URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWLRP/2012/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Salisbury Private Nursing Home v WorkCover [2012] SAWLRP 4 (26 June 2012)
[2012] SAWLRP 4
WORKCOVER LEVY REVIEW PANEL
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
SALISBURY PRIVATE NURSING HOME PTY LTD
No. E01349704 — file reference 200187560)
(Applicant)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
Member P.G. Eblen
Deputy Member E. Hosking
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED 26 JUNE
Application for review — assessment of levy by WorkCover without
consideration of possible adjustment — employer previously
significant remissions under former bonus/penalty scheme — whether
decision reviewable — nature of discretion
to adjust — role of
policy guidelines — objects of the Act — history of the
bonus/penalty scheme — burden
on applicants for exercise of discretion
— whether “remission” means in whole or in part — no
double-counting
for initiatives subject to separate incentives —
circumstances of applicant employer — whether circumstances sufficient
activate discretion to grant remission —
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Cases referred to:
SouthLink v. WorkCover
[2009] SASC 175
(2009) 104 SASR 172
(2009) 184 IR 72
Johnson Steel Fabricators v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP
Taking Care of Trees v. WorkCover
[2012] SAWLRP 3
Quark Technologies and Hocking v. WorkCover Corporation
[1997] SASC 6367
(1997) 70 SASR 153
194 LSJS 299
Chiropractors Association & Perry v. WorkCover
Corporation
[1999] SASC 470
(1999) 75 SASR 374
Robbins v. Harbord and GMH
[1994] SASC 4571
Azzopardi v. Tasman UEB Industries
(1985) 4 NSWLR
Plaspak v. WorkCover
[2000] SAWLRP 2
Plaspak v. WorkCover (No. 2)
[2000] SAWLRP 4
Community Living v. WorkCover
[2006] SAWLRP 1
Skilled Engineering v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2001] SAWLRP
Olga’s Fine Foods v. WorkCover (No.2)
Kennedy Cleaning Services v. WorkCover
(1993) 169 LSJS
D&V Services v. WorkCover
[2006] SAWLRP 8
R. v. Anderson: ex parte Ipec-Air
[1965] HCA 27
113 CLR 177
Re Becker and Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1977] AATA 12
(1977) 32 FLR 469
Appearances:
Mr C.A. Sargent of counsel for the applicant
Ms S.A. Emmett of counsel, with her Ms A.M. Rogers, for the
respondent WorkCover.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. This is the determination of an application dated 18 August 2010, pursuant
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
(“the Act”), seeking a review of a decision assessing the
applicant’s levy rate for the financial year 2010-2011,
embodied in
correspondence from WorkCover dated 4 June 2010.
, at the relevant time, provided as follows:
(1) Where an employer considers that a decision of the Corporation as
(aa) the estimate of remuneration that is to be used for the calculation of a
(a) the fixing or assessment of a levy; or
(b) the imposition of penalty interest or a fine; or
(c) the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead to the
imposition of a supplementary levy,
is unreasonable, the board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a levy,
penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the board, by the board itself, or by a committee or
person to whom the board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the board has an
absolute discretion as to whether
it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the board may—
(aa) alter an estimate;
(a) alter a levy or an assessment;
(b) quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
(c) direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
(d) quash or vary a condition imposed by the Corporation.
(5) An application under this section for review of a decision of the
Corporation—
(a) must, if the decision relates to a class of employer, be made within four
months after notice of the decision was given;
(b) must, if the decision relates to an individual employer, be made within
two months after the employer was given notice of the
unless the Board (or its delegate) allows an extension of time for making the
application.
3. It appears, by crude comparison of the date of the reviewable decision and
the date of the application for review, that the application
for review may have
been out of time by about two weeks. This was not adverted to by the employer in
its application (for example,
by seeking an extension of time) or by WorkCover
in its reconsideration of the disputed decision. Indeed, it appears not to have
been adverted to by either of the parties at any stage of the proceedings. We
think we may be allowed to know that correspondence
does not necessarily leave
the Corporation on the date printed on it, nor is it easy to establish a precise
date of mailing, so the
“posting rule” embodied in
section 117
the Act is not easy to apply. The practice in the courts, as we understand it,
is that if the respondent does not take the point
on apparently out of time
litigation, neither does the court. We think we should adopt the same approach.
In any event, the time
is so short, and there is such a lack of any obvious
prejudice to the Corporation, we think we should allow an extension of time
any extent necessary.
4. Section 67 of the Act, on which the application focuses, at the relevant
time provided (so far as is relevant):
67—Adjustment
of levy in relation to individual employers
(1) The Corporation may, in relation to a particular employer, having regard
to all or any of the following matters—
(a) the adequacy or inadequacy of measures taken by the employer to reduce
the incidence of work related traumas;
(b) the incidence or costs of claims for compensable disabilities suffered by
the employer's workers (disregarding claims of a class
excluded from the ambit
of this paragraph by regulation);
(c) the rehabilitation facilities or services for disabled workers provided
by the employer, or the absence or inadequacy of such
facilities or services
provided by the employer;
(ca) the employer’s practices and procedures in connection with the
appointment and work of a rehabilitation and return to work
co‑ordinator
under Part 3 (including with respect to compliance with any relevant guidelines
published by the Corporation for
the purposes of section 28D);
(d) the employer’s practices as to the retention, employment or
re-employment of disabled workers (and, in particular, any failure
employer’s part to provide, in accordance with this Act, employment to a
worker who has suffered a compensable disability
in the employer's
employment);
(e) such other matters (whether similar or dissimilar to those referred to
above) as the Corporation considers relevant,
grant to the employer a
remission of the levy that would be otherwise payable or impose on the employer
a supplementary levy (as the
case may require). …
5. The employer’s application indicated it was seeking a remission of
its levy pursuant to section 67. It indicated that the
employer had taken
significant measures to reduce the incidence of work related traumas (section
67(1)(a)) and set out a summary
of them. It indicated that the employer’s
incidence of claims costs in respect of compensable disabilities suffered by its
workers is very low (section 67(1)(b)), and referred to WorkCover’s
Quarterly Employer Claims Paid Summary as at 31 December
2008. It said that
rehabilitation facilities provided by the employer for injured workers (section
67(1)(c)) include workstation
assessments, job analysis, work training and work
hardening. It further stated that the employer had always complied with its
obligations
under section 58B of the Act in respect of practices relating to
injured workers (section 67(1)(d)) and was committed to the effective
rehabilitation of injured workers.
6. WorkCover’s response by way of reconsideration included the
“The employer is seeking a remission of levy under Section 67(1) of the
Act. This section permits but does not oblige WorkCover
to grant a remission of
levy or impose a supplementary levy considering all or any of the matters in
that section.
“WorkCover’s current policy by board determination for the
remission of levies and imposition of supplementary levies
was published in the
South Australian Government Gazette
on 20 August 2009 at page 3712.
“The publication shows that a condition has been placed on each of the
three elements allowing WorkCover to grant remissions
of levies and impose
supplementary levies (commonly referred to as the Bonus/Penalty Scheme) that
they shall not operate ‘in
respect of any financial year commencing on or
after 1 July 2010’. It is no longer possible to grant remissions of levies
employers through the Bonus/Penalty Scheme.
“We have examined the impact of the removal of the Bonus/Penalty Scheme
on the employer’s levy rates. For 2009-10 the
employer was granted a 30%
bonus to their industry levy rate. As the Bonus/Penalty Scheme ceased on 30 June
2010 bonuses to the employer’s
industry rates have not been granted for
2010-11. The employer’s industry classification levy rate of 7.50% is
“We confirm that the employer’s WorkCover levy rates
for 2010-11 are correctly based on the industry classification levy
7.50%. No bonuses can be granted through the Bonus/Penalty Scheme which finished
on 30 June 2010. WorkCover’s Board
has not implemented any replacement
scheme or an alternative mechanism for granting remissions to employers.
Accordingly, WorkCover
cannot grant a remission to the employer’s levy
rates for 2010-11 as requested.”
7. The Board determination referred to (“LAS09”) continued a
“Levy Adjustment Scheme” from a succession of
such gazetted
determinations. LAS09 was similar in most respects to LAS06 and LAS07, which
were extensively construed in
SouthLink v. WorkCover
(2009) 104 SASR 172
, with a few of the specific problems that emerged
from that case addressed. LAS09, in common with its predecessors, provided for
“Bonus/Penalty Scheme” that operated under section 67(1)(b) to
provide for automatic remissions or supplements, in
accordance with a formula
based on each employer’s claims experience of the two preceding full
calendar years. (In other words,
the adjustment for the levy year commencing 1
July 2009 would be based on the cost of claims made between 1 January 2007 and
31 December
2008.) However, LAS09 did, as WorkCover’s reconsideration
letter recited, provide that the Bonus/Penalty Scheme would not apply
end of the 2009-2010 levy year.
8. As we have pointed out in such earlier
decisions as
Johnson Steel Fabricators v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP
Taking Care of Trees v. WorkCover
[2012] SAWLRP 3
dropping of the Bonus/Penalty Scheme by WorkCover does not have the effect of
repealing any provision of section 67, by which
Parliament has seen fit to
confer upon WorkCover a discretion to adjust the levies of individual employers
in accordance with subsection
(1). That provision of the Act cannot be ignored
simply because the Board has chosen to abolish its previous scheme for automatic
adjustments. As WorkCover discovered to its cost in
Quark Technologies and
Hocking v. WorkCover Corporation
[1997] SASC 6367
(1997) 70 SASR 153
194 LSJS 299
Chiropractors Association & Perry v. WorkCover
Corporation
[1999] SASC 470
; (1999) 75 SASR 470, it is not viable simply
to adopt a policy of refusing to consider applications to exercise a statutory
discretion.
Fair and honest consideration must be given to material bearing on
the possible exercise of the discretion, and a decision-maker
is not entitled
simply to consult its own (economic or other) interests in making a decision:
Robbins v. Harbord and GMH
[1994] SASC 4571
(1994) 62 SASR
9. This was not a case where the employer had expressly sought the exercise
of the discretion of WorkCover under section 67. It had
been accustomed to the
automatic application of the Bonus/Penalty Scheme, and simply complained about
the apparent harshness of the
unadjusted industry levy rate, which it seemed to
have been experiencing for the first time. Its first explicit request for
consideration
under section 67 seems to have been that contained in its
application for review. In fact, this was partly the basis for WorkCover’s
argument that there was no decision to review, an argument to which we will
return. Suffice it to say at this stage that we make
no particular criticism of
WorkCover’s failure to consider an adjustment under section 67 when
issuing the assessment of 4
June 2010, but the request is certainly before us
now and, for reasons that will emerge, we will proceed to consider the merits of
that request.
The factual background
10. Part of the following narrative is taken from
documents included in the agreed book of documents tendered by WorkCover, while
part of it is taken from the signed statement of Barry Jonathan Lowe, Executive
Officer of the employer, tendered by the employer,
and the attachments to that
statement. Mr Lowe also gave sworn evidence before us. Few facts were
contentious. The dispute between
the parties centred on the conclusions to be
drawn from the facts.
11. The employer operates a nursing home at Salisbury South. Mr Lowe said in
his statement that the current level of residents is
76, and there are
approximately 85 staff. (We were not informed whether that is 85 full time
equivalents, or whether the 85 includes
a number of part-time staff.) The
company, we are informed, was incorporated in 1981, and therefore was presumably
registered as
an employer under the Act when the Act was introduced in 1987. At
our suggestion, evidence was confined to the past ten years.
12. As at 28 May 2001 (the date of the levy notice for the 2001-2002
financial year), the employer was classified as
814301 Nursing or
Convalescent Homes
. The base levy for that classification in that year was
5.6%, to which seems to have been added a 22% supplement under the Bonus/Penalty
Scheme formula as it then operated, to produce a final levy of 6.832% of
remuneration (as defined). We note Mr Lowe, in his statement,
referred to this
as a 22% bonus, but we think he was mistaken. As he told us he had been
Executive Officer for about seven years,
it was clearly before his time.
13. In the relevant window period (1 July 1998 to
30 June 2000), WorkCover accepted six claims from the employer’s workers.
The largest had accumulated claims costs of just over $40,000 to 31 December
2000. None of the others exceeded $2,000, and two of
them were under $100.
14. The base levy for 2002-2003 was 6.1%, from which was subtracted a 30%
remission under the Bonus/Penalty Scheme, to produce a final
levy of 4.27%. In
the window period relevant to that levy year, there were no claims.
15. The base levy for 2003-2004 was 7.1%, from which was subtracted a 30%
remission under the Bonus/Penalty Scheme, producing a final
levy of 4.97%. The
relevant window period for that levy year produced only one claim, with costs of
around $40.
16. In 2004-2005, the description of the industry classification was changed
814301 Personal Care Services
and the base levy rose to 7.5%, the
maximum permissible under the Act. From that was subtracted a 30% remission
under the Bonus/Penalty
Scheme, producing a final levy of 5.25%. In the relevant
window period there were eight claims, but five of them recorded claims
nil (presumably no time-loss claims) and the highest was only about $150.
17. In 2005-2006, the base levy was again 7.5%, from which was subtracted a
26% remission under the Bonus/Penalty Scheme, producing
a final levy of 5.55%.
The relevant window period produced eleven claims, of which six recorded nil
claims costs, two were around
$5 each, and two were around $1100.
18. The base levy for 2006-2007 was again 7.5%, from which again was
subtracted a 26% remission under the Bonus/Penalty Scheme, again
producing a
final levy of 5.55%. The relevant window period showed seven claims, including
one of the nil cost claims from the window
period before, the two $1100 claims
and one of the $5 claims. No new claim rose above $400.
19. The base levy for 2007-2008 was again 7.5%, from which was subtracted a
30% remission under the Bonus/Penalty Scheme, to produce
a final levy of 5.25%.
There were four claims recorded in the relevant window period, the largest of
which was a $322 claim repeated
from the previous window period. A fifth claim
was rather larger, but excluded from calculations as a secondary disability,
is one of the excluded classes under section 67(1)(b).
20. The base levy for 2008-2009 was again 7.5%, from which was subtracted a
30% remission under the Bonus/Penalty Scheme, to produce
again a final levy of
5.25%. Claims recorded in the relevant window period (other than excluded
claims) were two, the higher of which
was around $540.
21. The base levy for 2009-2010 was again 7.5%, from which was subtracted a
30% remission under the Bonus/Penalty Scheme, again producing
a final levy of
5.25%. The relevant window period saw only the $540 claim from the year before,
and no new claims.
22. The base levy for 2010-2011 was again 7.5%.
Because of the ending of the Bonus/ Penalty Scheme, the final levy was 7.5%.
because of the ending of the Bonus/ Penalty Scheme, relevant window periods
no longer needed to be calculated and we have no corresponding
schedule relating
to 2010-2011. WorkCover has given us some information, but it is unclear whether
it is directly comparable. Ms
Emmett tendered a table, primarily showing the
levy calculations recited above, where total claims costs are listed opposite
financial years, which is difficult to compare with a two-year window, a
financial year behind (but with claims costs to the end
of the preceding
calendar year, as mentioned at [
above). Having said that, it seems that the 2008-2009 year, where there were no
new claims costs, was followed by 2009-2010 with
claims costs of about $2600
(which appears to have arisen from two claims: tab 21 in the book of documents)
and 2010-2011 with nil
claims costs.
23. For comparison, a combination of tabs 21 and
22 in the book of documents shows that in 2009-2010, where the applicant
experienced
claims costs of about $2600, there were 294 locations covered by the
same industry classification (South Australian WorkCover Industry
Classification, or SAWIC), which accounted for approximately $8,485,000 in
claims costs, an average of approximately $28,860 per
location. The number of
claims across the SAWIC was 882, an average of approximately $9,620. In
2010-2011, the average location experienced
claims costs of a little over
$21,000, or about three claims at around $6,825 per claim, while the
applicant’s location experienced
no claims. It is clear that there are
many limitations to these sorts of comparisons (the most obvious of which is
that we do not
know whether the applicant is near the average in the size of its
workforce — although it seems its remuneration total is almost
70% greater
than the industry average per location), but on any view the applicant appears
to emerge favourably. We will return to
these comparisons.
24. In Mr Lowe’s statement, he emphasised the employer’s
“safety culture”, which he said was “focused
on high standard
of performance criteria that becomes part of the employee’s focus and
attention from the first time they step
foot into the home”. He said there
is an open door policy to safety issues being raised by all staff members. He
is no board of management, giving him complete autonomy to deal with
safety issues, and there is no limit to his financial authority
on such matters.
25. He said the company’s performance criteria on safety are an
integral part of its induction process and part of an annual
review and regular
audit process. He said the induction process is a three-day orientation. On the
first day, the employee goes through
the information booklet one on one in the
Nurse Manager’s office. The next two days are by way of a
“buddy” system.
The new employee is expected to complete the booklet
by way of a practical review by another nurse, who signs off.
26. He said the company also has two dedicated occupational health and safety
officers, a principal officer and a deputy. There is
an extensive incident
reporting procedure; hazard and risk assessment, along with clear duties and
roles for responsible officers.
27. To illustrate these matters, he attached a number of documents, which
 A certificate from WorkCover dated 31 May 2007 showing the employer
had met the requirements of the Corporation’s Safety
Achiever Business
System (SABS) Performance Standards;
 A 145-page
Occupational Health, Safety & Welfare Management
(apparently prepared under the guidance of the Community Employers
Association);
 A 20-page
Occupational Health & Safety Guide
A Handbook for Employees & Contractors
 A 26-page
Employee’s Information Handbook
 Terms of Reference for the employer’s Occupational Health,
Safety & Welfare Committee;
 Sample minutes of meetings of the OH&S & Resident care
 Summary of responses to an OHS&W questionnaire of October 2009,
showing a 19.25% return rate;
 A staff orientation checklist;
 An 11-page
Back on the Job
booklet for injured workers
returning to work;
 A record of staff attendance at compulsory OHS training;
 Environmental Hazards, Systems and Legislative Audit Sheets, said to
be utilised every three months (samples apparently completed
June 2010);
 Workplace safety audit, completed 7 March 2010;
 Workplace risk assessment, apparently conducted by Nursing Australia
Staffing Solutions on 1 June 2010;
 Sample preventative maintenance schedule;
 Equipment service schedule for 2009;
 Hazard report form;
 Staff hazard report summary from 2005-2010;
 Staff incident report form;
 Extended Work Training/Work Hardening Agreement between employer, an
employment placement consultant and a worker under the
RISE scheme, 30 December
 Job analysis/description report relating to position of diversional
therapist’s assistant, or lifestyle worker, prepared
by CRS Australia, 17
April 2009;
 A 19-page
Job Dictionary (Ergonomic and bio-mechanical Task
, prepared for the employer by a firm of occupational safety and
rehabilitation consultants, August 2008;
 Workstation assessment and job analysis in relation to an injured
worker by the same firm of rehabilitation consultants,
17 December 2009;
 An example of a form headed Index & Amendment Status Sheet,
which is apparently associated with a Plant/Equipment Risk
 Various Plant/Equipment Risk Assessment Records from various areas
of the nursing home assessed on various dates between
January 2000 and June
 A 25-page
Laundry Procedure Manual
compiled in August 1999
and most recently revised in October 2008;
 A 79-page
Catering Procedure Manual
compiled in July 1999 and
most recently revised in July 2010;
 An organisation chart;
 Education Schedules for 2010 and 2011;
 A notice relating to an Employee Assistance Program conducted by an
external organisation called Access-Ocar;
 An audit schedule for July, September and December 2010;
 A 5-page Plan for Continuous Improvement.
28. Some of the documents were self-explanatory. In other cases, their
significance required explanation during Mr Lowe’s sworn
evidence or
during submissions.
29. In his evidence before us, Mr Lowe said he had been a registered nurse
for 32 years and had commenced with the employer in 2004.
He said the nursing
required some sort of assistance, giving
rise inevitably to manual handling
risks, which were regularly reviewed. Stress was also an issue for staff
members. Dementia patients
represented particularly active risks, both by way of
verbal abuse and unpredictable actions.
30. He said the nursing home was licensed under the federal Department of
Health & Ageing and, as such, inspected periodically.
Catering was assessed
by the local council, which gave the employer 12-month approvals, although
6-month approvals were more usual
for the council to give to others.
31. Mr Lowe described the structure of the company and the occupational
health and safety structure in particular, describing a “continuous
improvement” approach involving frequent auditing. He was in a position to
respond immediately to any problem because of the
wide authority he had been
given by the owner. At OHS committee meetings, all departments are represented,
with external contractors,
and a resident representative. An annual staff
questionnaire is administered, responses to which Mr Lowe collates, looks where
improvements
could be made, and puts the results to an OHS meeting, where
actions are reviewed and evaluated.
32. He also described the induction of new staff. He said he personally
conducted employment interviews, which for a successful applicant
was followed
by a functional capacity test and a 3-day orientation period, throughout which
occupational health and safety are talked
appropriate existing employee on their role and given various information
packages as observed
from the documents attached to Mr Lowe’s written
statement. They are then required to complete a “competency booklet”
relating to their role and a staff orientation list showing they have understood
the information they have been given. They then
have an appraisal 3 months and 9
months after engagement to pick up any shortfalls.
33. He said the
Occupational Health & Safety Guide
was produced
internally and given to all pre-existing employees as well as each new staff
member, as a brief overview of all the
safety procedures and policies. There was
a procedure manual, mostly quite large, for each area, and these are regularly
and updated. There is mandatory ongoing education, with topics
including fire, evacuation and manual handling procedures. He referred
practice award for dementia care, which he said was one of only seven to be
awarded in Australia out of three and a half
thousand dementia facilities. He
described the continuing education programmes provided to staff. He also drew
attention to the SABS
Level 3 award from WorkCover.
34. On the other hand, the injury procedures, which reflected the high-risk
nature of aged care, were designed on a “just in
case” basis. The
employer, he said, “don’t actually have that many [injuries]
ourselves”. The job dictionary
had been developed by the external
provider, which had come out and observed the performance of various duties.
This was not issued
to staff; it was for reference if an injury did occur, to
assist in investigating why it had happened, and to assist in identifying
suitable duties for a partially incapacitated worker. He said “we can
always find something”.
35. In summary, he said, processes, procedures and forms were one thing but
it was the culture that mattered. It is instilled in employees
from Day 1, he
said. Safety was a big issue: the staff was the employer’s best asset and
needed to be protected. It was not
possible to look after residents effectively
without looking after staff. He spoke of “pathways” which he said no
nursing home has, and said that OH&S was emphasised at every meeting.
The processes were simple, had been developed by the staff,
and were used. The
culture was that if something was wrong, or something was broken, it was fixed.
The culture had been instilled
over a number of years. He spoke of the financial
consequences. He said 10% of the budget was spent on staff education and, of
1% was spent specifically on OH&S education. In reply to a question
from the Panel, he said that a lot of general education has
36. Under cross-examination by Ms Emmett, he acknowledged that the response
rate to the OH&S questionnaire had been 19.25%, and
described that as
“not bad”. He said that, statistically, a response rate of 20-25%
for a non-compulsory questionnaire
of that type was considered good. He also
acknowledged that four respondents had responded “don’t know”
question as to who their OH&S representative was, and said “We
address that.”
37. In response to a question from the Panel about staff turnover, Mr Lowe
said it was 2% from year to year, representing a very stable
staff. He said
little use was made of agency staff. He said the stability of staffing
represented a significant difference from most
other aged care facilities. Asked
whether there was any follow-up on the education programmes to ensure staff had
retained the knowledge,
he said that he had found that resident outcomes show
whether employees have retained information on subjects such as dealing with
physical aggression, administration of medication and so forth.
Reviewable decision?
38. In our consideration of the parties’ respective cases, it is
convenient first to deal with WorkCover’s submission
that there was no
reviewable decision, and therefore nothing for the Panel to review.
39. Ms Emmett argued that WorkCover had not turned its mind to the question
of a remission because there was no basis to do so, and
therefore could not be
said to have made a decision not to grant one. She acknowledged that one had
not, in fact, been granted, but
emphasised that that was not on the basis of a
specific decision. It was simply a consequence of the discontinuation of the
bonus/penalty scheme from which the applicant had benefited for some
years. She said on that basis the present situation is different
from those in
Johnson Steel Fabricators v. WorkCover
SouthLink v.
, as both those cases dealt with the application of a scheme
that was on foot. On that basis, she said, it was open to the Panel to
there was no reviewable decision. She raised the question whether the
“reasonableness” referred to in section
72 was global or
individual.
40. The Panel has grappled previously with the question whether
“reasonable” in section 72 should be seen subjectively
objectively, and we see no reason to depart from the approach taken in
Henderson’s Automotive v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2005] SAWLRP 2
“We note that a decision that seems reasonable to WorkCover in
the light of all of its objectives and responsibilities to the
public interest
may sometimes seem unreasonable to an individual employer in its individual
circumstances. Indeed, it is probable
that such a disparity of frames of
reference will very often be the source of disputes for adjudication under
section 72. The framing
of section 72(1) necessarily implies that the right to
apply for a review is activated by the perception of an employer that a decision
is unreasonable in the former, subjective, sense. Sections 67 and 72, however,
appear in Part 5 of the Act, the heading to which
is ‘Registration and
funding’. The funding of the WorkCover scheme is a public interest matter
for which the Corporation’s
Board has overall responsibility. As a
delegate of the Board, we think it is incumbent on us to pay steadfast attention
to that which
is reasonable in the wider, whole-of-scheme sense, while not
losing sight of that which is fair to the individual levy-payer.”
41. Mr Sargent noted that the making of an application for review under
section 72 is conditioned upon the employer considering that
a decision of the
Corporation as to the assessment of a levy is “unreasonable”. By
implication, he said, the Panel is
only to exercise its powers under section
72(4) if the Panel considers that the decision is unreasonable. That task of
determining
whether a particular assessment is “unreasonable”
requires a judgment involving questions of fact and degree, and “[a]n
erroneous conclusion that the facts properly determined fail to satisfy a
statutory test … will ordinarily be an erroneous
conclusion of fact”
Azzopardi v. Tasman UEB Industries
(1985) 4 NSWLR 139
He submitted that WorkCover’s decision not to investigate and consider any
adjustment was in itself unreasonable.
42. In our respectful opinion, the answer lies in the terms of section 72
itself. An employer believing a levy assessment is unreasonable
reason — is entitled to lodge an application for review and have it
considered fairly and honestly, as the
Panel explained in
Johnson Steel
Fabricators v. WorkCover
, especially at [21]-[26], and
Taking Care
of Trees v. WorkCover
, at [30]-[35]. The conduct of the review is not
conditioned on a finding that the employer’s state of belief is justified
no doubt, the review is unlikely to vary the decision if the state of
belief is not to some degree justified. By analogy with the
original section 96
of the Act, on the reasonable assumption that the word “review” was
used at that time consistently
between sections 72 and 96, the task is a
review: see, for example,
Plaspak v. WorkCover
Plaspak v. WorkCover (No. 2)
[2000] SAWLRP 4
referring to
Santos v. Saunders
[1988] SASC 960
(1988) 49 SASR 556
Community Living v. WorkCover
[2006] SAWLRP 1
. The review
by the Panel does not require it to treat the reviewable decision as
“automatically vacated” (
Skilled Engineering v. WorkCover
[2001] SAWLRP 11
, p.14, footnote 4) as the original decision and
any reasons expressed for its making are to be noted, but there is no
presumption
in favour of its being upheld. The Panel needs to make its own
findings and a fresh judgment on the matter, including exercising
relevant discretion unimpeded by the manner in which the Corporation exercised
Olga’s Fine Foods v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2004] SAWLRP 7
— or, in this case,
failed to exercise it. Put briefly, if persuaded that it is proper to do so, the
Panel must assess the
applicant’s appropriate levy itself, and by all
appropriate means provided under the Act. If WorkCover did not consider it
appropriate to make an adjustment under section 67, whether it adverted to the
question or not, but the Panel on review does consider
it appropriate to make
such an adjustment, the adjustment must be made.
43. Accordingly, in the present matter, a review must be conducted.
The parties’ cases
44. Mr Sargent, for the employer, tendered a helpful written outline of
argument, which he supplemented with oral submissions. He
went through the
evidence given orally by Mr Lowe and in documentary form, seeking to demonstrate
that the employer had addressed
the criteria set out in section 67 to avail
itself of a remission of its levy having regard to (what he submitted was) the
of the safety systems introduced to reduce the incidence of work
related traumas; its extraordinary claims history over the last
specific injury management and rehabilitation measures introduced to control
claims costs; the high level of retention
of injured workers; and its general
level of performance as measured against other employers in the relevant
industry class.
45. He drew particular attention to (what he described as) the
organisation’s comprehensive safety policy and procedures; the
organisation’s induction program; the organisation’s risk assessment
and hazard identification procedures; and the organisation’s
culture. While it might be said that these are only what is to be expected of an
employer in this safety-conscious age, he
said, it is still important to the
overall consideration of a remission under section 67 for these matters to be
46. Mr Sargent contended that section 67 introduced the concept of a
merit-based scheme to complement the levy fixed under section
66(8) of the Act,
the provisions of which he emphasised. To understand the significance of that
submission, it is necessary to set
out section 66(8) as it stood at the relevant
(8) In fixing the percentage applicable to a particular class of
industry the corporation must have regard to—
(a) the extent to which
work carried on in that class is, in the opinion of the Corporation, likely to
contribute to the cost of
compensable disabilities; and
(b) the need for the
Corporation to establish and maintain sufficient funds—
(i) to satisfy
the Corporation’s current and future liabilities in respect of compensable
disabilities attributable to traumas
occurring in a particular period from
levies raised from remuneration paid in that period; and
(ii) to make proper
provision for administrative and other expenditure of the Corporation;
(iii) to make up any insufficiency in the Compensation Fund resulting
from previous liabilities or expenditures or from a reassessment
liabilities.
47. He noted that in past decisions the Panel has made reference to the
desirability of avoiding, as far as possible, disturbance
of the financial
balance of the WorkCover scheme through the Compensation Fund:
Steel Fabricators v. WorkCover
, at [39]. He contended that this implies
the Panel must have regard to a balance between the values of certainty,
administrative
convenience and reduction of administrative costs on the one
hand, and the assignment of the “right” levy in every single
individual case, on the other. He said that when the Panel exercises the
discretion under section 67, it need not pay heed to this
matter, even despite
section 2(1)(d) of the Act (one of the objects of the Act: to ensure the scheme
is fully funded on a fair basis),
because it is equally applicable to consider a
reasonable balance between the interests of employers and the interests of
(section 2(1)(a)(i)) and the containment of employers’ costs
within reasonable limits (section 2(1)(a)(v)).
48. Moreover, he submitted, section 67 would have no work to do if the
provisions of the section were always disregarded because of
the impact of costs
on the scheme.
49. He contended that the merit-based scheme introduced by section 67 stands
alone in having regard to the individual circumstances
of the registered
employer. This, he said, is in fact the concept applied when WorkCover is
considering the imposition of a supplementary
levy on an employer:
Cleaning Services v. WorkCover
(1993) 169 LSJS 310
SouthLink v.
. It would be incongruous to allow the Corporation to impose
supplementary levies under the section without the same approach applying
granting of a remission. He pointed to a number of references in
recognising that the nature of the provision is to allow
for a remission of the levy that would otherwise be payable, in particular
J at [36]-[41] and White J at [98].
50. He said it was not always possible for all of the criteria under section
67(1) to be applicable or satisfied in order for an employer
to be granted a
remission, and in terms of any measurement of success, regard needs to be had to
the end product or end result in
measuring what remission should be granted. He
also noted that there is no formula or methodology contained in the section to
the quantum of any remission, save that it is open for the employer to be
granted a remission of the levy that would otherwise be
”, having regard to the matters referred to in the section.
51. He argued that the provision did not allow, in the applicant’s
view, the narrow application mooted in
Johnson Steel Fabricators
“Unlike the situation with the bonus/penalty scheme,
there is no pool to draw on to fund remissions. Accordingly, any remissions
Panel was persuaded to grant would be likely to be quite modest, perhaps
striking some as token in their quantum.”
52. He urged the Panel to consider the comments
of Kourakis J (acknowledging that His Honour was in dissent in that case) at
“Secondly, s 67 of the Act is
complementary to s 66 and contemplates an adjustment to the industry levy,
which is to be the
primary basis on which the amount of the levy is to be
calculated. It would seem, therefore, that the Act does not contemplate the
imposition of levies on individual employers in a way that recovers from them
the full cost incurred by WorkCover in discharging
its responsibilities with
respect to that employer’s workers. Within those parameters, the degree to
which there is to be cross-subsidisation
between industries and between
employers within an industry is a matter that ss 66 and 67 of the Act place
within the general discretion
of WorkCover.”
53. In the case of the current applicant, he said, it should be noted that
the total levy paid for the relevant year was over $150,000.
The industry
contributed approximately $33 million to the Fund. It was submitted that a full
100% remission of the levy based on
the total performance of the employer would
not produce a dramatic effect on the scheme. Alternatively, a remission
comparable with
that under the former Levy Adjustment Scheme, i.e., 30%, would
result only in $45,757 being remitted to the employer. As a final
alternative,
it was pointed out that the average levy rate of all employers for the relevant
year produced at 8% adjustment with
the average WorkCover levy rate being
reduced from 3% to 2.75%, while the SAWIC classification within which the
applicant falls did
not receive any reduction at all. It was submitted that this
was the very least remission the applicant should be given.
54. In response to a question from the Panel noting that there seemed not to
be much return to work activity because so few injuries
were sustained by the
employer’s workers, but enquiring whether any assistance was given to
workers of other businesses, Mr
Sargent made reference to Access-Ocar (document
34 attached to Mr Lowe’s statement), which we understand to be an
organisation,
operated by Centacare Catholic Family Services, that
“partners with organisations to promote positive organisational behaviour,
enhance individual well-being and improve workplace productivity … [and
does] this by providing Employee Assistance Programs
which include professional
counselling and related organisational support services” (see
www.access-ocar.com.au
, which we have
taken the liberty of consulting in the hope that the parties will not consider
it contentious). As we understand it,
this involves the provision of services to
the employer’s own workers, and arranging the provision of services to the
of other employers would be up to those other employers. However, Mr
Sargent also made reference to section 67(5) of the Act, which
he mentioned had
been noted by each of the judges in
, and which he said
described a RISE-type situation. (In fact, we think section 67(5) forms the
statutory underpinning for WorkCover’s
Re-employment Incentive Scheme for
Employers.) He said the employer had indeed participated in RISE, and pointed to
an Extended Work
Training/Work Hardening Agreement (document 20 attached to Mr
Lowe’s statement) entered into by the employer as a host employer
January 2006, and a letter from a rehabilitation consultant to Mr Lowe dated 17
June 2009 (document 1.22 in WorkCover’s
book of documents) relating to the
placement of a different worker.
55. As the latter document and, indeed, the terms of section 67(5) itself
make clear, participation in RISE carries its own incentives,
and we doubt it
would be appropriate to double-count by including that as a matter going to the
awarding of a remission under section
56. Ms Emmett, in her able submissions, referred to the history of the
bonus/penalty scheme, which she said had been in operation
since the early
1990s, until 1 July 2010. Its ending was announced to employers in April-May,
2010. (We note that the ending was
announced in the
South Australian
in August 2009, but readers of the
at that time might have been forgiven for anticipating that the date would
simply be extended as it had been in the past.)
57. She said that the bonus/penalty scheme had failed in its objective of
self-funding. It had been $47 million dollars negative per
annum. That is to
say, while it was intended that the “bonuses” (remissions of levy)
awarded should be paid for by the
“penalties” (supplementary levies
imposed), and that the scheme therefore be revenue neutral, in fact $47 million
was remitted than was collected in supplements. Figures of that order have
been in the public domain (and given by the Minister in
Parliament) for some
time, and we accept them as accurate.
58. Ms Emmett also said there was no evidence of improved injury outcomes or
occupational health and safety outcomes as a result of
the bonus/penalty scheme.
This may be so, but since it is a somewhat controversial and counter-intuitive
submission — and since
the new employer payments scheme seems to be
proceeding on the very basis that employers are expected to be responsive to
signals — it would have preferable if we could have seen some
details of whatever studies or research have shown that there
is no evidence of
improved outcomes in worker safety terms since the bonus/penalty scheme was
introduced in 1990.
59. Ms Emmett also said that the bonus/penalty scheme often operated unfairly
because of random events. That is an observation this
Panel has previously made:
see, for example,
D&V Services v. WorkCover
[2006] SAWLRP 8
at [50]–[51].
60. She said no decision had been made to increase the applicant’s levy
for non-compliance or anything that the applicant had
done (or not done). It was
simply not practicable to individually assess the circumstances of each of
50 000 registered employers
throughout the state. She said levies were
assessed on the basis of about 500 SAWIC codes averaging about 100 employers per
They were never intended to be individually tailored. They have always
been tailored to a class. She said the effect of the removal
bonus/penalty scheme was similar to an employer moving from bonus to penalty.
The scheme had proven not to be an effective
Johnson Steel
Fabricators
was not decided on this basis.
61. Ms Emmett referred to the object of the Act that the scheme be fully
funded on a fair basis (section 2(1)(d)).
62. She said WorkCover does not think the applicant is a bad employer, but
the weight of the evidence produced does not reach the
level to depart from the
consolidated scheme as it currently stands (with the expiry of the bonus/penalty
scheme). She pointed to
the employer’s internal survey showing four out of
fifteen workers did not know who the OH&S officer was. She acknowledged
the applicant has very good policies with safety a high priority, but is in a
dangerous work environment (presumably reflected
by the base levy of 7.5% in the
first place) giving the employer a high OH&S threshold to start from.
Section 67 is not intended
to reward activities that have commercial benefits:
some of the accreditations shown by the employer have commercial benefits quite
apart from occupational health and safety.
63. She accepted that the applicant’s policies have corresponded with
limited claims, but said a direct relationship has not
been shown. She
acknowledged that such evidence would be difficult to obtain.
64. In relation to rehabilitation, she said the applicant appeared well set
up, but not out of the ordinary or in excess of what should
be expected. She
said there was no evidence of anything warranting special recognition. She
pointed out that RISE participation,
as we have already said, carries its own
incentives (presumably under section 67(5)).
65. In summary, she said WorkCover acknowledged that the applicant is a good
employer with a comprehensive system of occupational
health and safety and
injury management. She said WorkCover would not want to be thought to have
accused it of not doing the right
thing. However, it was not considered so far
in excess of what was required that its levy should be remitted in whole or in
Additionally, she denied Mr Sargent’s contention that section 67(1)
contained a potential for a 100% remission of levy.
66. In response to a question from the Panel as to how “out of the
ordinary” or “exceptional” should be defined,
Ms Emmett said
that WorkCover would need to assess the contention, examine SafeWork
assessments, etc. WorkCover would contend that
at the moment if the Panel finds
a remission is warranted, it would affect the setting up of new incentive system
for employers,
which is not what WorkCover would like; it would prefer to set up
its own system established to a proper standard. If the Panel granted
remission, it would have a major impact on the scheme because no employers are
seeking penalties.
67. Mr Sargent in reply said that, according to the figure quoted by
WorkCover, the removal of the bonus/penalty scheme gave the Fund
$47 million it
didn’t have before, thereby providing a source of funding for limited
remissions. He quoted
Kennedy Cleaning Services v. WorkCover
authority that section 67 stands by itself, without any need for a specific
Corporation policy. He also said that section 67 does
not refer to employers
needing to perform over and above any particular standard to qualify for
remissions.
Section 67 of the Act
68. It is convenient to commence with some general observations on section 67
of the Act. It is beyond doubt that Parliament has made
it part of the Act, and
the action of WorkCover in drafting LAS09 to discontinue the so-called
bonus/penalty scheme at the end of
the 2009-2010 year does not serve to repeal
it. That action merely leaves officers of the Corporation without guidelines for
implementation
of section 67(1)(b). As discussed above, section 67 is
complementary to section 66. As Ms Emmett has acknowledged in her careful
argument, section 66 is not designed to produce a levy that is tailored to the
circumstances of individual employers. It is designed
to produce levy rates for
classes of employers, broadly broken into industry groups. It is section 67 that
is designed to provide
for discretionary adjustments to industry rates, tailored
to the circumstances of individual employers.
69. As the Panel has pointed out in earlier cases (e.g.,
Johnson Steel
Fabricators
at [18]), the law accepts that in a high-volume
decision-making environment, where a designated decision-maker necessarily acts
servants or agents, policy guidelines for the exercise of a discretion
such as that conferred by section 67(1) may be necessary,
but the ultimate
decision must be the result of a fair and honest assessment of all the
circumstances and not the uncritical and
mechanical application of policy:
Chiropractors Association and Perry v. WorkCover Corporation
[39]. There is no room for blanket policies that a particular discretion will
not be exercised at all, in advance of proper consideration
of any application,
for that would be to close the decision-maker’s mind to the required fair
and honest assessment:
Quark Technologies and Hocking v. WorkCover
Corporation
. Further, in exercising a statutory discretion conferred for
a public purpose, a decision-maker is not entitled simply to consult
(economic or other) interests:
Robbins v. Harbord and GMH
70. In the present situation, there is no explicit or obvious provision for
the making of applications under section 67(1). The applicant
accustomed to the automatic application of the bonus/penalty scheme; indeed that
is still the case with the balance of the
consolidated scheme under LAS09.
Interestingly, we are told that after receiving its 2010-2011 levy notice, the
applicant telephoned
WorkCover and was told that applications under section 67
were not being taken. The present application for review seems to be the
71. It may be accepted that the administrative burden would be too great if
it were supposed that WorkCover should conduct detailed
investigations into the
affairs of 50 000 registered employers, just to see if any of them were
worthy of a remission (although,
if it did so, it might find some warranting
supplements as well). That, of course, leaves aside information already in the
of WorkCover, such as each employer’s claims history. However,
failing that, and assuming it to be correct that employers calling
WorkCover are
told that applications under section 67 are not being received, the only avenue
left for an aggrieved employer to seek
consideration under section 67(1) is to
lodge an application for review under section 72. It is at this point at the
very latest,
given the provisions for reconsideration of disputed decisions,
that WorkCover should make the fair and honest assessment required
authorities we have referred to.
72. We have previously indicated that we do not think it unreasonable that
the applicant seeking the exercise of the discretion under
section 67(1) should
provide the material on which the decision may be made, that material usually
being uniquely in the possession
of the employer:
Johnson Steel
Fabricators
, at [32]-[35]. This expectation should relieve WorkCover of
any excessive investigatory burden. On the 2010-2011 experience, the
numbers are
not great in any event.
73. However, WorkCover’s current policy of refusing to implement
section 67(1)(b) at all produces an unbalanced situation in
which employers who
think they should be granted a remission (the former “bonus”) are
likely to exercise their right
of review under section 72, while employers who
might be subject to a supplementary levy through poor claims records (the former
“penalty”) escape entirely. That imbalance may be thought
unfortunate, but it is beyond the scope of this Panel or this
review. In this
context, it should be noted that the rest of LAS09 (other than the bonus/
penalty provisions) remains in force, and
many of its provisions do involve the
imposition of supplements.
74. We cannot agree with Mr Sargent that we should ignore section 2(1)(d),
but we do consider that section 2(1)(a)(i) and (v) have
to be taken into account
at the same time. We consider this follows from the terms of section
(2) A person exercising judicial, quasi-judicial or administrative
powers must interpret this Act in the light of its objects without
bias towards
the interests of employers on the one hand, or workers on the other.
75. The objects of the Act are contained in section 2(1), and include the
three referred to by Mr Sargent. We do not overlook the
fact that the injunction
against bias mentions only the interests of employers and workers, not the
interests of WorkCover, but since
the fundamental principle of natural justice
is that matters be decided without bias of any sort, we do not think the
omission makes
any difference to the approach we are bound to take.
76. We have already made clear our view that section 67 of the Act operates
independently of any policy of WorkCover. While it is
acceptable for WorkCover
to publish policy guidelines for the use of its staff (subject to the matters
referred to in [
] above), it is not
compulsory, and the withdrawal of previously published guidelines cannot impede
the operation of the section at
all. All that is required is a decision to
exercise (or not exercise) the discretion conferred “according to the
rules of reason
and justice, not according to private opinion; according to law,
and not humour, and within those limits within which an honest man,
competent to
discharge the duties of his office, ought to confine himself”: per Kitto J
R. v. Anderson: ex parte Ipec-Air
[1965] HCA 27
[1965] HCA 27
113 CLR 177
77. That passage was quoted by Von Doussa J in
[1988] SASC 960
(1988) 49 SASR 556 (Legoe
J concurring). His Honour went on to
quote Brennan J (as he then was) in
Re Becker and Minister for Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs
[1977] AATA 12
(1977) 32 FLR 469
“The subject-matter, scope and purpose of the statute conferring
the discretion may mark the boundary of relevance (cf.
Murphyores v.
Commonwealth
(1976) 50 ALJR 570 at 579) but within the boundary the
honest decision-maker may legitimately fashion his views and determine the
exercise of his powers without constraint. Where a policy-maker forms a policy
to govern or effect the exercise of his statutory
discretion, the policy must
conform to law. Otherwise decisions taken pursuant to the unlawful policy may be
set aside … The
tribunal which reviews a decision taken pursuant to an
unlawful policy could not affirm the decision—at all events, not for
reasons which led to the making of the decision.”
78. Policy guidelines, while convenient, are not necessary and their absence
does not alter the nature of the discretion conferred
by Parliament in the
79. There was debate between the parties as to whether the power to grant a
remission of a levy included reducing it to zero. Ms Emmett
pointed out that the
section does not say, as could be expected if such was the intention, “in
whole or in part”. In
our respectful view, it does not need to. The
Shorter Oxford Dictionary
(third edition, revised, 1973) relevantly
defines “remission” as “[t]he action of remitting or giving up
or wholly (a debt, tax, penalty, etc.)”.
Merriam-Webster’s Unabridged Dictionary
(CD version 3.0, 2003)
relevantly defines “remission” as “cancellation or
relinquishment of the whole or a part
of a financial obligations (tax
Macquarie ABC Dictionary
(2003) gives
“abatement or diminution, as of diligence, labour, intensity, etc.”
and “the relinquishment of a payment,
obligation, etc.”, the latter
of which almost implies
a total remission. However, taking the three
dictionaries together, we are confident that in ordinary English usage, the word
“remission”
includes within its meaning the concept of “in
whole or in part”.
80. Having said that, we think that, just as the criminal law reserves the
maximum sentence for the worst imaginable case, a full
remission under section
67(1) must be reserved for the best imaginable case. We do not need to attempt
that imagining here, but we
observe that we should think it must be extremely
rare. The very passage of Kourakis J in
urged upon us by
Mr Sargent ([
] above), in suggesting
“that the Act does not contemplate the imposition of levies on individual
employers in a way that recovers
from them the full cost incurred by WorkCover
in discharging its responsibilities with respect to that employer’s
seems to imply that the converse, i.e., a reduction to nil where
claims are nil, is also not contemplated. That would seem contrary
well-recognised cross-subsidisation principle inherent in the scheme and,
indeed, inherent in any scheme in the nature of
81. While it is probably correct to assert that to reduce a levy to nil in a
single case in isolation would not dramatically affect
the Compensation Fund,
nothing is done in isolation. Our legal system operates on the principle that
like cases are treated alike.
What is done for one employer must be done for
another employer in the same circumstances. The impact on the Fund is
cumulative.
The objects of the Act, collectively, compel us to bear this in
mind, while also bearing in mind the scope and apparent purpose of
itself. Clearly the legislature does not intend the section to be a dead letter
in the Act; this impression of the parliamentary
intent is reinforced by the
section’s recent re-enactment in substantially similar terms (as section
72C of the principal Act
from 1 July 2012) by the
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation (Employer Payments) Amendment Act 2011
Consideration
82. We have seen and heard considerable evidence in this case of safety
procedures and policies, written and unwritten. This evidence
was impressive,
although little attempt was made to compare the procedures and policies with
legislated requirements to show whether
or not they were in excess of
requirements. The employer’s position would no doubt be that the results,
in terms of the claims
record, speaks for itself.
83. There was also reference to rehabilitation facilities and services for
injured workers, although it is fair to say this was less
detailed. The point
was repeatedly made that there were so few workers injured in the service of the
employer that there was little
call for such facilities and services.
84. We share to some extent Ms Emmett’s surprise that a response rate
to a safety questionnaire of 19.25% was considered acceptable,
and that four of
the 15 respondents did not know who the OH&S representative was. However, we
were assured the latter point had
been “addressed”. We note that all
but one staff member knew that the RN (registered nurse) on duty is the
“designated
officer”, which is perhaps the more important thing to
know in the case of an injury or problem actually arising.
85. In truth, the employer’s case kept coming back to its safety
record. As set out above at [
], a print-out tendered by Ms Emmett for
WorkCover covering the decade from 2001-2002 to 2010-2011 showed a remarkable
claims record
over a sustained period of time, with zero claims costs in
2008-2009 and 2010-2011, and only $2 676 in the intervening year,
Total claims costs were less than $1 000 in 2002-2003,
2003-2004, 2005-2006 and 2007-2008, and in only one year in the decade exceeded
$3 000, being $30 140 in 2006-2007. Even that is not a major figure,
as shown by the extent of remissions granted under the bonus/penalty
that year and the following years when the “window” for those costs
remained open.
86. Crude comparisons obtained by dividing the total claims costs for all
employers in the
814301 Personal Care Services
classification by the
total number of employer locations show that the average claims costs for each
location are as follows:
Employer claims numbers
Employer claims costs
SAWIC average location
SAWIC average location
993/277 = 3.6
$17 300 858/ 277 = $62 458
1 028/253 = 4.1
$15 004 193/ 253 = $59 305
940/250 = 3.8
$15 411 937/ 250 = $61 648
1 001/251 = 4.0
$17 372 254/ 251 = $69 212
1 000/251 = 4.0
$17 995 135/ 251 = $71 694
1 009/267 = 3.8
$20 717 119/ 267 = $77 592
959/280 = 3.4
$14 966 588/ 280 = $53 452
921/283 = 3.3
$11 536 025/ 283 = $40 763
882/294 = 3.0
$8 484 821/ 294 = $28 860
844/274 = 3.1
$5 760 563/ 274 = $21 024
87. It is to be noted that in the only year of the decade in which the
employer experienced more claims than the location average
(2003), the total
costs were a trivial $156 (0.25% of the industry location average of
$61 648) and in the highest cost year (2006)
costs did not rise above 39%
of the industry location average. Both of those years are now quite some time in
the past. In the most
recent years, the results are outstanding. We do not think
these results were achieved by chance. Having heard the evidence of Mr
examined the other material placed in front of us by the parties, we are
prepared to draw the inference that the results
were achieved by the diligent
efforts of the employer’s staff members, and in particular, Mr Lowe.
88. We do not ignore the conventional wisdom that emerges from literature
that has been put to us in a number of cases that show that
a typical small
employer might only expect an injury every several years and that injury-free
years are to be expected. The present
employer is not small in that sense. The
average location in the relevant SAWIC grouping has experienced approximately
three or four
injuries per year in the decade we have examined, and a comparison
of the applicant’s remuneration totals with the averages
for the class
seems to indicate that the applicant is larger (or, at least, has a larger
payroll) than the average industry location.
We do not think the
applicant’s good claims history is explained by random statistical
phenomena. On the contrary, we find
the applicant operates in a notoriously
high-risk industry (as indicated by the base industry of 7.5%, which is the
maximum permissible
under the Act), and has produced outstanding results.
89. The remaining question is how these findings affect our exercise of the
discretion under section 67(1).
Johnson Steel Fabricators v. WorkCover
, at [34]-[37], we
spelled out our expectations of an employer seeking consideration from the Panel
of a remission under section 67(1):
“Given that the list of criteria for the exercise of the discretion
under section 67 appears in the section itself, we cannot
think those criteria
should come as a surprise or that any spelling out of what needs to be
demonstrated is necessary.
“The Panel is always sensitive to the position of small employers who
cannot be expected to have the resources to develop a
detailed knowledge of the
levy review system, especially if unrepresented, and where an employer is
represented in proceedings before
this Panel we endeavour to exercise the
greatest restraint in running up employers’ legal bills. We are keenly
aware that this
is a jurisdiction where legal costs are not recoverable. …
However, where the outcome of a review is crucially dependent on
Panel’s acceptance of evidence in the possession of the employer and
thought by the employer to be persuasive, it does
not seem too much to expect
that the employer should actually present that evidence.
“It seems to us that, in meeting that expectation, any employer should
aim to show more than simple compliance with the requirements
Occupational Health, Safety and Welfare Act 1986
and applicable
regulations. That is a legal requirement of that legislation, to be complied
with for that reason. Such compliance
is good to see, and to be encouraged. But
it is not something to be specially rewarded by the granting of a remission of
section 67.
It is to be remembered that the ordinary
position under
of the Act is that an employer pays the base levy
applicable to its industry classification. Anything that an employer contends
be rewarded by the Panel by the granting of a remission should reasonably
be expected to be, and be demonstrated to be, out of the
ordinary, in excess of
what the average employer is doing, and warranting the special recognition of a
remission under
.” [Emphasis added.]
91. In relation to the employer’s claims history, which we are prepared
to attribute to the strong safety culture described
to us, WorkCover has
properly furnished us with the material to enable us to make the appropriate
comparisons. As we have seen, the
recent comparisons are favourable to the
applicant, indeed, strikingly so.
92. In our respectful opinion, it is appropriate in this case to recognise
this employer’s superior contribution to the safety
of its workers by
exercising the discretion to grant a (partial) remission of the levy it would
otherwise have to pay with respect
to the year under consideration.
Quantum of remission
93. As we have already explained, we think the amount of the remission that
may be granted is at large. We think its size is subject
to the objects of the
Act, which collectively point in both conservative and liberal directions. We
reject the submission that the
Compensation Fund, by reason of the abolition of
the automatic bonus/penalty scheme, has an extra $47 million that it would not
have had, thus enabling a degree of generosity. The moneys saved from
that abolition have already been factored into the revisions
made to industry
levy rates at the beginning of the 2010-2011 levy year. However, Mr Sargent is
correct in his observation that those
revisions did not benefit the
applicant’s particular SAWIC.
94. Despite the abolition of the bonus/penalty scheme, the balance of the
consolidated scheme for remissions and supplements set out
in LAS09 is still in
operation. Many of its items provide for supplements, for example, the
supplement imposed for failure to provide
suitable employment under section 58B.
It would, however, be an exaggeration to suggest that those funds provide a
significant pool
from which remissions as proposed in the present case may be
drawn: a section 58B supplement, for example, is typically calculated
little more than the additional cost inflicted upon the fund by the relevant
95. We accept Mr Sargent’s submission that the lack of an obvious
offsetting source of funds for remissions should not, as a
matter of law, defeat
the clear intent of the section in an appropriate case. Nevertheless, we
consider in the circumstances that
in exercising our discretion in the present
case, it is appropriate that we set the quantum of the remission conservatively.
Additionally,
we do not overlook the other benefits to the applicant of its
strong safety culture and the commercial advantages accruing.
96. We mention that it has been traditional, in levy notices issued under the
consolidated scheme, to state the quantum of remissions
and supplements in terms
of a percentage of the base industry levy fixed for the relevant SAWIC grouping.
The wording of
, however, does not indicate any preference on the part
of Parliament as to whether remissions and supplements should be expressed
percentages or dollar terms.
97. Despite the mathematical attractions of percentages in a levy notice that
takes as its starting point an industry base rate expressed
in percentage terms,
we propose to prefer the precision and clarity of a dollar amount. Doing the
best we can, we fix the remission
in this case at the sum of $10 000 for
the 2010-2011 levy year. As the levy has, no doubt, already been paid by now, we
will be sufficient if this amount is credited in the Compensation Fund
against the employer’s future liabilities.
Determination
98. Pursuant to our delegated powers under section 72 of the Act, we vary the
reviewable decision, being the assessment of levy dated
4 June 2010. Pursuant to
section 67(1)
of the Act, the levy is adjusted by a remission in the sum of
Bob Donnelly
Deputy Member
We acknowledge apparent tension
between the comment in
Skilled Engineering
that “it seems
fair to treat the impugned decision as the starting point” and
Olga’s Fine Foods
that “the review under section 72
should be conducted as though with a blank page”, although the latter is
somewhat qualified
by the (unacknowledged) quote from Von Doussa J in
Santos v. Saunders
relating to noting the decision and the reasons
expressed for its making. The reference to the blank page is best thought of in
of the Panel’s approach to taking evidence, but the impugned
decision would often be the starting point for the reasoning process
Total number of claims
for the SAWIC divided by number of locations registered for the SAWIC for the
Total claims costs for
the SAWIC divided by number of locations registered for the SAWIC for the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (269 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter