URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASADT/2020/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:11:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Elizabeth Bertenshaw v Bruce Warner [2020] TASADT 4 (25 May 2020)
[2020] TASADT 4
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
Elizabeth Bertenshaw v Bruce Warner
[2020] TASADT
BERTENSHAW, Elizabeth
WARNER, Bruce
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
15 May 2020
DELIVERED ON:
25 May 2020
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Chairperson Clues
CATCHWORDS:
Is the proceeding a “
residents of different States -
Constitution
determining issue of jurisdiction.
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
; Burns v Corbett
[2018] HCA 15; Shuttleworth and Pearson
[2018] WASAT 112
; Sharma and Carlino
[2019] WASAT 1
; Medical Board of Australia v Yu
[2020] SACAT 3
; Palmer v Ayers
[2017] HCA 5
; Commonwealth of Australia v Wood
[2006] FCA 60
; Foxe v Brown
[1984] HCA 69
; Watson v Marshall; Watson v Cade
[1971] HCA 33
; Devantier v
McKenna & Ors
[2019] TASADT 2
; R v Oregan; ex parte Oregan
[1957] HCA 18
Wood v Gerke & Ors
[2007] TASADT 3
; Abblitt v The Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner
[2016] TASSC 12
DETERMINATION:
(1) The Tribunal determines
that it does not have jurisdiction to deal with this matter by reason of s75(iv)
Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution
1900 (Cth).
(2) The complaint is dismissed pursuant to
Anti-Discrimination Act
on the basis that it is misconceived.
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant:
Respondent:
M. Armstrong & S. Jackson
Solicitors:
Complainant:
Launceston Community Legal
Respondent:
Sparke Helmore
[2020] TASADT 4
Chairperson Clues
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. On 7 December 2018 Mrs Elizabeth Bertenshaw (the
complainant) lodged a complaint on behalf of her son, Ryan Bertenshaw, with the
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner (Commissioner) alleging conduct by the Tarremah
Steiner School (the first respondent) and Bruce
Warner (the second respondent)
towards Ryan in breach of the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
2. On 11 January 2019 the Commissioner accepted the complaint for
investigation.
3. The Commissioner investigated the complaint and on 12 July
2019 determined under s71(1)(c) of the Act that the complaint proceed
inquiry by the Anti-Discrimination Tribunal (Tribunal) because it disclosed
possible breaches of the Act.
4. The Tribunal listed the matter for
conciliation. The complaint against the first respondent was resolved in the
conciliation process.
The complaint against the second respondent remains
unresolved.
5. On 18 March 2020 the solicitors acting for the second
respondent wrote to the Tribunal advising that the second respondent was
resident of Western Australia which raised the question of whether or not the
Tribunal has jurisdiction to deal with the complaint
in light of the decision of
the High Court in Burns v Corbett [2018] HCA 15.
6. The second
respondent’s solicitors provided an outline of submissions and a sworn
affidavit of the second respondent in support
of a submission that the Tribunal
had no jurisdiction to deal with the complaint and if the Tribunal was to
determine the complaint
it would be acting “ultra vires”. Therefore
the most appropriate course of action was for the Tribunal to dismiss the
complaint for want of jurisdiction.
7. The Tribunal gave the parties the
opportunity to provide written submissions on this preliminary issue and the
matter was listed
for oral submissions on 15 May 2020.
Burns v Corbett
8. In the State Administrative Tribunal of Western Australia,
Senior Member Mr D Aitken provided the following useful summary in relation
the decision in Burns v Corbett (supra) in the decisions of Shuttleworth and
[2018] WASAT 112
and repeated at of Sharma and Carlino
[2019] WASAT 1
Section 75(iv) of the Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution
Act 1900 (Cth) (
Constitution
provides that the High Court shall have original jurisdiction (federal
of different
Constitution
empowers the Commonwealth Parliament to make laws investing any 'court of a
State' with federal jurisdiction and
(Cth) does that, subject to various limitations.
[18] Burns v Corbett concerned an appeal to the High Court from the decision
of the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales that the Civil
and Administrative Tribunal of New South Wales (NCAT) did not have jurisdiction
to hear and determine a dispute
arising under the
Anti-Discrimination
(NSW) (AD Act) between a resident of New South Wales and a resident
of another State; see Burns v Corbett at [14].
[19] At all material times, the complainant, Mr Burns was a resident of New
South Wales, the respondent to one of his complaints,
Ms Corbett was a resident
of Victoria and the respondent to his other complaint, Mr Gaynor was a resident
of Queensland; see Burns
v Corbett at [7].
[20] A majority of the High Court (Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane and Gageler JJ)
dismissed the appeal on the basis that:
The adjudicative authority in respect of the matters set out in
Constitution
cannot be conferred on an organ of government, federal or State, other than a
court referred to in Ch III of the
Constitution
see Burns v Corbett at [45], [46], [64], [65], [69] and [121] (Note: the courts
referred to in Ch III of the
Constitution
are the High Court, federal courts and courts of a State, which are therefore
the only courts on which federal jurisdiction can be
conferred).
It was accepted by all parties that NCAT was not a court of a State; see
Burns v Corbett at [27].
The provisions of the
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (NCAT Act) which confer
relation to the matters between Mr Burns, and Ms Corbett
and Mr Gaynor. And, pursuant to
Interpretation
(NSW), those provisions are to be read down so that they do not
confer jurisdiction on NCAT to determine a complaint under the AD
Act where the
complainant and the respondent to the complaint are 'residents of different
States' within the meaning of
Constitution
see Burns v Corbett at [64], [119] and [120].
[21] In summary, the decision in Burns v Corbett, was that:
The complaints by Mr Burns against Ms Corbett and Mr Gaynor were each a
'matter between residents of different States' for the purposes
Constitution
Those complaints were, therefore, within federal jurisdiction and could not
be dealt with by NCAT, since it is not a 'court of a State'
and, therefore,
cannot exercise federal jurisdiction; and
The provisions of the NCAT Act which purport to confer jurisdiction on NCAT
to deal with those complaints are to be read down so that
they do not confer
such jurisdiction.”
Agreed Facts
9. The complainant and the second respondent were residents of
Tasmania both at the time of the alleged discrimination and when the
complainant
lodged a complaint with the Commissioner on 7 December 2018.
10. The second
respondent became a resident of Western Australia in May 2019 and continues to
be a resident of that State.
11. The Commissioner referred the complaint to
the Tribunal for inquiry on 12 July 2019.
12. When the Tribunal conducts an
inquiry it involves an exercise of judicial power.
13. The Tribunal is not a
court of the State.
14. If the Tribunal finds that this is a
“matter” to which
Constitution
applies the Tribunal
will not have jurisdiction following the decision of Burns v Corbett
Questions to be determined
15. The following questions are to be determined by the
(a) Is the proceeding before the Tribunal a
“matter” for the purposes of
Constitution
the time the “matter” arose were the complainant and the second
respondent residents of different States for the
purposes of the
Constitution
Submissions of the Second Respondent
16. Counsel for the second respondent made the following
submissions:
• The point in time at which jurisdiction is to be
assessed by the Tribunal is when the proceeding in the Tribunal was
• The second respondent became a resident of Western
Australia in May 2019.
• The Commissioner referred the matter to the
Tribunal on 12 July 2019 and as at that date the parties were residents of
• It is only once a matter has been referred to the
Tribunal by the Commissioner (in this case, 12 July 2019) that it becomes
proceeding before the Tribunal and the matter commences.
the matter commenced in the Tribunal on 12 July 2019 is the earliest time the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction is able
to be assessed.
• Even if it is
appropriate to assess jurisdiction at some earlier time (which is not conceded)
the Tribunal is not “seized”
and is not impacted by a later move
interstate by one of the parties. This approach would be inconsistent with the
manner in which
other State tribunals have been interpreting Burns v Corbett
(supra) in similar matters involving residents of different States;
Shuttleworth and Pearson (supra); Sharma and Carlino (supra) and Medical Board
of Australia v Yu
[2020] SACAT 3.
• The Tribunal does not have
requiring the exercise
of Federal judicial power under
Constitution
• A “matter” has been defined to mean a
“justiciable controversy”. A justiciable controversy may arise
to proceedings being instituted. For example, a letter of demand is sent or a
complaint is made to an Ombudsman or Regulator.
However, it does not become a
matter before a court or tribunal until the matter is referred to that court or
tribunal. The matter
must be capable of identification in the relevant court or
tribunal. (Palmer v Ayers
[2017] HCA 5)
• The Tribunal cannot have
Commissioner.
• It is not correct to say that the matter was defined
at the time the complaint was made. The matter could only be defined
Tribunal when it was referred to the Tribunal.
• The scope of the
matter could not be defined until July 2019 when the Commissioner referred it to
the Tribunal.
• It was held by Heerey J in Commonwealth of Australia v
[2006] FCA 60
that “proceedings in the [Tribunal] are
commenced by referral by the Commissioner, not by the complainant
• The Tribunal is an independent statutory tribunal
established under the Act. Its main purpose is to conduct inquiries concerning
complaints about conduct prohibited by the Act (s13(a)) and to review decisions
of the Commissioner relating to exemptions, withdrawals,
rejections and
dismissals of complaints (s13(b)).
• The Commissioner is a separate
statutory appointment to the Tribunal and is responsible for the investigation
and resolution
of complaints (ss6(h) and 69(1)). The Commissioner is empowered
under the Act to do a number of things, including to determine the
procedures to
be followed in any investigation or complaint resolution (s7(a)).
Commissioner may refer a complaint to the Tribunal for an inquiry after it has
been investigated and cannot be resolved
by conciliation (ss71(1)(c), 74(1)-(2),
78(1)). However, the power of the Commissioner to investigate a complaint has
on whether the Tribunal – an entirely separate statutory body
– has jurisdiction to determine the complaint.
investigatory phase is complete, the Commissioner has no further involvement in
the matter.
• The Commissioner exercises administrative power in
exercising functions under the Act. The Tribunal exercises judicial power
exercising the inquiry function under the Act.
• Aside from the ability
for the Commissioner to refer a complaint to the Tribunal and the fact that the
two bodies are established
under the Act, the two are not otherwise
• A proceeding may become a “matter between residents of
different States” after it has commenced and before it
is determined. If
that happens the matter will then fall within Federal jurisdiction under
Constitution
. Therefore, although a proceeding, when it is commenced in
a court or tribunal, may be within State jurisdiction, the authority
adjudicate under State jurisdiction will cease if the matter subsequently falls
within Federal jurisdiction (see Sharma and Carlino
• If the parties are residents of different States at the time
of the hearing before the Tribunal and not at the time it was
Commissioner, the complaint is a matter that falls within Federal jurisdiction
and one that cannot be dealt with by the
Tribunal (see Shuttleworth and Pearson
(supra) at [48] and [49]).
• Even though the second respondent was a
resident of Tasmania when the alleged discrimination occurred and when the
complainant
lodged the complaint with the Commissioner, at the time that the
matter was referred to the Tribunal and at all times since, the
respondent has been a resident of Western Australia. The second respondent and
the complainant are residents of different
States and the matter requires the
exercise of Federal jurisdiction.
• If the Tribunal was to hear and
determine the complaint it would be exercising a Federal judicial power
“ultra vires”
as it does not possess Federal diversity
Submissions of the Complainant
17. Counsel for the complainant made the following
submissions:
• The conduct of the second respondent that the
complainant complains about occurred when the parties were both residents of
• The matter arises on the date the complainant lodged the
complaint with the Commissioner. At that time the complainant and
respondent were residents of Tasmania therefore, the matter does not fall within
Constitution
• Once jurisdiction is
‘seized’, the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is not impacted by the
second respondent’s
subsequent moving interstate. Therefore, because the
Tribunal is not exercising or purporting to exercise Federal judicial power
has jurisdiction to conduct the inquiry.
• The matter before the
Tribunal does not require the exercise of Federal judicial power and it is not a
matter to which
Constitution
• The facts of
this matter are to be distinguished from Burns v Corbett (supra). In that case
at all relevant times the disputing
parties were residents of different States,
unlike in this matter, the conduct to which the complaint relates occurred in
while both parties were residents in Tasmania. The parties were still
residents of Tasmania when the complaint was lodged with the
Commissioner. The
second respondent only moved to Western Australia after the Commissioner
commenced an investigation into the complaint.
• The matter arose at
the time the complainant lodged the complaint with the Commissioner and
therefore the residency of the
parties for the purposes of determining whether
the Tribunal has jurisdiction should be assessed at the commencement of the
• The matter between the parties is defined and jurisdiction
should be determined at the time the complaint is lodged and accepted
Commissioner (Foxe v Brown
[1984] HCA 69
; Watson v Marshall; Watson v Cade
[1971] HCA 33
; Devantier v McKenna & Ors
[2019] TASADT 2).
Commissioner may reject a complaint if he or she is of the opinion that the
complaint is trivial, vexatious, misconceived
or lacking in substance amongst
other reasons listed in
Pursuant to
, the Commissioner has the power
to reject complaints as a result of “jurisdictional
• A complaint lodged with the Commissioner discloses
the extent of the matter from the complainant’s perspective.
a complaint is accepted by the Commissioner for investigation, the scope of the
matter is defined. The Commissioner at
that point in time sets out what the
issues are (the issues are outlined in the Assessment Decision and Reasons for
Decision document
which is provided to the parties). The Commissioner’s
decision also defines the scope of the issues subject to an inquiry if
is referred to the Tribunal.
• The process followed by the Commissioner
in accepting complaints defines the scope of the matter and assists in
identifying
any jurisdictional issues which may be relevant at the time the
complaint is made. The scope of the matter does not expand upon
a complaint
being accepted (unless with the approval of the Commissioner or Tribunal) and
therefore the date the complaint is lodged
is the most appropriate time to
assess issues related to jurisdiction.
• The cases of Shuttleworth and
Pearson (supra) and Sharma and Carlino (supra) are distinguishable. They deal
with building
complaints which are different to discrimination matters. The
Building Commissioner has broad powers to take positive actions whereas
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner does not. Building complaints can take a number
of different courses depending upon the order
made, whereas with respect to a
complaint made under the Act, there is consistency in the process.
the Tribunal has no jurisdiction on the facts of this case, complainants would
be severely prejudiced when making complaints
pursuant to the Act as it would
essentially create a loophole whereby a respondent/s could move interstate to
prevent the matter
from advancing. Conversely, a complainant/s would be forced
to continue to reside in Tasmania until a matter is finalised.
logical that because both parties were residents of Tasmania at the time the
complaint was instituted the Tribunal has
interstate.
The Legislative Scheme
18. Before considering the issue of whether this is a
“matter” for the purposes of
Constitution
necessary to consider the terms of the legislation:
• The Commissioner is appointed under s5.
Act confers ten wide ranging statutory functions with respect to discrimination
and prohibited conduct (s6).
• One of the Commissioner’s
statutory functions is to investigate and seek to resolve complaints made in
relation to prohibited
conduct (s6(h)).
• A person who alleges that
discrimination or prohibited conduct was directed against them may complain to
the Commissioner
(s60(1)(a)).
• The Commissioner may authorise a person
nominated by a complainant or respondent to act on behalf of that party
• A complaint is to be made in writing and signed by the
complainant. It is to identify the person against whom the alleged
discrimination or prohibited conduct was directed and against whom the complaint
is made. It must set out the details of the alleged
discrimination or
prohibited conduct (s62).
• The grounds upon which the Commissioner may
reject a complaint are specified in s64.
• If the Commissioner accepts
the complaint the respondent must be notified, with reasons and a copy of the
complaint, within
10 days (s67).
• Once accepted the Commissioner (or a
person authorised by the Commissioner) may investigate a complaint
• At the completion of an investigation the Commissioner is to
determine that the complaint is dismissed; is to proceed to conciliation
to proceed to an inquiry (s71).
• The Commissioner must refer a
complaint for inquiry if he or she believes the complaint cannot be resolved by
conciliation,
has attempted to resolve the complaint by conciliation but has not
been successful or believes that it should be referred for inquiry
• Inquiries are to be conducted by the Tribunal pursuant to
Division 4, Part 6 of the Act.
• The Tribunal is established under the
Act and its functions include conducting an inquiry into a complaint
• The Commissioner is to provide the Tribunal with a report
relating to any complaint that is referred to the Tribunal
• Inquiries are to be conducted with as little formality and as
expeditiously as the requirements of the Act and a proper consideration
matters before the Tribunal permit (s86(1)).
• The Tribunal may
determine a question of law or procedure (s86(4)).
• The Tribunal is
not bound by the rules of evidence and may inform itself on any matter as it
thinks fit (s87).
• If the Tribunal finds that a complaint is
substantiated it may make one or more of the orders listed in s89.
• The Tribunal has a broad power to make interim orders at any stage
of the inquiry (s98).
• The Tribunal may dismiss a complaint if, after
an inquiry, it finds that the complaint is unsubstantiated (s99).
19. It is clear from the legislative scheme that the functions
and powers of the Commissioner and the Tribunal are quite different
distinct. The Tribunal is separate to the Commissioner. Once the investigative
phase of the Commissioner has been completed
the Commissioner has no further
involvement in the matter. The Tribunal then conducts its own independent
Is the proceeding before the Tribunal a “matter”
for the purposes of s75(iv) theConstitution?
20. In relation to this issue, I refer to and repeat paragraphs
[23] - [30] of the decisions of Shuttleworth and Pearson (supra) and
Carlino (supra):
The High Court has considered the question of what a 'matter' is for the
purposes of
Constitution
in a number of cases.
[24] In Re Judiciary and Navigation Acts
[1921] HCA 20
(1921) 29 CLR 257
at 265, the High Court stated
that a 'matter' is not a legal proceeding; it is the subject matter in a legal
proceeding in which
there is some immediate right, duty or liability to be
established by the determination of the Court.
[25] In Fencott v Muller
(1983) 152 CLR 570 (Fencott)
at 603, the High
Court stated that a 'matter' is a justiciable controversy, identifiable
independently of the proceedings which are
brought for its determination and
encompassing all claims made within the scope of the controversy.
[26] In CGU Insurance v Blakeley
[2016] HCA 2
(2016) 259 CLR 339
at 351 the High Court stated
that 'matter' has two elements. Firstly, the subject matter itself and secondly,
the concrete or adversarial
nature of the dispute sufficient to give rise to a
justiciable controversy.
[27] In Burns v Corbett at [70], Gageler J referred to the above three cases
and stated, succinctly, that a 'matter' encompasses a
concrete controversy about
legal rights existing independently of the forum in which that controversy might
come to be adjudicated.
[28] In Re McBain; Ex parte Australian Catholic Bishops Conference
[2002] HCA 16
(2002) 209 CLR 372
at 405 the High Court stated
that the task of identification of the 'matter' is to be approached as a
tripartite inquiry: first,
the identification of the subject matter for
determination in the proceeding; secondly, the identification of the right, duty
liability to be established in the proceeding; thirdly, the identification of
the controversy between the parties to the proceeding
for the quelling of which
judicial power is invoked.
[29] In Rizeq v Western Australia
[2017] HCA 23
(2017) 91 ALJR 707 (Rizeq)
at 719, the majority
of the High Court, citing Fencott at 608, stated that the essential character of
judicial power stems from the
unique and essential function that judicial power
performs by quelling controversies about legal rights and legal obligations
ascertainment of facts, application of law and exercise, where
appropriate, of judicial discretion.
[30] In Palmer v Ayres
[2017] HCA 5
(2017) 259 CLR 478
at 491, the High Court stated
that the controversy that the Court is being asked to determine must be genuine,
and not an advisory
opinion divorced from a controversy, and only a claim is
necessary; a 'matter' can exist even though a right, duty or liability has
been, and may never be, established.”
21. Applying these principles to the facts of this case, I
determine that once the complaint was referred to the Tribunal it became
‘matter’ and that the relevant date for the purpose of determining
Constitution
is engaged is the date on which the
proceedings were brought in the Tribunal (see R v Oregan; ex parte Oregan
and Medical Board of Australia v Yu (supra) at [15]).
22. The Tribunal
exercises judicial power to conduct the inquiry and to determine the complaint
before it by taking evidence, making
findings on material questions, applying
the law and exercising the discretion given to it to dismiss the complaint or
it is substantiated and make any of the orders set out in s89 of the
23. The complaint only becomes a concrete justiciable controversy at the
time it is referred to the Tribunal. Contrary to the submissions
made by the
complainant the scope of the controversy is not defined by the Commissioner at
the time the complaint is made. The scope
of the controversy is to be determined
by the Tribunal. The referral report prepared by the Commissioner is advisory
only. It is
not binding on the Tribunal and it would be open to the Tribunal to
find that some provision of the Act, other than those provisions
mentioned in
the referral report, have been breached (see Wood v Gerke & Ors
24. In conducting an inquiry, the Tribunal has an
inquisitorial role. The Commissioner’s function is to investigate, not to
determine the complaint. The Commissioner’s role is to decide whether a
complaint should be dismissed, proceed to conciliation
or proceed to inquiry
(see Abblitt v The Anti-Discrimination Commissioner
[2016] TASSC 12
25. The role of the Tribunal is separate to the role of the
Commissioner. The involvement of the Commissioner ceases when a matter
referred to the Tribunal for inquiry together with a referral report. Once that
occurs, the Tribunal is free to conduct an inquiry
on any terms it considers
appropriate.
26. The Tribunal must make its own decision as to whether there
has been discrimination or prohibited conduct in breach of the Act.
The standard
of proof required is the civil standard, also known as “the balance of
probabilities”. The Tribunal is required
to make its own findings of fact
as to what the complainant/s and the respondent/s said and did in the subject
matter of the complaint.
The Tribunal must make its own findings of fact,
assess the credibility of the witnesses and evaluate the competing evidence on
any particular issue (see Burton v Houston
[2004] TASSC 57).
27. I do not
accept the submission that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is
‘seized’ on the date that the complaint is
made to the Commissioner
by the complainant or that the scope of the matter is defined as from that date.
Further I do not accept
that the cases of Shuttleworth and Pearson (supra) and
Sharma and Carlino (supra) are distinguishable from the facts of this case.
find the cases to be relevant and persuasive to my findings.
28. I find that
in this case the ‘matter’ or the concrete justiciable controversy
arose at the time the Commissioner referred
the complaint to the Tribunal for
investigation.
At the time the “matter” arose were the Complainant
and the Second Respondent residents of different States?
29. This issue was also considered in detail in the decisions
of Shuttleworth and Pearson (supra) at [42] and Sharma and Carlino (supra)
[44]. Senior Member Mr Aitken states:
The High Court has considered the meaning of the words 'residents of different
Constitution
in a number of cases, from which the Tribunal draws the following principles:
(1) Only a natural person can be a resident; see The Australasian Temperance
and General Mutual Life Assurance Society Limited v Howe
[1922] HCA 50
(1922) 31 CLR 290 (Howe's
case) in which the High
Court (Knox CJ, Gavan Duffy and Higgins JJ) held that the word 'residents' in
Constitution
refers to natural persons only and not to artificial persons or corporations.
The High Court refused to re‑open that decision
in Cox v Journeaux
[1934] HCA 72
(1934) 52 CLR 282 (Cox)
and again in Crouch v
Commissioner for Railways
[1985] HCA 69
(1985) 159 CLR 22
, in which the Court applied
(2) A natural person can only be a resident of one State at any time; see
Howe's case at 296, where it was stated by Knox CJ and Gavin
Duffy J that
Constitution
seems to assume that a resident of one State cannot at the same time be a
resident of another State.
(3) A resident is a natural person who resides permanently in a place, which
is his or her home; see Howe's case where it was stated,
by Knox CJ and Gavin
Duffy J at 295 and by Higgins J at 327, that a resident is a natural person who
resides permanently in a place.
Also, in Howe's case it was stated by Isaacs J
at 324, that a natural person is a resident of the State where, in fact, the
of his residence shows it is his real home. And also, in Howe's case it
was stated by Starke J at 327, that a resident is a natural
person who lives,
dwells and has his home in some place.
(4) A natural person can be a resident of a State after residing there for
only a brief period of time; see R v Macdonald; Ex parte
[1953] HCA 35
(1953) 88 CLR 197
(a month), R v Langdon; Ex
parte Langdon
[1953] HCA 66
(1953) 88 CLR 158
(five months) and R v Oregan;
Ex parte Oregan
[1957] HCA 18
(1957) 97 CLR 323
(two and a half months).
(5) There must not be residents of the same State 'on both sides of the
record'; see Watson and Godfrey v Cameron
[1928] HCA 4
(1928) 40 CLR 446.
Mr Watson, who was a resident
of Victoria, and Mr Godfrey, who was a resident of New South Wales, instituted
an action in the High
Court against Mr Cameron, who was a resident of New South
Wales. The High Court (Knox CJ, Isaacs, Higgins, Gavan Duffy, Powers and
JJ) held that it did not have jurisdiction under
Constitution
to deal with the matter because it was not an action between residents of
different States. Knox CJ stated, at 448, that where there
is a resident of New
South Wales on each side of the record, then it is impossible to say that the
controversy is between residents
of different States. Higgins J stated, at 449,
that in his opinion, the plaintiff or plaintiffs must be resident in one State
the defendant or defendants must be resident in another State for the action
to be 'between' residents of different States.
(6) If a corporation is a party in a proceeding it is precluded from being a
matter 'between residents of different States'. In Cox
an action was brought in
the High Court by a natural person resident of Queensland against a number of
natural persons, who were
residents of Victoria and two companies which had been
incorporated in Victoria. Dixon J ordered that the action was to be dismissed
unless the plaintiff elected to proceed only against the defendants who were
natural persons, applying the decision in Howe's case.
The plaintiff appealed
the decision of Dixon J to the Full Court (constituted by Gavan Duffy CJ,
Starke, Evatt and McTiernan JJ),
which dismissed the appeal. In Rochford v Dayes
[1989] HCA 17
(1989) 84 ALR 405 (Rochford)
, in a proceeding in
the High Court, the plaintiff and the first and second defendants were natural
persons and residents respectively
of New South Wales, Queensland and Western
Australia and the third defendant was a corporation. In Rochford, at 406,
Gaudron J noted
that in Cox Dixon J, at first instance, held that the presence
of a corporation on the record had the effect of denying to a proceeding
otherwise between residents of different States the character of a matter
'between residents of different States' as those words
are used in
Constitution
and followed that decision, making an order that the action be dismissed unless
the plaintiff elected to proceed only against the
first and second
respondents.
(7) The relevant date of a natural person's residence is the date the
proceeding is commenced as opposed to the date of the conduct
in question in the
matter; see Watson v Marshall and Cade
[1971] HCA 33
(1971) 124 CLR 621
at 623 and Momcilovic v The
[2011] HCA 34
(8) A proceeding may become a 'matter between residents of different States'
after it has commenced and before it is determined. If
that happens the matter
will then fall within federal jurisdiction under
Constitution
'Jurisdiction' is the authority to adjudicate or determine a matter, which is to
be distinguished from the law that is applied in
the exercise of that
Therefore, although a proceeding,
when it is commenced in a court or the
Tribunal, may be within State jurisdiction, the authority to adjudicate under
State jurisdiction
will cease if the matter subsequently falls within federal
30. Applying the above principles the Tribunal finds:
(a) The second respondent is now, and has been since the
date the matter was referred by the Commissioner to the Tribunal, a resident
Western Australia and the complainant is, and has at all material times, been a
resident of Tasmania.
(b) Even though the second respondent and the
complainant were both residents of Tasmania (the same State) at the time when
the alleged
discriminatory or prohibited behaviour occurred and at the time the
complaint was made to the Commissioner, at the time that the
Commissioner
referred the complaint to the Tribunal (in July 2019) the second respondent was
a resident of Western Australia and
that continues to be the case. The second
respondent can only be a resident of one State at any time. At the time this
matter arose
and the issue of jurisdiction is to be determined he was a resident
of Western Australia.
(c) The second respondent and the complainant are
natural persons.
31. Therefore, the Tribunal finds that at the time the matter
arose, the second respondent and the complainant were and continue to
residents of different States for the purposes of
Constitution
32. In relation to the issue of residency, the complainant
relies upon the decision of the Tribunal in Devantier v McKenna & Ors
(supra) to support a finding that because at the time the complaint was
instituted, it was a complaint between residents of Tasmania,
the Tribunal had
33. The second respondent says that
Devantier v McKenna & Ors (supra) is distinguishable from this case given
that the complainant
in that case was a resident of Tasmania at all relevant
times, including at the time of the referral of the complaint by the
Commissioner
to the Tribunal. The complainant in that matter moved to Victoria
after the referral by the Commissioner to the Tribunal.
34. Further, the
evidence of the complainant in Devantier v McKenna & Ors (supra) was that he
was merely “residing in Victoria
on a temporary basis and still regarded
himself as a Tasmanian resident” at [5]. This is to be contrasted with
the present
case where the second respondent has become a permanent resident of
Western Australia since May 2019, prior to the referral of the
matter by the
Commissioner to the Tribunal. On this basis I find that the decision of
35. In Devantier v McKenna & Ors (supra) the parties were residents of
the same State at the time of the referral of the complaint
by the Commissioner
to the Tribunal. The decision is consistent with my finding in this case that as
at the date that the proceedings
were brought before the Tribunal and it became
a ‘matter’ before the Tribunal, the parties were residents of
36. In response to the questions to be determined by the
Tribunal, I find that when the Commissioner referred the complaint to the
Tribunal for inquiry it became a “matter” for the purposes of
Constitution
. Further, I find that at the time the matter arose
in July 2019, the complainant and the second respondent were residents of
States for the purposes of the
Constitution
. In the circumstances,
following the decision of Burns v Corbett (supra), this Tribunal does not have
the complaint.
37. The preclusion of jurisdiction
on this Tribunal to deal with this matter as a result of the High Court decision
of Burns v Corbett
(supra) is an unfortunate result for the complainant.
However, it is an issue that can only be rectified by the Parliament of
38. The Tribunal makes the following orders:
(1) The Tribunal determines that it does not have
Constitution
Act 1900 (Cth).
(2) The complaint is dismissed
pursuant to
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
on the basis that it
is misconceived.
CHAIRPERSON
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (206 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter