URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASWRCT/2021/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:23:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Candice Care Inc. v S. [2021] TASWRCT 20 (18 June 2021)
[2021] TASWRCT 20
WORKERS REHABILITATION AND COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
Candice Care Inc. v S.
[2021] TASWRCT
CANDICE CARE INC.
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
27 April 2021, 24 May 2021, 2 June 2021 and by
written submissions completed 11 June 2021
DELIVERED ON:
18 June 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Commissioner Wilkins
CATCHWORDS:
Dispute of claim under s81A – service of notice of
dispute – purported electronic service – purported service by
sending correspondence to solicitors – whether Tribunal has
Department of Health and Human Services v H.
[2011] TASWRCT 7
Rogerson v Tchia
[1995] NTCA 34
(1995) 123 FLR 126
; Thorne Airfield Lighting Pty Ltd v W
[2012] TASWRCT 11
State of Tasmania v Herlihy
[2019] TASSC 5
Pivot Limited against Crawford; Re
[1999] TASSC 67
State of Tasmania v
2004] TASSC 15;
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
DETERMINATION:
The employer’
referral is dismissed for
want of jurisdiction.
REPRESENTATION:
Solicitors:
Everett Flight & Associates
Carter Newell Lawyers
[2021] TASWRCT 20
Commissioner Wilkins
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. This is a decision about whether the Tribunal has
Workers Rehabilitation
and Compensation Act 1988
(“the Act”). The jurisdictional issue
arises because there is a question about whether the worker was served with
of the employer’s dispute of his claim, as required by
Section 81A
of the Act provides, in part:
employer who disputes liability to pay compensation by way of weekly payments
for an injury referred to in
(1) or benefits under Division 2 of
must, within 84 days of receiving the claim for compensation in respect of
the injury to the worker –
(a) serve the worker with written notice that the employer disputes
liability –
(i) to pay compensation by way of weekly payments; or
(ii) to pay any benefits payable under Division 2 of
of the injury; and
(b) inform the worker of the reasons for disputing liability; and
(c) refer the matter to the Tribunal.
(2) The referral of a matter to the Tribunal is to be accompanied by
(a) the prescribed fee; and
(b) all evidentiary material on which the employer intends to rely at the
hearing of the matter.
(2AA) If an employer fails to lodge evidentiary material under subsection
(2)(b), the employer may not rely on that material unless
the Tribunal otherwise
Section 159
of the Act deals with service of notices and
documents. It relevantly provides:
“(1) Where under this
Act a notice or other document, other than a notice of injury or claim for
compensation referred to in
, is required or authorized to be
served on a person, the notice or document may be served –
(a) in the case of a person who is neither a
body corporate nor a firm –
(i) by delivering it to him
personally;
(ii) by leaving it at that person's place
of residence last known to the person required or authorized to serve the notice
document with someone who apparently resides there, or at that person's
place of business or employment last known to the person
required or authorized
to serve the notice or other document with someone who is apparently employed
there, being in either case
a person who has or apparently has attained the age
of 16 years; or
(iii) by sending it by post to that
person's place of residence, business, or employment last known to the person
required or authorized
to serve the notice or other
4. The employer’
referral has not quite followed
the usual course of these referrals, and because some of the things that
happened in that course
have been the subject of submissions in relation to the
5. The worker made a claim for compensation in relation to a
psychological injury. I am advised by counsel for the employer that
employer does not have workers compensation insurance in Tasmania.
April 2021 the solicitors for the employer filed a referral in the Tribunal
pursuant to
of the Act.
form itself provides:
following documents or information must be attached to this referral:
1. Copy of claim form and medical certificate/s.
2. Notice to worker under
3. All evidentiary material intended to be relied upon at the
8. No materials were filed in support of the referral, apart
from a copy of correspondence sent to the solicitors for the worker via
dated 6 April 2021.
9. The terms of the
referral set out the
employer’s reasons for disputing liability:
“The employer does
not accept that that any psychological injury from which [the worker] claims to
be suffering is referable
to or is a consequence of any conduct in the
workplace. In this regard the employer denies the unparticularised allegations
by [the worker] in his application for workers compensation that he has
been subjected to “indirect bullying, discrimination,
intimidation, high
workload, threats of job loss, lack of resources, damage to reputation in the
State to the company being accused
of Commonwealth fraud.” The employer
categorically denies the scandalous allegation advanced by [the worker] to the
that Candice Care Inc. has been “accused of Commonwealth
fraud”. Rather, Candice Care contends that [the worker’s]
workers compensation benefits is fraudulent and any psychological injury from
which he may suffer is referable to matters
unrelated to his employment, that
is, stressors in his personal life.”
10. The copy correspondence filed with the referral to the
worker’s solicitors advised:
“The purpose of this letter is to inform
your client, pursuant to
and (b) of the
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1988
(Tasmania) that our client disputes any liability to pay
compensation to your client by way of weekly benefits, inform your client
reasons for disputing liability and that our client requires this matter to be
referred to the Tribunal.”
The bases of dispute set out in the
referral were
repeated, and the correspondence went on:
“In advance of any hearing, our client will
require your client to subject himself to an independent medical examination by
a properly accredited and disinterested psychiatrist, who will be asked to
specifically comment as to whether any psychological injury
from which your
client claims to suffer is referable to events in the workplace or, as is our
client’s contention, stressors
in your client’s private
referral was listed for hearing in accordance with
the Tribunal’s usual process.
12. On 23 April 2021 the solicitors for
the employer filed in the Tribunal an affidavit sworn by counsel for the
employer exhibiting
a copy of correspondence sent to the worker’s general
practitioner, and to the worker’s solicitors, both dated 22 April
advising that an order was being sought from the Tribunal for the worker to
attend an independent psychiatric examination.
The worker’s solicitors
were requested to advise, in advance of the hearing scheduled before the
Tribunal, whether the worker
would submit to such an assessment. The affidavit
from counsel for the employer also evidenced a response that had been forwarded
by the worker’s solicitors advising:
“It is not clear why
you have sought to file an application in the Tribunal seeking that [the worker]
be assessed by a psychiatrist
when you have not nominated a date and time for
that appointment, nor sought confirmation of my client’s availability to
such appointment beforehand. My client will likely attend an appointment
with Dr Sale, subject to notification of the time, date
and location of same.
Please confirm when you propose the appointment occur. Please also confirm that
your client will pre-pay
my client’s travel expenses. I can then take
instructions as to [the worker’s] availability.”
13. In addition to the affidavit with its annexed
correspondence, the solicitors for the employer filed submission in support of
application under
of the Act that the worker be independently
referral, and the employer’s application in
relation to independent medical assessment came before the Tribunal on 27 April
15. I advised counsel for the employer that the application for an
order for the worker to be independently medically assessed appeared
unnecessary in the circumstances, in that the Act did not require an order for
independent medical review absent a worker’s
refusal to submit to the
same. Counsel for the employer advised me that the worker’s solicitor had
indicated as much to him
and that he would accordingly make arrangements for the
assessment to take place.
16. On that basis, counsel for the employer
requested that the
referral be adjourned to enable that to take
17. In relation to the application for adjournment of the
referral, the worker’s counsel pointed out that at this time, the referral
was before the Tribunal with no supporting evidence.
It was her application
that the referral be dismissed until such time as the employer was in a position
to make an appropriate referral
when it had its evidence in support of its
18. I indicated to counsel for the employer that if it was intended
to proceed with the
referral, he would need to seek the leave of the
Tribunal to rely on any evidence in support of that referral, and he advised
it was his intention to do so. The
referral was adjourned until 24
May 2021, and the application for an order that the worker submit to independent
medical assessment
was dismissed.
19. Prior to the next hearing date, the
solicitors for the employer filed in the Tribunal, and forwarded to the
worker’s solicitors,
number of documents. They were a statutory
declaration by the Managing Director of the employer, Ms Dover, a report
prepared by Dr
Peter Miller, Consultant Psychiatrist, dated 17 May 2021, and a
statutory declaration by Ms Holly Smith, the Operations Manager of
20. Just prior to the
referral being heard, the Tribunal and
the worker’s solicitors received via email written submissions on behalf
of the employer,
addressing the employer’s application for leave to rely
upon material that had not been filed with the
referral, and the submission
in support of the employer’s argument to dispute the claim for
compensation.
21. When the
referral came before the Tribunal on 24 May
2021, counsel for the worker indicated that the employer’s application for
to rely on evidence not filed with the referral would be resisted, but
that as a preliminary issue the worker raised that the evidence
Tribunal showed that notice of the dispute and a copy of the referral had been
provided only to the worker’s solicitors’
office by email, and had
not been served on the worker as required by
Counsel for the worker
submitted that
of the Act deals with service, and that strict compliance is
required when serving a worker under
Counsel for the worker referred to
the Tribunal decision of Department of Health and Human Services v H.
In that case, Commissioner Chandler, amongst other things,
determined that although service of documents might be effected under
email, in that case the purported service by email of notice of the dispute to
the worker’s last known place of employment
upon a person apparently
employed there was ineffective, there being no evidence that either the worker
or the purported recipient
of the notice had consented to service by electronic
means upon that recipient.
22. Counsel for the worker indicated that her
understanding was that the initial workers compensation certificate in support
claim was dated 18 February 2021. She calculated that the 84th day from
18 February 2021 is 13 May 2021. Her submission was that
there was no evidence
that the worker had been served with notice of the dispute or a copy of the
referral before that date. I note
the claim for compensation indicates that it
was given to the employer on 19 February 2021, which would actually make the
14 May 2021.
23. Counsel for the employer conceded that it appeared
to be the case that the worker had not been served directly with notice of
dispute, but he submitted that Ms Everett, the worker’s counsel and
solicitor, had been served with the material and had
appeared on behalf of the
worker in proceedings relating to the
referral. He submitted that it was
clear the dispute had come to the worker’s attention, and the worker had
not been prejudiced
in resisting the dispute in relation to his
24. After a brief adjournment to enable counsel for the employer to
refer to his files, he made some further submissions that the
wife had given a direction on 19 March 2021 that the worker was unable to cope,
and that she requested there be no
direct dealings with the worker. On that
basis, counsel for the employer said they began to deal directly with the
solicitors in accordance with those instructions.
relation to the particular requirements of
, counsel for the employer
submitted that where his firm had been asked not to engage directly with the
worker, the worker’s
place of business could be regarded as being his
solicitor’s office. He advised that at least four pieces of
correspondence
had been exchanged between his office and worker’s
solicitors since the
referral had been filed. Counsel for the employer
sought the opportunity to put further evidence before the Tribunal and make some
further submissions in relation to the jurisdictional issue that has been
raised, and the
referral was again adjourned, this time to 2 June
26. Prior to the
referral coming on again for further hearing, the
solicitors for the employer filed a statutory declaration of counsel for the
dated 27 May 2021, and some submissions in relation to the
27. The statutory declaration attached and referred to
a number of documents as follows:
(a) An email from Mr Di Santo, People and Culture Manager
with the employer, dated 18 March 2021, referring to the worker’s
for compensation and requesting the provision of an incident report from the
(b) A file note of a conversation made by one of the employer’s
solicitors on 19 March 2021. I will refer to this file note
(c) An email from the worker’s wife to Mr Di Santo dated 19
March 2021, responding to the request for an incident report form,
issues that Mr Di Santo had raised in his email about attempts that had been
made to contact the worker and his wife and
enquiring about some matters
relating to the worker’s claim for compensation. The email included
“I will require all
correspondence to be sent to myself via email. [The
worker] is not to be contacted by any parties from Candice Care, as his mental
health is extremely vulnerable at present”
(d) A response from Mr Di
Santo to the worker’s wife in draft. The statutory declaration indicated
that the response had been
sent to the worker’s wife via email of 19 March
2021 at 11:10 am, and that the worker had not submitted any incident report
respect of the claim. I note here that in fact what was annexed to the statutory
declaration was an email from Mr Di Santo to
Ms Dover with what appears to be
the draft email, which is headed “for approval before sending”.
There is no evidence
that the email was actually sent. However, nothing, in my
view, turns on this.
(e) File note of counsel for the employer’s
attendance at a teleconference before the Registrar of the Tribunal in relation
to a referral that had been made under
of the Act by the worker. That
referral sought the appointment of the Nominal Insurer in relation to the claim,
in the absence of
a workers compensation insurer for the employer. Mr
Heath’s file note indicates towards the conclusion of the teleconference
“I said I would be sending through to [the worker] today, now via Everson
[this appears to be a reference to Ms Everett, the
solicitor for the worker],
the letter denying liability for the workers compensation benefits and the
notification.”
(f) A letter from Ms Everett to the employer’s
solicitors dated 1 April 2021, which confirmed that the employer had agreed to
credit the worker’s annual leave, and pay weekly compensation and medical
expenses in accordance with the Act.
(g) Copy of correspondence from the
employer’s solicitors to the worker’s solicitors dated 6 April 2021
via email confirming
the matters set out in Ms Everett’s earlier
correspondence, forwarding a copy of an email in relation to re-crediting of
and advising “With respect to our client’s disputation of
your client’s entitlement to any workers compensation
benefits, we will
send you a separate letter setting out the basis of that dispute, before filing
application in the Workers Compensation & Rehabilitation
(h) Letter to the Tribunal dated 6 April 2021 via post and
fax, enclosing the
referral and a copy of the correspondence forwarded to
Ms Everett on the same date. These documents have previously been referred
(i) Exchanges of correspondence between the solicitors for the employer
and the solicitors for the worker relating to the application
for an order that
the worker attend an independent medical assessment (which has already been
referred to above) which was ultimately
dismissed by consent.
(j) Exchanges
of correspondence between the solicitors for the worker and the solicitors for
the employer relating to invoices for
medical and related treatment that had
been submitted by the worker and/or forwarded by his solicitors.
referral was heard on 2 June 2021 in relation to
the jurisdictional issue.
29. In the course of the hearing, the solicitor for
the worker raised an issue in relation to the document referred to in paragraph
27(b) above, which counsel for the employer in his statutory declaration had
described as a file note between the worker’s
wife and the
employer’s solicitor. Ms Everett raised that, on the face of the file
note, it appeared to be a record of a discussion
with someone from the employer,
rather than the worker’s wife. I heard the submissions from both parties,
but directed counsel
for the employer to file further information in relation to
that file note, as he indicated the solicitor who had taken the phone
available to confirm the situation. I granted the parties leave to provide
additional submissions upon receipt of the further
information. By email dated
4 June 2021 counsel for the employer filed correspondence and a transcript of
the file note in question
in the Tribunal. The transcript of the file note by
Mr Gapes, who took the telephone call and made the file note, shows that the
telephone exchange in question was with Ms Dover, and not with the
worker’s wife, as had been deposed in the statutory declaration
2021. The notes indicate that the conversation had included that the
worker’s wife was the point of contact, and
that the worker was not
Submissions on behalf of the employer
30. Counsel for the employer submitted that
of the Act is
not exhaustive, and what is essential is that notice of the dispute comes to the
attention of the worker (referencing
Rogerson v Tchia
[1995] NTCA 34
(1995) 123 FLR 126)
the case of
, within 84 days.
31. It was submitted that notice of the
dispute came to the worker’s attention within the 84 day period is
evidenced by the
fact that the worker and his solicitor attended the Tribunal
via telephone in relation to the
hearing, and the worker’s solicitor
engaged in exchanges of correspondence with the employer’s solicitors in
to the notice of dispute, the payment of medical invoices and
arrangements for independent medical assessment.
32. It was submitted I could
infer that Ms Everett gave notice to the worker of the details of the dispute,
but that ultimately it
is unnecessary for me to draw that
33. Counsel submitted that it was appropriate to deal with the
worker’s solicitors in serving the
notice upon them, given the advice
by the worker’s wife to the employer that there was no direct contact to
be had with the
34. It was submitted that the worker’s
solicitors accepted service of the
notice and engaged with the
employer’s solicitors as to the dispute process, and in relation to the
claim generally; that it
was only when the employer placed evidence before the
Tribunal that there was a reasonably arguable case to dispute the claim that
worker seeks to raise an objection to service of the notice of which the worker
is well aware; and such “unconscionable
conduct” raises an estoppel
preventing any dispute as to service.
Submissions on behalf of the worker
35. Counsel for the worker did not concede that the
worker’s wife was able to provide directions that notice of dispute should
go to her, and not the worker, nor did she concede that the worker’s wife
was able to consent on the worker’s behalf
to receipt of the dispute
notice by email, but even if these things were the case, it would demonstrate
that notice of the dispute
ought to have been forwarded to the worker’s
wife, and not to the solicitors acting on his behalf at that time.
Everett also submitted that there was no evidence of any enquiry being made
instructions to accept service
on his behalf. She said it was not unusual for there to be multiple ongoing
issues in relation to
claims for compensation (as is the case here), and in
those circumstances the employer is still required to effect personal service
notice of dispute under
, and commonly a copy of the referral is forwarded
to the worker’s solicitors as a courtesy.
37. Counsel for the worker
submitted that it was not incumbent upon the worker’s solicitors to
explain the requirements of the
Act in relation to service to the
employer’s solicitor.
38. Ms Everett also made some submissions to the
effect that the form of notice of dispute was deficient, in that it did not set
the notice of dispute, the nature of dispute nor the evidence relied
Was service of the notice of dispute upon the worker available
39. It is accepted that
of the Act is facultative, not
exclusive, and service of a notice on a worker may be effected by methods other
than those specifically
(see Thorne Airfield Lighting Pty
[2012] TASWRCT 11).
40. Service of notice of a dispute under
may, in appropriate circumstances, be effected by email. Those
“appropriate circumstances” are circumstances where the
requirements
of s6 of the Electronics Transactions Act 2000 (“the ET Act”) is
satisfied, including the requirement that
the person to whom the information is
required to be given consents to the information being given by electronic
communication (see
State of Tasmania v Herlihy
[2019] TASSC
41. “Consent” under s3 of the ET Act “includes consent
that can reasonably be inferred from a conduct of the person
concerned”.
42. Both s6, and the definition of “consent” in
s3, of the ET Act are concerned with consent either from the person to
information is required to be given, or inferred from the conduct of that
person. In this case, it is the worker who must
be served with written notice of
the dispute, and reasons for the dispute under s81A.
43. There is no evidence
to show that the worker consented to any information being given to him
electronically, nor is there any
evidence of the conduct of the worker from whom
consent can reasonably be inferred.
44. On that basis, the requirement of
consent, whether actual or inferred, under s6 of the ET Act has not been made
out. It was therefore
not open to the employer, or the employer’s
solicitors, to give notice of the dispute to the worker by email. Because this
was the only method by which notice of the dispute was purportedly served, it
means that the employer has failed to serve the worker
with notice of the
dispute within 84 days as required by s81A of the Act, and the Tribunal has no
Is there jurisdiction because the worker knew his claim is in
45. It has been submitted on behalf of the employer that the
participation by the worker and his solicitor in proceedings before the
shows that the worker had notice of the dispute about his claim for compensation
within the 84 day limitation period, irrespective
of how the notice of dispute
was served.
46. Counsel for the employer referred to Rogerson v Tchia:
object of all service is of course only to give notice to the party on whom it
is made, so that he may be made aware of
and may be able to resist that which is
sought against him; and when that has been substantially done, so that the Court
perfectly confident that service has reached him, everything has been
done that is required. Hope v Hope
(1854) De GM&G 328
47. This passage has been applied by the Supreme Court in Pivot
Limited against Crawford; Re
[1999] TASSC 67
, where Crawford J (as he then was)
went on to refer to the Court’s further observation in that case:
“It does not matter
how it comes about that documents to be served are left with the person to be
served or who does it... What
is important is that the documents to be served
are left with the person to be served. It does not matter if they are first
to some other person at an intermediate stage of the transmission of the
documents from the person wishing to serve them to the person
upon whom they are
to be served”
48. In Pivot, one of the issues being considered was the
question of service of a claim for compensation under s35(1)(b) of the Act
a person ‘designated for the purpose’ of receiving a claim by the
employer. The evidence was that the worker had
engaged a process server to give
the claim to the employer. The process server had given the claim documentation
to a person employed
as an office administrator with the employer. She gave it
to the manager. Neither the office administrator, nor the manager were
‘designated person’ under s35(1)(b) of the Act. The manager sent it
to the employer’s human resource manager,
which he had been directed to
do, for the purpose of sending it to the employer’s insurance and
superannuation manager in Melbourne.
The evidence was that the employer’s
insurance and superannuation manager in Melbourne was a designated person for
the purpose
of s35(1)(b), and the Court upheld the Tribunal’s finding that
the claim for compensation was given to the employer by being
personally to the insurance and superannuation manager at the time that he
received it.
49. Counsel for the employer referred to State of Tasmania v
[2004] TASSC 15
, and the observations of Slicer J in relation to
purported service of a bill of costs under the Act:
which require personal service have been strictly construed and the traditional
requirement that the: ‘... method
of service which can be effected only in
the case of an individual, and then only by placing the writ into the hands of
the defender
or arrestee personally’ ... accepted. In cases involving
status or financial interest, a mere ‘coming to notice’
regarded as insufficient to comply with the requirement of personal service ....
However, in cases where service has been
effected on another but proof is
provided that at some subsequent time the legal document came into the
possession of the party,
the service has been held to have been validly made ...
but it is the date of actual receipt which governs any requisite statutory
period ... an approach adopted by Crawford J in Pivot Ltd against Crawford; Re
[1999] TASSC 67
, a case involving the provisions of the Act, ss159 and 35(1)(b).
Here there was no proof of receipt by the respondent and no compliance
statutory requirement. Regulation 13 adds nothing to the requirement, stating
only that service is to be effected ‘on
any other unsuccessful
50. On behalf of the employer, it was submitted that the
engagement of solicitors by the worker to represent him in the s81A proceedings;
the appearance by those solicitors before the Tribunal in those proceedings; the
worker’s solicitors’ dealings with the
employer’s solicitors
as to the notice of dispute, the payment of medical invoices, and the
arrangements for an independent
medico-legal examination; and the attendance by
the worker at the s81A proceedings on 31 March, 27 April and 24 May 2021 lead to
the conclusion that notice of dispute has come to the worker’s attention
within the 84 day period prescribed by the Act.
51. The Act requires that an
employer who disputes liability to pay compensation must serve a worker with,
not only notice that it
disputes liability - s81A(1)(a), but also inform the
worker of the reasons for disputing liability – s81A(1)(b), and provide
the worker all evidentiary material upon which the employer intends to rely. It
is clear that what the employer is required to
provide to the worker within the
statutory time limit is more than simply information that the claim is in
52. In the present instance, as a result of the participation by
the worker and his counsel in the hearing of the s81A referral as
unfolded to date, I am prepared to draw the inference that the worker was aware
that his claim for compensation has been disputed,
and was so aware prior to the
expiration of the 84 days (the first appearance in relation to the s81A referral
occurring within the
84 days). However, there is no evidence that the
correspondence from the employer’s solicitors to the worker’s
came into the possession of the worker, nor that he became aware of
any of the details of the dispute within the statutory time frame
from the date the claim was made.
53. Although I have already determined
that the worker was not served with the dispute, because service via email was
not available
to the employer, even if I am wrong about that, there is no
evidence that notice of the dispute, as contemplated by s81A, including
reasons for the dispute, came into the possession, or to the attention, of the
worker within the 84 days permitted by s81A. On
that basis, the Tribunal does
not have jurisdiction to hear the s81A referral.
Waiver/estoppel
54. It has been submitted that either or both “acceptance
of service” by the worker’s solicitors, and the engagement
worker’s solicitors in the s81A process creates a waiver or estoppel that
prevents them from raising the jurisdictional
issue relating to service. Because
of the conclusions I have come to already, it is not necessary for me to
consider this argument
in any detail, but I observe, firstly, that an employer
who seeks to dispute liability to make payments in relation to a claim for
compensation bears the responsibility of ensuring that it complies with the
requirements of the Act in doing so. It is not incumbent
upon a worker, or a
worker’s solicitor, to point out any potential want of compliance before
the matter comes before the Tribunal.
55. It will be seen from the history of
this matter that I have set out above, the s81A referral first came before me
for hearing
on 27 April 2021. The 84 days had not expired. On 27 April 2021,
the s81A referral was adjourned at the request of the employer,
to enable it to
obtain medical evidence to support the dispute. If the referral has been in a
position to proceed on that day, no
doubt the jurisdictional issue would have
been raised then.
56. On that day, counsel for the worker made an application
for the s81A referral to be dismissed on the basis that there had been
evidence of any kind filed in support thereof. That application, in my view, was
not inconsistent with raising the jurisdictional
issue when the referral finally
came on for hearing. I also consider the dealings that the worker’s
solicitor has had with
the employer’s solicitors to do with other matters
in relation to the claim (including payment of compensation and accounts,
attendance for independent assessment and the like) to be inconsistent with
taking the point as to jurisdiction.
Disposition
57. Because the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to deal
with the employer’s s81A referral, it is dismissed.
COMMISSIONER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (147 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter