URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASLPDT/2025/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:16:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Suzanne Stephenson v Christopher John Bartlett (No 2) [2025] TASLPDT 3; (29 July 2025)
LEGAL PROFESSION DISCIPLINARY TRIBUNAL
Suzanne Stephenson v Christopher John
Bartlett (No 2)
[2025] TASLPDT 3
Suzanne Stephenson v
Christopher John Bartlett
DELIVERED ON: 29 July 2025 DELIVERED AT: Hobart
HEARING DATE: On the papers
THE TRIBUNAL: M. E. O’Farrell SC (Chairman)
J. Ker (Member)
M. Shirley (Member)
(1) The application to adjourn the respondent’s application for costs
(2) The applicant is to pay the costs of the respondent of and incidental to
the application to the Tribunal, filed 26 May 2020, on
a solicitor and client
basis, in accordance with the
Supreme Court Rules 2000
, on the scale of
costs in Schedule 1 of those Rules.
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: In person Respondent: In person
Decision Number: [2025] TASLPDT 3 Number of paragraphs: 35
Determination as to Costs
Introduction
17 December 2024 the Tribunal published its determination in these
proceedings,
dismissing the
applicant’s application made under
Legal Profession Act
(Tas) (‘the Act’).
letter 20 December 2024 the respondent applied for costs and attached his
submissions in support of that application. By email
to the Tribunal Secretary
23 January 2025 the applicant requested the Tribunal to ‘stay’ its
determination.
Accordingly,
the following issues are presently before the Tribunal. The first is whether the
Tribunal should agree to the applicant’s
request to ‘stay’ or
postpone the respondent’s application for costs. The second is, if the
Tribunal does not accede
to the applicant’s request, what, if any, orders
for costs should be made.
Some further background
applicant’s request for a ‘stay’ followed a direction made by
the Tribunal’s chair on 23 December 2024
that by no later than 4pm 24
January 2025 the applicant file and serve any submissions she wished to make in
respect of the respondent’s
application for costs.
to applicant’s email requesting the stay was a document, 124 pages in
length, described as ‘2005 disciplinary
Tribunal appeal of
costs.docx’. Apart from the request for a stay, it provided details of the
applicant’s personal financial
circumstances.
is sufficient to record at this point that the Tribunal takes the view that it
has no jurisdiction to stay its determination, nor
the application for costs. If
Suzanne Stephenson v Christopher
John Bartlett
[2024] TASLPDT 8.
appeal lies from a determination of the Tribunal,
any application to stay the
proceedings must be made to the Court
the Tribunal considers that it has jurisdiction to hear and determine an
application to adjourn the question of costs until
the determination of any
appeals that relate to its determination. We will proceed on that basis.
28 January 2025, following receipt of the applicant’s request of 23
2025, the Tribunal Chair made directions:
the respondent to:
(a) indicate, by no later than 4pm 11 February 2025, whether he opposes the
applicant's application to adjourn the question of costs
until after the
resolution of the Supreme Court appeal; and if so
(b) file and serve any submissions in support; and
and only if respondent opposes the applicant's application to adjourn the
question of costs, directing the applicant, by no later
than 4pm 25 February
2025 to file any submissions limited to replying to the respondent's
submissions.
letter 4 February 2025 the respondent opposed the applicant’s application
to adjourn the question of costs. He pointed to
the unlikelihood that the Court
would determine it has jurisdiction to hear an appeal against a determination
against a decision
of the Tribunal under
He said that even if the Court
has jurisdiction, it is unlikely to alter the Tribunal’s determination. He
submitted that the
applicant had not responded constructively to the invitation
of the Tribunal on the issue of costs, and that she had made no submissions
to why an order for costs should not be made against her.
Tribunal received the applicant’s submissions as to costs under cover of
an email 18 February 2025. The submissions are
191 pages in length. They first
reiterated the request for the respondent’s application to be stayed until
the applicant’s
appeal to the Supreme Court is finalised. The applicant
also pointed
which there is presently some doubt:
Wang v Sheehy
[2024] TASSC 67 (Brett
J); presently on appeal to the Full
Supreme Court Rules
out that she had no legal training, and that she had not been able to obtain
legal advice. Her submissions then turned to historical
matters about the
respondent’s conduct.
applicant submitted that if the Tribunal would not stay the ‘cost
decision’, there were reasons why the application
should not be granted.
However, once again, the submissions were grounded in historical matters
concerning the respondent’s
conduct. She referred to various matters
relating to the Board’s conduct of its investigation. At this point, we
repeat what was said at para [28] of our
determination.
From the lengthy submissions the applicant has made
in this application it is fair to say that she is unable to accept, or at least
fully accept, that the respondent’s conduct alleged in her first complaint
in 2013 was the subject of a determination
by the Board, which forecloses it from being agitated again as either
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct.
Application to withdraw
a directions hearing held on 20 March 2023 the applicant intimated that she
wished to withdraw her application to the Tribunal.
At that directions hearing
the respondent’s counsel had also indicated that, should the matter
proceed and the applicant was
unsuccessful, he was instructed to apply for an
order for costs.
Act does not allow an applicant to withdraw from proceedings without leave of
the Tribunal.
Accordingly, the
matter was adjourned for 7 days to hear whether the respondent opposed or
consented to the withdrawal application
and whether that would be on terms as to
a further directions hearing held on 27 March 2023 the applicant confirmed that
she was applying for leave to withdraw her application.
The Tribunal chair
invited the parties to make submissions and, in particular, to address the
question of public interest. Submissions
were received from the
respondent’s
The Act, s 469.
solicitors on 17 April 2023. At paragraphs 17 and 18 of those submissions it was
the Respondent has been put to cost in responding to the Applicant’s
application to date, he does not seek an order that
the Applicant pay his costs
of the proceeding to date, provided he is not put to any further cost.
the Tribunal will not impose a condition on granting the Applicant leave to
withdraw her application that she not be at liberty
to bring another proceeding
in respect of the same subject matter of this Application, or, the Tribunal is
not prepared to determine
the Applicant’s application for leave to
withdraw her Application on the parties written submissions, meaning that the
will be put to further cost, the Respondent reserves the right to
make such application for costs as is appropriate at the conclusion
proceeding.
applicant’s submissions were expected on 1 May 2023, but an extension
until 15 May 2023 was given to ensure that the applicant
was in possession of
the Board’s file.
9 May 2023 the applicant requested the Tribunal to seek disclosure by the Board
of a number of documents, relating to the previous
complaints she made in 2013
and 2015. At that stage the issue before the Tribunal, once properly constituted
to hear it, was to consider
whether leave should be given to the applicant to
withdraw her application because the continuation of the proceedings was not
in the public interest.
on 11 May 2023 the applicant requested the Tribunal to delay the hearing until
she was able to receive legal advice about
a number of matters. It was then
apparent that one of the issues concerned whether she should abandon her
application to withdraw
the proceedings.
15 May 2023 the Tribunal wrote to the parties in the following terms.
I also refer to the email Ms Stephenson to the Secretary of the Tribunal 11
Ms Stephenson’s email contains a request for the hearing to be delayed
until she is able to obtain legal advice about a number
of matters to which she
refers. Mr Lunn’s letter informs the Tribunal, amongst other things, that
should Ms Stephenson require
the matter to proceed otherwise than by a
determination on the written submissions (that is, by oral hearing) the
practitioner will
appear in person on the hearing. However, the practitioner
will not be available for that purpose for a two month period following
In practical terms the matter is best resolved by setting the matter down for
hearing at the end of that two month period. That will
enable Ms Stephenson to
seek legal advice and to consider her position.
Should Ms Stephenson decide during the intervening period to withdraw her
application, she should advise the Tribunal and Mr Lunn
of her decision to do so
without delay.
an email 1 June 2023 the applicant requested the Tribunal to postpone her
application to withdraw her application. She indicated
that she wished to
reconsider her position.
application to withdraw the proceedings was not pursued and following further
directions hearings the matter was listed for hearing.
is apparent, however, that, as from 20 March 2023, the applicant was aware that,
should she proceed with her application, she was
at risk that the respondent
would apply for his costs.
Self-represented litigant
the conduct of this application the applicant has frequently informed the
Tribunal of her lack of legal training, at the same
time submitting that the
respondent’s conduct has contravened standards of professional conduct, by
reference to inferences
that she draws from the facts, but which have
consistently been rejected, first by the Board, and now by the Tribunal. Of
the applicant is at liberty to conduct her case in the way in which she
sees fit, however, she is not entitled to gain an advantage
over the respondent
in the way in which the law is applied.
was pointed out in
Bhagat v Royal & Sun Alliance Life Assurance Australia
...I accept that a court does have to make allowances for the position of
litigants in person, and to try to ensure that such a litigant
does not lose out
because of lack of expertise; although there is a limit to what the Court can do
in that regard, while
[1999] NSWSC 159 (Hodgson
still remaining an impartial determinant of a dispute. The Court may in those
circumstances refrain from making orders against litigants
in person for conduct
that might be considered as justifying orders for costs against represented
litigants. By the same token, litigants
in person can cause great hardship and
expense to other parties, through making allegations and claims that lawyers
would recognise
as allegations and claims that could not reasonably or even
properly be made, and through making proceedings much longer and much
expensive than they otherwise would be, by not focusing accurately on the real
issues in the case. Conduct of that nature by
legally represented parties would
often lead to orders for indemnity costs. Litigants in person may escape the
consequence of indemnity
costs, but I do not think that the circumstance that a
party is a litigant in person is a ground for displacing the ordinary result
that costs follow the event.
Videnovic v Todorovic
Hallen J said:
Alesco Corporation Limited v Te Maari
I noted that the Defendant, in that case, was unrepresented, and concluded that
this fact, alone, does not mean, “they should
be treated... with greater
consideration than litigants who are legally represented”.
Had the Defendant had continuous legal representation, the problems that he
faced at the hearing might have been reduced. Yet, as
was stated in
CSIRO (No 3)
, by Beach J at [28] – [29]:
“Again, as was said by Nettle and Osborn JJA in Karam v Palmone Shoes
Pty Ltd ‘[t]here comes a point at which a self-represented
litigant must
be required to take responsibility for his choices’. Consistently with the
principles enunciated in the
Procedure Act,
Mr Knorr cannot be permitted to continue to subject the
parties to this proceeding to significant cost and inconvenience and to add
pointlessly to the load on the Court's already limited resources.”
(Omitting footnotes).
Also, more recently, in
Duraisamy v Sydney Trains
, Bell P (as the Chief Justice then was) wrote at [25]:
“I would add only this, and it is to note that Senior Counsel for the
respondent relies upon the High Court’s endorsement
92 ALJR 806
of the observation of Samuels JA in
Rajski v Scitec Corporation Pty Ltd
(Court of Appeal (NSW), 16 June 1986, unrep):
‘the absence of legal representation on one side ought not to induce a
court to deprive the other side of one jot of its lawful
entitlement
... An unrepresented party is as much subject to the rules as any other
litigant. The court must be patient in explaining them and
may be lenient in the
standard of compliance which it exacts. But it must see that the rules are
obeyed, subject to any proper exceptions.
To do otherwise, or to regard a
litigant in person as
[2023] NSWSC 242 (Hallen
enjoying a privileged status, would be quite unfair to the
represented opponent.’”
A self-represented litigant cannot be allowed to stand behind the shield of
his, or her, own lack of knowledge, especially when it
continues to subject
another party, or other parties, to cost and inconvenience and to add
pointlessly to the load on the court’s
already limited resources: see, for
Al Dakhili v Al
What the Tribunal found
its determination the Tribunal made the following findings:
paragraph [43] that the complaint related to an investigation on 12 February
2015 that was concluded on 15 January 2015. The complaint
was made on 30 April
2019. Thus the complaint was made more than three years after the alleged
conduct, s 428(2) was engaged and
the Board was correct to consider it. At [45],
that having concluded that each complaint was not capable of amounting to
professional
misconduct s 428(2)(b) was not engaged and that the Board’s
only option was to summarily dismiss the complaint, because, under
s 433(1)(e)
it was not one that the Board had power to deal with.
question for the Tribunal was whether the conduct complained of amounted to
professional misconduct: [51]. It found there was
no substance to either of the
complaints: [65] & [76].
Disposition
481 of the Act relevantly provides:
may make an order requiring the complainant to pay costs if the
is satisfied that the
is vexatious, misconceived, frivolous or lacking in substance.
(5) An order for costs –
(a) may be for a specified amount; or
Ibid., [69]-[74].
(b) may be for an unspecified amount but must specify the basis on which the
amount is to be determined.
(6) An order for costs may specify the terms on which costs must be paid.
may make an order directing that costs be taxed in accordance with the
Court Rules 2000
Application to adjourn
application to adjourn determining the question of costs must be viewed in the
circumstances of the delay that will be occasioned
by the consideration of the
Wang v Sheehy,
which is yet to be heard, let alone determined. We consider that to defer
consideration of costs in the present case indefinitely
in anticipation of that
ruling is unreasonable, noting of course that the ruling does not impact upon
the powers or functions of
the Tribunal, only whether any right of appeal lies
from their exercise or performance. Accordingly, we dismiss the application to
adjourn the respondent’s application for costs.
Application for costs
to the question of costs itself, before setting out our reasons, we note that
the respondent has applied for his costs to be paid
on a solicitor and client
In Zhoa v TR & KR Shipton Pty Ltd
the Full Court
Costs are normally ordered on a party and party basis. However
the respondent applies for an order for its costs of the appeal on
an indemnity
basis. A court may order indemnity costs, or costs assessed on a basis lying
somewhere between indemnity costs and party
and party costs, in an appropriate
case. Such an order is generally only made if "there is some special or unusual
feature in the
case to justify the court exercising its discretion in that way":
Preston v Preston
at 58. It is only in a special case that the discretion to depart from
the normal rule will be properly exercised:
NMFM Property Pty Ltd v Citibank
Re Wilcox; Ex parte Venture Industries Pty Ltd (No
[1996] FCA 1942
(1996) 72 FCR 151
at 152-153, and 158;
Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission v Australian Safeway Stores Pty Ltd (No 3)
Colgate-Palmolive Company v Cussons Pty Limited
46 FCR 225 at 232-233;
Ruddock v An Vadarlis (No 2)
229 at 234;
Australian Competition & Consumer Commission v
Petroleum Pty Ltd
[2017] TASFC 5
, [4] (Estcourt, Pearce
& Brett JJ).
Hamod v State of New South Wales
188 ALR 659, the Full Court of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
said at 20:
"Indemnity costs are not designed to punish a party for persisting with a
case that turns out to fail. They are not awarded as a means
of deterring
litigants from putting forward arguments that might be attended by uncertainty.
Rather, they serve the purpose of compensating
a party fully for costs incurred,
as a normal costs order could not be expected to do, when the Court takes the
view that it was
unreasonable for the party against whom the order is made to
have subjected the innocent party to the expenditure of costs."
Throughout the proceedings in the Magistrates Court, before the primary judge
and before this Court, the appellants have been unrepresented.
It is proper to
allow for that fact. In general, courts are more reluctant to make orders for
indemnity costs against unrepresented
Ogawa v The University of
Melbourne (No 2)
Bhagat v Royal & Sun Alliance Life Assurance Australia Ltd
Litigants in person generally lack knowledge of the law, are
unfamiliar with court practice and lack objectivity:
Spalla v St George Motor
Finance Ltd (No 8)
However, as the Court of Appeal in Western Australia pointed out
Tey v Optima Financial Group Pty Ltd
, "[l]itigants in person have the capacity to inflict a great deal of
unnecessary expense and hardship on other parties and the court
should not stay
its hand where such censure is properly called for". The reference to the term
"censure" should not be misunderstood.
Costs orders are primarily compensatory
and not punitive. The position is as explained by Gaudron and Gummow JJ
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
at 89 [44], that in a case
involving some relevant delinquency on the part of an unsuccessful party, the
result of an order for "solicitor
and client" or indemnity costs is "more fully
or adequately to compensate the successful party to the disadvantage of what
would have been the position of the unsuccessful party in the absence
of such delinquency on its part". Subject to that qualification,
the approach in
should be adopted.
consider that the respondent’s application for costs should be
complaints regarding the issues of substance were both misconceived, (having
regard to the course the Board was obliged to take
in respect of the matters
being out of time) and lacking in substance (insofar as there was no evidence
that the respondent, by his
responses either to the Board Investigator or his
evidence before the Magistrates Court, misled the Board) To the extent that the
applicant sought to reagitate issues the subject of previous complaints, her
complaints were also misconceived. It was clearly reiterated
to her on many
occasions, including during the hearing itself, that these were matters that the
Tribunal did not have power to consider.
is apparent from the correspondence that the applicant was put on notice, not
once, but multiple times and as recently as two months
prior to the hearing as
to the possibility of an order for costs. She has, as submitted by the
respondent, not availed herself of
the opportunity to provide any meaningful
submissions as to why an order should not be made.
also consider that it is appropriate to make an order for solicitor client
costs. Even allowing for the applicant’s status
as an unrepresented
litigant, she should not be allowed to invoke it to avoid the consequences of
the cost, delay and inconvenience
she has brought on the respondent by advancing
a case that, had she been properly advised, she should not have brought at
Accordingly,
we make the following orders.
(1) The application to adjourn the respondent’s application for costs
(2) The applicant is to pay the costs of the respondent of and incidental to
the application to the Tribunal, filed 26 May 2020, on
a solicitor and client
basis, in accordance with the
Supreme Court Rules 2000
, on the scale of
costs in Schedule 1 of those Rules.
Michael O’Farrell SC
Chairperson
Martin Shirley
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (343 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter