URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASWRCT/2021/28.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:23:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Candice Care v S. [2021] TASWRCT 28 (27 July 2021)
[2021] TASWRCT 28
WORKERS REHABILITATION AND COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
Candice Care v S.
[2021] TASWRCT
CANDICE CARE INC.
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
20 July 2021
DELIVERED ON:
27 July 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Commissioner Wilkins
CATCHWORDS:
Employer’s s81A referral dismissed – Whether
the worker’s costs of the referral should be paid by the employer
Candice Care Inc. v S.
[2021] TASWRCT 20
Farrow v Tasmania
(Metropolitan Transport Trust)
[1997] TASSC 62
(1997) 7 TasR 127
v State of Tasmania (Education Department)
[1998] TASSC 10
Maver & Pereira Pty Ltd v Vince
[1999] TASSC 8
Legal Profession
(Solicitor’s Conduct) Rules
2020, Rule 35;
Workers Rehabilitation
and Compensation Act 1988
DETERMINATION:
That the employer pay the worker’s costs of and
incidental to the
referral, including the application for costs
REPRESENTATION:
Solicitors:
Everett Flight & Associates
Carter Newell Lawyers
[2021] TASWRCT 28
Commissioner Wilkins
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. The worker made a claim for workers compensation in February
2021 and the employer, through its solicitors, disputed liability
compensation to the worker in relation to his claim by filing a referral in the
Tribunal in accordance with
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
(“the Act”). Ultimately, I determined that the worker had
not been served with notice of the dispute about his claim
as required by
and (b) of the Act, and that the Tribunal therefore had no
referral. The referral was
dismissed on that basis. See Candice Care Inc. v S.
[2021] TASWRCT
2. The worker seeks an order that the employer pay his costs of and
incidental to the unsuccessful
referral. This is resisted by the employer,
and it is the worker’s application for costs that is the subject of this
Costs under the Act
3. S59 of the Act deals with costs, and provides, relevantly,
that “...the Tribunal may make such order as to costs as it considers
appropriate in any proceedings before it”.
4. In Farrow v Tasmania
(Metropolitan Transport Trust)
[1997] TASSC 62
(1997) 7 TasR 127
Underwood J
traced the history of costs provisions in the Act and its predecessor, the
Workers’ Compensation Act 1927. He
confirmed that the costs provision in
the Act, as it now stands, provides the Tribunal with an unfettered discretion
in relation
to costs, and the general rule is that costs will “follow the
5. In Lowrie v State of Tasmania (Education Department)
, Underwood J considered the rationale behind a costs order, and
referenced the comments of the High Court in Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
as per Mason CJ:
one thing is clear in the realm of costs, it is that, in criminal as well as
civil proceedings, costs are not awarded by
way of punishment of the
unsuccessful party. They are compensatory in the sense that they are awarded to
indemnify the successful
party against the expense to which he or she has been
put by reason of the legal proceedings:"
And McHugh J:
“An order for costs indemnifies the
successful party in litigious proceedings in respect of liability for
professional fees
and out-of-pocket expenses reasonably incurred in connection
with the litigation... The rationale of the order is that it is just
reasonable that the party who has caused the other party to incur the costs of
litigation should reimburse that party for the
liability incurred. The order is
not made to punish the unsuccessful party. Its function is compensatory. Thus,
in civil proceedings
an order may, and usually will, be made even though the
unsuccessful party has nearly succeeded or has acted reasonably in commencing
the proceedings. It may, and usually will, be made even though the action has
failed through no fault of the unsuccessful party."
6. Underwood J confirmed that the proper exercise of the
unfettered discretion in relation to costs requires an order for costs in
of the successful party, unless there are good reasons for departing from the
general rule
7. Evans J, in Sims Knipe Maver & Pereira Pty Ltd v Vince
[1999] TASSC 8
, adopted the observations of Underwood J in Farrow referred to
above. Evans J also noted that:
“Circumstances
recognised as warranting a departure from the usual order that costs follow the
behalf of the successful party, other than that which gave rise to the claim,
which could be described as unreasonable
or improper; and/or
Whether the
successful party did something connected with the institution or the conduct of
the proceedings calculated to occasion
unnecessary litigation and
8. Evans J observed that the Tribunal, in that case, had
focused upon the reasonableness of the worker’s conduct in pursuing
claim as being the main reason to deny the successful employer its costs. Evans
J commented in this regard “Many unsuccessful
litigants act quite
reasonably in pursuing or defending a claim. Reasonable conduct on the part of
the unsuccessful party to proceedings
does not deprive the successful party of
his or her entitlement to an order for costs.”
The employer’s submissions
9. In resisting the application for costs, counsel for the
employer referred to background matters leading up to the resolution of
Car Inc. v S. It was his submission that those
matters amounted to conduct on
the part of the worker and/or his solicitor that ought to mitigate against an
order for costs in favour
of the worker.
10. In particular, counsel for the
employer referred to the worker and his solicitor participating in Tribunal
proceedings on -
• 31 March 2021, which was a telephone conference before
the Deputy Registrar, where counsel for the employer advised the worker’s
solicitor that he would be sending her correspondence denying liability for
compensation and the s81A notification;
• 27 April 2021, where the s81A
referral was first brought before the Tribunal, and adjourned at the request of
the employer;
• 24 May 2021 where the s81A referral was back before the
Tribunal and the jurisdictional issue was raised.
11. These attendances have been referred to in more detail in
my decision about the s81A jurisdictional issue.
12. On behalf of the
employer, it was submitted that in dealings with the worker’s solicitor,
the employer’s counsel had
made it clear that he believed he was entitled
to deal with the worker’s solicitor and serve the worker’s solicitor
notice of the dispute, and that the worker’s solicitor “did not
demur” in relation to the proposed course of conduct.
He further submitted
that the employer’s solicitors had made plain the manner in which they had
intended to deal with the delivery
of the notice to dispute the claim, in
circumstances where the worker’s wife had advised that the worker was not
to be contacted
because he was unwell. He submitted that if it was the case that
the worker’s solicitor did not hold instructions to accept
service (and
observed that there was no sworn evidence to that effect from the worker’s
solicitor) then it was incumbent upon
the worker’s solicitor to inform him
of that fact on 31 March 2021 when she was advised how he intended to serve the
13. Further, counsel for the employer submitted that the
worker’s solicitor’s conduct amounted to conduct that was a
contravention
of s35 of the ‘Legal Profession Act’. From
counsel’s submissions, it is clear that he was actually referring to
35 of the Legal Profession (Solicitor’s Conduct) Rules 2020, (“the
Rules of Conduct”) which provides:
35. Another
solicitor’s or other person’s error (ASCR 30)
A solicitor must not take unfair advantage of the obvious error of another
solicitor or other person, if to do so would obtain for
a client a benefit which
has no supportable foundation in law or fact.”
14. Counsel for the employer submitted that he had made a
mistake when he had advised the worker’s solicitor of his intention
serving her with the s81A notice, and that he had taken her to have accepted
that service would be effected in that way.
15. Finally, counsel for the
employer submitted that the belated agitation of the issue of service of notice
under s81A was conduct
that was not in furtherance of the objects of the Act as
set out in s2A, which provides:
“2A. Objects
The objects of this Act are to establish a rehabilitation and compensation
scheme for workplace injuries that –
(a) provides for the prompt and effective
management of workplace injuries in a manner that promotes and assists the
of injured workers as soon as possible; and
(b) provides fair and appropriate compensation
to workers and their dependants for workplace injuries; and
(c) assists in securing the health, safety and
welfare of workers and in reducing the incidence of workplace injuries;
(d) provides an effective and economical
mechanism for resolving disputes relating to the treatment and management of,
and compensation
in relation to, workplace injuries; and
(e) is efficiently and effectively administered;
(f) is fair, affordable, efficient and
effective.”
Should there be an order for costs?
16. Where the Tribunal has found that the employer failed to
properly serve notice of an s81A dispute, and thus invoke the jurisdiction
the Tribunal to hear a s81A referral, the usual order would be for the employer
to pay the worker’s costs of and incidental
to the referral, in accordance
with the general principle that costs follow the event.
17. The employer
here effectively is submitting that the conduct of the worker and his solicitor
in relation to the referral amounts
to improper conduct that would justify a
departure from the usual order.
18. On 31 March 2021, counsel for the
employer advised the worker’s counsel in a teleconference, that he was
going to send to
her the notice of the dispute. He was not invited to do so. He
did not enquire whether she had instructions to accept service.
correspondence that was sent on 6 April 2021to the worker’s solicitors by
email. One of the reasons that I determined
that service had not been effected
in accordance with the Act was that the employer had not demonstrated electronic
service via email
was available as a means of service.
correspondence, sent by email to the worker’s solicitors, advised that its
purpose was to inform the worker of the
dispute, the reasons for the dispute and
that there was going to be a s81A referral. It was not expressed to be sent
of service’.
21. Under the Act, if a worker makes a
claim for workers compensation in the approved form, supported by an appropriate
medical certificate,
that worker is entitled to payments of compensation in
accordance with the Act. An employer who wishes to dispute liability to pay
compensation has the option of disputing the claim under s81A of the Act. The
employer bears the responsibility of complying
with the requirements of s81A,
including the requirements relating to service upon the worker of notice of the
dispute and the reasons
for the dispute.
22. As I expressed in my decision
solicitor, to point
out any potential want of compliance to the employer or its
solicitors before the matter comes before the Tribunal.
23. The first time
this s81A referral came before the Tribunal, the employer’s solicitors
requested an adjournment to enable
them to obtain evidence in support of the
dispute. When the referral finally came on for hearing, the jurisdictional issue
properly, raised by the worker’s solicitors as a preliminary
24. I should also say that an allegation that a practitioner has
breached the Rules of Conduct is not one that ought to be made lightly.
difficult to see how such an allegation in the circumstances could be supported,
particularly where the worker’s entitlement
to compensation under the Act,
supported by appropriate medical certification, could hardly be thought to be a
benefit without ‘supportable
foundation in law or fact’ where the
employer still had to surmount the hurdle that the s81A referral had been filed
supporting evidentiary material.
25. There is nothing in the conduct
of the worker, or his solicitor that leads me to a conclusion that there should
be anything other
than an order in accordance with the usual rule that costs
follow the event. Neither the conduct of the worker, nor his solicitor,
considered to be unreasonable or improper. Neither the worker or his solicitor
could be said to have done anything connected
with the s81A referral that could
be thought to have been calculated to occasion unnecessary litigation or
expense, or that was not
in furtherance of the objects of the Act.
order that the employer pay the worker’s costs of and incidental to the
costs of the s81A referral. To be clear, and to
forestall any additional
argument, those costs also include the costs of and incidental to this
determination.
COMMISSIONER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (111 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter