URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASSC/2025/53.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:21:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tasmania v Scott [2025] TASSC 53 (29 October 2025)
[2025] TASSC 53
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA
[2025] TASSC 53
SCOTT, Fraser Reid
DELIVERED ON:
29 October 2025
HEARING DATE:
20 October 2025
Criminal Law – Procedure - Trial had before judge without jury –
Generally – Accused charged with aggravated assault
contrary to the
Criminal Code
Defence of insanity.
Criminal Law [3164]
Criminal Code Act
(Tas), s 16.
[1933] HCA 1
(1936) 55 CLR 182
R v Falconer
(1990) 171 CLR 30,
Hawkins v The Queen
1994] HCA 28
179 CLR 500
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Director of Public
Prosecutions
: Tasmania Legal Aid
[2025] TASSC 53
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 53/2025
File No 1219/2024
STATE OF TASMANIA v FRASER REID SCOTT
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT PEARCE J
29 October 2025
accused, Fraser Scott, is charged on indictment with one count of aggravated
assault contrary to the
Criminal Code
, s 183. He pleaded not guilty. In
accordance with an order made under s 361AA of the Code, I conducted the trial
as a single judge
in place of a trial by jury.
Presumption of
innocence and burden of proof
Scott is presumed to be innocent until the prosecution proves his guilt to my
satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt. The prosecution
must prove that Mr Scott
committed the act or acts, accompanied by the required state of mind, which
constitute the crime of aggravated
is accepted by both the prosecution and defence that, if the acts which
constitute the crime of aggravated assault are proved,
the question arises of
whether Mr Scott is criminally responsible for those acts by reason of mental
Criminal Code
, s 16. He is presumed to have been of sound mind
at the time that he committed the relevant acts unless the contrary is proved:
Code, s 15. He bears the onus of establishing that he is not criminally
responsible on the ground of insanity, although the onus
may be discharged on
the evidence presented by the prosecution: the Code, s 381. The standard of
proof is on the balance of probabilities:
Evidence Act
prosecution evidence of the events of 4 August 2023 is comprised in a series of
agreed facts. The accused did not give evidence
but adduced evidence from an
expert witness about his mental state at the relevant time.
charged crime
indictment alleges that on 4 August 2023, Mr Scott unlawfully assaulted the
complainant, a young female, by pointing a firearm
at her. Any person who
unlawfully assaults another is guilty of a crime: the Code,
alleged that Mr Scott applied force or attempted to apply force to the
complainant. The prosecution case is that he assaulted
her by threatening by
gesture to apply force to her by pointing a firearm or something which appeared
to be a firearm at her, within
the definition of assault in
The crime of
aggravated assault is created by
Mr Scott is charged with aggravated
assault because the
Firearms Act
, provides that a person is
guilty of a crime under
of the Code if, during the course
of an assault, the person carrying out the assault uses, threatens to use
or was carrying a firearm
or toy firearm.
person commits the crime of aggravated assault if it is proved beyond reasonable
doubt that:
(a) the accused;
(b) by a voluntary act or acts;
(c) made a threatening gesture to apply force to another person by pointing a
firearm or toy firearm;
(d) at the time of the gesture, the accused used, threatened to use or was
carrying a firearm;
(e) the accused:
i had the present ability to apply force to the other person; or
the other person to believe, on reasonable grounds, that he had the present
ability to apply force; and
(f) the acts were unlawful; and
(g) at the time of the acts, the accused either:
to threaten the other person, that is, give some sort of indication that he may
use the firearm to apply force; or
that the likely consequence of his actions was that the other person would
apprehend that force was being threatened and
proceeded regardless of the
consequence.
7 At about 5.15 am on 4 August 2023 the complainant was working at McDonalds
in Devonport. She was aged 19. A car driven by Mr Scott
pulled in to the drive
through. An unknown male was sitting in the passenger seat. At the first window
Mr Scott stopped and ordered
food which he paid for in cash. He then drove to
the collection window where the complainant was working. At that window Mr Scott
presented a black firearm, I infer a hand gun, which the prosecution does not
dispute was a toy. He pointed the toy firearm at the
sky and tapped it on the
top edge of the window frame. As the complainant approached the window with the
food she saw what Mr Scott
was holding. He reached out and grabbed the food
quickly with his left hand while, with his right hand, holding the firearm and
it at the complainant. The complainant thought it was a real gun, was
very frightened and believed she may be shot. She had forgotten
order. Not sure what to do, she retrieved the drinks and returned to the window.
By that time the firearm had been given
to the passenger, who held it near his
stomach pointed towards the complainant. One of the males said "she's scared,
she's a woman".
The car remained at the window for a short time. A manager
noticed that the complainant was upset and approached the car, at which
Scott drove away.
facts which Mr Scott agrees to be true establish to my satisfaction beyond
reasonable doubt that Mr Scott's gestures were voluntary
and intentional acts
which constituted a threat to apply force to the complainant with the firearm,
and that the complainant believed
on reasonable grounds that he had the present
ability to effect that purpose. I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that he
committed the acts charged in the indictment which would constitute the
crime of aggravated assault.
Mr Scott's mental state
expert evidence of Mr Scott's mental state comes from Dr Georgina O'Donnell, who
has a PhD in psychology with dual specialist
endorsements as a Forensic and
Clinical Psychologist. Dr O'Donnell has treated and assessed perpetrators and
victims of crime since
1977 and has undertaken regular post graduate
professional development. Dr O'Donnell's evidence is in the form of a report
11 November 2024. She inspected CCTV footage of the crime, watched three
police body worn camera files of Mr Scott's arrest, inspected
the Tasmanian
Health Service records concerning Mr Scott including emergency and ambulance
records, records of Mental Health Services
and the Spencer Clinic. She
interviewed Mr Scott on 28 October 2024.
Scott is currently aged 49. At the relevant time he was 47. In Dr O'Donnell's
opinion, Mr Scott suffers from bipolar disorder
with manic episodes and
psychosis. After leaving school Mr Scott joined the Air Force at age 19. Even
then, his condition adversely
affected his employment. He first received
treatment for his mental health in his early 20's in Western Australia. He spent
working as a civilian on Christmas Island. More recently he held
employment as an aged care support worker. His duties included to
community bus. He currently lives independently and receives a disability
support pension based on his mental health. He
has three adult daughters.
O'Donnell reported that between 1999 and 2024 Mr Scott required involuntary
treatment under the
Mental Health Act
on numerous occasions. When
experiencing active episodes of mental illness his symptoms included manic mood
and erratic behaviour,
pressured and tangential speech, pacing and restlessness,
hyper arousal, lack of sleep, thought disorder, delusional beliefs,
disorientation,
heightened irritability and aggression, contradictory behaviours
and tearfulness. He has been treated for many years with various
combinations of
anti-psychotic and mood stabilising medications, including by regular injection.
At times his symptoms are so severe,
and the risk to himself and others is such,
that mechanical and chemical restraint is required. He is subject to a treatment
supervised by the Tasmanian Civil and Administrative Tribunal. His
compliance and engagement with mental health treatment fluctuates
mental state. He lacks insight into his illness and the need for assertive
treatment when he is acutely unwell.
the period leading up to and shortly following 4 August 2023, Mr Scott was
admitted to the Spencer Clinic, the inpatient mental
health service at the North
West Regional Hospital from 8 to 19 July 2023, 6 to 18 August 2023 and 24 August
to 15 September 2023.
Thus, as Dr O'Donnell points out, within days of the
incident at McDonalds, Mr Scott was receiving involuntary mental health care
the high dependency unit of the Spencer Clinic, where it was documented that he
was experiencing a manic episode.
to the events of 4 August 2023, Dr O'Donnell reported that Mr Scott told her had
had limited recollection of the incident, and
that he had no intention to cause
harm to anyone. He acknowledged that "he may not have been thinking clearly as
he knows he was
manic at the time." He said that he had purchased a toy gun for
a fancy dress party at the aged care facility, which may have been
Section 16 and criminal responsibility
Scott could not be guilty of aggravated assault unless the prosecution proves
that the act for which he is criminally responsible
was done either with intent
to threaten or with a realisation that a threat may be perceived. The evidence
of mental disease is relevant
to a determination of whether his act was done
with either state of mind. If the evidence is not sufficient to prove that the
disease produced any of the consequences prescribed by s 16(1)(a) or (b)
it becomes necessary to consider the evidence of the formulation
Evidence of mental disease remains relevant and admissible to that issue:
Hawkins v The Queen
[1994] HCA 28
179 CLR 500.
However, the issue
of insanity is to be determined before any issue of intent:
at 517 per the joint judgment of Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane, Dawson and
Gaudron JJ;
[2000] WASCA 413
23 WAR 254.
the first question is what did the accused do, and is he criminally responsible
for doing it.
Code, s 16(1) provides:
"(1) A person is not criminally responsible
for an act done or an omission made by him -
(a) when afflicted with mental disease to such
an extent as to render him incapable
(i) understanding the physical character of such act or omission; or
(ii) knowing that such act or omission
was one which he ought not to do or make; or
(b) when such act or omission was done or made
under an impulse which, by reason of mental disease, he was in substance
deprived of
any power to resist.
(2) The fact that a person was, at the time at which he is alleged to have
done an act or made an omission, incapable of controlling
his conduct generally,
is relevant to the question whether he did such act or made such omission under
an impulse which by reason
of mental disease he was in substance deprived of any
power to resist.
(3) A person whose mind at the time of his
doing an act or making an omission is affected by a delusion on some specific
matter, but
who is not otherwise exempted from criminal responsibility under the
foregoing provisions of this section, is criminally responsible
for the act or
omission to the same extent as if the fact which he was induced by such delusion
to believe to exist really existed."
am satisfied that bipolar disorder is a mental disease within the meaning of s
16 and that Mr Scott was afflicted with that condition
when he pointed the toy
gun at the complainant. I direct myself in accordance with the comments of King
R v Radford
(1985) 42 SASR 266
, as approved by Mason CJ, Brennan
and McHugh JJ in
R v Falconer
[1990] HCA 49
; 171 CLR 30 at 53. However,
the existence of a mental disease by itself does not excuse an accused person.
v The Queen
[1962] TASStRp 6
[1962] Tas SR 35
, the Court of
Criminal Appeal comprising Burbury CJ, Crisp and Cox JJ said at
"It was for the accused affirmatively to establish to the
satisfaction of the jury that upon the balance of probabilities he by reason
mental disease was not criminally responsible for his acts. For the mere
existence of mental disease would not excuse him from
criminal responsibility.
Nor was it sufficient for him to prove that his alleged crime was the product of
mental disease in the sense
that it would not have occurred but for the
existence of the disease. ...The law prescribes additional criteria to be
established
by evidence as a condition of criminal responsibility. An act may be
a crime although the mind of a person who does it is affected
by mental disease
if such disease does not in fact produce upon his mind one of the results
prescribed by the law as tests of criminal
responsibility." (Citations
terms of s 16, Dr O'Donnell does not assert that the mental disease with which
Mr Scott was afflicted at the time he threatened
the complainant with the gun
rendered him incapable of understanding the physical character of the act of
pointing a gun at a person.
As a result, s 16(1)(a)(i) of the Code has no
operation. However, in Dr O'Donnell's opinion, s 16(1)(a)(ii) and s 16(1)(b)
both apply.
Counsel for both the prosecution and defence submitted that I should
find that Mr Scott is not criminally responsible for the crime
of aggravated
assault by operation of s 16 of the Code. Counsel for the prosecution did not
seek to draw any distinction between
the operation of s 16(1)(a)(ii) and s
Section 16(1)(a)(ii) is made out but section 16(1)(b)
evidence supports the conclusion that Mr Scott is exempted from criminal
responsibility under s 16(1)(a)(ii). Accepting that
Mr Scott is exempted from
criminal responsibility under that provision, there is no room for the operation
of s 16(3). The evidence
does not support the conclusion that Mr Scott is
absolved of criminal responsibility by operation of s 16(1)(b).
s 16(1)(a)(ii) to apply, Mr Scott must establish that, when he was holding the
gun and pointing it towards the complainant, he,
by reason of his bipolar
disorder, was incapable of knowing that his acts were ones he ought not to do.
For s 16(1)(b) to have operation
it must be established that Mr Scott's acts
were in fact done under an impulse, and it was an impulse which, by reason of
disease, he was, in substance, deprived of any power to resist:
her report, Dr O'Donnell expressed her opinion about s 16(1)(a)(ii) by stating
her opinion that "Mr Scott acted impulsively during
an acute phase of mental
illness". She continued that "Mr Scott's general conduct on the day of the
alleged incident was significantly
influenced by his acutely mentally unwell
state". In her report, Dr O'Donnell expressed her conclusion about s 16(1)(b) by
that the provision applies because "Mr Scott's major illness resulted in
acutely impaired judgment and insight at the time of the
alleged incident." With
respect to Dr O'Donnell, that evidence, even when read with the balance of her
report, does not support the
conclusion that either of those limbs of s 16
operated to absolve Mr Scott of criminal responsibility for his acts. For that
I gave leave for the accused to re-open his defence case and Dr
O'Donnell gave some further oral evidence.
will first address s 16(1)(b). The degree of impairment of volition required
under that sub-section was addressed by the High Court
O'Neal v The
[1977] HCA 24
141 CLR 496
where Barwick CJ and Mason J, with who
Stephen and Aickin JJ agreed, held at 500 that to succeed in a defence under
that sub-section
"the defence must satisfy the jury on a balance of
probabilities that, due to mental disease, the accused had lost all power to
that mental disease had left him with no power of resistance to the
impulse to do the fatal act." Further, their Honours held that
it is correct to
say that it is for an accused to establish that "at the time he did that of
which he is accused he was to all intents
and purposes wholly unable by reason
of mental disease to resist the impulse to do that act." It must be established
that he could
not resist the impulse, not just that he did not resist the
impulse: see also
Jeffrey v The Queen
[1982] TASRp 20
[1982] Tas R 199.
to the assertion in her report that Mr Scott acted "impulsively", Dr O'Donnell
identified the "impulse" as "the posturing with
the toy gun and the way in which
he did that". She concluded that this was an impulse because "there was no
logical reason to threaten
or intimidate the food worker, having already paid
and ordered the food..." and it was illogical for him to do so. I asked Dr
again to identify what impulse she was referring to and she again
referred to his possession of, and gesturing with, the toy gun,
causing fear and
intimidation for the complainant, and the action was "in a state of being
erratic, expansive, grandiose, not having
control of his [racing] thoughts,
sleepless" and that it was an impulse in his manic state he could not
supplemented by oral evidence and notwithstanding the terms of s 16(2), Dr
O'Donnell's evidence, though not challenged by the
prosecution, falls far short
of establishing to my satisfaction that Mr Scott acted under an impulse at all,
still less that there
was an impulse he could not resist. I would accept that Mr
Scott's mental illness may have caused him to act in a stupid, ill-judged,
impulsive way, in the sense that he acted without any pre-planning and on the
spur of the moment, and that his acts lacked any
logical foundation. However, Mr
Scott had no recollection of the incident. He said nothing about, and gave no
evidence of, any impulse
in the sense that he was somehow impelled to do what he
did and, in my respectful view, Dr O'Donnell's evidence does not establish
existence of any such impulse. The inference that there was such an impulse must
be based on conjecture. Even if Mr Scott acted
on the basis of an impulse there
is no evidence from which I would infer that he could not, as opposed to did
not, resist it.
to the operation of s 16(1)(a)(ii), I direct myself in accordance with the
charge to the jury given by Dixon J in
[1933] HCA 1
(1936) 55 CLR 182
stated and applied by Brett J in
Tasmania v Smyth
[2022] TASSC 50
"We are dealing with one particular thing, the act of killing,
the act of killing at a particular time a particular individual. We
dealing with right or wrong in the abstract. The question is whether he was able
to appreciate the wrongness of the particular
act he was doing at the particular
time. Could this man be said to know in this sense whether his act was wrong if
through a disease
or defect or disorder of the mind he could not think
rationally of the reasons which to ordinary people make that act right or wrong?
If through the disordered condition of the mind he could not reason about the
matter with a moderate degree of sense and composure
it may be said that he
could not know that what he was doing was wrong. What is meant by 'wrong'? What
is meant by wrong is wrong
having regard to the everyday standards of reasonable
Accordingly,
Mr Scott must establish that he was, at the relevant time, affected by symptoms
of bipolar disorder to such an extent
that he was rendered
knowing that pointing the gun at the complainant was an act he ought not do. He
must demonstrate that, through the disordered
condition of his mind, he was
incapable of reasoning, with a moderate degree of sense and composure, that it
was, having regard to
the everyday standards of reasonable people, wrong to
point the firearm at another person. The opinion in Dr O'Donnell's report that
Mr Scott's illness resulted in acutely impaired judgment and insight, falls far
short of establishing that he was incapable of reasoning
that his act was wrong
in that sense. However, I have concluded that the further oral evidence
sufficiently established that proposition.
O'Donnell took into account the evidence of what occurred, Mr Scott's mental
health history including the fact that he was detained
in a highly manic state
only two days after this event, and formed the view that at the relevant time
the symptoms of his mania were
indicative of frontal lobe dysfunction. The
neurological effects of his manic episode were such that, in Dr O'Donnell's
Mr Scott did not have the decision-making capacity to appreciate that
his actions would be quite threatening and frightening for
someone who did not
know what his intentions were. His social comprehension, judgment,
decision-making and insight were lacking.
According to Dr O'Donnell, Mr Scott,
in that state, presented a risk to himself and others.
confess to some hesitation about this evidence. The question of whether Mr Scott
was, by reason of his bipolar disorder,
of knowing that the act
of pointing a toy gun at another person was something he ought not to do was not
squarely addressed. However,
I am satisfied that the evidence of Dr O'Donnell
sufficient to establish that proposition on the balance of probabilities. I
take into account the absence of any adverse expert opinion
prosecution's acceptance of Dr O'Donnell's
the charge of aggravated assault contrary to s 268 of the
Criminal Code
brought on indictment 165/2025, I return the following verdict, in the terms
required by s 383(2) of the Code:
Mr Scott committed the acts
charged, but is not guilty, on the ground that he was insane at the time so as
not to be responsible according
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (228 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter