URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMC/2024/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
New v Dvorsky [2024] TASMC 4 (6 March 2024)
[2024] TASMC 04
MAGISTRATES COURT OF TASMANIA
New v Dvorsky
[2024] TASMC 04
NEW, Sheridan
DVORSKY, Nicholas Stefan
DELIVERED ON:
6 March 2024
HEARING DATE:
19 February
DECISION OF:
CATCHWORDS:
Criminal Law –Failing to vote in federal election – defence of
“valid and sufficient excuse” – religious
Commonwealth Electoral Act
Criminal Code
Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution
Police v Gale
[2020] TASMC 11
Church of the New
Faith v Commissioner of Pay-Roll Tax (Victoria)
[1983] 154 CLR 120
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions v Easton
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant:
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Complainant:
Commonwealth
Director of Public Prosecutions
Respondent:
Number of Paragraphs:
Serial No. 04/2024
File No. 70263/2023
SHERIDAN NEW v NICHOLAS STEFAN DVORSKY
REASONS FOR DECISION MAGISTRATE K STANTON
Stefan Dvorsky did not vote at the Federal election held on 21
2022. He has been charged with failing to vote at an election contrary to
Commonwealth Electoral Act
. He has pleaded not
guilty. He says he was not required to vote because of his religious belief.
is an offence for an elector to fail to vote at an election:
an offence of strict liability:
s 245(15A).
However, the offence is not
committed if the elector has a valid and sufficient reason for the failure:
s 245(15B).
The fact than an elector believes it to be part of his or her
religious duty to abstain from voting constitutes a valid and sufficient
for that failure:
essential facts constituting the offence were averred in the complaint.
Pursuant to
Commonwealth Electoral Act
taken to be proved in the absence of evidence to the contrary. There was no
such contrary evidence.
there was evidence of email communications between the defendant and the
Australian Electoral Commission in which the defendant,
describing himself as a
"private sentiment soul"
"Nicholas Stefan of the House of
and using the email address
Livingman1995@gmail.com
, sought to
establish that he was not obliged to vote. What the defendant was saying in
those emails was difficult to understand.
They contained illegitimate demands,
used terms and language with a quasi-legal complexion but which were otherwise
entirely misconceived
and contained a plethora of non-sequutur.
accused the Australian Electoral Commission of being an unconstitutional foreign
entity acting outside of the
Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution
1900 UK and not abiding by
"heavenly father’s Authorised King James
Version Bible 1611 (Banking Instruments, Banking Law and Equity)"
“It’s against my religion to abstain from
voting and if you ask why, it’s because that’s between myself and
the Creator”.
literally that statement indicates the defendant is asserting a religious duty
to vote. However given the other content of his
emails I understand him to be
asserting it is his religious duty not to vote.
order to fall within the valid and sufficient reason specified in s245(14) there
is a need to identify a religious duty, that is
a duty imposed by a religion.
The leading authority on what constitutes a religion is
Church of the New
Faith v Commissioner of Pay-Roll Tax (Victoria)
[1983] 154 CLR 120
Mason ACJ and Brennan J observed at 132
"the mantle of immunity should soon
be in tatters if it were wrapped around beliefs, practices and observances of
every kind whenever
a group of adherents chose to call them a religion ... a
more objective criterion is required"
. Their Honours identified the
objective criteria as being twofold:
[F]irst, belief in a
supernatural Being, Thing or Principle; and second, the acceptance of canons of
conduct in order to give effect
to that belief ...”
and Deane JJ referred to the following indicia of a religion, at 174:
a belief in the
supernatural, that is to say a belief in a reality which extends beyond that
which is capable of perception by the
a belief in
ideas relating to the nature of human beings, their place in the universe and
relationship to the supernatural;
those beliefs
require adherence to particular standards, codes of conduct or practices by
those who hold them;
the existence of
an identified group of believers even if not a formal organisation; and
the opinion of
the believers that what they believe constitutes a religion.
defendant need only point to evidence which suggests the reasonable possibility
that such a religious duty exists. It is then
for the prosecution to negative
the existence of that duty beyond reasonable doubt: s13(3)
Commonwealth
Criminal Code
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions v
[2018] NSWSC 1516
defendant referred to Christian belief. He also referred to many texts from an
ancient version of Christian scripture. However,
aside from his assertion that
it was against his religious belief to vote, there was no evidence that the
Christian religion including
its many manifestations in the multitude of formal
and informal denominations which now exist contains any prohibition on voting.
Indeed there was no express assertion that the defendant was an adherent of any
group of believers who are subject to a duty not
to vote. I am not satisfied he
is. Rather his assertion of a religious duty appears idiosyncratic.
the eventuality that I am wrong as to that I have assumed that the asserted duty
not to vote arises as a result of adherence
to the standards, codes of conduct
and practices articulated in the various passages of scripture referred to by
the defendant in
the Authorised King James Version of 1611. I have therefore
considered whether those texts in that version provide any support for
not to vote.
undertaking that consideration I take care to avoid this court assuming any role
as a tribunal of doctrine. I am considering whether
the ideas the defendant
articulates as a basis for failure to vote give rise to a duty to behave in that
manner. I also understand
that a belief in the supernatural may involve an
element of mystery, perhaps grounded in the experience of the divine rather than
in logic alone. However, if the duty not to vote is to be established as a
religious duty, it should be capable of some coherent
explanation by reference
to the tenets of the defendant’s religion. With those considerations in
mind I turn to consider the
passages of scripture referred to by the
the defendant refers to Romans 2:11 which says,
“For there is no
respect of persons with God"
. Although on his case the Australian Electoral
Commission is an unconstitutional foreign entity acting outside of the scope of
Constitution
, I infer the defendant considers it a person and
therefore not respected by God. Whether or not the Australian Electoral
is a person and whether or not that entity is respected by God has no
bearing on the duty of an elector to vote. Further, properly
understood, that
text is simply referring to the impartiality of God; that the social status of a
person is irrelevant to God. It
does not provide any foundation for failing to
the defendant refers to Leviticus 19:15 which says
"Ye shall do no
unrighteousness in judgment: thou shalt not respect the person of the poor, nor
honour the person of the mighty: but
in righteousness shalt thou judge thy
. Although again alluding to impartiality, there is nothing in
that passage which would justify a failure to vote.
the defendant refers to Matthew 7:12 which states
"Therefore all things
whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this
is the law and the prophets"
. Sometimes referred to as the Golden Rule,
there is nothing in that passage which would justify a failure to vote.
the defendant refers to Exodus 20:13, part of the Decalogue, in particular the
prohibition on killing. There is nothing in
that passage which would justify a
failure to vote.
the defendant refers to Matthew 5:9, one of the Beatitudes, which states,
"Blessed are the peacemakers: for they will be called children of God"
There is nothing in that passage which would justify a failure to vote.
the defendant refers to Proverbs 24:11-12 which states,
"If thou forebear to
deliver them that are drawn unto death, and those that are ready to be slain; if
though sayest, behold, we knew
it not; doth not he that pondereth the heart
consider it? And he that keepeth thy soul, doth not he know it? And shall not
to every man according to his works?"
Although clearly encouraging
ethical, compassionate, empathetic and responsible conduct towards others,
particularly the vulnerable,
there is nothing in that passage which would
support a failure to vote.
the defendant refers to Psalm 25:9 which says,
"He guides the humble in what
is right and teaches them his way"
. Once again there is nothing in that
passage which would justify a failure to vote.
as the defendant seeks to rely on Holy Writ, it appears somewhat convenient to
the position he takes that he omits a reference
to the Apostle Paul in Romans
13:1-4 which says, in the particular translation upon which the defendant
"Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For there is no
power but of God: the powers that be are ordained of God. Whosoever
resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God: and they that resist shall
receive to themselves damnation. For rulers
are not a terror to good works, but
to the evil".
That suggests a duty to comply with the requirements of the
have focussed on the passages of scripture referred to by the defendant because
they are the only parts of his emails which carry
any religious allusions.
However in reality, insofar as the defendant’s objection to voting is
capable of being understood,
it is, in substance, based on a belief in the
invalidity of the legislation requiring him to vote, that the legislation does
bind him for some other reason, some defect in the status of the Australian
Electoral Commission or a disagreement with the decisions
made by those elected.
Similar views have consistently been held not to constitute a valid and
sufficient reason for failing to vote:
Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions v Easton
[2018] NSWSC 1516
, particularly the discussion of the
authorities by N Adams J from [75] and the summary at [95]. The defendant has
simply given those
views a religious gloss. The suggestion that they give rise
to a religious duty of some sort is not established by the evidence.
the materials provided to me provide no coherent basis for concluding that any
such religious duty exists.
is enough to determine these proceedings. However it is appropriate to refer to
one further matter raised in the materials the
defendant relied on.
part of the assertion that the laws which require the defendant to vote are not
valid, he referred to statements said to have been
made by Magistrate McKee when
dealing with complaint 51841/2015 on 13 November 2015. The defendant asserts
that Magistrate McKee
said that he understood the argument of the defendant in
that case to be that any state laws that had been passed since 1901 in Australia
and in the State of Tasmania are invalid because they didn’t put the
correct seal on. The laws the prosecution was relying
upon therefore do not
exist and if the prosecution was to proceed any further it would have to address
the seal argument.
have not reviewed the audio of the hearing on that complaint. But assuming
Magistrate McKee said what the defendant asserts, it
is abundantly clear that
his Honour was simply summarising the argument put to him. There is no
suggestion he agreed with that submission.
It is perniciously misleading to use
that statement to support the defendant’s position. In fact, although
Magistrate McKee’s
reasons for decision in that case were published only
to the parties, they were reproduced by Magistrate Fairley in
[2020] TASMC 11
. Magistrate McKee and Magistrate Fairley both
rejected the argument the defendant seeks to repeat in this case. With respect
agree with their conclusion.
those reasons the assertion by the defendant of a religious duty which would
provide a valid and sufficient reason for not voting
is baseless. It has
therefore been negatived by the prosecution beyond reasonable doubt.
find the charge proved.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (104 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter