URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCAT/2025/203.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
QTX v Construction 4U Pty Ltd [2025] TASCAT 203 (30 October 2025)
QTX v Construction 4U Pty Ltd [2025] TASCAT 203
Personal Compensation
QTX (Worker)
Construction 4U Pty Ltd (Employer)
Hearing Date:
16 October 2025
Hearing Location:
Date of Orders:
30 October 2025
Date Reasons Issued:
30 October 2025
R O Winter, Senior Member
Orders Made:
That all of the records produced by Rosny Doctors and After Hours pursuant
to the summons issued by the Tribunal are to be produced
to the employer in
unredacted form on or before 14 days from the date of this decision.
Catchwords:
Summons – Documents produced pursuant to summons – Objected to
on the grounds of relevance – Apparent relevance
– Legitimate
forensic purpose
Legislation Cited:
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
Tasmanian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2020
Cases Cited:
S v State of Tasmania (Department of Justice)
[2023] TASCAT
Kuchlmayr v Australian Capital Territory (Compensation)
Representation:
Worker: I Gunadasa – Simmons Wolfhagen
Employer: Z Sabapathy
– Tremayne Fay Rheinberger
Publication Restriction:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication.
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
11 March 2024, the worker made a claim for workers compensation in relation to
an injury to his right index finger which was said
to have occurred on 4
December 2023.
claim for compensation was supported by an initial workers compensation medical
certificate dated 4 April 2024 from Rosny Doctors
(Dr Freeman) which indicated
that the worker had presented on 21 March 2024 with “persistent right MF
swelling which had been
apparent since 4 December 2023, swollen right MF U/S
plus steroid no improvement MRI – swelling evidence”. The
injury was recorded as having occurred “in the course of
day to day work”.
employer elected to dispute liability to pay compensation to the worker in
relation to their claim and on 24 May 2024 referred
its dispute to the Tribunal
pursuant to s 81A of the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
(the WRC Act).
to a hearing of the s 81A referral on 13 June 2024, and with the Tribunal being
satisfied that a reasonably arguable case
existed concerning the
employer’s liability in relation to the worker’s claim, made orders
pursuant to s 81A(3)(c) and
(d) of the WRC Act.
27 February 2025, the worker filed a s 42 referral. As part of that referral, on
20 May 2025, with the agreement of the employer,
the worker made an application
for a summons to be issued to produce evidentiary material pursuant to s 104 of
Tasmanian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2020
(the TASCAT
Act). The summons was requested to be issued to Dr James Freeman – Rosny
Doctors and After Hours.
summons sought:
All medical records and documents from any point in time concerning [the worker]
[DOB] concerning the right hand and relating to
any x-rays, MRIs and ultrasound
imaging [the worker] has undergone including but not limited to copies of
records, consultation notes
and entries, results of test, correspondence to and
from other health professionals (including specialists) and reports.
its correspondence to the Tribunal seeking the summons to be issued, the
following reasons for its issue were articulated by the
We contend that the worker’s relevant medical records held by Rosny
Doctors and After Hours are relevant to the following issues
associated with the
condition for which the worker seeks compensation:
Prognosis; and
treatment requirements.
The employer’s solicitor has initiated a request for the records which we
agree are relevant. As such, the worker’s medical
and associated records
concerning his right hand as held by providers such as Rosny Doctors and After
Hours are relevant to the determination
of issues before the Tribunal on both
the worker’s and the employer’s referrals. Accordingly, please find
attached for
filing an application for summons to be issued to Rosny Doctors and
After Hours.
was no objection to the summons being issued to the Rosny Doctors and After
Hours, and consequently the Tribunal issued the
summons. On 1 July 2025, the
documents produced by Rosny Doctors and After Hours were produced (initially
incorrectly being provided
to the worker’s solicitors) but subsequently
being provided to the Tribunal on 1 July 2025.
email on 11 July 2025 to the Tribunal, the worker, having reviewed the documents
produced pursuant to the summons, submitted that
the following documents should
be excluded from production on the basis of relevancy:
(a) Pages 2-11, half of page 11 ending at XRL elbow
(b) Pages 14-25 save for the bottom one third of page 25 which commences at
x-ray R hand which is relevant
(c) Pages 41-42
(d) Pages 51, 53, 54, 55 and 61
claim for the documents to be excluded from production to the employer’s
solicitors on the basis of relevancy was asserted
because the relevant injury
for the purpose of the claim was an injury to the worker’s middle finger
on his right hand, and
the documents sought to be excluded from production did
not relate to such an injury.
15 September 2025, the employer indicated that they wished the Tribunal to make
a determination in relation to the worker’s
objections to producing the
specific GP records returned on the summons. The employer noted:
It is impossible for the employer to make an assessment as to the relevance of
the documents without viewing the documents. I also
note that the objections
would remove GP records in the period of two years preceding the worker making a
The issue for determination
issue for determination in this matter is whether the Tribunal should allow the
employer access to all of the documents produced
pursuant to the summons, or
whether access should be limited to those documents produced but to which the
worker has objected to
produce on the basis of relevancy.
worker’s submissions
a hearing on 16 October 2025 in support of its claim objecting to the production
of the documents identified in its email of 11
July 2025, the worker maintained
his position that the identified documents were objected to being produced on
the basis of relevancy,
noting that the worker’s claim was for an injury
to his right index finger and that the documents sought to be excluded
related to biochemistry results concerning kidney function and stress
and anxiety.
pressed by me that the relevant test for the issuing of a summons was apparent
relevancy, the worker’s counsel indicated
that given the report of Dr Doig
provided by the worker’s solicitor dated 12 November 2024 which did not
indicate any secondary
conditions, and in light of what was requested to be
produced in the summons, there is not even any apparent relevancy to the medical
records to which the objection to production was related.
employer’s submissions
employer noted that the documents the subject of the objection to production
occupied the period between 2022 and 2023, being
essentially the two-year period
immediately prior to the worker making a claim for compensation for an injury
occurring around December
employer’s counsel submitted that these documents are apparently relevant,
especially so given the opinion and diagnosis
of Dr Robbins in his report of 29
April 2024 that the worker had been diagnosed with tenosynovitis which is a
degenerative condition.
It was the employer’s submissions that these
presentations in this two-year period may be consistent with that degenerative
condition. The employer’s counsel referenced page 29 of the unredacted
documents produced pursuant to the summons which indicated
the possibility of
inflammatory arthritis which might be a condition consistent with this possible
diagnosis of a degenerative condition.
was the employer’s submission that there may be no relevant documents
amongst those sought to be excluded, but the employer
isn’t able to make
that determination without seeing them. The employer submitted that if none of
the documents were relevant,
the employer would not seek to rely upon them, or
if they did seek to do so at a final hearing, the worker could object at that
to their admissibility, or that they should be given little weight.
employer also submitted that as the worker’s condition, on its case, is a
pre-existing condition which was the basis for
its s 81A referral, documents
within the preceding two-year period are apparently relevant to this assertion.
This, on the employer’s
case, is a more extensive exclusion period than
that asserted in
S v State of Tasmania (Department of Justice)
, which was ultimately found to be unreasonable.
employer referenced [24] of the decision of
S v State of Tasmania (Department
of Justice)
(supra) in which Deputy President Clues (as she then was)
clearly indicated that the test for apparent relevancy is a low
The medical evidence
Dr Doig’s report of 12 November 2024, in response to the question
“What is your clinical diagnosis of the above
injury?”, Dr Doig
The initial diagnosis appears to be a soft tissue injury to the palm of the
dominant right hand, most likely damage to the flexor
sheath to the middle and
possibly ring fingers. This is based on the mechanism of injury and the MRI scan
outlined above. He has
gone on to develop problems with functional restrictions
following a cortisone injection to the middle finger. There has possibly
deep infection which was not treated. This will require further clarification.
in answer to the question “Your opinion as to the whether [the
worker’s] current disability and/or complaints
result from his claimed
workplace injury?”, Dr Doig stated:
Unless there is evidence available to the contrary
, in the absence of any
prior or subsequent injuries to the right hand, [the worker’s] current
disabilities and complaints are
a direct result of the incident of November
2023. (emphasis added)
his report of 29 April 2024, in response to the question “What is the
diagnosis?”, Dr Robbins stated:
Tenosynovitis of the flexor tendon of the middle finger, leading to triggering
and locking.
response to the question “Does the presently diagnosed condition result
from the incident at work on 31 December 20203? If
not, why not?”, Dr
Robbins stated:
It may or may not. The condition occurs spontaneously due to degenerative
processes in older people particularly. Squeezing ratchet
pliers in the region
of the metacarpophalangeal joint (knuckle joint) could, on the balance of
probabilities, contribute to triggering
but this would not explain the
difficulty with the proximal interphalangeal joint.
S v State of Tasmania (Department of Justice),
Deputy President Clues (as
she then was) undertook an analysis of the principles relating to summonses and
in [16]-[19] stated:
16. In the case of
Bob Brown Foundation Inc v Barnett
Blow CJ held:
The principles relating to the setting aside of subpoenas are equally applicable
to disputes as to the inspection of documents produced
pursuant to
Secretary of the Department of Planning, Industry and
Environment v Blacktown City Council
[2021] NSWCA 145
(as he then was) at [80]. A subpoena will be set aside, or inspection will be
refused, when the issuing party did not
have a legitimate forensic purpose. The
test for the existence of a legitimate forensic purpose is that of apparent
relevance; see
Comcare v John Holland Rail Pty Ltd
[2011] FCA 622
the authorities cited there by Bromberg J.
17. In the case of
Secretary of the Department of Planning,
Industry and Environment v Blacktown City Council
(supra), Bell P
stated at [68]:
There is a plain difference between “apparent relevance” and
“fishing”, the latter being the metaphor that
is frequently deployed
in this area of discourse; see, for example,
The Commissioner for
Railways v Small
[1938] NSWStRp 29
(1938) 38 SR (NSW) 564
[1938] NSWStRp 29
(1938) 55 WN (NSW) 215.
“apparent” admits of the possibility that the documents sought by
way of subpoena may not ultimately turn out
to be relevant.
18. Bell P goes on to state at [80]:
My review of the authorities in relation to the setting aside of the subpoenas
and/or the refusal to permit access to documents produced
leads me to the
conclusion that, although a party will generally be able to demonstrate that it
had a legitimate forensic purpose
in issuing a subpoena where, to quote Simpson
J (as her Honour then was, and with whom Spigelman CJ and Studdert J agreed)
at [11], it can:
(i) identify a legitimate forensic purpose for which access is sought; and
(ii) establish that it is “on the cards” that the documents will
materially assist his case,
at least in civil matters, an inability to demonstrate that it is “on the
cards” that the documents sought will materially
assist the subpoenaing
party’s case will not automatically require either that the subpoena will
be set aside or that access
to the documents produced be refused. It will
generally be sufficient and prima facie of a legitimate forensic
purpose if the documents
sought to be produced on subpoena have an apparent
relevance to the issue in the case and/or bear upon the cross examination of
expected to be called in the proceedings.
Kuchlmayr and Australian Capital Territory
(Compensation)
[2023] AATA 2305
, the Tribunal held at [36]:
The threshold of apparent relevance involves two considerations:
(a) whether there is a real possibility that the documents could reasonably be
expected to throw light on some of the issues in the
principle proceedings and
may assist in the resolution of the issues in the proceedings; and
(b) whether there is a reason to suppose that the documents will be capable of
being used as evidence or for a legitimate forensic
purpose in cross
examination, such that, when viewed realistically, the documents sought have a
bearing on an issue which is not
unreal, fanciful or speculative, or that the
material sought is reasonably likely to add in some way to the relevant evidence
the case, or that it be “on the cards” that the documents sought
will materially assist the party at whose request the
subpoena has been issued.
Consideration
is clear from the evidence referred to that the employer relies upon Dr
Robbins’ opinion and diagnosis that the worker has
been diagnosed with
tenosynovitis which is a degenerative condition.
employer also relied upon reference in the unredacted records produced pursuant
to the summons of possible inflammatory arthritis,
referencing page 29 of those
employer also asserts the documents to which objection is made to the production
thereof covers the period 2022-2023, noting that
the date of the worker’s
injury is December 2023.
is also a reference in the initial prescribed medical certificate dated 4 April
2024 of the worker’s condition arising
in the course of day-to-day work
before December 2023.
the worker’s counsel was cognisant of the test to be applied to the
consideration of an objection to the production
of documents being apparent
relevance, and not relevance per se, he indicated that given the nature of the
worker’s claim:
that his injury related to a right middle finger injury,
and it was only the right hand; relevant documents were requested pursuant
the summons, there is no relevance whatsoever thus excluding a categorisation of
these documents as even having any apparent relevance.
all of the circumstances, I do not accept the worker’s counsel’s
submission basing the exclusion of the production
of the identified documents
pursuant to the summons at this stage in the proceedings.
accordance with the authorities summarised by Deputy President Clues (as she
then was) in
S v State of Tasmanian (Department of Justice)
, I consider
there is a legitimate forensic purpose in the employer seeking production of the
excluded documents as they have apparent
the differing medical opinion as to the worker’s diagnosed injury and the
employer’s medical evidence indicating
a diagnosis of tenosynovitis, being
a degenerative condition, there is a real possibility that the documents sought
to be excluded
could reasonably be expected to throw light on some of the issues
in the principal proceedings, and may assist in a resolution of
the issues in
the proceedings.
there is also reason to suppose that the documents will be capable of being used
as evidence or for a legitimate forensic
purpose in cross examination, such
that, when viewed realistically, the documents sought have a bearing on the
issue which is not
unreal, fanciful or speculative, or that the material sought
is reasonably likely to add in some way to the relevant evidence in
the case, or
that it be “on the cards” that the documents sought will materially
assist the party at whose request the
summons has been issued (see
v Australian Capital Territory (Compensation)
[2023] AATA 2305
is a legitimate forensic purpose in the employer seeking access to the documents
sought to be excluded, and that it is on the
cards that the documents will
materially assist in this case.
worker’s pre-existing medical history is an identified issue in the case
and there is a reasonable basis beyond speculation
that the documents produced
may give rise to a line of inquiry relevant to the issues that need to be
determined by this Tribunal.
all of these reasons, I uphold the employer’s objection to the
worker’s objection to the production of the identified
documents in the
email of 11 July 2025 on the basis that they are not relevant. They have a
legitimate forensic purpose and are apparently
all of the records produced by Rosny Doctors and After Hours pursuant to the
summons issued by the Tribunal are to be produced
to the employer in an
unredacted form on or before 14 days from the date of this
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.83 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter