URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASHPT/2018/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia v Gregory John Hogan (Ref No 8/2018) [2018] TASHPT 3 (16 November 2018)
[2018] TASHPT 3
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL
Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia v Gregory John
Hogan (Ref No 8/2018)
[2018] TASHPT 3
NURSING & MIDWIFERY BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
HOGAN, Gregory John
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
8 November 2018 and by written submissions
DELIVERED ON:
16 November 2018
DECISION OF:
Chairperson Webster
CATCHWORDS:
Registered nurse – professional misconduct –
multiple counts of common assault – domestic violence offences involving
the respondent’s former partner that did not occur in the course of his
practice as a registered nurse – whether the
respondent is a fit and
proper person to hold registration
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law Act
Health Practitioners Tribunal Act
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (Tasmania) Act
Police Offences Act
Sentencing Act
Tasmanian Board of the Medical Board of Australia
[2015] TASHPT 3
Medical Board of Australia v Roberts
Pharmacy Board of Australia v Meaney
[2017] TASHPT 1
Adamson v Pharmacy Board of Tasmania (No 2)
[2004] TASSC 82
Medical Board of South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
Ziems v Prothonotory of
the Supreme Court of New South Wales
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
MacMillan v Pharmaceutical Council of Western Australia
[1983] WAR 166
Chan v The Nurses Board of Western Australia
[2005] WASAT 115
Law Institute of Victoria
[2007] VCSA 122;
Nursing & Midwifery Board
of Australia v Thomas
Unreported decision of the State Administrative
Tribunal of Western Australia No VR89/2017;
Secretary to the Department of
Planning and Community Development v Muto
[2011] VCAT 328
DETERMINATION:
The respondent is guilty of professional misconduct and
the appropriate sanctions are imposed.
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Australian Health
Practitioner Regulation Agency
Respondent:
Butler McIntyre &
[2018] TASHPT 3
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. On 21 August 2018 the applicant referred to the Tribunal
pursuant to s193(1)(a)(i) of the Health Practitioner Regulation National
2009 (QLD) (“the National Law”) and
Practitioners Tribunal Act 2010
conduct of the respondent which it asserts
amounts to professional misconduct. The National Law set out in the Schedule to
Practitioner Regulation National Law Act 2009 (QLD) has been adopted
by the Tasmanian Parliament and applies as a law of this
initial directions hearing was listed before me on 10 September 2018. At that
time I was advised by the respondent’s
counsel, Mr Damien Geason, the
respondent was an inmate of Risdon Prison but was shortly to be released. Mr
Geason indicated while
he had discussed the matter briefly with the respondent
he wanted to take full instructions and that would be best achieved once
respondent was released. It was suggested at that early stage this matter might
proceed by way of an agreed statement of facts.
3. The next directions
hearing was held on 18 October 2018. I was at that time advised by counsel for
the respondent, Mr Geason,
he had taken instructions and had reached an in
principle agreement with the applicant about the disposition of this matter. He
still needed to clarify a few issues before this matter proceeded to hearing.
With the agreement of the parties the following directions
were therefore
(a) that by close of business on 5 November 2018, a joint
statement of facts and contentions signed by the parties be provided to
Tribunal; and
(b) the matter was adjourned until 8 November 2018 for further
4. On 5 November 2018 I received the joint statement of facts
and contentions from the parties. I sought further information from
respondent’s solicitors on 6 November 2018 and Mr Daniel Zeeman responded
in writing that same day. I then clarified
some matters with the parties in
person on 8 November 2018.
The Allegations against the Respondent
5. The relevant conduct which the applicant referred to the
Tribunal is criminal conduct which the applicant alleges the respondent
convicted of in the Magistrates Court on 26 June 2018 at which time he was
sentenced to a total of 7 months imprisonment, 4 of
those months being
suspended. The particulars set out in the referral were as follows:
counts of common assault, contrary to
Section 35(1)
Police Offences Act
(Tas), that were committed between 17 February 2017 and 4 April
Re-sentenced
on 26 June 2018 following the breach of a suspended sentence imposed on 2 July
2015 involving 14 counts of common assault
contrary to
Section 35(1)
Police Offences Act 1935
(Tas) that were committed between 29 April 2014 and 17
August 2014...
It is noted that these domestic violence offences
involved the Respondent’s former partner and did not directly occur in the
course of practising the nursing profession, but they could amount to conduct
that is inconsistent with the Respondent being a fit
and proper person to hold
registration.
The Applicant also refers to the Tribunal the Respondent’s conduct,
namely his failure to advise the Applicant within 7 days
of a relevant event as
defined in s.130 of the National Law, namely being charged with an offence
punishable by 12 months imprisonment
or more and being convicted of an offence
punishable by imprisonment.”
Agreed Facts
6. The respondent admitted the allegations set out in the
application which were supported by two certificates of conviction, the
of which were also admitted. The first certificate of conviction is dated 5
July 2018 and notes a date of conviction of
26 June 2018 with respect to
complaint no 4387/2017. Set out in that certificate are seven charges of common
assault alleged to
have taken place at Sorell, Sloping Island and Tasman
Peninsula between 17 February 2017 and 4 April 2017. The certificate records
the respondent pleaded guilty to those seven charges, a conviction was recorded
and a victims of crime compensation levy was imposed.
The respondent was also
subject to a probation order for a period of 18 months which was to commence
upon his release from prison.
The following conditions of his probation are
recorded on the certificate:
(a) He was to be of good behaviour for a period of 18
(b) He must not commit an offence punishable by
imprisonment.
(c) He must report within one clear working day of release from
prison to a probation officer or supervisor at Highfield House, 114
Street, Hobart.
(d) He must submit to the supervision of a probation officer
as required by that probation officer.
(e) He must report to a probation
officer as required by that officer.
(f) He must not leave or stay outside
Tasmania without the permission of the probation officer.
(g) He must comply
with the reasonable and lawful directions given by a probation
(h) He must notify a probation officer of any change of address or
employment before or within 2 working days after the change.
(i) He must
attend educational or other programs directed by the Court or a probation
(j) He must undergo assessment and treatment for alcohol and drug
dependency as directed by a probation officer.
(k) He must submit to medical,
psychological or psychiatric assessment and treatment as directed by a probation
(l) He must attend, participate in and successfully complete the
EQUIPS Domestic Abuse Program as directed.
7. As the offences were assaults against the respondent’s
spouse or partner they were recorded in the certificate of conviction
violence offences under
Family Violence Act 2004
8. In addition
the respondent was sentenced to imprisonment for 3 months which was to commence
and be cumulative with the sentence
on complaint 8272/2014. One month of that 3
month period was suspended and the conditions on the suspension of that period
of imprisonment
were to apply for 3 years and were as follows:
(a) The respondent was not to commit another offence
punishable by imprisonment during the period the order is in force.
was to be of good behaviour.
(c) He was to successfully complete the
probation order.
(d) He must not commit any breach of the
Family Violence Act
(e) He must keep appointments with his psychiatrist and psychologist as
recommended.
(f) He must comply with his prescribed medication
9. The second certificate of conviction is also dated 5 July
2018 and relates to 14 charges on complaint no 8272/2014 of common assault
between 29 April 2014 and 17 August 2014 at Forcett and Bicheno contrary to
Police Offences Act 1935
. The date of conviction is again 26 June
2018. A suspended sentence that was imposed on 2 July 2015 was varied pursuant
Sentencing Act 1997
because there was an application for an
order under
Sentencing Act 1997
before the Magistrate, which was
granted, with respect to a breach of the suspended sentence; that application
being lodged on 11
January 2018. With respect to the 14 charges of common
assault and other offences on another complaint (complaint no. 7964/2014)
respondent was given a sentence of imprisonment of 4 months commencing on 26
June 2018, 3 months of which was suspended. The
conditions of the suspension
which were to apply for 12 months were as follows:
(a) The respondent was not to commit another offence
punishable by imprisonment during the period the order is in force;
must not commit any breach of the
Family Violence Act 2004
(c) He is to
be of good behaviour.
10. Attached to the joint statement of facts and contentions
were the prosecution facts with respect to the counts of assault. Those
were admitted by the respondent.
11. The facts in relation to the assaults on
complaint no 4387/2017 are as follows:
- Counts 1 and 2
On the evening of the 17
of February 2017 the victim was working
as a nurse when she received a text message from the DEFENDANT who stated
wanted her to go around to his house when she finished work. She
finished at 11pm and went around to his residence at Rushes Court,
The DEFENDANT informed the victim that he believed that his furniture had
been moved within his residence, and accused the victim
of doing so. After a
while the DEFENDANT started making derogatory comments about the victim and
putting her and her work down,
informing her that she ‘wasn’t even a
real nurse’, becoming more irate at this time. The victim began to cry
moved into the kitchen area and was followed by the DEFENDANT who got
himself a glass of water. At this time the DEFENDANT made
a motion as if to
strike the victim to the face with the back of his hand and then laughed. He
didn’t hit the victim but it
made her flinch and he said that she should
be worried about him and what he could do to her. The victim told the DEFENDANT
and that she had work in the morning and at this time he threw the
contents of the glass at her face and started laughing. The victim
know what to do, and being fearful that trying to leave the residence may make
matters worse, she went into his bedroom
and jumped into bed. About 10-15
minutes later the DEFENDANT went into the bedroom got into bed, saying that he
loved her and apologising.
They both fell asleep shortly afterwards.
Assault – Count 3
February 2017, the victim awoke early, as she had to
commence work at 7am. She got out of bed and the DEFENDANT was still asleep.
She noticed that the DEFENDANT’S mobile phone was beeping as it was going
flat, so she grabbed it to place on a charger in
the kitchen. She went to the
kitchen and made herself some weetbix for breakfast. At this time the DEFENDANT
awoke and went to
the kitchen and started yelling at the victim ‘get out
of my house’. The DEFENDANT appeared to be quite enraged as he
the victim and she held the bowl of cereal up between her and the DEFENDANT.
The bowl has hit the side of the DEFENDANT’s
face, and at that time the
DEFENDANT yelled that he had been physically abused by the victim. The
DEFENDANT then grabbed the weetbix
that were in the bowl and threw them at her,
hitting her in the face and head. He then grabbed the remaining weetbix box and
that at the victim.
At this time the victim was crying and really scared. She grabbed all her
belongings that were on the kitchen bench, including the
DEFENDANT’s
mobile phone and left the residence in her car. A short way down the road she
pulled over to compose herself and
at that time realised that she had the
DEFENDANT’s mobile. She contemplated what she should do, and knowing that
say that she had stolen it decided to return to his house to give it
Assault – Count 4
The victim drove back to the DEFENDANT’s residence and he answered the
door with the victim trying to explain that she had accidentally
grabbed his
phone. The DEFENDANT started yelling at the victim that she had stolen it, and
that she was a thief. The DEFENDANT
tried to grab the phone from her and pushed
her against a brick wall, scratching her arm and hand. She then got into her
and the DEFENDANT slammed the door closed, and she drove away.
The victim drove to the Sorell Police Station to report the matters. She sat
outside for 10-15 minutes but did not go in. Whilst
outside, she took photos of
the scratches to her arms and hands.
March 2017, the DEFENDANT and Victim have a verbal
argument. The DEFENDANT yells at the Victim about his ‘human
and rips up a painting she has been working on for the past 4
weeks. He says she is to blame for his past assaults on her. He then
‘I can shoot you’ and ‘I can get a gun and shoot you”.
The Victim asks him to repeat what he just
said and he does. He then says he
couldn’t get a gun; it is just a hypothetical situation.
Assault – Counts 5 and 6
of March 2017 the DEFENDANT and the victim kayaked
Sloping Island where they camped for a couple of days. On
the morning of the 18
of March 2017 the pair were backing
up their items and moving them to the shore where the kayaks were. Whilst
packing up the DEFENDANT asked the victim where his camera
was, and she told him
it was with her gear. He went back to where they had been camping and again
started yelling at her. He was
red in the face and threw a bag onto the kayak
and then started pulling at the other bags that were there, yelling’ get
fucking camera, if I say it you must do it.’
The victim told him that that was no way to ask, and this infuriated the
DEFENDANT. He then grabbed the victim by the pony tail with
his left hand and
struck her to the face with his right. This caused the victims
to bleed, an amount of hair to be pulled out of the victim’s head and
broke her sunglasses. The Victim was on the ground
and the DEFENDANT dragged
her by the hair causing her to hit her head on the kayak. The victim yelled for
him to stop and tried
to get up. As she attempted to get up, the DEFENDANT put
his hand over her nose and mouth with one hand and grabbed her neck and
with the other hand. As a result, the Victim could not breathe. She bit the
DEFENDANT’s hand and he let go. She
gasped for air. The DEFENDANT then
stormed off holding his hand saying that he’d been assaulted by the victim
and that she
should listen to what he says or ‘This is what
The Victim typed ‘000’ into her phone to call Police. However,
before she could do so, the DEFENDANT walked back and
so she did not.
The DEFENDANT and the victim then paddled back to the main land, and when
they arrived on the other side the DEFENDANT was a completely
different person,
talking like nothing had ever happened, and later sent her a text message
thanking her for the lovely weekend.
The following day, the Victim had bruising to her neck area and her lip was
swollen and cut. She took photos of these injuries and
has provided them to
At the time, the Victim had a broken foot. The assault made her foot hurt
Assault – Count 7
April 2017, the DEFENDANT and Victim went for a motorbike
ride on the Victim’s motorbike. The DEFENDANT was the driver and
Victim was the pillion passenger due to her having a broken foot. They ride to
the Tasman Peninsula and stop at the Blow Hole.
The DEFENDANT talks to the
Victim about her licence and makes comments to the effect that she cannot do
anything right and she should
learn her lesson. The Victim asks him to leave it
alone in a raised voice. They get back on the Victim’s motorbike, again
with the DEFENDANT driving and the Victim as pillion passenger. She has her
legs wrapped around him as they drive to maintain her
position. They
DEFENDANT elbowed the Victim’s left leg. The DEFENDANT then lets go of
the handlebars and punches the Victim
her knee twice hard. This
causes her to slide down the seat towards the DEFENDANT and lose her balance
temporarily. The Victim is
scared and asks the DEFENDANT to pull over a number
of times...”
12. The facts in relation to the assaults on complaint no
8272/2014 are as follows:
April 2014: The defendant and the victim were at their home
address when the victim climbed into bed with the defendant around lunch
An argument occurred about how the victim had cold hands and showed no respect
for him for waking him up. The defendant became
angry and threw decorative
boxes and 3 full drink bottles at the victim hitting her in the upper chest and
shoulder area. The victim
suffered a sore shoulder and cleaned up the mess
while the defendant went back to sleep.
April 2014: The victim returned home at approx. 9pm
and the defendant had drunk approx. 9 or 10 cans of beer. The defendant’s
mood was erratic, being jovial to being somber
in a very short
period of time. The victim asked the defendant about how he was feeling. The
defendant threw an egg at the victim,
hitting her in the face with such force,
causing the egg to smash. The defendant then began to sing and dance like
nothing had happened,
touching and provoking the victim. The defendant then
grabbed the victim by the wrists but quickly managed to break free. The
then picked up and swung a full glass of beer into the right side of
the victims
head, causing the glass to smash. The victim went
blank momentarily, felt immediate pain and noticed a clump of bloodied hair come
from her head. The victim also suffered two gashes behind her right ear. The
defendant went to bed and the victim cleaned up the
May 2014: The victim and the defendant were sitting
on the couch at their home at Forcett when an argument developed concerning how
the defendant
had her hair straightened. The defendant grabbed the
face of the victim, scratching her cheeks by digging in his fingernails. This
caused welts and some bleeding. The victim was concerned about the injuries as
she was starting a new job the next day.
May 2014: An argument developed between the victim
and the defendant over the defendant being woken up after working night shift.
The defendant was in an agitated state, swearing and yelling at the victim. The
defendant upturned the dining table, breaking vases
and glassware in the
process. The defendant then pushed the victim, into the wood heater. The
victim was worried that the defendant
would punch her so she did not say
anything, with the defendant yelling ‘it’s all your fault
May 2014: An argument developed between the victim
and the defendant at their home address regarding the defendant’s issues
after he starts to drink beer. The defendant shoves the victim to the floor
forcibly, causing grazes and bruising to her hips and
June 2014: An argument developed at the house
regarding the defendants
need of sleep and their relationship
problems. The defendants
temper flared and he threw a vase,
hitting the victim in the back as she turned to protect herself. The defendant
then hit the victim
on the upper arm saying that the victim makes him do
June 2014: The victim and defendant went away to
Bicheno for the defendants
Birthday. Upon arrival
at the holiday cabin, the pair enjoyed the afternoon together, both consuming
alcohol. The defendant consumed
approx. 10 stubbies of beer and his behaviour
changed, becoming angry quickly, particularly when a conversation came up about
relationship. The defendant began to damage items within the unit,
turning over chairs and throwing wine glasses. The defendant
left the unit with
his car keys and the victim tried to stop him by grabbing the keys to stop him
driving. The defendant then threw
the victim against the front door. The
victim attempted to calm the defendant down. The defendant then again attempted
the cabin and the defendant pushed the victim again onto the floor,
causing pain and bruising. The victim got halfway up and grabbed
the defendant
around his wrist and the defendant then punched the victim 3 times in her back.
The victim tried to get to get
to her feet and push him away. The
defendant then scratched and punched the side of the victims
The victim then yelled at the defendant at what he had done and bit him on the
chest in an attempt to stop him. The defendant
then again tried to leave the
unit with the victim trying to persuade him to go to bed. The victim tried to
grab the defendant to
stop him but the defendant grabbed the victims
and pulled her down the steps. This caused the victims
wrists to hurt and her knee and feet were scratched and bruised.
The defendant then pushed the victim away which caused her to fall
to the grass.
The defendant walked off into the bush area and the victim cleaned up the mess
in the cabin. The victim took photographs
of her injuries on the
July 2014: An argument developed between the
defendant and the victim in the evening at their home address. The argument
stated how terrible the victim was and that its
fault. The defendant began to throw items around the house
including chairs. He also turned over the dining table, damaged cupboard
and smashed the glass in the wood heater with an axe handle. The defendant
threw a chair at the victim and numerous beer bottles,
with some of the bottles
hitting her and others missing. One bottle did hit the victim on her hand
causing a cut and for it to bleed.
The defendant tackled the victim to the
floor with the victim smashing her knee onto the tiled floor. The defendant
continued to
wrestle with the victim causing pain in her back, hips and wrists.
The defendant held the victim down and was on top of her while
the victim was
for him to stop. The defendant ripped off the victims
G shock watch and threw it against the wall. The victim managed to
break free with the result being her body throbbing in pain and
scratches and bruises. The defendant sat on the stairs while the defendant said
for her to clean up in the morning as
he wanted to get some sleep. The victim
took photographs of the damage and her injuries.
July 2014: The defendant had been drinking beer
throughout the day while being at home. In the evening an argument developed
the relationship between the the
defendant and the
victim. The defendant became upset and threw an open beer bottle at the victim,
hitting her on the chest. The
defendant then threw another beer bottle and it
hit the victim on her side as she was trying to move away. The defendant then
another beer bottle at the victim but it missed as the victim was running
away. The victim then went upstairs to change her clothes
as she had beer spilt
on them. A short time later the victim was watching a rented DVD. The
defendant became enraged that the victim
was watching a DVD that he had rented
without his permission. The defendant then threw a beer bottle he had in his
hand hitting
the victim whilst she was sitting on the couch. The bottle hit her
on the shoulder and beer spilt on her and the floor. The defendant
damaged more
items inside the house including a new motorcycle helmet. A short time later
the defendant calmed down and watched
the movie with the victim.
12 July 2014: The victim and the defendant were watching a DVD in
the evening at their home. The victim was eating cookies and drinking
whilst watching the movie. The defendant made a comment to the victim about how
many cookies the victim was eating, with the
victim saying she will eat as many
as she likes. The defendant became angry and smashed the TV remote onto the
tiled floor. The
victim got up off the couch and the defendant picked up and
threw the mug of milk at the victim, hitting her in the arm and the side
body. This caused a cut on her arm as the mug smashed. The victim told the
defendant to stop acting like a spoilt brat and
to stop his temper tantrum. The
defendant then went upstairs to bed.
July 2014: The defendant was cooking a BBQ outside
the home whilst the defendant
was preparing a salad inside. The
defendant was drinking beer as he cooked. The victim went outside to see how
the defendant was
going and tried to cuddle up to him. The defendant was
distant and cold toward the victim so she went inside and sat at the computer.
The defendant came inside and the victim made a comment that she was getting
bored on the computer. The defendant became upset
and went back outside to
finish up cooking. The defendant came back inside when he had finished cooking,
approached the defendant
and hit her to the right side of her face
from behind. The force was so hard it made the victims
July 2014: The victim came home from work at
approx. 12:40pm. The victim
was angry and as soon as the victim
entered the house the defendant stormed out not saying anything, leaving in his
vehicle. The
defendant returned home approx. 3pm in a better mood after he had
been shopping. The defendant began to fit seat covers to his vehicle
drank beer. The defendant then left the property to return the seat covers as
they did not fit. Upon returning home again,
the victim had a conversation with
the defendant about his drinking, asking why he was drinking after saying he had
quit. He stated
that using alcohol was a way he could self medicate for his
depression. The conversion
became heated and the defendant became
upset and went inside to get his car keys and key card for his work with the
victim following
him. When the victim asked him what he was doing, the
defendant headbutted the victim to the face with such force it caused the
to blank out for a short time. The victims
face and head started
to throb immediately and her lips swelled and bled. The defendant then grabbed
a full open bottle of beer and
threw it at the victim. The defendant began to
tell the victim how ugly she was, what an awful person she was and that it was
victim who made him do what he does. The victim said its
her fault and the defendant spat in the victims
face. The victim
told the defendant to show her some respect, but he walked off and cut some
wood. The victim went inside crying,
felt low and cleaned up in the
August 2014: The victim arrived home at 11:45am and
as she approached the sliding door to enter, the defendant smashed a plate and
cup into the sink. The victim asked him what was wrong but he ignored her. The
defendant then pushed the victim out of his way
as he went into the bathroom.
The defendant yelled out ‘Why the fuck are you home? Fuck Off. Piss
Off”. The victim
explained she had a short shift but this caused the
defendant to become angrier and he started to damage items around the house.
The victim asked the defendant to stop, but the defendant pushed the victim with
both hands forcibly. The victim balanced herself
not to fall over. The
defendant pushed the victim hard again causing her to fall just missing the
couch. The victim got up but
was again pushed back to the floor again. The
defendant remained angry and caused more damage to the house. The defendant
calmed down, had a shower and left for work after giving the victim a
August 2014: The victim and defendant were at home
and had an argument about their relationship in the morning. The victim was
after the argument, particularly after comments made by the defendant
defendant grabbed
the victims
right arm very tightly as she sat at the computer. The
defendant said he wanted a hug with the victim saying she did not want one.
defendant then pulled the victim up to her feet by grabbing her arm causing her
pain. The defendant then wrapped his arms around
the victim and whilst still
holding her wrist tightly, forcing her to hug him. The victim said
‘no’ to the defendant.
The victim was crying and scared. The
defendant put his arms around the victim aggressively and yanked her into his
began to crush her, saying it was a hug. The victim asked him to
stop but he continued to squeeze the victim, hurting her. The
victim stood
there waiting for the defendant to stop. The victims
arms, wrists
and chest hurt and as he let her go he kissed her. The victim sat back down and
the defendant left the room.”
Findings of Fact
13. Given the certificates of conviction and the admissions of
the respondent I find the respondent was convicted of common assault
in paragraphs 6 to 9 and sentenced to the penalties set out in paragraphs 6 to 9
in the Magistrates Court of Tasmania
on 26 June 2018.
Do the Proven Allegations Amount to Professional
Misconduct?
14. The respondent does not dispute that in the circumstances a
finding of professional misconduct is appropriate.
15. Insofar as the
categorisation of the admitted conduct is concerned, the Tribunal can determine
in respect of all or some of those
matters the respondent:
(a) behaved in a way that constitutes unsatisfactory
professional performance;
(b) behaved in a way that constitutes
unprofessional conduct; or
(c) behaved in a way that constitutes professional
16. The meaning of those terms has been previously discussed by
this Tribunal in the decisions of Tasmanian Board of the Medical Board
Australia v Lyall
[2015] TASHPT 3
and Pharmacy Board of Australia v Meaney
[2017] TASHPT 1
wherein the decision of Medical Board of Australia v Roberts
[2014] WASAT 76
has been discussed. I have considered the general principles
set out in those cases for the purposes of this case.
17. Each of the terms
in paragraph 15 is defined in the National
and in summary they are:
(a) Unsatisfactory professional performance means the
knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised by the practitioner
the practice of the health profession in which the practitioner is registered is
below the standard reasonably expected of a health
practitioner of an equivalent
level of training or experience.
(b) Unprofessional conduct means
professional conduct which is of a lesser standard than might reasonably be
expected of a health
practitioner by the public or the practitioner’s
professional peers.
(c) Professional misconduct includes unprofessional
conduct of a practitioner that amounts to conduct that is substantially below
the standard reasonably expected of a registered health practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience. Additionally,
where more than one
instance of unprofessional conduct, when considered together, amounts to conduct
substantially below the standard
reasonably expected of a registered health
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience then this amounts
to professional
misconduct. In addition, and relevant to the facts of this
case, it includes conduct whether that conduct occurs in connection with
practice of the health practitioner’s profession or not, which is
inconsistent with the practitioner being a fit and proper
person to hold
registration in the profession.
18. I accept the definition of “professional
misconduct” is an inclusive one and is not an exhaustive statement of that
term. The definition therefore includes conduct that may not fall within any of
the paragraphs of the definition, for example matters
established at common law
or under previous disciplinary legislation.
19. The term
“unprofessional conduct” is defined by including examples and is an
exhaustive statement of that term. It
is conduct of a less serious nature than
professional misconduct and must be judged in accordance with the standards of
the practitioner’s
peers. This term has both a performance component and
a conduct component. As explained in Medical Board of Australia v Roberts
(supra) at [181]:
performance component is professional conduct that is of a lesser standard than
that which might reasonably be expected
of the health practitioner by the public
or by the practitioner’s professional peers. The conduct component is,
for example,
the conviction of the practitioner for an offence under an Act
other than the National Law, the nature of which may affect the
practitioner’s
suitability to continue to practise the
profession.
20. In Medical Board of Australia v Roberts (supra), the
Tribunal went on to say at [182]:
“Unsatisfactory
professional performance, on the other hand, has only a performance component
(the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised by a medical
practitioner is below the standard reasonably expected of a medical practitioner
equivalent level of training or experience). It is suggestive of a
generalised deficiency in the way in which a practitioner handles
professional affairs...[i]t is likely that a finding of unsatisfactory
professional performance will occur where the performance
of the practitioner
concerned has consistently fallen below the expected standard as a medical
practitioner, or where the practitioner
has never attained that
21. The comments in Medical Board of Australia v Roberts
(supra) are confined to medical practitioners as the respondent in that case
a consultant paediatrician, however the statutory definitions do not distinguish
between health professions and therefore apply
to all health professionals
including nurses.
22. Professional misconduct, by reference to common law
principles, includes behaviour on the part of a member of a profession that
would reasonably be regarded as disgraceful or dishonest by members of that
profession of good repute and
considered the authorities referred to above and the admitted conduct, my view
is the respondent’s conduct is clearly
unacceptable, it is inappropriate
and would not be considered by the public or by his profession to be
appropriate. In addition
it is my view the conduct, as found by the Magistrate,
is a clear breach of the law. Given the principles set out in the case law
referred to above there are, in this case, repeat examples of instances of
conduct which is below acceptable standards of conduct
and accordingly those
instances amount to a substantial departure from the proper conduct of a
registered nurse. There were 14 counts
of assault proved against the respondent
in under a 4 month period in 2014 for which the respondent received a suspended
prison sentence.
There were a further 7 counts of assault in a period of under
2 months in 2017 that resulted in the penalties set out in paragraphs
This conduct, in my view, is clearly substantially below the standard reasonably
to be expected of a registered nurse and
accordingly the allegations amount to
professional misconduct.
What Consequential Orders are Appropriate?
24. The parties seek the following consequential
(a) That the respondent be reprimanded.
(b) That the
respondent’s registration be suspended for a period of 3 months, to
commence within 7 days of orders being made.
(c) That his registration be
subject to a condition that he undertake a comprehensive assessment with a
forensic psychologist, to
be approved by the Board or its delegate, at the
respondent’s expense, and for a report of the assessment to be considered
by the Board before he resumes nursing practice again.
25. On 6 November 2018 I received, from the respondent’s
solicitors, further information in respect of some queries I had raised
parties. On 8 November 2018 the parties appeared before me and provided further
information orally. The information in
the letter and orally was as
26. It was submitted I could be satisfied of the respondent’s
reliability in the future. The relationship with the victim of
the assaults
ended at least 12 months ago. Whilst not a justification I was advised the
explanation for what in fact occurred was
due to a mental illness suffered by
both the respondent and his former partner which led to a volatile relationship.
The respondent
indicated the termination of that relationship is
27. The respondent’s disciplinary history is as
(a) He was cautioned on 20 December 2012 with respect to a
medication error he made on 29 April 2012.
(b) He was cautioned on 18 July
2013 with respect to a proven breach of a family violence order which involved
his former partner;
however the conduct with respect to that breach was not
related to the conduct set out in paragraphs 11 and 12.
(c) He was cautioned
as a result of an investigation on 15 December 2016 with respect to multiple
charges of assault. This relates
to the conduct alleged in the 2014 complaint.
He was again cautioned on 17 March 2016 and four conditions were imposed on his
on 18 May 2017 the most significant of which was that he was to
undertake treatment with a psychiatrist and general practitioner
and attend at a
frequency determined by those practitioners.
(d) On 19 May 2017 AHPRA
received a notification with respect to the conduct alleged in the 2017
complaint. The outcome of that notification
will essentially be the outcome of
these proceedings.
28. In addition the respondent brought to the Tribunal’s
attention an incident between the respondent and a doctor which occurred
Tasmania. The doctor had instructed the respondent to insert a catheter in a
patient however the respondent refused because he
believed he was inadequately
trained to perform that procedure. The doctor and the respondent both wrote to
AHPRA. The respondent
believes that occurred after AHPRA commenced operation in
2010 and if that is so then he has no matters in either Tasmania or Western
Australia, where he moved from, prior to July 2010. If he is wrong about that
then he says this is the only prior matter before
July 2010. I was also advised
that a number of the respondent’s colleagues wrote letters in support of
his position and the
respondent understands there was no investigation with
respect to that matter.
29. I was also advised by the respondent, who
appeared in person, he was incorrectly diagnosed with depression for 20 years
treated on that basis. He was seeing a psychologist, Damien Minehan,
but for the last year and a half he has been seeing Dr Philippa
psychologist, and he has seen her twice since his release from prison. He is
next due to see her on 27 November 2018 and
at monthly intervals thereafter. He
is also seeing a psychiatrist by the name of Ben Harwood at monthly intervals.
It is his understanding
his treatment will be ongoing but he thinks over time
the frequency of appointments will reduce. He says the events the subject
the complaints and his incarceration was a traumatic period in his life and the
frequency of contact with a psychologist and psychiatrist
has been much higher
than what it is currently but there has been some improvement in his condition
in the last year or so, so the
frequency of visits is slowly
30. The respondent advised the Tribunal it was only when he was
admitted to the Rokeby Clinic and was under close supervision that
the correct
diagnosis of Bipolar II Disorder was made. He advised there is a hypomanic
component to that condition which results
in significant mood swings. This
condition was not diagnosed until late 2015. Thereafter there was a period
during which the appropriate
medication regime was determined by trial and error
in order to stabilise his mood.
31. Finally I was advised the respondent has,
in recent years, always worked as a registered nurse. The relationship with his
partner was volatile but he has addressed the stressors in his life by
seeking professional treatment. It was that treatment that
in fact uncovered
the previously undiagnosed condition which is now being properly treated. In
addition the respondent’s counsel
submitted the respondent was aware that
while he has agreed to a period of suspension as being an appropriate outcome in
these proceedings,
the lifting of that suspension is subject to him being able
to provide a report from a forensic psychologist which supports the lifting
any such suspension that is imposed.
32. Counsel for the applicant did not
quarrel with any of the facts and submissions which are reproduced at paragraphs
33. As to the proposed orders the applicant submitted the
• A reprimand is a severe reproof, a chastisement for
past conduct and is an appropriate sanction.
• The admitted behaviour
does not reflect well on the nursing profession and is inconsistent with the
respondent being a fit
and proper person and accordingly it has the potential to
bring the nursing profession into disrepute.
• Accordingly a period of
suspension is required for general deterrence and to demonstrate the nursing
profession does not tolerate
such repeated violent behaviour. Such conduct
reflects very poorly on the profession as a whole.
• The 3 month period
of imprisonment served by the respondent is acknowledged and he should be given
some credit for that when
determining how long his registration should be
suspended for.
• During the proposed period of suspension there is
ample opportunity for the respondent to attend an assessment with a forensic
psychologist for the purpose of obtaining a report which can be considered by
the Board prior to his resumption of practice following
the expiry of the
suspension. The rationale for such a report is the Board wishes to be
reassured that despite the respondent’s
repeated violent behaviour in
domestic settings, he does not pose any risk to patients or staff in his
34. The Board submitted the proposed orders strike a proper
balance between the protective element of the duties and functions of
Board and the Tribunal and the need to arrive at an outcome that will not be
unduly punitive. I note that although the
respondent has already served 3
months in prison there is a further 4 months imprisonment which has been
suspended and the suspension
of that period of imprisonment is subject to
conditions as set out in paragraphs 8 and 9. Some of the conditions apply for a
of 12 months whilst other conditions apply for a period of 3 years. The
respondent is also subject to probation as set out in paragraph
6 for a period
of 18 months from his release from prison. Any further conduct of a similar
nature to that identified in paragraph
5 may result in a further charge with
respect to a breach of probation or alternatively a breach of the suspended
sentence and activation
of that sentence along with punishment for any further
offences giving rise to such a breach.
35. Provided the Board can be
satisfied as a result of an assessment carried out by a forensic psychologist
prior to the respondent
resuming practice that he does not pose any risk to
patients or staff in the workplace then the Board is satisfied the proposed
are an appropriate outcome for these proceedings.
36. The respondent
agrees with the submissions in paragraphs 33 to 35.
37. Having made the
professional misconduct finding, what purpose is to be served by the
consequential orders? This question was
Board of South Australia
[2001] SASC 169.
Although that case referred to
medical practitioners it is my view the principles are equally applicable to
registered nurses.
At [41] the Court said:
purpose of disciplinary proceedings is to protect the public, not to punish a
practitioner in the sense in which punishment
is administered pursuant to the
criminal law. A disciplinary tribunal protects the public by making orders
which will prevent persons
who are unfit to practice from practising, or by
making orders which will secure the maintenance of proper professional
A disciplinary tribunal will also consider the protection of the
public, and of the relevant profession, by making orders which
will assure the
public that appropriate standards are being maintained within the relevant
profession.”
38. Many pieces of legislation which deal with professional
vocations require a member of that profession to be a fit and proper person.
Where a member of a profession is convicted of an offence, it is ordinarily said
the real question is not whether the person has
been convicted of an offence,
but whether his or her conduct has been so serious to demonstrate that he or she
should not remain
a member of the profession: Ziems v Prothonotary of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
; MacMillan v
Pharmaceutical Council of Western Australia
[1983] WAR 166
per Kennedy J. at
39. Convictions are generally regarded as more serious if they are
offences of dishonesty or are otherwise so serious, either in themselves
representing a course of disregard for the law as to reflect particularly
adversely on the character of the respondent: Chan
v The Nurses Board of Western
[2005] WASAT 115
40. While the term “fit and
proper” was considered in the context outlined in paragraphs 38 and 39
above as to whether
a practitioner should remain a member of a relevant
profession, the question whether the respondent is a “fit and
person to practise must be considered in the context of the
definition of what constitutes professional misconduct for the purposes
definition of that term in s5 of the National Law.
41. Professional
misconduct in terms of the definition set out in paragraph (c) in s5 of the
National Law only requires a practitioner’s
conduct to be
“inconsistent with the practitioner being a fit and proper person to hold
registration in the profession”
(my emphasis).
42. Where there is a
choice of sanctions the Tribunal will choose the sanction which maximises the
protection of the public: Quinn
v Law Institute of Victoria [2007] VCSA 122 at
43. The dominant purpose of the disciplinary regulation of the nursing
profession is the protection of the public by the maintenance
standards within the profession. Therefore, the impact which an appropriate
penalty would have upon a practitioner who
is guilty of misconduct, and any
personal hardship imposed on such a practitioner, are therefore secondary
considerations
appropriate sanction is to be considered at the time of imposing the sanction
and not by reference to the date of the
45. Suspension
is of course a less serious consequence for the respondent than cancellation of
his registration because suspension
is for a specified and limited period. The
proper use of a suspension is in cases where the practitioner has fallen below
standards to be expected of such a practitioner, but not in such a way
as to indicate that he or she lacks the qualities of character
necessary attributes of a person entrusted with the responsibilities of a
practitioner
is suspension is appropriate where the Tribunal is satisfied that, upon
completion of the period of suspension, the practitioner
will be fit to resume
practice; that is the purpose of the report which the Board seeks by way of the
consequential order set out
in paragraph 24(c).
46. In determining an
appropriate sanction a number of matters require consideration. The matters
which follow are inter-related
and are not mutually exclusive. There may be
others. They are as follows:
(a) Any need to protect the public against further
misconduct by the
practitioner
need to protect the public from similar conduct, through general deterrence, of
practitioners
need to protect the public and maintain confidence in the profession by
reinforcing high professional standards, denouncing
transgressions and thereby
articulating the high standards expected of the
that even where there may be no need to deter a practitioner for repeating the
conduct, the conduct is of such a nature that
the Tribunal should give an
emphatic indication of its
disapproval
(d) In the case of conduct
involving misleading conduct, including dishonesty, whether the public and
fellow practitioners can place
reliance on the word of the
practitioner
(e) Whether
the practitioner has breached any Act, regulations, guidelines or code of
conduct issued by the relevant professional
body and whether the practitioner
has done so knowingly.
(f) Whether the practitioner’s conduct
demonstrates incompetence, and if so, to what level.
(g) Whether or not the
conduct was isolated such that the Tribunal can be satisfied of his or her
worthiness or reliability in the
practitioner’s disciplinary
(i) Whether
or not the practitioner understands the error of his or her ways, including an
assessment of any remorse and insight (or
lack thereof) shown by the
practitioner. It has been said a practitioner who fails to understand the
significance and consequences
of misconduct is a risk to the
desirability of making available to the public any special skills possessed by
the practitioner.
(k) The practitioner’s personal circumstances at the
time of the conduct and at the time of imposing the sanction. The weight
given to personal circumstances cannot, however, override the fundamental
obligation of this Tribunal to provide appropriate
protection of the public
interest in the honesty and integrity of practitioners and in the maintenance of
proper standards of such
Tribunal may consider any other matters relevant to the practitioner’s
fitness to practice and other matters which may
be regarded as aggravating or
which mitigate its
seriousness
Generally speaking, mitigating factors such as no previous misconduct or a
practitioner’s service to the profession are of
considerably less
significance than in the criminal process because the jurisdiction is
protective, not punitive
47. In this case the matters identified above at paragraphs
46(d), (f), (j) and (l) are not relevant.
48. As to paragraph 46(a) I take
the view multiple convictions for assault against a practitioner’s partner
is a very serious
matter. The public is entitled to be protected against
further similar conduct that, even though it did not occur in the practice
nursing, may reveal a defect in the respondent’s character and therefore
impact on the trust and confidence of his patients
and/or fellow health
practitioners in his practice of nursing.
49. Similarly in respect of
paragraphs 46(b) and (c) health practitioners ought to be aware that such
convictions when outside the
practice of the practitioner may ultimately have
some impact on their registration under the National Law.
50. In relation to
paragraph 46(e), the convictions establish a number of serious breaches of the
law. The respondent breached the
law knowingly because there were multiple
counts of assault for which he ultimately pleaded guilty.
51. The incidents
of assault are isolated in that they cover a 4 month period in 2014 and a 6 week
period in 2017. In addition I
accept the relationship is at an end.
respondent does have a disciplinary history which is summarised in paragraph 27.
Most of his disciplinary history relates
to conduct for which he is presently
before this Tribunal.
53. As to paragraph 46(i), the respondent did
participate in these proceedings and appeared to answer questions from me fully
frankly. He pleaded guilty to the offences and that, combined with his
appearance before me and his apparent willingness to seek
treatment, indicates
some remorse.
54. Insofar as the respondent’s personal circumstances
are concerned he was working as a nurse at the time of the conduct the
of the complaints and was in a relationship. He still wishes to work as a nurse
however the relationship is no more. It
seems between the first period of
impugned conduct in 2014 and the second period of impugned conduct in 2017 the
respondent was properly
diagnosed from a mental health standpoint and his
medication regime has, by trial and error, been perfected over time. It seems
he has been required to seek treatment from both a general practitioner and a
psychiatrist since at least May 2017 and that treatment
has resumed since his
release from prison in late September or early October 2018. In addition he has
been seeking treatment from
a psychologist. While the sanction I must impose is
to be determined at the time of imposing the penalty rather than the time of
professional misconduct, I take the view there is a basis for a lower penalty
than might otherwise have been imposed having regard
to the respondent’s
mental health difficulties at the time of the assaults.
55. There are no
other matters which I think are relevant.
56. In the joint submission I was
referred to the unreported State Administrative Tribunal decision in Western
Australia of Nursing
and Midwifery Board of Australia v Thomas (Matter No
VR89/2017). But for the respondent’s sentence of imprisonment, including
time actually served, the applicant would have sought a suspension of the
respondent’s registration for 6 months which, it
was submitted, was
consistent with the penalty in this Western Australian decision. In that case
the respondent was charged with
one count of assault under the Western Australia
Criminal Code which consisted of a number of verbal threats by the respondent to
his wife and unborn child and a number of instances of physically pushing,
biting and holding his wife against her will and dragging
her by the hair and
forcing her head up against a wall. He had to be forcibly separated from his
wife by third parties. The respondent’s
wife had to be treated in
hospital for soft tissue damage to her right cheek and eye socket and bruising
to her neck and shoulder.
He pleaded guilty in the Perth Magistrates Court to
the charge and was convicted and sentenced to an intensive supervision order
18 months. He was liable on conviction for that offence, to imprisonment for up
to 5 years. The respondent failed to give notice
to the applicant of the charge
or conviction. He also falsely answered a question with respect to his criminal
history in the subsequent
application to AHPRA for renewal of his general
registration as a registered nurse. His registration was renewed. He repeated
false declaration in his renewal application the following year and again
his registration was renewed. The Tribunal in that case
made a finding that the
respondent’s conduct constituted professional misconduct and the
consequential orders were:
(a) The respondent was reprimanded in relation to the
professional misconduct;
(b) The respondent’s registration was
cancelled effective 17 July 2017;
(c) The respondent was disqualified from
applying for registration for a period of 6 months; and
(d) The respondent
was to pay the applicant’s costs and disbursements of the
proceedings.
57. In making determinations and orders in this matter I am
assisted and guided by statements of Ross J. in Secretary to the Department
Planning and Community Development v Muto
[2011] VCAT 328
, where his
Honour observed that:
proceedings in respect of civil penalties there is now a well-established line
of authority in support of the proposition
that where a regulatory body and a
respondent have reached a negotiated settlement and the penalty proposed is,
broadly speaking,
within the ‘permissible range’ having regard to
all the circumstances, the court (or in this case the Tribunal) should
depart from the agreed sanction. I propose to adopt the same approach to the
matter before me. The question then becomes whether
the sanction proposed is
within the permissible range.”
58. This approach has been followed in other health
practitioner disciplinary
proceedings
this case, in addition to the professional misconduct finding the parties seek
the consequential orders set out in paragraph
59. As I have previously
whether the
sanction proposed is within the permissible range must be answered by whether
the protection of the public and the maintenance
of professional standards is
achieved by imposition of the proposed penalties. I have also taken into
account the other matters
set out in paragraphs 46 to 54. A suspension is a
serious form of censure and condemnation which carries serious implications for
the respondent as he will not be able to earn a living from his chosen
profession for at least a period of 3 months. I also note
in this case whether
or not the respondent is reregistered as a nurse is dependent upon him
satisfying the applicant, by the provision
of a report detailing the
comprehensive assessment of a forensic psychologist, a psychologist is of the
view he should be considered
by the applicant to be entitled to resume nursing
practice. In this case the combined effect of the proposed sanctions is onerous
but it recognises the very serious allegations which are before the Tribunal and
which have been established by the applicant. I
therefore conclude that the
sanctions are within the permissible range.
DISPOSITION
60. I have found the respondent’s conduct amounts to
professional misconduct so I formally determine that the conduct summarised
paragraphs 11 and 12 for which the respondent was convicted and punished
constitutes professional misconduct pursuant to the National
is no evidence which has been tendered or agreed in relation to the allegation
concerning the respondent’s failure
to advise the applicant within 7 days
of a relevant event as defined in s130 of the National Law, namely being charged
with an offence
punishable by 12 months imprisonment or more, and being
convicted of an offence punishable by imprisonment. That allegation is
62. Insofar as penalty is concerned I order
(a) The respondent is reprimanded.
respondent’s registration is suspended for a period of 3 months, such
period commencing within 7 days of the date of
these orders.
respondent’s registration is subject to a condition that he undertake a
comprehensive assessment with a forensic psychologist,
to be approved by the
Board or its delegate, at his expense, and for a report of the assessment to be
considered by the Board before
he resumes nursing practice again.
CHAIRPERSON
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (Tasmania) Act
See s196(1)(b) of the
National Law.
See s5 of the
National Law.
Adamson v Pharmacy Board of
Tasmania (No 2)
[2004] TASSC 82
Legal Profession Complaints
Committee v Detata
[2012] WASCA 214
Legal Profession Complaints
Committee v Masten
[2011] WASC 71
Legal Profession Complaints
Committee v Leask
[2010] WASAT 133
Medical Board of Australia
[2014] WASAT 137(S)
A Solicitor v Council of the Law
Society of NSW
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253.
Legal Profession Complaints
Committee v A Legal Practitioner
[2013] WASAT 37(S)
Practitioner
(1984) 36 SASR 590
at 593 per King CJ.
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
at 440C and
NSW Bar Association v
(1999) NSWCA 404
Veterinary Practitioners
Board of NSW v Johnson
[2010] NSWADT 308
NSW Bar Association
(supra) at [77].
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman
(supra) at 444F and
NSW Bar Association v Hamman
(supra) at [77] and
Craig v The
Medical Board of South Australia
(supra) at [64].
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman
(supra) at 445B and 445G;
Veterinary Practitioners Board
of NSW v Johnson
(supra) at [109].
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman
(supra) at 442E and 442G;
New South Wales Bar Association
[1968] HCA 20
(1968) 117 CLR 177
Council of the Law
Society (NSW) v A Solicitor
[2002] NSWCA 62
Chamberlain v Law
Society of the Australian Capital Territory
[1993] FCA 527
(1993) 118 ALR
at 62 and 63.
Profession Complaints Committee v O’Halloran
[2013] WASC 430
New South Wales v Walsh
[1997] NSWCA 185
per Beazley JJA;
Profession Complaints Committee v Lashansky
[2007] WASC 2011
Law Society of New South Wales v Foreman
Settlement Agents Supervisory Board
[2007] WASCA 97
(2007) 33 WAR 361
Profession Complaints Committee v A Legal Practitioner
(supra) at [25].
Law Society of New South
Wales v Walsh
See for example
Board of Australia v Saykao
[2011] VCAT 1338
Board of Australia v Gazelakis
[2011] VCAT 726
Pharmacy Board of
Australia v Victoria Brice
[2018] TASHPT 2
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (237 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter