URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMC/2024/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
French v Meander Valley Council [2024] TASMC 5 (27 May 2024)
[2024] TASMC 5
L AUNCESTON COURT OF PETTY SESSIONS
French v Meander Valley Council
[2024] TASMC
FRENCH, Warren David
VALLEY COUNCIL
27 May 2024
DELIVERED AT:
13 May 2024
DECISION OF:
Magistrate K
CATCHWORDS:
Criminal Law – Offences – Infringement Notices – Setting
aside deemed conviction – Requirements - Valid and
Relevant Reason –
Prima facie
Environment and Planning - Building control –
Implementation and enforcement – Failure to comply with building direction
– Defence that building direction not valid - Status of building direction
– Whether collateral challenge available
Building Act 2016
Monetary Penalties Enforcement Service
National Construction Code
Krulow v Glamorgan Spring Bay Council
[2013] TASFC 11
Krulow v Glamorgan Spring Bay Council
[2013] TASSC 33.
[2017] TASSC 64
McKenna v Smith
[2014] TASMC
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
Paragraphs:
Serial No. 5 /2024
File No. 703110/2024
WAYNE DAVID FRENCH V MEANDER VALLEY COUNCIL
EDITED REASONS FOR DECISION GIVEN ORALLY STANTON, M
11 October 2023 Wade Hately issued an infringement notice to Warren French under
Building Act
. The infringement notice specified
the offence as a failure to comply with a building order contrary to
of that Act. Mr French did not take any of the steps for dealing
with the notice specified in it within the 28 days, in particular
elect a court hearing within that time. As a result he is taken to have been
convicted of the offence pursuant to s 20
Monetary Penalties
Enforcement Service Act
2005. He now applies to set aside that
conviction.
the absence of consent by the enforcement debtor under the Act, s 40(4)
gives the Court power to set aside the conviction if satisfied
“(a) the offender has provided valid and
relevant reasons why he or she did not elect to have the matter heard by a court
the time allowed by the infringement notice; and
(b) the offender has established a prima
facie defence to the offences that are the subject of the infringement
this case the enforcement debtor opposes the application.
facts are not substantially in contention and are as follows. The applicant is
responsible for building work at 4 Tower Hill
Road, Deloraine. On
27 October 2022 a building direction was issued by the building surveyor
for that site which identified defects
and required remedial work as
a) It is apparent significant additional steel framing has been installed
under the house. The consulting engineer is to provide
an inspection direction
and Form 55 covering these modifications.
b) All subfloor steel members are to comply to National Construction Code
(NCC) Volume 2 2019 Part 3.4.4.4 corrosion protection.
proofing/water proofing is to be modified at the front door to prevent moisture
ingress. The resulting damage that has occurred
which now presents a trip
hazard and as such is to be replaced as necessary.
d) Drainage at the base of the bolt cut, adequate drainage is to be installed
to make it compliant with NCC Volume 2 2019 Part 3.1.3.
e) An additional smoke detector is to be installed in the lounge room NCC
Volume 2 2019 Part 3.7.5.
f) Roof BAL compliance – roof ladder/end protection is required over
the non-compliant clear sheets to comply with AS3959. Performance
building inspection direction required that work to be undertaken and indicated
that the builder or owner must not undertake
or allow any further building work
which would make compliance with that direction more difficult or impossible.
30 October 2022 a building order was issued by the building surveyor to Mr
French referring to the same defects and requiring substantially
action. On 14 November 2022 a building notice was issued, again referring to
the same defects. On 11 October 2023, that
is about 11½ months after the
building order and approximately 11 months after the building notice, the
infringement notice
was issued.
a show cause notice dated 23 October 2023, the Director of Building Control
alleged various breaches of the
Building Act
. The provisions alleged to
have been breached were
Building Act
The particulars of those alleged breaches are as follows:
a) Inspection photo shows stairways were construction but not specified in
the approved plans. Failed to update the plans as constructed.
contradiction to the approved plans and as per
Building Act 2016
b) Additionally, any stairways and ramps must be suitable for safe passage in
relation to the nature, volume and frequency of likely
Building Act 2016
P2.5.1 of the NCC 2016 Volume 2.
Furthermore,
as per the bushfire hazard assessment report and bushfire hazard management plan
2.2 states, "Establishing non-combustible
paths and driveways around building,
however fibre reinforced polymer and pine will be used for stairway".
Building Act 2016
d) Inspection photos show handrails were not constructed along the full
length of the ramp.
Building Act 2016
Part 3.9.2.4
NCC 2016 Volume 2.
e) Approved drawing includes insufficient information regarding ramp design
standards on the plans which fail to meet mandatory minimum
level of design
details as described in schedule 1 of the Director’s specified list.
Building Act 2016
f) Failure to construct the footings and piers as per plan.
Building Act 2016
g) Footings were not designed as per
Building Act 2016
of the NCC 2016 Volume 2.
h) Steel stumps are showing indications of rusting. Failure to comply with
corrosion protection. Section of the
Building Act 2016
2016 Volume 2.
wall cladding exposed to the weather must be flashed. Failure to comply with
Building Act 2016
Part 3.5.3.6
of NCC 2016 Volume
j) As per the inspection photos, clearance between the ground surface and the
subfloor is not minimum height of 150 millimetres.
Part 3.4.1.2
of the NCC 2016 Volume 2.
that letter, the Director indicated an intention to issue an infringement notice
for the various offences alleged in that notice.
30 October 2023 the applicant wrote to the senior compliance officer of the
Consumer Building and Occupational Services (CBOS)
denying the alleged
a statutory declaration Mr French said that the closeness in time of the
infringement notice and the letter from CBOS led him to
mistakenly believe that
they were the same matter and that responding to CBOS would satisfy the
outstanding matters referred to in
the infringement notice. He gave oral
evidence to similar effect. I accept what he says about that. That constitutes
reason for failing to elect a court hearing. It was his mistake; the
question remains whether that is a valid reason.
was not referred to any authority as to what constitutes a valid reason. I
observe that despite the terms of the application, that
is, the standard form
application, the reason does not need to be reasonable but valid. Generally a
reasonable reason would also
be a valid one. Having regard to the purpose of
I consider a valid reason to be one which is genuine and
sufficiently rational to justify the exercise of the power to set aside
conviction.
careful reading of the documents would have revealed a number of distinctions as
a matter of substance and procedure between the
infringement notice and the
letter from CBOS. Indeed, while I do not exclude some other overlap, the most
obvious common defect
is only one, that is, the alleged failure to comply with
the subfloor corrosion protection, contrary to
of the NCC Volume 2
2019. In that sense a careful reading of the documents would have made it clear
to the applicant that he needed
to treat them differently in substance and as a
matter of procedure.
Nonetheless
the contemporaneity of the infringement notice and the correspondence from CBOS
and the fact that the documents were in
respect of the same building, and
included at least one common alleged breach, means that such a mistake might be
made with only
a modest lack of care. A person in Mr French’s
position might expect that the various enforcement authorities would communicate
and I consider that his mistake is sufficient to constitute a valid reason.
am therefore satisfied that the applicant’s mistake that his communication
with CBOS would adequately deal with the infringement
notice was a valid and
relevant reason for failing to elect a court hearing.
next question however is whether I am satisfied that Mr French has a prima facie
defence to a charge for the offence which he
is taken to be convicted of as a
result of the operation of s 20 of the
Monetary Penalties Enforcement
Service Act
that regard, the applicant Mr French contends the order should not have been
made and the notice should not have been issued.
I understand Mr French
contends that the building inspection direction, the building order and the
building notice should not have
been issued. I also understand the building
surveyor who issued them did not continue as the surveyor for this project.
Nonetheless,
Mr French accepts that he did not comply with the notice and the
order fully, as I understand it, because he disagreed with the requirements
imposed by them.
first barrier to that argument as a defence to the offence which must be
overcome, is that it is necessary for its success for
him to successfully
challenge the validity of the building order. That would require a collateral
challenge to that order, that
is, a challenge to the validity of the order in
proceedings for an offence in which that validity is in issue as opposed to a
to set aside or review the order.
are a number of Tasmanian authorities in respect of such collateral challenges
Krulow v Glamorgan Spring Bay
[2013] TASFC 11
which was an appeal from a decision of Wood J in
Krulow v Glamorgan Spring Bay Council
[2013] TASSC 33.
In addition but in
a different context, there is
[2017] TASSC 64
, a decision of Pearce J and a decision of
[2014] TASMC 11
, a decision of Magistrate Brett (as his Honour then
effect of all those decisions is that a collateral challenge to the validity of
an administrative decision is not permissible
unless the purpose, scheme and
terms of the relevant legislation suggest to the contrary, or that the
invalidity of the administrative
decision is apparent on its
factors which those decisions refer to as telling against the ability to mount a
collateral challenge include:
a) the legislation has a protective purpose.
b) the availability of review in respect of the particular decision; and
c) evidentiary provisions which facilitate the proof of the relevant decision.
this case the objects of the
Building Act
are set out in
that Act. Those objects include to ensure that:
a) building work, plumbing work and demolition work including the design and
maintenance of domestic, commercial and industrial buildings
meets or exceeds
the minimum National Construction standards; and
b) building work, plumbing work, demolition work and maintenance work do not
negatively affect the health and safety of people; and
c) owners, building service providers, practitioners and councils comply with
the requirements of this Act and the
National Construction Code
performing work or performing functions and exercising powers under this Act.
objectives are referred to including accessibility for people with disabilities,
energy and water efficiency and sustainability
with minimal impact on the
environment, the legal protection of those involved in building work,
facilitating and promoting cost
effective construction of buildings and
encouraging an efficient, innovative and competitive building industry. Not all
objectives are protective but the first ones certainly are. In my view
that points against the ability to mount a collateral challenge
is also possible to seek a review of the order. That can be pursued pursuant to
Building Act
which provides that an owner of
premises affected by an emergency order, building order or plumbing order may
appeal to the appeal
tribunal against that order or any condition in the order,
or refusal to amend or cancel the order, and a failure to revoke the order
completion of the work specified in the order. The appeal tribunal is of course
a reference to the Tasmanian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal. It is clear
therefore that there is the availability of review in respect of that order.
That also counts against the
conclusion that collateral challenge is available
in respect of the validity of the order.
Act also contains a provision requiring the court to take judicial notice of
such an order: see
Building Act
my view all of those factors tell firmly against the availability of collateral
challenge unless the order is invalid on its face.
to that an order can be issued pursuant to s 246 of the Act by a building
surveyor or permit authority. In this case on its face
it is issued by a
building surveyor.
accordance with s 246(1) a building order would usually follow a building
notice. In this case the only building notice in evidence
was issued after the
building order. However, s 246(3)(b) authorises a building order to be
served if it contains requirements specified
in s 246(2)(d), that is, that
the requirements of a building direction have not been complied with. This is
such a case. On its
face therefore it appears to have been issued pursuant to a
power provided in
Building Act
the order might have been expressed more elegantly, in my view it is
sufficiently clear in its requirements to be enforceable.
those reasons in my view the order is not invalid on its face.
summary, the order is valid on its face. The applicant accepts that he has not
fully complied with the order, although that is
because he believes it was
wrongly issued and that the defects specified in it don’t exist and he
ought not be required to
take the steps specified in it. That is a matter of
collateral challenge which is not available in proceedings for an offence in
respect of a building order.
those reasons I am not satisfied the applicant has a
prima facie
I am not satisfied that one of the preconditions to the existence of the power
to set aside the conviction exists.
application is therefore dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (138 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter