URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASWRCT/2021/31.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:23:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Xenco Pty Ltd v A. [2021] TASWRCT 31 (9 September 2021)
[2021] TASWRCT 31
WORKERS REHABILITATION AND COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
Xenco Pty Ltd v A.
[2021] TASWRCT 31
XENCO PTY LTD
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
27 August 2021
DELIVERED ON:
9 September 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Chief Commissioner Clues
CATCHWORDS:
Entitlement to compensation – whether injury
suffered in the course of employment – whether employer induced or
worker to engage in activity
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
Hatzimanolis v ANI Corporation Ltd
[1992] HCA 21
; Comcare v PVYW
[2013] HCA 41
(2013) 250 CLR 246
; Comcare v Mather
[1995] FCA 1216
; P. v Xenco Pty Ltd
[2021] TASWRCT 29
; Xenco Pty Ltd v P.
DETERMINATION:
No reasonably arguable case
REPRESENTATION:
Brown (Abetz Curtis)
[2021] TASWRCT 31
Chief Commissioner Clues
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. The worker was employed by Xenco Pty Ltd (the employer) as a
fixed plant maintenance planner. He has claimed workers compensation
injury he suffered to his left knee on 15 June 2021. The employer disputes
liability for the claim and has referred it to
the Tribunal under s81A of the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988 (the Act).
2. The question
for the Tribunal to answer at this time is whether a reasonably arguable case
exists concerning the issue as to whether
the worker’s injury arose
“in the course of” his employment as required by s25(1)(a) of the
The Evidence
3. At the hearing of the referral, the employer tendered and
relied upon the following documents:
• The referral dated 13 August 2021.
• The claim
form dated 21 June 2021.
• The initial workers compensation medical
certificate dated 17 June 2021.
• The statement of Michael Hyde dated 2
August 2021.
• The notice of dispute to the worker dated 13 August
4. In the workers compensation claim form the worker states
that on 15 June 2021 he “hurt knee whilst ascending retaining wall
of mess”. In the initial workers compensation medical certificate dated
17 June 2021 it states that “2 days
ago at work had twisting injury on
left knee”. It says the worker presented with symptoms of “left
knee pain and swelling/soft
tissue injury”. The worker was certified as
incapacitated for any work from 17 June 2021 to 21 June 2021. He was certified
as fit for suitable duties from 21 June 2021 to 5 July 2021.
Hyde’s statement provides further information in relation to the
circumstances giving rise to this claim. He states
• He is the Operations Manager of the
• On the date of the injury (15 June 2021) the worker was
staying at accommodation just off Zeehan Highway leading on to Main
• The accommodation is owned by the employer’s client,
Bluestone Mines Tasmania Joint Venture Pty Ltd.
• The accommodation was
arranged by the employer so that the worker could work at the Renison Mine
• There is approximately 20kms between the accommodation and the
Renison Mine site.
• At the time of the injury, the employer had
approximately 11 employees staying at the accommodation.
letter of offer to the worker, the employer directed him to comply with the
safety policies and procedures of the employer’s
• Bluestone Mines Tasmania Joint Venture Pty Ltd set the
rules, regulations and guidelines for the accommodation, and a copy
is provided
in the rooms.
• The worker was engaged to work 14 days on, 7 days off,
working 12 hour shifts from approximately 5:30am to 5:30pm. At the
time of his
injury, he had just completed his first day of his roster cycle.
the date of the injury at approximately 5:30pm, the worker had completed a
day’s work at the Renison Mine. He then
drove from the Mine to the Zeehan
Village accommodation and parked his car in the car park. At around 6:00pm he
exited the car, walked
across the car park and was heading to the mess to
collect his room key and eat dinner.
• The injury was suffered when the
worker attempted to climb a retaining wall approximately 850mm high. The worker
had on the wall and tried to jump off his left leg. He reported
feeling a sharp pain and heard some minor cracking in his left
• The worker (nor anyone else) was ever directed by the employer
to step over the retaining wall. The normal practice is to
6. In an email to the employer from the worker dated 17 June
2021 that is attached to Mr Hyde’s statement, the worker says he
see any stairs in the area so he went up to the retaining wall.
7. There was
no dispute in relation to these facts.
The Employer’s Submissions
8. The employer submits that this evidence establishes
(a) at the time the injury occurred, the worker was in
between two periods of actual work and not “on the clock” in the
sense of being directly engaged in any work related activity or having begun his
(b) the worker suffered the injury while engaged in the activity of
stepping up onto a retaining wall whilst intending to walk to
the mess to
collect his room key; and
(c) the employer did not induce or encourage the
worker to engage in the activity of stepping up on to the retaining
9. The employer further submits that:
“An injury occurring
between periods of actual work does not occur ‘in the course of
employment’ unless it arises
at and by reference to a particular place
where the employer required, induced or encouraged the worker to be, or it
arises while
the worker is engaged in an activity which the employer required,
induced or encouraged the worker to engage in (see Comcare v PVYW
[2013] HCA 41
The statement of Michael Hyde establishes the injury the worker suffered did
not arise out of or in the course of his employment,
within the meaning of
s25(1)(a) of the Act. Rather it arose from an activity occurring between
periods of actual work, and the employer
did not induce or encourage the worker
to engage in that
The Workers’ Submissions
10. The worker was not represented at the hearing, he submitted
that at the time of the injury he considered he was under the direction
employer. He submitted that he remained certified as fit for suitable duties.
He said that as he suffered “tightness”
and pain going up stairs he
was currently prevented from doing site work. He was hoping to be certified as
fit for work in 3 weeks..
Consideration
11. The meaning of the term “course of employment”
has been determined by the High Court to be a “temporal”
The temporal connection between a worker’s injury and his employment is
usually self-evident in those cases where the worker’s
injury is suffered
within his ordinary or overtime hours of work. However, in this case, the
worker was injured outside these hours
and during an interval between the end of
work on 15 June 2021 and its resumption on 16 June 2021. Whether an injury
occurring during
such an interval can arise in the course of a worker’s
employment has been the subject of consideration by the High Court in
of Hatzimanolis v ANI Corporation Ltd
[1992] HCA 21
(1992) 173 CLR 473
(“Hatzimanolis”) and Comcare v PVYW
[2013] HCA 41
(2013) 250 CLR
12. In Hatzimanolis the majority held at
“...it should now be
accepted that an interval or interlude within an overall period or episode of
work occurs within the course
of employment if, expressly or impliedly, the
employer has induced or encouraged the employee to spent that interval or
at a particular place or in a particular way. Furthermore, an injury
sustained in such an interval will be within the course of
employment if it
occurred at that place or while the worker was engaged in that activity unless
the employee was guilty of gross
misconduct taking him or her outside the course
of employment. In determining whether the injury occurred in the course of
employment,
regard must always be had to the general nature, terms and
circumstances of the employment "and not merely to the circumstances of
particular occasion out of which the injury to the employee has arisen"(20)
Danvers (1969) 122 CLR, at p 537.”
13. In PVYW, the majority considered the case of Hatzimanolis
and held at [32] and [33] as follows:
“An employer’s
inducement or encouragement may create an interval according to Hatzimanolis,
but it is not itself a sufficient
condition for liability. Further factual
conditions necessary for the application of that principle are stated in the
passage, following
the word “Furthermore”. There, it is said that
an injury sustained in such an interval will be in the course of employment
it occurred at that place or while the employee was engaged in that activity.
It will be so considered unless the employee has
been guilty of gross
misconduct.
To these conditions it is added,..., that it will always be necessary to have
regard to the “general nature, terms and circumstances
employment” in determining the overall question, whether the injury
occurred in the course of employment. Attention
is not to be focused just upon
the occasion giving rise to the injury.”
14. In PVYW, the majority made the following further comments
in relation to the case of Hatzimanolis at [38] and [39]:
“The starting point in
apply what was said in Hatzimanolis, in order to determine whether an injury was
suffered in the course
of employment, is the factual finding that an employee
suffered an injury, but not whilst engaged in actual work. The next enquiry
what the employee was doing when injured. For the principle in Hatzimanolis to
apply, the employee must have been either engaged
in an activity or present at a
place where the injury occurred. The essential enquiry is then: how was the
injury brought about?
In some cases, the injury will have occurred at and by
reference to the place. More commonly, it will have occurred while the employee
was engaged in an activity. It is only if and when one of those circumstances
is present that the question arising from the Hatzimanolis
principle becomes
relevant. When an activity was engaged in at the time of the injury, the
question is: did the employer induce
or encourage the employee to engage in that
activity? When injury occurs at and by reference to a place, the question is:
employer induce or encourage the employee to be there? If the answer to
the relevant question is affirmative, then the injury will
have occurred in the
course of employment.
It follows that where an activity is engaged in at the time of the injury,
the relevant question is not whether the employer encouraged
the employee to be
at a place, an employer’s inducement or encouragement to be present at a
place is not relevant in such a
15. The employer submits that at the time the worker suffered
his injury he was not engaged in actual work and further that this is
“activity” case. I accept those submissions. I now turn to the
relevant questions to be determined as set out in
16. The first enquiry
is “How was the injury brought about?” As stated above (8(b)) the
employer submits that “the
worker suffered the injury while engaged in the
activity of stepping up onto a retaining wall whilst intending to walk to the
to collect his room key”. According to the evidence it was also the
worker’s intention to eat dinner whilst at the mess.
I accept and find
that the worker’s relevant “activity” was stepping up onto a
retaining wall whilst intending
to walk to the mess to collect his room key and
eat dinner.
17. The employer further submits (8(c)) that it “did not
induce or encourage the worker to engage in the activity of stepping
the retaining wall”
18. In my view, the “activity” must be
looked at as a whole and cannot be separated into different actions, such an
is too narrow and restricted. Further, it does not “have regard
to the ‘general nature, terms and circumstances of the
employment’
and it just focuses “upon the occasion giving rise to the injury.”
19. I do not accept that the activity of ascending the retaining wall can be
looked at in isolation. The worker would not have ascended
the wall unless he
was going to the mess to collect his room key and eat dinner.
20. In my view,
the only reasonable conclusion can be that the worker’s injury occurred
whilst he was engaging in the activity
of going to the mess to collect his room
key and eat dinner, that activity included the circumstances surrounding that
activity including
ascending the retaining wall for the purpose of attending the
21. The second enquiry is “Did the employer induce or encourage
the worker to engage in that activity?”
22. The interpretation of the
phrase “induced or encouraged”, in the context of Hatzimanolis, was
considered in the case
of Comcare v Mather
[1995] FCA 1216.
In that decision
Kiefel J stated at [22]:
my view ‘encouragement’ is not to be taken as of narrow meaning and
limited to some positive action and in specific
terms which might lead the
employee to undertake a particular activity or attend at a particular place. The
two particular cases
which their Honours in Hatzimanolis were concerned with in
this context, The Commonwealth v. Oliver
[1962] HCA 38
(1962) 107 CLR 353
and Danvers v. Commissioner
for Railways (NSW)
[1969] HCA 64
(1969) 122 CLR 529
involved, respectively, an
expectation of presence coupled with a recognised practice and making available
facilities for an employee's
use. The facts in Hatzimanolis did not require the
Court to discuss in greater detail what was encompassed by the phrase "induced
or encouraged". To be said to have, expressly or impliedly, induced or
encouraged an undertaking or presence at some location could
refer to, by way of
example only, requirements, suggestions, recognition of practices, fostering of
participation, or providing assistance
and may include the exercise of
discretion or choice on the part of the employee. Further attempt at definition
would be fruitless.
In each case, the question will be whether the attendance at
the place at which or the undertaking in which the employee is involved
injured in an interval falls within the ambit of statements, acts or conduct
made by the employer and what may be said to logically
arise from them. And in
each case, importantly, they must be viewed in the background of the particular
employment and the circumstances
in which the employer is then
23. There can be no doubt that the employer induced or
encouraged the worker to reside at the Zeehan Village and use the mess for
periods whilst working at the Mine.
24. I accept that the employer did not
induce or encourage the worker to ascend the retaining wall. However, I have
found that the
relevant activity that the worker was engaged in at the time of
his injury was going to the mess to collect his room key and eat
order to access the mess, he ascended the retaining wall. I find that the worker
was induced or encouraged to access
the mess for the purpose of obtaining his
room key and eating dinner, that includes ascending the retaining wall in order
to do that.
25. He was not engaged in gross misconduct. He did not ascend
the retaining wall for any other reason than to go to the mess to collect
room key and eat dinner.
P. v Xenco Pty Ltd
[2021] TASWRCT 29
26. In P. v Xenco Pty Ltd
[2021] TASWRCT 29
Xenco”), the worker was required to work at the same mine as this worker
and was provided with accommodation by
the same employer at the same place as
this worker.
27. In P. v Xenco, the worker suffered an injury to his shoulder
when he fell at about 4:50am whilst crossing a grass area after returning
the laundry facility that was available at the Zeehan Village for workers to
use, whilst staying there. He did not use a designated
path and he was not
“on the clock”. That is, he suffered his injury in an interval
between his shifts at the mine and
he was not engaged in actual work at the
28. It was agreed that it was an “activity case”. It was
submitted on behalf of the employer that the worker was engaged
in the activity
of attending to his personal laundry, which activity necessarily involved him
walking to and from the laundry. Commissioner
Wilkins accepted the
employer’s description of the relevant activity and went on to find at
“...a consideration of the ‘general nature, terms
and circumstances’ of the worker’s employment leads to
conclusion that he was induced and/or encouraged by the employer to engage in
the activity which led to his injury.”
29. As in the case of P. v
Xenco, as a drive-in/drive-out worker at the Mine, the worker was expected to
stay at the Zeehan Village
in the intervals between his shifts at the Mine. The
Zeehan Village provided facilities that were available for the use of people
were accommodated at the Village. The employer should be taken to have accepted
(and expected) that the worker would make use
of the facilities provided at the
Zeehan Village as incidents of his
including eating dinner at the mess and obtaining a key to access his
30. In the course of submissions, the employer’s representative
referred to the Tribunal’s decision in relation to the
s81A referral in
Xenco Pty Ltd v P.
[2021] TASWRCT 11.
He argued that as a reasonably arguable
case was found to exist in that matter, the same finding should be made in this
case. I disagree.
31. In that case the employer submitted that the relevant
‘activity’ that the worker was engaged in at the time his injury
occurred was taking a shortcut from the laundry to his cabin over uneven ground,
in the dark. That case is distinguishable because
the focus of submissions from
both parties was on that activity alone. That is not so with respect to this
referral. In this referral
the evidence is that the relevant activity was
stepping up onto a retaining wall whilst intending to walk to the mess to
his room key and eat dinner.
32. The applicable test which is to be applied to s81A
referrals was set out by Evans J in St Helens Oysters Pty Ltd v Coatsworth
[2007] TASSC 90
where at [10] he said the test is an objective one and:
case will not be reasonably arguable unless the case itself is reasonable in the
sense that there is a reasonable prospect
of the claim being rejected following
a final hearing...the very notion of a ‘reasonably arguable case’
like the very
notion of a ‘prima facie case’, precludes a final
determination of a disputed question of fact...on the face of section
reasonably arguable case will exist concerning the liability of an employer to
pay a worker if it is reasonably arguable on
the material available in relation
to the claim or identified deficiencies or weaknesses in the claim that,
following a contested
hearing, it may be
33. Pearce J in Vos Construction & Joinery Pty Ltd v
Norton-Smith
[2016] TASSC 38
referred to this test as said at [5]:
“It is not enough, in
a section 81A referral, for the employer to indicate that it simply wishes to
put the worker to proof.
The terms and history of section 81A disclose a
legislative intention that an employer must do more than rely on the contention
that the worker may not ultimately be unable to discharge the onus of proof.
Because section 81A(2)(b) requires an employer’s
referral to be
accompanied by all of the evidentiary material on which the employer intends to
rely on at the hearing, the employer
bears an onus of establishing a reasonably
arguable case: Skilled Group Ltd v Anning
[2015] TASSC 18
; GIO Australia Ltd v
[2000] TASSC 75
; Lamont v MRD Supermarkets Pty Ltd
[2016] TASSC
The Act does not require that the employer’s case about liability be
strong or compelling, but the case that the claim may
ultimately be rejected
must be reasonably arguable. The use of those words in the legislation means
that the answer to the question
posed by section 81A will be a matter for
assessment and judgment of the Tribunal, determined objectively, on the evidence
it in each case.”
34. The evidence is that at the time the worker was injured he
had just completed the first day of his 14 day roster cycle. He was
encouraged by the employer to stay at the Zeehan Village and use its facilities
including the accommodation and the mess.
He parked his car at the village,
walked across the car park and was heading to the mess to collect his room key
to enable him to
access the accommodation and eat dinner. It was whilst doing
this activity that he ascended the retaining wall and injured his
35. For the reasons given, I find the only reasonable conclusion to be
drawn from the evidence is that the worker’s injury occurred
interval between actual periods of work whilst he was engaged in an activity
that he had been induced or encouraged to
engage in by the employer.
36. In this case, I am not satisfied on the evidence before me
that the employer has discharged its onus of proof in establishing
reasonably arguable that at a final hearing this worker’s claim may
ultimately be rejected. I have reached the
view that the employer’s
evidence does not support a reasonable argument that the worker’s injury
did not arise in the
course of his employment.
37. The employer’s s81A
referral is therefore dismissed. I determine that the worker is entitled to
workers compensation benefits
in accordance with the terms of the Act and I make
orders pursuant to s81A(3)(a) and (b) of the Act.
CHIEF COMMISSIONER
See paragraph (f) of the
employer’s referral.
paragraphs (g) and (h) of the employer’s
Commonwealth
[1960] HCA 25
(1960) 103 CLR 547
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (132 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (367 KB)
Plain text (ASCII) (21.5 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter