URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASGAB/2021/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
FXM (Review of Guardianship and Administration) [2021] TASGAB 7 (11 February 2021)
FXM (Review of Guardianship and Administration)
[2021] TASGAB 7
HEARING DATE(S):
11 February 2021
DATE OF ORDERS:
11 February 2021
DATE OF STATEMENT OF REASONS:
15 March 2021
Mr A Mihal, Member
Mrs A Jordan, Member
Ms A Gott, Member
APPLICATION:
Application to Review Guardianship Order and Administration Order
CATCHWORDS:
Statutory review of guardianship and administration – no need for
appointment of guardian – suitability of administrator
for appointment
– non-compliance with duties of private administrator – gifting
without authority – intermingling
of funds – conflict of interest
– insufficient experience to administer estate – medical treatment
or chemical
LEGISLATION CITED:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Quality of Care Principles 2014
Aged Care Act 1997
Trustee Act 1898
CASES CITED:
J v Guardianship and Administration Board and anor
Barker v Guardianship and Administration Board
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION:
This decision has been anonymised for the purposes of publication.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
an Application dated 27 January 2021, Mrs DXQ applied for a review of an Order
under which she was appointed as guardian for her
mother, Mrs FXM, and an Order
under which she was appointed as Administrator for Mrs FXM.
DXQ’s powers under the Guardianship Order were limited to decisions
concerning where Mrs FXM is to live either permanently
or temporarily, and any
health care and treatment that is in the best interests of Mrs FXM and to refuse
or withdraw consent to any
such health care or treatment.
Orders were made on 8 March 2018 and were to remain in effect until 7 March
2021. Mrs DXQ sought the further continuation of
the Orders.
to guardianship, the Guardianship and Administration Board (‘the
Board’) found that the requirements of section 20(1)(a)
and (b) of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
(‘the Act’) were still satisfied. The Board could not, however,
be satisfied that Mrs FXM was in need of a guardian as
required by section
20(1)(c) of the Act and that the continuation of the Guardianship Order was
inconsistent with the principles
of section 6 of the Act. Accordingly, the Board
revoked the Guardianship Order.
to administration, the Board found that the requirements of section 51 of the
Act were still satisfied in relation to Mrs FXM and
that the continuation of an
Administration Order was consistent with the principles of section 6 of the
Board was not satisfied that Mrs DXQ met any of the eligibility requirements set
out in section 54(1)(d) of the Act and she was
therefore not suitable to be
reappointed as Administrator.
Public Trustee (Tas), who was not represented at the hearing, was appointed as
Administrator in place of Mrs DXQ with effect until
18 February 2022.
DXQ requested a Statement of Reasons. The Board received the request on 24
February 2021.
Board heard the Application on 19 February 2021. Mrs DXQ attended the hearing
by telephone, as did her husband Mr KXQ, who Mrs
DXQ introduced as her
mother’s ‘administrator’.
FXM did not attend the hearing. The evidence before the Board from Dr Klonaris
was that Mrs FXM has severe intellectual disability
due to having dementia and
no ability to understand the proceedings. There was no evidence as to Mrs
FXM’s wishes.
Board took into account the following documents, which were before the Board at
the hearing:
Administration Order dated 8 March 2018;
Guardianship Order dated 8 March 2018;
DXQ’s written Application dated 27 January 2021;
Health Care Professional Report prepared by Dr Dimitrios Klonaris dated 28
January 2021 (‘HCPR’);
Private Guardian’s Report made by Mrs DXQ dated 27 January
Administrator’s Annual Report for the period 22 January 2020 to 21 January
2021 made by Mrs DXQ dated 29 January 2021.
Legislation
67 of the Act provides for hearings to review Orders on application by, or on
behalf of a represented person or any other
68 of the Act provides for the making of an Order as follows:
(1) On a review under section 67, the Board may vary or continue a
guardianship order or administration order subject to any conditions
requirements it considers necessary or the Board may revoke the order.
(2) The Board may make such further orders as it considers necessary in
order to give effect to an order made under subsection (1).
exercising the powers on a review, the Board must observe the principles in
section 6 of the Act, which are:
A function or power conferred, or
duty imposed, by this Act is to be performed so that –
(a) the means which is the least restrictive of the proposed represented
person's freedom of decision and action as is possible in
the circumstances is
(b) the best interests of the proposed represented person are promoted; and
(c) the wishes of the proposed represented person are, if possible, carried
into effect.
a review of an order appointing a guardian or an administrator, the Board must
consider if the legislative requirements for making
the relevant appointment can
still be met.
order to appoint a guardian, the Board must observe the principles in section 6
of the Act and needs to be satisfied, in accordance
with section 20(1) of the
Act, that the proposed represented person, in this case Mrs FXM:
(a) is a person with a disability;
(b) is unable by reason of the disability to make reasonable judgements in
respect of all or any matters relating to her person
or circumstances,
(c) is in need of a guardian.
J v Guardianship and Administration Board and anor
, Wood J held that:
...the terms of
require a present necessity, not merely a contingency that may or may not
eventuate in the future, refer:
Re M & R v Guardianship & Admin
Public Trustee v Blackwood
(above) per Underwood J at 265-266;
v Guardianship and Administration Board
per Geason J at [16], [21].
Honour cited with approval,
Barker v Guardianship and Administration
(above) per Geason J at [16]: ‘I do not consider that the Act
authorises the making of orders against mere possibilities. Further,
approach is offensive to the principle which requires the lightest touch: s 6
order to appoint an administrator, the Board must again observe the principles
in section 6 of the Act, and needs to be satisfied,
in accordance with section
51 of the Act, that the proposed represented person, in this case Mrs FXM:
(a) is a person with a disability;
(b) is unable by reason of the disability to make reasonable judgements in
respect of all or any matters relating to all of part
of her estate, and
(c) is in need of an administrator of her estate.
54 of the Act sets out who may be appointed as an administrator as follows:
(1) The Board may appoint as an administrator of the estate of a
proposed represented person –
(a) The Public Trustee; or
(b) the Public Guardian; or
(c) a trustee company within the meaning of the
(d) any other person, including the guardian of the proposed represented
person, who consents to act as administrator if the Board
is satisfied that
(i) the person will act in the best interests of the proposed represented
person; and
(ii) the person is not in a position where his or her interests conflict or
may conflict with the interests of the proposed represented
person; and
(iii) the person is a suitable person to act as the administrator of the
estate of the proposed represented person; and
(iv) the person has sufficient expertise to administer the estate.
(2) In determining whether a person is suitable to act as the administrator
of the estate of a proposed represented person, the Board
must take into account
(a) the wishes of the proposed represented person, so far as they can be
ascertained; and
(b) the compatibility of the person proposed as administrator with the
proposed represented person and with his or her guardian, if
Evidence of Disability and Incapacity
opinion expressed in the HCPR was as follows. Mrs FXM has a severe intellectual
disability as a result of having dementia, which
has been evident since 2016 and
is static. By reason of the disability, Mrs FXM has deficits in orientation to
person, place or time,
expressive communication, receptive communication,
planning and reasoning skills and impulse control. The disability affects Mrs
FXM’s capacity to make reasonable judgements about day to day financial
requirements, complex legal and financial decisions,
legal matters, where to
live, medical treatment and healthcare, and what support services she should
HCPR writer relied on reports from specialists Assoc. Professor Robin Wallace,
Dr Ingrid McCaughey and Dr David Dunbabin in forming
the opinion as to Mrs
FXM’s capacity. Mr KXQ said the abovementioned specialists were the
doctors who attended on Mrs FXM
in Calvary St John’s Hospital and who
diagnosed her has having dementia when her capacity deteriorated after having a
operation. Those reports were not before the Board.
DXQ agreed with the opinion expressed in the HCPR. Her evidence was that Mrs FXM
was admitted to [the nursing home in Hobart]
in October 2016 and she has
‘basically been the same’ since then. Mrs DXQ said she can have a
conversation with her mother
but she is very forgetful. Mrs FXM still talks
Mrs DXQ’s father has passed away.
Evidence of Need for a Guardian
DXQ provided a written Private Guardian’s Report in the usual form
required by the Board. The Report discloses that since
the Guardianship Order
has been in force, Mrs DXQ has not made any decisions about Mrs FXM’s
accommodation because Mrs FXM
was already living in residential aged care at
[the nursing home in Hobart] before the Order was made and has continued to live
and no current decisions about Mrs FXM’s accommodation need to be
made. In her oral evidence, Mrs DXQ could not identify any
specific decision
that needed to be made in connection with that accommodation and said that Mrs
FXM was ‘pretty settled’
at [the nursing home in Hobart].
Report discloses that Mrs DXQ has used the health care power in the Guardianship
Order by consenting to medical treatment for
Mrs FXM, although where prompted to
do so by the form, Mrs DXQ did not provide any detail about those decisions. The
Report does
provide that there are no current decisions about Mrs FXM’s
health care that need to be made.
her oral evidence, Mrs DXQ said that she ‘just remembered’ that
‘every three months they call me to sign forms
for a chemical
restraint.’ She said Mrs FXM ‘gets very agitated and if she gets
agitated she throws her arms and legs
everywhere and she has even scratched one
of the carers and I have to go in and fill a form in for her to calm down every
three months...
also she becomes very teary in the evenings and can’t
sleep.’ She said she has had to sign those forms since the Royal
Commission into Aged Care.
Evidence as to Mrs FXM’ Estate and its Management
written Application discloses that Mrs FXM was in receipt of the aged pension in
the amount of $471.80 per fortnight, rent from
her property in [the suburb of
Hobart] in the sum of $1,500.00 per fortnight, some interest on her savings and
share dividends.
Her expenses amount to only $1,216.00 per fortnight.
Application discloses that Mrs FXM’s estate consisted of shares in travel
related companies Flight Centre, Qantas, the Star
Entertainment Group and
Webjet, together with some shares in a pharmaceutical company called Immuron. As
at 21 January 2021, the
shares were valued at just under $99,000.00. She had
cash at bank of about $71,000.00 and a tenanted property in [the suburb of
The oral evidence was that the property had been Mrs FXM’s home
together with her late husband before they entered residential
DXQ provided an Administrator’s Annual Report for the period 22 January
2020 to 21 January 2021, which was verified by statutory
declaration. The Report
discloses that Mrs FXM’s home was valued at $640,000.00, and in the
reporting period she received $18,000.00
of rental income from the home together
with $13,643.00 from Centrelink and some share dividends.
Report discloses a further asset which formed part of the estate was a
Refundable Accommodation Bond paid to Respect Aged Care
in the sum of around
$227,000.00. The total value of the estate was in excess of one million dollars.
a section headed ‘further comments or explanations’, the following
was written:
As interest rates fell in 2019 I invested $60,000.00
in bank shares but by late March 2020 they fell to <$38,000. I got all
back by investing heavily in Afterpay and now have switched to travel
stocks and raised total stake to $90,000 (worth $98,615.43
on 21/1/21). I plan
to return the $30,000 to cash in bank by 30/6/21 & then switch most of the
remainder to dividend yielding
Report discloses that Mrs DXQ gave $4,000.00 of Mrs FXM’s estate towards
Mrs DXQ’s daughter’s house renovations.
When asked about the
unauthorised gift, Mrs DXQ responded as follows:
It’s a four
thousand dollar gift. My daughter is married and they were renovating their
house. It was basically to help with
the renovation of their bathroom. My
parents always gave money to the children when they finished matric; finished
uni. They even
gave them money for their first car. It is what my mother and
father would have wanted. They would have accepted a donation for
renovation. When I was first appointed as guardian, I remember the administrator
saying you can give a gift if you have a receipt.
Even a box of chocolates, you
can give as our mother to your children as long as you keep a receipt. I know
my mother, if she was
in her right mind, she would have accepted a gift to the
‘the administrator’, the Board takes it that Mrs DXQ meant her
husband, Mr KXQ because before the hearing commenced,
she introduced herself to
the Board as her mother’s guardian and Mr KXQ as her mother’s
‘administrator’.
DXQ said she has two adult children, and the daughter who received the
unauthorised gift was 31 years old.
Board provides private administrators with an extensive document called ‘A
Handbook for Private Administrators’, which
includes details of an
administrator’s powers and responsibilities. It also provides a one page
document called ‘Acknowledgement
of Responsibilities as
Administrator’ which the Board asks the administrator to sign and return
to acknowledge and accept certain
matters including that the administrator must
at all times exercise the powers and duties in section 57 of the Act in the best
of the represented person.
the Board asked Mrs DXQ if she had received a copy of the Handbook, Mr KXQ
answered for her in the affirmative. The Board directed
the question again to
Mrs DXQ who said, ‘I do remember. I don’t remember which dates... we
have got some documents here...’
Mr KXQ then said, ‘it’s the
orange one’ and Mrs DXQ repeated, ‘yes, it’s the orange
asked if she had read the Handbook, Mrs DXQ said, ‘no, to tell you the
asked about whether she recalled signing the Acknowledgement, Mrs
KXQ said, ‘I did a lot of signing... but I don’t
recall, you know, that particular document.’
Board pointed out that had Mrs DXQ read the Handbook, she would have known that
she had a duty to only use her mother’s
money for her mother’s
benefit and not make unauthorised gifts. When asked why the Board should not
direct her to repay the
funds to her mother’s estate, Mrs DXQ said that
would not be fair because the gift is what her parents would have wanted. She
confirmed that the funds had not been repaid to her mother.
FXM had over a million dollars of assets and was in receipt of the aged pension.
Mrs DXQ was asked to explain the assets test
for the aged pension and how it
works, and why Mrs FXM was entitled to receive the amount of pension she does
with the value of assets
that she has. After prompting from Mr KXQ, Mrs DXQ
said, ‘the Centrelink rules, my understanding? Not one hundred percent
they are very convoluted.’
asked if she had satisfied herself that her mother was entitled to receive the
aged pension when she has over a million dollars’
worth of assets, Mrs DXQ
did not answer the question but asserted, ‘well, yes, she would be
entitled to the pension.’
asked if she knew what the Centrelink assets test was, she said:
Can you speak to my husband because he is more the accountant side
of her information... I rely on his advice. We do talk together
assets and everything but because he knows a bit about the law and studied the
law, I rely on him.
KXQ was then asked about the Centrelink assets test. He could not explain it
either. He gave an explanation as to how Centrelink
had calculated Mrs
FXM’s assets and the amount of pension to which she was entitled, but
could not say what the assets test
actually was and whether Mrs FXM was in
actual fact entitled to receive the aged pension.
the assets test now is...it was all reset by
Centrelink... in early January on the two year anniversary of [Mrs FXM’
death last year. We had to fill in all of the new forms... we
put all the assets in... but stuff didn’t go through and they
told us that
the pension was cut off for Mrs FXM... now the assets test apparently at that
time... they don’t count the accommodation
bond... as an asset, they only
count the house. The house they used their own amount. They asked me... to
estimate the value of
the house... I said, $570,000.00. After doing that, they
made her pension something like three hundred and something dollars per
fortnight... however... they determined that the house was only worth
$540,000.00.
They reduced the value themselves. ...also those shares that were bought in
Mrs DXQ’s name, as you can see, on the front page
it shows the NAB trade
account for Mrs FXM, right, it shows Mrs FXM has... $70,000.00 in cash and
$98,000.00 in shares, however the
NAB trade although those shares are...
beneficially owned by Mrs FXM because the money has come straight out of Mrs
FXM’s account
because the account is opened by NAB trade in Mrs
DXQ’s name, those shares are listed in Mrs DXQ’s name. So when we
went back to Centrelink and they lost the documents and reassessed, they said
these shares don’t belong to Mrs FXM. So they
didn’t count them, so
they only counted as Mrs FXM the assets as $100,000.00 in cash that she had at
that time, the house $540,000.00,
$640,000.00. The RAD does not count as an
asset. They calculated that she is entitled to a pension that she receives of
four hundred
and something dollars a fortnight.
asked why Mrs FXM’s shares were bought in Mrs DXQ’s name, Mr KXQ
could not give a satisfactory explanation. He said
he did not intend to
purchase shares using Mrs FXM’s money in Mrs DXQ’s name. It appears
that he inadvertently did so.
He said ‘it must be because Mrs DXQ is the
operator of the account, the shares come under her name.’
evidence was that Mr KXQ purchased bank shares using Mrs FXM’s funds in
he did after he found out
that he had used Mrs FXM’s money to buy the bank shares in Mrs DXQ’s
name was as follows:
When I became aware of this when I first
opened the account 18 months ago... what happened was the bank shares in the
beginning went
down really badly. I said for tax purposes this is going to be a
disaster because if we do something to change this to put this
FXM’s name specifically, the tax office will say a loss is going to be
incurred by Mrs DXQ so I left it there and
traded it up as best I could...
anyway [there was a] big improvement. ...the first few months while the banks
were paying dividends,
you will notice in the financial report, every time a
dividend came and the dividend came into this account, I transferred it to
exact amount into Mrs FXM’s investment account... first opportunity I
appears on Mr KXQ’s evidence that because of the intermingling of Mrs
FXM’s estate with that of Mrs DXQ’s, Centrelink
may have been
mistaken as to the extent of Mrs FXM’s estate when applying the assets
test to determine her entitlement to the
aged pension, and Mr KXQ knew about the
situation and allowed it to continue. He said,
Mrs DXQ has not
benefited at all. If this year, she makes a capital gain, well, she will have
to pay the tax... oh no, she won’t
actually because beneficially Mrs FXM
is the owner but I didn’t want to complicate things with Centrelink. I
where I stand now. This is so convoluted. I don’t know
what to do now.
is the real prospect that Mrs FXM is not in fact entitled to the aged pension
because of the extent of her assets, but neither
Mrs DXQ nor Mr KXQ could say.
was clear to the Board that Mr KXQ made all of the investment decisions for Mrs
FXM and operated Mrs FXM’s bank account and
Mrs DXQ’ share trading
account. His evidence was as follows: ‘My wife has tasked me the job of
decision maker because
she does not know how to buy a share or sell a share. We
did not open a specific account for this.’
Mrs DXQ was then asked directly if she had delegated the responsibility of
looking after her mother’s money to Mr KXQ,
she agreed that she had.
the Board pointed out that it could determine to appoint the Public Trustee as
administrator of Mrs FXM’s estate because
Mrs DXQ had not appreciated her
duty was not to delegate the powers and responsibilities of administration to
her husband and to
only use her mother’s money for the benefit of her
mother, Mrs DXQ said Mr KXQ ‘filled in the forms’ but she read
and they ‘worked as a team.’ She later said that she and her
husband ‘worked together’ and she sat
beside him when all of the
decisions were made and the decisions were made together. That evidence was
unconvincing. Mrs DXQ’s
understanding of her mother’s financial
affairs was very limited.
asked if she took advice from an accountant or a financial planner as to the
best way of handling her mother’s finances,
Mrs DXQ said she had not.
Board found on the basis of the HCPR and the evidence provided by Mrs DXQ and Mr
KXQ that Mrs FXM is a person with a disability,
by reason of which, she is
unable to make reasonable judgements in respect of matters relating to her
person or circumstances, including
where to live, medical treatment and
healthcare, and what support services she should access.
Board also found that by reason of that disability, Mrs FXM is unable to make
reasonable judgements in respect of matters related
to her estate including day
to day financial matters, dealing with Centrelink, managing her investments and
her real property. In
coming to that conclusion, the Board considered the
evidence set out above and the nature and extent of Mrs FXM’s estate which
is not insignificant.
Guardianship Order
DXQ’s Private Guardian’s Report provides that no decisions need to
be made about accommodation or health care. Mrs
DXQ could not identify any
specific decisions that needed to be made in her oral evidence, nor did Mr KXQ.
DXQ’s evidence about the need to consent to a ‘chemical
restraint’ for her mother was troubling. The Commonwealth
Care Principles 2014
made under section 96-1
Aged Care Act 1997
regulates Mrs FXM’s accommodation and care defines a ‘chemical
restraint’ as follows:
chemical restraint
restraint that is, or that involves, the use of medication or a chemical
substance for the purpose of influencing a person’s
behaviour, other than
medication prescribed for the treatment of, or to enable treatment of, a
diagnosed mental disorder, a physical
illness or a physical condition.
DXQ’s power under the Guardianship Order was limited to decisions
concerning accommodation, and health care and treatment
that is in the best
interests of Mrs FXM. A ‘chemical restraint’ as defined above does
not include medication prescribed
for treatment. Therefore, if medication was
being administered to Mrs FXM for the treatment of a mental disorder or physical
then it was not a ‘chemical restraint’ and it was within
Mrs DXQ’s power to consent to it. If it was not for treatment
to influence Mrs
FXM’s behaviour, then Mrs DXQ did not have
the power to consent to its administration.
the limited evidence and the inability to hear from the prescribing medical
practitioner or staff at [the aged care facility
in Hobart], the Board proceeded
on the basis that Mrs DXQ was exercising her power under the Guardianship Order
by consenting to
treatment for her mother and her use of the term
‘chemical restraint’ was not intended by her to have
the same meaning as in the
Quality of Care Principles 2014
being the case, without appointment as guardian, as Mrs FXM’s only
daughter and the person having her care, Mrs DXQ is
able to consent to such
treatment as ‘person responsible’ pursuant to section 39 of the Act.
Accordingly,
Mrs FXM is not in need of a guardian and consistent with the principles in
section 6 of the Act, the Board must revoke
the Guardianship Order.
Board observes, that it would be prudent of Mrs DXQ, as person responsible to
find out the purpose of the prescribing of the medication
she referred to as a
‘chemical restraint.’ If there is evidence that medication is being
prescribed and administered
to Mrs FXM only for the purpose of controlling her
behaviour then it would be open to Mrs DXQ to make application to the Board for
a guardianship order with the power to consent to the administration of a
chemical restraint.
Board orders that the Guardianship Order for Mrs FXM made 8 March 2018 has been
reviewed and revoked.
Administration Order
into account the evidence concerning the extent of Mrs FXM’ estate and the
considerations set out in subsections 51(2)
and (3) of the Act, the Board is
satisfied in all the circumstances that the need for the appointment of an
administrator of Mrs
FXM’ estate continues.
management of the estate has been complicated by the misuse of Mrs
FXM’s funds that will need to be recovered from Mrs DXQ, the
intermingling of Mrs FXM’s estate with Mrs DXQ’s because
purchase of shares by Mr KXQ in Mrs DXQ’s name, and the need for
clarification of Centrelink’s records as to Mrs
FXM’s assets and
whether or not Mrs FXM is in fact entitled to the aged pension. There is a need
for a competent administrator
to disentangle Mrs FXM’s affairs. Mrs DXQ
and Mr KXQ on whom she improperly relied to manage her mother’s finances,
their own admission, do not know how to do that.
the less, Mrs DXQ wished to continue in the role of Administrator for her
mother. The Board therefore considered whether it could
be satisfied about the
matters set out in subsections 54(1)(d)(i)-(iv) of the Act in respect of Mrs
DXQ. The Board found that it
could not be so satisfied.
Mrs DXQ read the Handbook, she would have understood that she had a duty to only
use her mother’s money for the benefit
of her mother, a duty to take
control of and take proper care of her mother’s estate in her
mother’s best interest and
not delegate the responsibility for doing so to
another person, and to adhere to the principle in
to ‘exercise the care, diligence and skill that a prudent
person of business would exercise in managing the affairs of another
person.’ She would also have known about her ability to seek an order
from the Board permitting her to lawfully gift from
her mother’s estate.
DXQ failed to act in the best interests of her mother in relation to the
unauthorised gift and in the delegation of her responsibilities
as administrator
to her husband, and appeared to fail to appreciate those failures. The Board
could not be satisfied that if the
appointment continued that she would act in
the best interests of Mrs FXM at all times because of that lack of appreciation.
Board could not be satisfied that Mrs DXQ’s interests do not conflict with
those of Mrs FXM because at the time of the hearing,
the unauthorised gift had
not been repaid and Mrs FXM remained liable to her mother for its return. The
intermingling of her mother’s
estate with her own in respect of the shares
also potentially puts her in a position of conflict, particularly if a
Commonwealth
offence has been committed because Mrs FXM has been in receipt of
the Aged Pension to which Mrs DXQ ought to have known Mrs FXM was
not entitled.
Board could not be satisfied that Mrs DXQ has sufficient expertise to administer
the estate. Mrs DXQ admitted as much when she
agreed that she delegated her
duties as administrator to Mr KXQ and relied on him to manage Mrs FXM’s
all of the above reasons, the Board could not be satisfied that Mrs DXQ is a
suitable person to act as administrator of Mrs FXM’s
estate. The need for
an administrator remains, so the Board determined to vary the Administration
Order to appoint the Public Trustee.
Accordingly,
the Board orders that:
Administration Order for FXM made on 8 March 2018 has been reviewed and varied
and from this day the Order is:
i. The Public Trustee
(Tas) is appointed as Administrator of the estate of FXM.
Order remains in effect until 18 February 2022.
Board directs that DXQ pay the sum of $4,000.00 to the estate of FXM at the
earliest opportunity.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (236 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter