URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFC/2024/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sowerby v State of Tasmania [2024] TASFC 7 (14 November 2024)
[2024] TASFC 7
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (FULL
Sowerby v State of Tasmania
[2024] TASFC
: SOWERBY, Stewart Colin
DELIVERED ON:
14 November
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
13 November
JUDGMENT OF:
Pearce J, Porter AJ
Criminal Law – Jurisdiction, practice and procedure – Bail
– Before trial – Other cases – Family violence
– Statute prescribing prerequisite to granting of bail.
Family Violence Act
Aust Dig Criminal Law [2991]
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Tasmania Legal
Respondent:
Director of Public Prosecutions
[2024] TASFC 7
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 7/2024
File No 2972/2024
STEWART COLIN SOWERBY v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
14 November
of the Court:
Appeal allowed.
File No 2972/2024
STEWART COLIN SOWERBY v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
14 November
was an appeal against an order made by Marshall AJ on 30 September 2024 refusing
an application for bail made by the appellant
The appeal to this Court was brought pursuant to
s 21(3)(b)(ii).
accordance with the
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act
At the conclusion of oral submissions the
Court allowed the appeal, ordered that the appellant be admitted to bail with
and indicated that reasons would be published later. These are those
appellant was charged with assault contrary to the
Criminal Code
It was alleged that on 11 March 2024 he assaulted his former partner, Cayla
Williams-Jacques. The appellant and Ms Williams-Jacques
had been in a
significant relationship. At the time of the alleged assault he was subject to a
police family violence order under
Family Violence Act
almost five months earlier on 30 October 2023. The order included conditions
that he not threaten, abuse or assault Ms Williams-Jacques,
approach her or go
to or near her home. This Court was informed that the police family violence
order was made as a result of circumstances
of conflict in the relationship. The
appellant lived in Campania but Ms Williams-Jacques lived in Glenorchy. On one
occasion she
was at his home and they argued. She attempted to leave but he did
not want her to and kept her phone. On another occasion they argued
appellant was driving her to her home. She claimed that he grabbed her and
pulled her towards him. She escaped from the
vehicle and ran off. She notified
the police the next day and the order was made. No charges arose from either
to the circumstances leading up to the assault alleged to have been committed on
11 March 2024, the prosecution case was outlined
in these terms. By that time
the appellant and Ms Williams-Jacques had been in a relationship for about a
year. At about 9 pm on
10 March 2024 he went to her home in Glenorchy in breach
of the police family violence order. In the course of the evening they argued.
At one point she called "000" but hung up. At around 6.30 am the following
morning they left together in his vehicle to buy cigarettes.
He was driving.
During the journey, in the course of an argument, she reached across him and
grabbed an item belonging to him. He
struck her face and pushed her away. She
attempted to remove herself from the vehicle. He grabbed her but, despite his
attempts to
prevent her from doing so, she managed to escape. Then, as she
walked along the footpath he drove the car directly at her and on
footpath, stopping only just before he made contact. She was frightened that she
would be run over. On the following day,
12 March 2024, she went to the police
and made a statement. The appellant's threat to strike her with the car is the
subject of the
charge of assault under the
. The pushing, hitting and
grabbing in the car is the subject of a summary charge of common assault. Both
assaults, if proved, would
breach the family violence order, and, of course, it
was an offence to have been in her presence in contravention of the order. The
summary charges have been adjourned to a date to be fixed.
appellant was arrested on 21 March 2024. He was remanded in custody until
granted bail by a magistrate on 27 March 2024 on conditions
which included that
he live at his father's address in Campania, that he not approach Ms
Williams-Jacques or go to or near her home
in Glenorchy, and that his father,
Kevin Sowerby, enter into a promissory recognizance to forfeit the sum of $5,000
if the appellant
failed to comply with a condition of bail. The appellant
appeared in the Magistrates Court in accordance with his bail on 23 April,
May, 13 May, 7 June and 21 June 2024 when he was committed to the Supreme Court
on bail to appear on 3 September 2024. On 13 May
2024 the appellant's bail
address was varied to a different address in Campania, the home of Paul
Churchill. Kevin Sowerby remained
a surety following the change although the
appellant was no longer living with him.
3 September 2024 the appellant failed to appear in the Supreme Court. On
application being made, his father was released from
the recognizance. Marshall
AJ issued a warrant for the appellant's arrest. He was arrested on 24 September
2024 at his bail address
in Campania. On the following day he appeared in the
Supreme Court. His bail was revoked and he was remanded in custody. An oral
application for bail was made but adjourned.
appellant's application for bail came before Marshall AJ on 30 September 2024.
The application sought reinstatement of the previous
bail conditions, which
included that he live with Paul Churchill in Campania, but that Mr Churchill
enter into a recognizance in
equivalent terms in place of the appellant's
father. The application for bail was refused. The appeal to this Court was
21 October 2024.
Ms Williams-Jacques and the appellant had been in a significant relationship,
the indictable assault with which the appellant
was charged is a family violence
offence within the meaning of that term in the
Family Violence
("the Act"). Thus,
of the Act has
application, and the respondent was not to be granted bail unless this Court was
satisfied that his release on bail
would not be likely to adversely affect the
safety, wellbeing and interests of Ms Williams-Jacques. The Act creates a
presumption
against bail:
[2005] TASSC 89
(2005) 157 A Crim R 451.
The onus was on
the respondent to displace the presumption:
Olsen v State of Tasm
[2005] TASSC 40.
A detailed discussion of the grant of bail in family violence
matters may be found in
Director of Public Prosecutions (Acting) v JCN
[2015] TASFC 13.
We would accept the submission of counsel for the
respondent that it was not to the point that the appellant had previously been
granted bail. It was for the appellant to satisfy this Court, on the material
presented on the hearing of the appeal, that the grant
of bail should be made.
appellant is aged 33. His record is mostly for driving offences which include,
however, instances of driving with alcohol in
excess of the prescribed
concentration or driving with a drug in his oral fluid or blood, driving while
suspended, driving while
disqualified and evading police. There is only one
prior conviction for assault, a common assault in 2010 for which he was fined.
In 2017 a charge of aiding the commission of a breach of a family violence order
was dismissed under the
Sentencing Act
is alleged that the appellant committed other offences before the alleged
assault on 11 March 2024, some of which are family violence
offences and some of
which are not:
driving with an
illicit drug in blood on 19 October 2023;
breaching the
police family violence order on 12 January 2024 by going to Ms Williams-Jacques
breaching the
police family violence order on 28 January 2024 by being within 50 metres of Ms
Williams-Jacques;
stealing an
electric bike and a mountain bike on 30 January 2024; and
stealing from Kmart, possessing amphetamine and resisting a police officer on 1
March 2024. On that day, he was arrested
and bailed by the
breach of a condition of bail to which the appellant was already subject is
alleged to have occurred on 18 March 2024, three days
prior to his arrest on 21
March 2024, when he failed to report to the police in Bridgewater.
only offending alleged against him since his release on bail on 27 March 2024 is
drove while
suspended and with THC present in his oral fluid on 10 June 2024;
unlawfully in possession of property on 12 June 2024;
driving without
a licence on 8 August 2024.
for the respondent drew one other matter to this Court's attention. On 7
September 2024, only a few days after the appellant
failed to appear, a family
violence order was made to protect a different former partner and three children
of their relationship.
The order arose from an allegation of assault by punching
and kicking in August 2024. No other details of that allegation were provided
and no charges have yet arisen from it. Counsel also submitted that the fact
that the appellant's father withdrew from his surety
was suggestive of some
other underlying problem with the appellant's behaviour. It was submitted by the
appellant's counsel that
the appellant failed to appear on 3 September 2024
partly because of distress and disruption arising at the time from the
involvement
of child safety services in the care of his children. That seems to
coincide with the making of the further family violence order
on 7 September
2024. It was also submitted that there was some misunderstanding about in which
court the appellant was to appear.
follows from the foregoing that the principal matter which brought the appellant
back into custody was not a family violence offence,
or any other offence except
his failure to appear in the Supreme Court on the day on which he was remanded
to appear. Leaving the
operation of s 12 aside for a moment, the principal
consideration when granting bail is ordinarily whether, if bail is granted, the
person will appear in court to answer the charge. The appellant did not seem to
us to present a flight risk. When he failed to appear
he was found and arrested
at the home in which he was bailed to reside. He had appeared in the Court of
Petty Sessions in answer
to his bail on five occasions prior to his committal.
Another factor often referred to is the possibility that, if released, a person
will present an unreasonable risk of committing further offences, thereby making
a grant of bail contrary to the public interest.
The offences alleged to have
been committed by the appellant in June and August were not such as to justify
his remand in custody.
We were not considering whether he should be granted bail
for those offences, which were to be proceeded with on summons. In this
risk of re-offending is largely subsumed by a consideration of the operation of
Family Violence Act
There was no new matter which
suggested a material change to the level of risk posed by the appellant, if on
bail, to the safety,
wellbeing and interests of Ms Williams-Jacques. There had
been no further breach of the police family violence order in the six months
so which had elapsed since the date of the alleged assaults. Apart from an
immaterial chance encounter, there had been no contact
between them during that
period. On 11 October 2024, after bail was refused, an interim family violence
order was made by a magistrate
in terms substantially equivalent to the police
family violence order it replaced, including an order prohibiting any contact
the appellant and Ms Williams-Jacques. On bail the appellant will remain
subject to that order. According to counsel for the respondent,
Williams-Jacques had not expressed any ongoing fear of the appellant or
opposition to the grant of bail. She regarded their relationship
as at an end.
Of course, as was pointed out in
Director of Public Prosecutions (Acting) v
(above) at [20], independently of the attitude of an affected person,
the Court has a duty to consider the interests of persons who
may be affected by
family violence and, if necessary, act to protect them.
Act, s 12(2)(e), permits the Court to have regard to any matters it considers
relevant, but regard must be had to three particular
12(2)(a) – any available risk screening or rehabilitation program
assessment. The Court was not made aware of any rehabilitation
assessment. A risk screening assessment was undertaken by a police officer after
having spoken to the complainant on 14 March
2024. It gave a score of 17 but did
not explain what that meant. No fresh assessment was undertaken. We gave the
assessment little
12(2)(b) – the appellant's demeanour. The appellant was present during the
hearing of the appeal but there was nothing about
his demeanour which
strengthened or weakened the application for bail.
– the availability of suitable accommodation for the person and any
affected person or affected child. Here there
was no affected child. The
complainant had suitable accommodation in Glenorchy. A bail condition that the
appellant live at Campania
created a significant geographical separation between
them. His driver licence was suspended. Recently he had driven without a licence
on two separate occasions. He may have access to a vehicle. As a result, if he
were determined to travel to the complainant's home
in breach of the order he
could still do so with relative ease. There was no order in place which required
him to submit to electronic
monitoring and monitoring his movements and conduct
would therefore be difficult. We took that into account.
appellant intends to defend the indictable assault charge. He is entitled to the
presumption of innocence although in assessing
the risk he may pose to Ms
Williams-Jacques it was proper to take into account the possibility that the
allegation may be true. There
is likely to be a very substantial delay before
the charge is brought to trial. Every instance of violence committed within a
relationship
or former relationship is to be regarded seriously. However, on the
limited information available to this Court, the objective gravity
of the crime
alleged against the appellant and the absence of a serious record for violent
offending meant that there was a real
risk of injustice if he were remanded in
custody, even if found guilty. Assuming conviction, it is reasonably possible
that without
bail he would remain in custody awaiting trial for a period well
beyond any sentence of imprisonment reasonably proportionate to
his crimes.
Sometimes that is not an answer to the matters which s 12 requires be addressed.
The provision, and the presumption against
bail it contains, must be given
effect according to its terms. There are very frequently occasions where
protection of the safety,
wellbeing and interests of an affected person or
affected child requires remand of an accused person in custody for a period,
a very lengthy period, even at the risk of injustice. However, in our
view, this was not such a case.
concluded that, with the imposition of appropriate bail conditions, release of
the appellant on bail would not be likely to adversely
affect the safety,
wellbeing and interests of Ms Williams-Jacques. Whilst on bail between 27
March 2024 and 24 September 2024 the
appellant did not breach the terms of his
bail or the police family violence order. Nor had he done any other act which
a substantial risk to the complainant. The appellant spent six days in
custody following his arrest on 21 March 2024 and has been
in custody since his
arrest on 24 September 2024. Having spent more than seven weeks in custody he
must be acutely aware of the likely
consequences of future breach and has a
strong incentive to comply. Mr Churchill impressed us as a person who will, as a
act conscientiously. He has the means to meet the recognizance if called
upon and will be in a good position to monitor and supervise
the appellant. The
appellant will have an additional incentive to comply by reason of his awareness
that any breach may mean that
Mr Churchill, through no fault of his own, may
forfeit a substantial sum.
those reasons, we ordered that there be a grant of bail to the appellant on
condition that Mr Churchill execute a promissory
recognizance in the usual form
in the sum of $5,000, that during the period of remand the appellant live with
Mr Churchill at his
address in Campania, and be present at that address between
9 pm and 6 am each day, that he comply with the terms of the interim
violence order made 11 October 2024 and any order made in substitution for that
order, that he comply with any other police
family violence order, interim
family violence or family violence order made under the
Family Violence
or interim restraint order or restraint order made under the
, that the appellant not enter the City of Glenorchy and appear next on
the remand day in the first sittings of 2025.
will be apparent from these reasons, because this Court is rehearing the
application the appellant need not demonstrate error
on the part of the learned
primary judge. It is not necessary to consider the reasons his Honour gave for
refusing the application.
However it is appropriate to do so in one respect for
the guidance of judges hearing future applications subject to s 12. In the
course of the hearing the learned primary judge asked counsel for the applicant
"what's the compelling circumstance or the carefully
structured plan to secure
the safety, wellbeing and interests of the complainant?" Then, after referring
to some circumstances relevant
to the application, his Honour
"On balance, I'm not satisfied that there are compelling
circumstances or a carefully structured plan to secure the safety, wellbeing
interest of the affected person, so bail is refused."
is not clear where the reference to "compelling circumstances" or "a carefully
structured plan" came from or precisely what his
Honour meant by use of those
terms. The terms do not derive from the legislation. If all his Honour was
intending to convey was that
the appellant had not satisfied him that his
release on bail would not be likely to adversely affect the safety, wellbeing
and interests
of Ms Williams-Jacques, then no error is disclosed. However his
Honour's specific question and his concluding statement referring
particular terms suggest that he may have imputed an additional requirement for
either "compelling circumstances" or "a
carefully structured plan" or both to be
demonstrated before a grant of bail was to be made. To have done so would add a
the language of the legislation not justified by its terms. The
essential question is whether, in all of the circumstances and in
light of bail
conditions that may be available, the required state of satisfaction is reached
and the presumption displaced. It may
be that a "compelling circumstance" or a
"carefully structured plan" may assist a court to be so satisfied, but neither
is required
by the terms of the Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (128 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter