URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASSC/2025/59.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:21:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ringrose v Clarence City Council [2025] TASSC 59 (31 October 2025)
[2025] TASSC 59
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA
v Clarence City Council
[2025] TASSC 59
: RINGROSE,
Andrew-Grant
CLARENCE CITY COUNCIL
DELIVERED ON:
31 October 2025
HEARING DATE:
30 October 2025
Procedure — Civil proceedings in State and Territory Courts —
Ending proceedings early – Summary judgment for defendant
dismissal of proceedings — Plaintiff's case challenges the power of a
municipal council to levy rates and his
liability to pay them —
Plaintiff's case is so obviously untenable that it cannot possibly succeed
— Pseudo legal claims
and submissions present no real question to be tried
— Order for judgment against the plaintiff.
Aust Dig Procedure
Procedure — Civil proceedings in State and Territory Courts —
Ending proceedings early – Summary judgment for defendant:
dismissal of proceedings — Other matters — Evidence not admissible
on the question whether the pleadings (a)
disclose any reasonable cause of
action; or (b) show that the cause of action is frivolous or vexatious under r
259 — Evidence
is admissible on the questions arising on an application
under r 367.
Aust Dig Procedure [1308]
Hall v Hall
[1996] TASSC 87
REPRESENTATION
: In person
Solicitors:
Judgment Number:
[2025] TASSC 59
paragraphs:
Serial No 59/2025
File No 2812/2025
ANDREW-GRANT RINGROSE v CLARENCE CITY
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT DALY AsJ
31 October 2025
Introduction
These are my reasons for granting the interlocutory application brought by the
defendant and for making an order dismissing the
plaintiff's action against the
defendant. In these reasons I will refer to the plaintiff as Mr Ringrose and
to the defendant as
the Council.
This is an application for summary judgment brought by the defendant seeking
judgment under r 367 on the basis that the action is
frivolous or vexatious: r
367(2)(a). Alternatively, the defendant applied for an order under r 259 that
the action be dismissed,
permanently stayed, or the statement of claim be struck
out, and that judgment be entered for the defendant accordingly.
The Council's application for summary judgment under r 367 was brought out of
time and it has therefore sought an extension of time
for bringing that
application. For the reasons set out below, I have granted that application.
Time is extended to apply for summary judgment
For the following reasons, I propose to make an order extending the time within
which the defendant may apply for summary judgment
under r 367(1).
The legal principles to be applied to the determination of whether time should
be extended are set out at par 8 of the Council's
submissions. I accept these
submissions. In
Burnett v Fitzgerald and Browne
[2017] TASSC 31
, Brett J observed that there are four matters to be considered, no one
factor being determinative and the weight to be attributed
to each factor being
dependent on the circumstances of the case:
length of the delay;
reason for the delay;
the applicant has a "fairly arguable case" (in this case this means a fairly
arguable case on the application for summary
judgment under r. 367); and
extent of any prejudice suffered by the respondent if the application for the
extension is granted.
Rule 367(1) provides that a defendant may apply for summary judgment within 10
days after filing an appearance. An appearance is
to be filed within seven days
of proceedings being served within Tasmania: r 98. The writ and statement of
claim were served on
the Council on 21 August. The Council had until 28 August
to file an appearance, but it did so earlier, on 22 August, and therefore
day period under r 367 expired on Monday, 1 September. If the Council had filed
an appearance on the last possible day, it
would have had until 8 September to
file this application for summary judgment which was filed on 9 September 2025.
It can be seen that the period of delay between the stipulated events is so
short as to be inconsequential No lack of diligence
is demonstrated. On four of
the days in question, the Registry was closed: see the Council's outline of
submissions at par 11.
The Council has a strongly arguable case on the application for summary
judgment, having regard to the content of the writ, the
statement of claim and
the materials filed by the parties.
I am satisfied that the Council has an acceptable reason for delay in bringing
the application. Upon being instructed to act on
22 August 2025, an appearance
was filed immediately. Thereafter, the Council's legal advisor devoted his time
and effort to dealing
with the substance of the issues raised in the proceedings
and instructing counsel to advise. Those matters appear to have taken
and the time limit under r 367(1) was overlooked. The reason for delay is
satisfactory.
I cannot discern any prejudice if the application to extend time is granted. No
specific submission in opposition to the extension
I am satisfied that this is a proper case in which to exercise my discretion to
extend the time within which the defendant may apply
to a judge for summary
I order that the time within which the defendant may apply for summary judgment
under r 367 is extended until 9 September 2025,
being the date when this
interlocutory application was filed.
Evidence and
In relation to the Council's application for summary judgment under r 367, it
invites a finding that Mr Ringrose's action is frivolous
or vexatious. I
propose to admit the affidavits read by each party as evidence on the
application under r 367. I will not have
any regard to those affidavits on the
questions arising under r 259 as to whether the pleadings (a) disclose any
reasonable cause
of action; or (b) show that the cause of action is frivolous or
vexatious. Those questions depend upon the Court's views about the
text of the
pleadings and they are not questions about which evidence is generally
admissible. This is consistent with the approach
taken by Zeeman J in
[1996] TASSC 87
in relation to the cognate former
the Supreme Court
1965, Orders 16 (now r 367) and 28(4) (now r 259)
respectively. I respectfully agree with and follow Zeeman J's approach.
I wish to address an observation made by senior counsel for the defendant
concerning a matter of interest, but which does not bear
materially upon the
determination of the present application. It appears to me that the difference
between dismissing an action
and entering judgment under r 259 because "a
pleading ... shows that that the cause of action ... is frivolous or vexatious"
the one hand) and granting summary judgment under r 367 "if satisfied that
... the action is frivolous or vexatious" (on the other
hand) relies primarily
in the nature of the deficiency being addressed and the consequential procedural
approach. The enquiry under
r 259 is a narrow, pleading-focused threshold test
which does not involve the consideration of any evidence. It is concerned only
with the content of the pleading itself. By contrast, the enquiry under r 367
addresses the merits of a claim considering both the
pleadings and the available
evidence. The complexity and the potential nature of factual disputes are
relevant, and the test involves
a broad merits-based determination. The
applicant for summary judgment must demonstrate that even taking the opponent's
its highest, there is no arguable claim.
The principal
proceedings
By writ and statement of claim filed 21 August 2025, Mr Ringrose sued the
Council for:
"unjust/unjustified fees and charges in the sum of
$31,826.22; and
Usufruct $150,000
and costs to be taxed"
It appears to be common ground on this application that the Council has made
various demands of Mr Ringrose to pay rates, taxes
and related charges in the
accumulated total sum of $31,826.22. Mr Jackson submitted (without challenge)
that a part of this amount
is the subject of a judgment (or more than one
judgment) of the Magistrates Court sitting in its Civil Division, but no
action has yet been taken.
During the course of argument, Mr Ringrose clarified what his claim was really
should pay him
$31,826.22, but his central point is that this amount is a 'fine' and he seeks a
declaration that the rates and charges
making up that sum are unjust,
unjustified, unlawful and unenforceable because of the various points he makes
Local Government Act
The statement of claim invokes the following jurisdiction:
This proceeding is commenced in the Supreme Court of Tasmania pursuant
(i) Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution
Act 1900/1901
Bills of Exchange Act 1909
(iii) Financing Terrorism Act 2009
(iv) The will of the People in Referendum of both 1974 and 1988
(v) Bill of Rights
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Commonwealth)
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Australian Consumer Law - Commonwealth)"
Mr Ringrose complains that the council has failed or refused to provide any
lawful justification, documentation, or evidence in
response to his notices
containing his demands for clarification from the Council about its power to
levy rates under the
Local Government Act
. He asserts that he is
therefore entitled to the following remedies:
" a) an injunction
restraining the defendant from further unlawful action;
b) a declaration that the defendant's charges and demands are null and void;
c) a declaration that the defendant's conduct constitutes unlawful commercial
activity in breach of the Australian Consumer Law
d) an order for restitution of any sums unlawfully claimed or obtained;
e) fees to be taxed; and
such further orders as the Court deems just and
equitable."
Mr Ringrose's affidavit contained certain matters which are in reality,
submissions and that is how I will treat them except where
he is stating facts
within his own knowledge. Mr Ringrose deposes that he is bringing his claim in
his sovereign capacity. The affidavit
repeats the claims above and thereafter he
sets out a series of arguments of a pseudo legal nature, including the
"The Plaintiff asserts and relies upon the
Constitution
of the Commonwealth of Australia as the supreme and controlling law of this
land. All legislative, executive, and administrative
powers exercised within the
Commonwealth derive their validity solely from that
Constitution
and must remain
subject to its authority. No municipal body, local council, state agency, or
other subordinate entity may act outside
the scope of the
Constitution
its delegated powers.
The Defendant, Clarence City Council, is a municipal entity deriving its
existence and authority from subordinate legislation. It
possesses no inherent
sovereignty or law-making power independent of the
Constitution
. Any act by the
Defendant that purports to impose charges, obligations, or legal burdens upon
the Plaintiff must be strictly and
lawfully founded upon a valid delegation of
constitutional authority.
The Plaintiff asserts that the
Constitution
of the Commonwealth of Australia
is the supreme law of this land. Any legislative instrument or act purportedly
authorised under
the Great Seal of Tasmania is subordinate to that
Constitution
Royal Assent under a state seal does not grant a state or its instrumentalities
authority to act contrary to, or in excess of, constitutional
limits. To the
extent that any state legislation or subordinate instrument is inconsistent with
Constitution
, it is invalid and of no effect.
The Plaintiff notes that proposals to grant constitutional recognition to
local government have been twice put to the Australian people
rejected. Local councils therefore hold no constitutional status and exist
solely as statutory corporations under state
legislation. Any act undertaken by
a local council must strictly conform to the
Constitution
of the Commonwealth of
Australia and the limited delegated authority conferred by state Acts. Where
such acts exceed or conflict
with that authority, they are ultra vires, invalid,
and of no legal effect.
In this case, the Defendant has acted beyond that authority, rendering its
actions ultra vires, unlawful, and void. The Council's
conduct constitutes an
exercise of power without lawful foundation and in direct contravention of the
supremacy of the
Constitution
The Plaintiff therefore seeks the intervention of the Court in equity to
restrain the Defendant from continuing such unlawful acts
and to uphold the
constitutional order. Equity, being the guardian of lawful power and protector
against unconscionable conduct,
must act to prevent further harm and enforce the
supremacy of the
Constitution
over subordinate entities."
In his oral submissions, Mr Ringrose said that he did not press the claim under
the Australian Consumer Law. This was an appropriate
concession. When a Council
levies rates, it does so under the power conferred upon it by the
Government Act
, particularly the power contained in
expressly provides that when a council charges rates, that constitutes taxation
and it cannot therefore be characterised as
charging a fee for a service.
In relation to the other sources of jurisdiction set out in
statement of claim, there is no material before me which could possibly attract
their operation. None of the acts of parliament
in that list has anything
whatsoever to do with the subject matter of this dispute.
Mr Ringrose's principal dispute relates to the power of the Council to charge
rates. He submits that at a referendum in 1988, the
Australian people said "no"
to the question whether they 'approved' "the establishment of local government".
Firstly, I do not accept
that was a question put at the 1988 Australian
referendum. Secondly, I take judicial notice that there has never been any
referendum which has returned a result which has had the effect of
undermining the Tasmanian Parliament's power to make laws in respect
government.
Mr Ringrose submitted that the Australian
Constitution
"prohibits the
Government Act
from existing". It is clear from Mr Ringrose's
materials that this submission depends on the point which I rejected, above,
the result of the 1988 referendum and its impact on the Tasmanian
Parliament's ability to make laws with respect to local government.
Mr Ringrose
submitted that because local government is not specifically recognised under the
Constitution
, the Tasmanian Parliament was without any source of
power to pass the
Local Government Act
and that it is therefore in
conflict with the
Constitution
. Mr Ringrose referred to the
Constitution
He submitted that because the
Constitution
does not include provisions
to local government.
This is not an arguable proposition. The Tasmanian
Parliament plainly has very extensive plenary powers to make laws in relation
local government, a matter clearly reflected in the
Constitution
(Tas), s 45A.
In response to one of Mr Ringrose's demands of the Council to provide
documentation verifying its authority to make its claims for
rates "against the
living Man", Council included the following passage (see the letter sent to Mr
Ringrose by the Council on 15 June
2022, annexed to Mr Nelson's
affidavit):
"While the tier of local government is not recognised in
Constitution
, the States of Australia are sovereign states and each has the
power to legislate in relation to local government. Section 45A of
Constitution
1934 (Tas) establishes in Tasmania system of local
government with municipal councils elected in such manner as Parliament may from
time to time provide. Section 45A(2) further provides that each municipality
shall have such powers as Parliament may from time to
time provide, being such
powers as Parliament considers necessary for the welfare and good government of
the municipal area. The
provisions of Part 3 and Schedule 3 of the
Government Act
(Tas) establish the Clarence municipality and the
Clarence City Council."
With respect to the author of the letter, that is accurate. Further, by making
Local Government Act
the Tasmanian Parliament conferred power on a
Council to levy rates under
; and under Part 9 of the Act, parliament
imposed liabilities on ratepayers (as defined) for the payment of rates in
relation to land
owned by that person. There is no dispute in this case that Mr
Ringrose is an owner of the land which is the subject of the demand
In his oral submissions, Mr Ringrose submitted that land is transferred from the
Crown to the people in fee simple and
that "we own the land completely and the
Crown has no authority" and that "the only authority to tax land is under the
reject this plainly untenable submission.
I have considered the matters raised by the statement of claim in relation to
can be no doubt at all that Mr
Ringrose's pseudo legal arguments have no basis whatsoever in law. It is very
clear that there is
no possible legal basis upon which unmet demands by Mr
Ringrose for the Council to explain the legal justification for charging him
rates, could support any of the claims which he makes. The Council's legal
authority to charge rates is clearly set out in the
Local Government
In relation to his claim for 'Usufruct of $150,000', Mr Ringrose submitted that
he believed that amount that to be a "standard charge
for that particular
discretion". Senior counsel for the defendant referred me to the case of
Commonwealth v Yarmirr
[1999] FCA 1668
in which the expression
"usufructuary right" was considered by the Federal Court of Australia.
Beaumont, von Doussa and Merkel JJ
referred with approval to a passage in the
judgment of Kirby P (as he then was) in
Mason v Tritton
(1994) 34 NSWLR
at 580-2 where he considered the concept of fishing "as a usufructuary right
to the use, possession and occupation of land" of another:
'usufructuary right', as asserted by the appellant, commonly conveys the
entitlement of an individual to use, and take benefit
from, land belonging to
another. A usufructuary is one who has the use and reaps the profit of anything.
The term extends to 1 who
has the temporary use and reaps the fruits or profits
of an estate, benefice, office etc, legally belonging to another or others.
example of the United States formulation may be found in the following extract
Marshall v Marshall
735 SW 2d 587
(1987) at 598: 'a "usufruct" is
the right of using and enjoying and receiving the profits of property that
belongs to another, and
a "usufructuary" is a person who has the usufruct or
right of enjoying anything in which he has no proprietary interest.'"
It can be readily appreciated that the concepts discussed, above, have no
possible application to a dispute about whether a council
can levy rates and
whether a landowner is liable to pay them. It is absolutely apparent that Mr
Ringrose's claimed remedy of 'usufruct'
is misconceived and this part of his
claim presents no 'real question to be tried' and must necessarily fail:
Spencer v Commonwealth of Australia
[2010] HCA 28
241 CLR 118
There will be summary judgment for the defendant
For the following reasons, I grant the defendant's interlocutory application
and make the orders sought as explained more fully,
The relevant legal principles are not controversial. In summary, the exercise
of powers to summarily terminate proceedings must
always be attended with
caution, whether on the basis that the pleadings fail to disclose a reasonable
cause of action or on the
basis that the action is frivolous or vexatious or an
abuse of process. The same applies where such a disposition is sought in a
summary judgment application supported by evidence:
Woods v Deputy Commissioner of Taxation
[2011] TASSC 68
per Porter J at
[19]-[24]. Provisions permitting the entry of summary judgment, such as the
ones presently under consideration,
are to be "understood as requiring formation
of a certain and concluded determination that a proceeding would necessarily
The plaintiff has not identified, nor advanced, any factual or logical basis
upon which a Court might lawfully order any of the
remedies sought by Mr
Ringrose. The jurisdiction invoked by Mr Ringrose's statement of claim in par 2
bears no relationship whatsoever
to the subject matter of the proceedings. It is
clear that Mr Ringrose's case is brought as a fundamental attack on the right of
the Council to levy rates – and upon his liability to pay them. The facts
pleaded in par 3 of the statement of claim are that
the Council refused to
respond to his demands that the council variously 'verify' its demands and to
provide him further and better
particulars of its authority and jurisdiction to
require him to pay rates. It appears that Mr Ringrose has not received any
satisfactory
response and as a consequence, he issued these proceedings and
seeks the remedies as set out at par 4. There is no merit whatsoever
aspect of the claim as endorsed on the writ or pleaded in the statement of
In light of the findings made in these reasons, I conclude that Mr Ringrose's
claim is so obviously untenable that it cannot possibly
succeed, in the sense
contemplated by the cases referred to by Holt AsJ in
Strang v Johnston, McGee
and Gandy Pty Ltd
[2014] TASSC 56
. Mr Ringrose's claim does not
raise any debatable question of law:
Dey v Victorian Railway Commissioners
[1949] HCA 1
at 91. It is clear that the proceedings present no
real question to be tried:
Fancourt v Mercantile Credits Ltd
per the Court at [27];
Clark v AWC Pty Ltd
[2022] TASSC 44
am satisfied that the entire proceedings should be summarily dismissed:
In these circumstances, Mr Ringrose's claim is to be characterised as a
frivolous or vexatious action. The claim is presented in
such a way that no
amendment could cure its defects. There is no conceivable basis in fact or in
law upon which the plaintiff could
raise an arguable case for any of the relief
outlined in his writ and statement of claim.
Because of these findings, I am satisfied that the continuation of the
proceedings will impose a significant and unfair burden on
both the defendant
and the resources of the Court. In that sense, the continuation of the
proceedings will be so prejudicial or
damaging as to be vexatious because they
will produce significant and unjustified cost and expense associated with the
necessarily associated with the progress of the action to trial: see
Mudie v Gainriver Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2002] QCA 546
I am mindful that ordinarily a party must not be denied an opportunity to place
his case before the Court, but here, the degree
of certainty about the ultimate
outcome in this case is so high, that it would be wrong not to grant the
defendant's application.
I have made a certain and concluded determination that
the proceeding would necessarily fail:
In my view, the better course is to proceed under r 367. I therefore make an
order under r 367 that judgment is entered for the
defendant. However, even if
I was wrong in coming to that conclusion, I am satisfied that it would be proper
to make an order under
r 259 that the action be dismissed and that judgment be
entered accordingly on the dual bases that the pleading (i) does not disclose
reasonable cause of action; and (ii) is frivolous or vexatious.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (197 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter