URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASGAB/2021/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MDN (Guardianship) [2021] TASGAB 21 (30 March 2021)
MDN (Guardianship)
[2021] TASGAB 21
HEARING DATE(S):
16 November 2020, 3 February 2021, 24 March 2021 and 30 March 2021
DATE OF ORDER:
30 March 2021
DATE OF STATEMENT OF REASONS:
23 April 2021
Ms Rowena Holder, President
APPLICATION
Application for Guardianship
CATCHWORDS:
Guardianship; role of the NDIS nominee; conflict between service provider
and PRP’s family; purpose of psychotropic medication;
management; chemical restraint; need for guardian with chemical restraint
LEGISLATION CITED:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Disability Services Act 2011
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Restrictive Practices and
Behaviour Support Rules 2018
CASES CITED:
[2019] NSWCATGD 8
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication
STATEMENT OF REASONS
Application
Applicant, LN made Application for Guardianship in relation to her sister, MDN,
dated 13 October 2021 (‘the Application’).
The Application proposes
that the Applicant be appointed as MDN’s Guardian.
Application was heard by the Board over a number of days, 16 November 2020, 3
February 2021, 24 March 2021 and 30 March 2021.
The following people appeared at
some or all of the abovementioned hearing dates:
(the Applicant);
(MDN’s Mother);
QDN (MDN’s Brother);
Assoc Professor Robyn Wallace (General Physician) (Dr Wallace);
Amy Siggins of Mosaic Support Services (MSS);
Danielle Brown of Mosaic Support Services (MSS);
Megan Baker (General Practitioner).
Board had before it the following documents:
Application;
Administration
Order dated 24 June, 2020;
Care Professional Report by Dr Robyn Wallace dated 17 October 2020
medical letter by Dr Robyn Wallace dated 26 March 2021;
letter by Dr Robyn Wallace dated 19 August, 2020;
letter by Dr Robyn Wallace dated 27 May, 2020;
letter by Dr Robyn Wallace dated 19 March 2019;
letter by Dr Robyn Wallace dated 28 October 2015;
letter by Dr Robyn Wallace dated 26 August 2015;
check from Australian National Character Check dated 3 November 2020 relating to
the Applicant;
from the Public Trustee dated 20 May 2020;
Pathology Report from Tanya Laugher dated 30 September
submission from Mr Charley Hodgson, Senior Practitioner dated 30 November
from Mosaic Support Services, of multiple dates;
Assessment from Liss Gustafsson dated 27 July, 2014;
Behavioural
Support Plan from Anglicare undated;
Behaviour Assessment Report from Ms Di Pullen, Clinical Psychologist, dated 2
of Medication Form dated 14 August 2019;
Behavioural
Support Plan from Ms Rachel Barac dated 3 November 2020.
Legislation
section 20 of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Act’), the Board may make an order appointing a full or limited guardian
in respect of MDN if it is satisfied that:
is a person with a disability; and
is unable by reason of that disability to make reasonable judgements in respect
of all or any matters relating to her personal
circumstances; and
is need of a guardian.
determining whether or not an order should be made, section 20 of the Act
requires that:
Board consider whether MDN needs could be met by other means less restrictive of
her freedom of decision and action; and
Board be satisfied that an order would be in MDN’s best interests; and
Board not appoint a full guardian unless it is satisfied that an order for
limited guardianship would be insufficient to meet
MDN’s needs, and if a
limited order is made, the order must be the least restrictive to MDN’s
freedom of decision and
action as possible in the circumstances.
Board must also have regard to the general principals in section 6 of the Act,
which are :
means which is the least restrictive of MDN’s freedom of decision and
action as is possible in the circumstances is adopted;
best interests of MDN be promoted; and
wishes of MDN are, if possible, carried into effect.
is a 52 year old single woman who has strong family supports. MDN has lived in
independent support accommodation, with support
from Mosaic Support Services
funded through MDN’s NDIS plan, for the last approximate 20 years. She
previously resided at [the
Facility] and with her parents.
Administration Order was made in respect of MDN on 24 June 2021, appointing the
Public Trustee as her administrator and is in effect
until 23 June
Medical expert evidence
Wallace gave evidence at hearing, and in a HCPR dated 17 October 2020, that MDN
was born with a severe congenital intellectual
disability, and also has a
possible diagnosis of Autism. Dr Wallace stated MDN is nonverbal and has a
background of severe trauma
and behavioural issues attributed to being
institutionalised for many years at [the Facility]. Dr Wallace stated that there
diagnosis of mental illness but some history of anxiety.
Wallace identified that as a result of her disability MDN has deficits in the
areas of receptive and expressive communication;
planning and reasoning skills;
orientation to person, place and time; impulse control; and susceptibility to
influence and suggestibility.
Dr Wallace opined that MDN has significant
incapacities arising over a multitude of issues and has an inability to make
judgments in respect to any matters of consequence, such as medical
treatment, accommodation, and NDIS related matters including
support service
delivery. The HCPR by Dr Wallace states that MDN’s disability
‘affects her reasoning, understanding,
expression so that she requires
full disability support for all personal matters’ and ‘she does not
have literacy or
numeracy skills due to intellectual disability.’
Baker stated at hearing MDN had a diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder and a
background of complex childhood trauma. A Report
from Ms Di Pullen, Clinical
Psychologist dated 2 July 2019 refers to a diagnosis of severe Autism Spectrum
Disorder and intellectual
disability which is reiterated in the current
Behavioural Support Plan from Ms Barac, Behavioural Support
Practitioner.
Evidence of Need for a Guardian
Applicant opined that MDN needed a guardian and someone to advocate for her at
all times. The Applicant expressed concerns about
the service provision MDN was
receiving and believed information was being withheld from family members. The
Applicant reported there
was breakdown in communication between MDN’s
family and MSS. There was evidence that some issues had been partially resolved
with advocacy support from Speak Out. The Applicant stated at the hearing on the
16 November 2020 she was considering a change in
MDN’s service providers.
Wallace gave evidence that there have been multiple changes in MDN’s
living environment. There has been an appearance of
conflict or communication
breakdown between the service provider and family that most likely arose through
high staff turnover working
with MDN. This communication breakdown between staff
and family had been assisted by advocacy support; however, Dr Wallace did not
believe it had adequately resolved issues. Dr Wallace stated even though the
Applicant is MDN’s NDIS Nominee, many decisions
are being made by
MDN’s service providers without the approval of the Applicant. Dr Wallace
opined there may be a need for
the appointment of a guardian, being a family
member with powers relating to NDIS matters and service delivery; accommodation;
possibly decisions pertaining to medical treatment but indicated that this
may well be able to be managed by a family member acting
Responsible.
was evidence that MDN has a number of behaviours of concern, which are set out
in the current Behavioural Support Plan dated
3 November 2020. There was
evidence that a number of environmental restrictive interventions have been
approved by the Secretary
of the Department of Communities under the
Disability Services Act 2011
and implemented by MSS. These related to the
locking of a number of cupboards, a wardrobe and internal gates within
MDN’s residence
and are detailed further in the Behaviour Support Plan.
the hearing on 24 March 2021, the Board questioned the Applicant as to whether
she believed any accommodation decisions or changes
to MDN’s current
accommodation needed to be made. The Applicant indicated MDN’s
accommodation needs were currently being
met and she did not believe any
decisions as to where MDN was to live needed to be made.
gave evidence that she was MDN’s Person Responsible and made medical
treatment decisions on her daughter’s behalf.
expressed a fear of family not being involved in decision making around service
delivery based on what has occurred in the past.
QNN and the Applicant, however,
reported that since a new team leader of MSS had been appointed there has been
positive change and
the outstanding issues that weren’t resolved with
advocacy support were now resolved. QNN stated the family were willing to
collaboratively with MSS.
Applicant confirmed that she was MDN’s NDIS Plan Nominee. The Applicant
stated she has been involved in the NDIS Plan reviews
and believed MDN’s
NDIS Plan met her current needs. MDN’s next Plan review is scheduled for
October 2021.
Siggins from MSS confirmed there had been previous communication issues that
were rectified by a new team leader being appointed
and a core team working with
MDN. Ms Siggins indicated there was no intention in the foreseeable future to
change these arrangements.
Ms Siggins also commented that there was a better
understanding of the role of NDIS Nominee across management and support
Board heard evidence that MDN was being prescribed Largactil, a psychotropic
medication. Dr Wallace stated she had copies of letters
from Dr Peter Wurth,
psychiatrist, which indicated MDN was being prescribed a high dose of Largactil
when she first met with MDN
in 2015. The Board enquired whether the Largactil
was being prescribed for a medical treatment purpose or for the purpose of
controlling
MDN’s behaviour. At hearing Dr Wallace stated that she
believed the medication was prescribed for an organic reason. Dr Wallace
submitted to the Board evidence by email dated 29 March 2021 which
In 2019 a further review with Dr Wurth was instigated to
evaluate again the presence or not of mental illness, and treatment. He
that MDN benefited from the Largactil and would need it lifelong.
MDN has been on Largactil 400mg for some years now. Further consideration of
reduction is not excluded and would, as before, occur
in conjunction with her
In relation to the question: “Is largactil a chemical restraint now for
MDN?”, my answer is consistent with that of Dr
Wurth’s review in
that now Largactil at 400mg per day is useful for MDN and she now effectively
needs it for daily functioning.
She may well have experienced neurobiochemical
brain resetting as a result of this medication so that there is now an organic
for it to continue. In the past it may well have been used as a chemical
restraint. An underlying psychiatric psychotic illness may
well have been
present too, but that does not seem provable or disprovable at this point. That
MDN has experienced severe physical,
psychological trauma is undisputed and she
has been diagnosed as having autism and moderately severe intellectual
disability appear
I believe a behavioural management plan for MDN is indicated in any case,
whether or not she has a psychiatric illness, or and an
acquired/congenital
organic brain condition requiring largactil.
The management of MDN is complex and accept there is a degree of permanent
uncertainty for the indications of use of largactil. A
common aim is to make an
environment and ensure the best physical health for the best possible
opportunities for MDN to enjoy her
life, and her family. Functionally largactil
has been recommended for continued use. Its use cannot be confirmed as a
chemical restraint.
The sound psychiatry opinion suggested that it should not
ever be ceased.
Applicant and QNN were of the view that Largactil was being prescribed by Dr
Wurth for behavioural control. The Applicant advised
that Dr Wurth is now not
engaged in MDN’s treatment and her GP Dr Megan Baker was the prescribing
doctor. The Board adjourned
the hearing on the 24 March 2021 to enable it to
hear evidence from Dr Baker. Dr Baker gave evidence on the 30 March 2021.
Baker stated that she had been MDN’s GP since the end of 2015. MDN was on
Largatil overseen by Dr Wurth when she first commenced
seeing her. She
indicated MDN had been on psychotropic medication since childhood, the reasoning
being unknown but certainly involved
an element of behaviour control. She
indicated when people are on that medication for some time it is difficult to
get them off it.
Dr Baker stated a person with autism is usually quite reactive
to their environment and changes within that environment can affect
behaviour. She stated MDN had difficulty with self-regulation. Dr Wurth
conducted a review in 2019 that resulted in a change
in dosage of Largactil
because of an increase in behaviours. There was a subsequent review by Dr
Wallace who decreased the dosage
because of further changes in behaviour. Dr
Baker stated it was not black and white to determine whether Largactil was for
behavioural
management or for the treatment of an underlying mental health or
medical condition, and indicated she would refer to specialists.
At hearing Dr
Baker opined it was more likely than not she was prescribing Largactil for
behaviour management. She noted that family
had been consenting to its use.
Baker confirmed she had authored a Purpose of Medication Form relating to MDN
dated 18 September 2019 which was submitted to the
NDIS Quality and Safeguards
Commission (NDIS Commission) which stated Largactil was for behaviour
management. MSS stated they were
reporting to the NDIS Commission monthly on the
use of Largactil as a chemical restraint. MSS indicated they were only required
submit a new Purpose of Medication Form if circumstances changed or dosage
Determination
Board is persuaded by all the medical evidence before it that MDN has a
disability that is lifelong Intellectual Disability and
Autism Spectrum Disorder
with a background of complex trauma.
the basis of the medical evidence of Dr Wallace and the confirmatory evidence
given by her family and carers, the Board finds a
global impairment of
MDN’s capacity to make decisions in respect to personal and lifestyle
matters as a result of her disability.
considering where there is a need for the appointment of a guardian, the Board
finds that MDN is settled in her accommodation
and there are no proposals for
any change in her accommodation. She receives services and supports that are
funded through the NDIS.
There is no evidence of a current need for a guardian
to make decisions in respect to where MDN is to live.
Wallace raised there may be possible decisions that need to be made pertaining
to medical treatment. There was no evidence before
the Board of any need
arising in connection with medical treatment decisions, except the issue of
Largactil, which is dealt with
below. The Board heard evidence that MDN has her
mother as her Person Responsible
and if she was unable to perform the role, the Applicant or her brother are
willing to be Person Responsible for her. If a guardian
is appointed then the
guardian will be her person
responsible.
Applicant is MDN’s NDIS Plan Nominee. A nominee may be appointed to make
decisions under the NDIS on the person’s
behalf where a participant does
not have the capacity to undertake any of the tasks required by the Scheme and
the participant cannot
be supported to undertake those tasks. A plan nominee can
do any act relating to ‘the preparation, review or replacement of
and the management of funding for supports under the participants plan (unless
limited in some way in their appointment
NDIS scheme is a substitute decision making scheme designed for people with
disability like MDN. The Applicant as plan nominee
for MDN has the power to
engage providers; attend planning meetings; ensure the plan is implemented and
working effectively for MDN
and where required be an advocate for her. The Board
was not able to identify any current decisions a guardian would need to make
that a Plan Nominee is unable to make. Given the Applicant already has powers as
Plan Nominee, which are clearly set out in legislation,
there is no need to
appoint a guardian with these same powers.
Board also takes into account Ms Siggins’ evidence that MSS staff and
management have gained a greater understanding of
the NDIS plan nominee’s
role and powers, and it is hoped that this hearing has also assisted further in
this understanding
for all participants. It appears that areas of dispute
between family and MSS have resolved and it is hoped appropriate communication
is maintained and the role of Plan Nominee is fully recognised.
remaining issue raised is the use of Largactil, a psychotropic medication, and
whether this is being prescribed as medical treatment
to treat a diagnosed
medical condition or for the purpose of controlling a person’s behaviour
(behaviour management) and who,
if anyone, is providing consent to its use. This
requires a consideration of the meaning of medical treatment and chemical
treatment is defined in the Act as:
(a) medical treatment
(including any medical or surgical procedure, operation or examination and any
prophylactic, palliative or rehabilitative
care) normally carried out by, or
under, the supervision of a medical practitioner; or
(b) dental treatment (including any dental
procedure, operation or examination) normally carried out by or under the
supervision of
a dentist; or
but does not include –
(d) any non-intrusive examination made for
diagnostic purposes (including a visual examination of the mouth, throat, nasal
eyes or ears); or
(e) first-aid medical or dental treatment;
(f) the administration of a pharmaceutical
drug for the purpose, and in accordance with the dosage level, recommended in
the manufacturer's
instructions (if the drug is one for which a prescription is
not required and which is normally self-administered); or
(g) any other kind of treatment that is
declared by the regulations not to be medical or dental treatment for the
purposes of this
Act does not define chemical restraint. The
Disability Services Act 2011
which regulates the use of restrictive interventions by
disability services providers and funded private persons, defines only an
environmental restraint and physical restraint. It does not consider chemical
Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
(Cth) defines restrictive practices as
‘any practice or intervention that has the effect of restricting the
rights or freedom
of movement of the person with
disability’.
Quality and Safeguards Commission (the NDIS Commission) was formed with one of
its primary functions being to oversee restrictive
practices in Australia with
the focus to reduce and eliminate their use. The NDIS Commission ensures that
consent and authorisation
is obtained for the use of all regulated restrictive
Disability Insurance Scheme (Restrictive Practices and Behaviour Support) Rules
(‘the Rules') certain restrictive practices are subject to
regulation. Rule 6 state that a restrictive practice is a regulated
restrictive
practice if it is or involves any of the following:
(a) seclusion....
(b) chemical restraint, which is
the use of medication or chemical substance for the primary purpose of
influencing a person’s
behaviour. It does not include the use of
medication prescribed by a medical practitioner for the treatment of, or to
enable treatment
of, a diagnosed mental disorder, a physical illness or a
physical condition;
(c) mechanical ....
(d) physical restraint, ....
(e) environmental restraint....
of the Rules sets out the conditions of registration that apply to all
registered NDIS providers who use restrictive practices in
the course of
delivering NDIS supports. These conditions include requiring the use of
restrictive practices to:
not occur where the relevant State and Territory
prohibits such use;
be undertaken in accordance with State and Territory authorisation processes and
a behaviour support plan; and
be recorded by the provider and reported to the
Commissioner.
relates to the use of a regulated restrictive practice in a State or
Territory ‘with an authorisation process (however described)’
registered NDIS provider in that State. The Notes to r 9 of the Rules
An authorisation process may, for example, be a process
under relevant State or Territory legislation or policy or involve obtaining
informed consent from a person and/or their guardian, approval from a
guardianship board or administrative tribunal or approval from
an authorised
State or Territory officer.
it is not bound to do so, the Board adopts the definition of chemical restraint
used in the NDIS Rules, given there is no relevant
State legislation providing
such definition. The Board has considered and relies on the reasoning set out in
[2019] NSWCATGD 8
behaviour support plan details the use of some of the psychotropic medication as
being a restrictive practice: chemical
restraint. MSS submitted a Purpose of
Medication Form authored by Dr Baker to the NDIS Commision referring to the
Largactil as a
chemical restraint for behaviour management, and MSS are
reporting monthly to the Commission on its use. While somewhat hesitant
committing to whether the use of Largactil was for the purpose of treatment or
behaviour management, Dr Baker gave evidence that
she believed she was
prescribing it for behavioural management, a view shared by family members. Dr
Baker was not able to identify
any other medical condition she was treating with
the use of the Largactil.
Board had no reports before it from psychiatrist Dr Wurth, who up until 2019 had
some involvement in MDN’s clinical care.
No other psychiatrist in recent
times has been involved in MDN’s clinical care.
Wallace gave evidence that Dr Wurth ‘evaluated again the presence or not
of mental illness and treatment’ in 2019 and
there was no diagnosis of
mental illness in the documentation she had from Dr Wurth. Dr Wallace’s
comment that ‘[a]n
underlying psychiatric psychotic illness may well have
been present too, but that does not seem provable or disprovable at this
provides no evidence of mental illness. Dr Wallace stated that Dr
Wurth ‘suggested that MDN benefited from the Largactil and
would need it
lifelong’ is not evidence either way as to whether its use is for the
treatment of a medical condition or for
behaviour management. Dr Wallace opines
‘she now effectively needs it for daily functioning. She may well have
experienced
neurobiochemical brain resetting as a result of this medication so
that there is now an organic reason for it to continue.’
The Board accepts
this evidence from Dr Wallace as indicating possible medical conditions (that
is, mental illness and an acquired
brain/congenital organic brain condition)
that may require the use of psychotropic medication, but no clear medical
evidence at this
point is provided to support either of these conclusions.
the evidence before it, the Board finds that the use of Largactil is prescribed
and administered for the behaviour management of
MDN. The psychotropic
medication is being prescribed when there is no evidence of a mental illness
warranting treatment by it. The
evidence of the diagnosis of Autism Spectrum
Disorder does not indicate Largactil is being prescribed to treat this
condition. The
prescribing medical practitioner Dr Baker is not able to identify
any medical condition the medication is treating and believes it
purpose of behaviour management. The Board notes it is the intention of the
Applicant and QNN to obtain further psychiatric
review by a psychiatrist for
the use of Largactil is not medical treatment for a diagnosed medical condition,
Part 6 of the Act cannot be relied on. A Person
Responsible’s powers only
relate to decisions concerning medical
and therefore decisions
pertaining to chemical restraint cannot be made by a Person Responsible.
it stands, no one is authorised outside of the NDIS Commission’s process
of authorisation, to review, or consider the need
or not of the chemical
restraint; consider the appropriateness of dosage changes of the psychotropic
medication and discuss these
with a medical practitioners or behaviour support
practitioners; and provide consent or not to any changes. It also raises the
issue as to who a medical practitioner must seek consent from.
Board therefore needed to consider the appointment of a guardian with the power
to authorise or not psychotropic medication as
a form of chemical restraint.
Substitute decision making by way of appointment of a guardian is consistent
with a substitute decision
approval regime existing in the
Services Act 2011
whereby the Board, an independent authority authorised by
legislation, can approve or not personal and environmental restrictive
practices. Further, the appointment of a guardian would invoke
principles contained in the Act, ensuring any use of chemical restraint is the
least restrictive of MDN’s freedom and action
as is possible in the
circumstances; and in her best interests; and her wishes (if ascertainable) are,
if possible, carried into
Board finds the use of Largactil falls within the definition of chemical
restraint. Irrespective of the NDIS Commission’s
role of oversight
relating to restrictive practices, the Board finds it is appropriate to appoint
a guardian. The Board adopts the
reasoning in HCZ
where the Tribunal
68. The importance of the difference between
“authorisation,” being the process by which the proposed practice is
and recorded against appropriate guidelines by FaCS, [Department of
Family and Community Services] and the subsequent consent by
an authorised
person, cannot be overstated.
69. Therefore, irrespective of whether this restrictive practice requires
‘authorisation,’ its use also requires the
consent of a
Applicant has sought appointment as MDN’s guardian and no one at hearing
opposed her appointment. It is clear to the Board
that the Applicant is
concerned with MDN’s best interests and is willing to advocate on her
behalf when required. MDN’s
wishes were not ascertainable.
Board considers that the least restrictive approach to meeting MDN’s needs
is to make a limited guardianship order. Given
the medical evidence presented by
Dr Wallace, the Order is for three years.
Board deems it appropriate to make conditions similar to what it would impose
for an approval of a restrictive practice under
Disability Services Act
, and consistent with
principles.
is appointed as the limited guardian of MDN with the power:
give or withhold consent to the use of chemical restraint.
Order remains in effect until 29 March
Conditions:
LN may only consent to the use of chemical restraint if it is the means
which is the least restrictive of MDN’s freedom of action
and decision as
is possible in the circumstances and for the primary purpose of ensuring the
safety, health or wellbeing of MDN or
other persons, and should occur:
1. in accordance with a Behaviour Support Plan (BSP) which has been
developed by a behaviour support practitioner after having conducted
functional behavioural assessment upon MDN and after obtaining input from any
relevant allied health professionals. The BSP should
be reviewed regularly, and
subject to available funding (no less than every 12 months) and/or reviewed as
soon as practicable if
there is a change in circumstances which requires the
plan to be amended.
section 4 and section 39 of the
section 4 of the
Disability Insurance Scheme
There is no legislation
in NSW equivalent to the
Disability Services Act 2011
Tas relating to
restrictive practices
section 39 of the Act
[2019] NSWCATGD 8
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (323 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter