URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASLPDT/2023/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:16:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
NX & LX v A Legal Practitioner KBC [2023] TASLPDT 1; (1 August 2023)
Legal Profession Disciplinary Tribunal
Citation: NX & LX v A Legal Practitioner KBC [2023] TASLPDT 1
Parties: NX & LX (Applicant/Complainant)
KBC (Respondent/Practitioner)
Tribunal: Mr. D Wallace Deputy Chairperson
Ms. L Mackey
Mr. M Kitchell
Hearing Date: 24
February, and 5
March 2020, and 16
Delivered On: 1
day of August 2023
Representation:
Applicant/Complainants:
Respondent /Practitioner:
Mr T Barrett
Solicitors:
Applicants:
Respondent/Practitioner:
Tierney Law
The Tribunal ordered pursuant to s.470(2) of the Legal Profession Act
2007 that the names of the parties to the application be anonymized
not published or communicated to any other person.
Reasons for Decision
of December 2013 the Complainants complained to the
Profession Board
(Board) of conduct by the respondent
Australian legal practitioner (practitioner) occurring between August 2009 and
August 2012.
concerned a dispute about the design and building of a house for the
Complainants in Southern Tasmania. The Complainants resided
in England intending
to spend time in Tasmania and eventually retire to Tasmania. In April 2008 they
engaged a ‘project manager’
to design and project manage the
construction and engage the builder. They entered a standard building contract
direct with the builder
arranged by the ‘project manager’. In
January 2009 on coming to Tasmania to inspect the progress they found building
faults with the house. The Complainants required work on the house to be
suspended. Potentially that affected contractual times for
practical completion
of the house. A dispute arose both with the builder and ‘project
manager’. Various expert reports
were obtained over time showing the
problems with the building, some not apparent on first discovery. The
Complainants initial solicitors
gave notice to the ‘project manager’
and the builder of the dispute and seeking redress. The ‘project
notified its insurers who appointed lawyers. The builder was
largely unrepresented. The builder was of the opinion the defects initially
discovered could be rectified and wished to complete according to his
In August 2009, from England the Complainants engaged the
practitioner and the law practice [a law firm] as new solicitors on the
recommendation they had expertise in building disputes. The practitioner gave
advice on the contractual issues that arose with both
the builder and
‘project manager’. The Complainants were anxious to have proceedings
issued against the ‘project
manager’ without necessarily the
builder. The practitioner’s advice included a strategy of giving time to
the builder
to rectify defects, a question arose whether known faults would
enable a valid rescission if the faults were such as the builder
had repudiated
the contract.
The effect of an arbitration clause on the building contract also needed to
be considered. There was no arbitration clause in the
management agreement with
the ‘project manager’. There was a risk that separate paths of
resolution between builder and
the ‘project manager ’ could ensue if
the builder invoked the arbitration clause for resolution.
Advice was given concerning the apportionment of liability in the
circumstances pertaining to the uninsured builder and ’project
manager’ and the possible effect on recovery of damages. There was
potential for other parties, an engineer and building surveyor
being added or
joined. The practitioner had a view that ranged from 50 % liability with the
builder and the best but optimistic estimate
against the ‘project
manager’ as more information from expert reports were obtained was 80%
Extensions of time to remedy certain defects were given to the builder but as
time went on more defects were discovered as expert
reports were obtained and
the build remained incomplete.
The contracts with the builder and ‘project manager’ were ended.
Damages were crystallized in respect of costs for restitution
and to complete
the house. Counsel was engaged and proceedings commenced by Application and
Statement of Claim in the Federal Court
of Australia on the 18
March 2011 against the ‘project manager’, the builder and others
involved with the ‘project manager’.
Until then the practitioner had contemplated proceedings in the Supreme Court
of Tasmania. The practitioner had carriage of the litigation
including pretrial
steps. Court mediation was held but the matter was set down for trial beginning
of September 2012.
Following a conference with counsel and the practitioner as to the prospects
of recovery of the amount the Complainants expected,
they requested and received
further advice from the principal of [a law firm] QDW. The matter was settled
shortly after, close to
the proposed trial date, by awards of damages but less
than had been the Complainants earlier expectations.
The proceedings in the Board
the 24 July 2015 the Board dismissed each of the twelve allegations
‘A’ to ‘L’ of the complaint. They are
set out later in
these reasons.
allegations ‘B’ and ‘C’ were summarily dismissed
pursuant to Section 433(1)(c) of the
Legal Profession Act 2007
(‘LPA’) as the Board determined it had no power to deal with them.
The conduct complained of having occurred more than
three years prior to making
the complaint and it had not resolved the alleged conduct could have amounted to
professional misconduct
remaining allegations ‘A’, and ‘D’ to ‘L’
inclusive, were dismissed pursuant to Section
451(a) following an investigation.
The Board was satisfied there was no reasonable likelihood the practitioner
would be found guilty
of either unsatisfactory professional conduct or
professional
Ederle the Chief Executive of the Board had assisted the Complainants to
finalise their complaint
allegations
. Mr. Ederle provided
his recommendations in the Complaint Report (CR)
dated the 7
2014 to the Board.
recommended the allegations more than three years old not be investigated, being
ones that arguably were not open for the Board
to determine the conduct
complained of was capable of amounting to professional misconduct nor was any
public interest component
evident in the allegations. Otherwise, allegations
‘A’ and ‘D’ to ‘L’ except where parts of
referred to conduct more than three years prior to complaint, were
recommended to be investigated, which was agreed to by the Board.
investigator was appointed under Part 4.4 of the ‘LPA’. She had
powers conferred by Chapter 6 of the LPA including
reviewing all the
complainant’s extensive material in their complaint, as well as the
practitioners file, and seek answers
to questions from the parties and give
recommendations. The investigator noted that as conduct before and after three
the date of the complaint was intermingled in some of the
allegations, she referred to all those allegations in her Investigation
to give background to those parts of allegations that arose within three years
of the complaint allegation.
Investigation Report (
with its extensive content (including the complaint and the practitioners’
response and Complainants reply, and a summary of
correspondence from the
practitioners file
) together with
the Complaint Report
) constituted the material and information before
the Board upon which it made the determinations subject to this re-hearing.
investigator reported the materials of the parties were so comprehensive that it
was not necessary for her to ask many questions.
She recorded the
practitioners’ file was the most comprehensive and meticulously arranged
file she had ever come across. She
asked the practitioner of one issue and
received his response orally and sent a question to the complainants via email.
She conducted
legal research into the Federal Court rules and practice relating
to freezing orders. She described the practitioners file as the
blue whale of
legal files. It required 22 archive boxes to house. The correspondence part of
the practitioners file took up 8 archive
boxes. She perused the entirety of the
correspondence document by document, prepared a chronology of the more
significant documents
(all annexed to the
) and reviewed the briefs
provided to counsel and the court document folders. She reported that reviewing
the file and examining the
significant number of allegations and related matters
raised had required about 6 weeks of her time between September 2014 and March
2015 to complete the Investigation
an investigation is completed, the Board has various options available if the
conduct investigated was considered capable of
amounting to unsatisfactory
professional conduct or professional
misconduct.
. It could proceed to
hold a hearing pursuant to s. 453 with procedures set forth in Schedule 1
‘LPA’ or it could apply
to the Tribunal to hear and determine a
matter pursuant to s. 464. If it considered the conduct was capable of being
professional
misconduct it could also apply to the Supreme Court pursuant to s.
486. In all such instances evidence would be taken and parties
examined, and
findings made including where facts were in dispute.
an investigation is completed and the Board is satisfied there is no reasonable
likelihood that a practitioner will be found
guilty of either unsatisfactory
professional conduct or professional misconduct it may determine to dismiss the
No evidence is or has
been taken on oath or affirmation and no findings are made resolving contentious
facts in this preliminary
assessment or pre-hearing procedure
S.458(1) Rehearing
re-hearing pursuant to s.458(1) is for the Tribunal or Supreme Court to have the
matter to which the determination by the Board
relates determined by the
Tribunal or Supreme Court. Section 458 (2) provides the Board’s dismissal
of complaints under s.433
(Summary dismissal) and s.451(Dismissal of complaint)
are determinations of the Board. Before the Tribunal, the parties rely on the
material or information that was before the Board when it made its decision
unless otherwise ordered
party may make a written submission or oral or additional submissions as the
Tribunal permits. If a rehearing is before the Supreme
Court, it regulates its
own procedure.
Tribunal is not hearing and determining a complaint when re-hearing a
preliminary determination of the Board, such as summary
dismissal of complaint
(s.433(1)) or dismissal of complaint
. That is reserved for
matters proceeding under s.464. So far as the Tribunal differently constituted
decided otherwise in
EP v Legal Practitioner
[2019] TASPDT 6 and
Legal [ Practitioner
[2019] TASPDT 7 those decisions are not followed by
Tribunal’s task is to evaluate the material and information that was
before the Board, together with any additional information
and submissions it
has permitted to be received and decide for itself the potentiality of the
allegations to establish unsatisfactory
professional conduct or professional
misconduct.
the 9th of August 2015 the Complainants applied pursuant to s.458(1)(a) for the
re-hearing of the Board determinations by the Tribunal.
The Complaint allegations
following are the Complainants final allegations
August 2009 and March 2011 (at the time the writs were filed and served), the
Practitioner failed to take appropriate legal
action on behalf of the
Complainants against the organisation [the ‘project manager’ ], or
in the alternative, failed
to follow the Complainants’ expressed
instructions in relation to taking appropriate legal action against the
around April 2010 the Practitioner arranged for, and consented to, the
‘project manager’ to be released from the
then current written
agreement dated 1
April 2008 between the ‘project manager
‘and the complainants, and in doing so;
without the Complainants’ expressed[sic] instructions; and
negligently.
August 2009 and November 2010 provided negligent legal advice to the
Complainants in relation to the invoking of clause 10
of the building contract,
or in the alternative, failed to follow the Complainants expressed instructions
regarding invoking clause
10 of the building contract.
March 2011 and September 2011, the Practitioner failed to take appropriate legal
action in relation to freezing the proceeds
of sale of the builder’s
property, and in doing so failed to act in the best interests of the
Complainants, in circumstances
where the Practitioner:
been advised by counsel acting for the Complainants that “serious
consideration” ought to be given to taking such
the builder’s property was subject to a contract of sale; and
the Complainants to believe he was monitoring the progress of sale of the
builder’s property and that he would take the
necessary action prior to
the completion of the property sale.
December 2010 and August 2012, the Practitioner knowingly provided Counsel
acting for the Complainants with false and misleading
information in relation
nature and extent of the ‘project managers’ duties and obligations
under contract to the Complainants.
Complainants’ understanding of the nature and scope of the written
agreement, dated 1 April 2008, between the ‘project
manager’ and the
Complainants.
‘LVR’[ of the ‘project manager’] effecting statutory
building inspections on behalf of a licenced building
Date upon which the sale of the builder’s property completed.
Decisions and Reasons issued by Work Place Standards (“WPS”)
regarding the Complainants complains previously made
documents; and
particulars
of loss and damage.
around September 2012, the Practitioner engaged in disreputable conduct in
relation to withdrawing monies held in Trust on behalf
of the Complainants, for
payment of legal fees without the consent or authorisation of the Complainants,
in circumstances where the
Practitioner:
previously agreed to deposit the Complainants’ settlement monies into
their bank account; and
been made aware that the Firm’s accounts for legal services were disputed
by the Complainants.
around September 2011, the Practitioner was ill-prepared for a mediation
conference and arranged for the Complainants to attend
from over-seas in
circumstances where the Practitioner:
aware that no meaningful resolution in respect to a mediated outcome could be
around June 2012, the Practitioner provided negligent legal advice to the
Complainants in relation to the Complainants’
defence regarding an
application brought by the other side concerning the release of their
‘privileged documents’.
approximately September 2011 and August 2012, the Practitioner provided
negligent legal advice to the Complainants in relation
to their claim for loss
and damage in circumstances where the Practitioner:
to institute legal proceedings against the ‘project manager’ until
March 2011 which rendered invalid any claim
for loss and damage incurred prior
to March 2011, or in the alternative, prepared particulars of loss and damage
that were not legitimate.
August 2009 and August 2012, the Practitioner overcharged for legal services,
and or inappropriately charged for legal services,
which were incurred as a
result of negligent or useless legal work effected in relation to that work
particularised at allegations
“1” to “9” inclusive.
August 2009 and August 2012, the Practitioner made deliberate decisions and took
actions that were not in the Complainants’
best interests, and which
advantaged ‘LVR’/ the ’project
August 2009 and August 2012, the practitioner provided inaccurate and misleading
estimates of the costs to the end of trial.
Between September 2011 and August
2012, the Practitioner failed to provide an update to the legal fees and
disbursements in circumstances
i. The estimate given in September 2011 was $55,000 to complete the legal
matter however, by August 2012 despite no further estimate
or revision of
estimate had been given to the Complainants, the Complainants had in fact
incurred additional legal fees and disbursements
of approximately
$81,000.00.
Complainants submissions
the Tribunal included statements of alleged events or matters that were not
before the Board. Some posed many questions in
interrogative form they wished
the practitioner answer or alternatively for the Tribunal to seek answers to the
questions. What was
not before the Board unless otherwise permitted by the
Tribunal is irrelevant to the Tribunals task and falls outside the boundaries
the rehearing and will be given no consideration. The practitioner by counsel
has made written submissions to the Tribunal which
we have read and considered.
Each party gave oral submissions before the Tribunal.
consider each particular of the complaint in turn on the material and
information that was before the Board. An exception in respect
of complaint
particular ‘D’ was made. A file note from the practitioners file
bearing the date 2 September 2011 was received
as new material before the
Tribunal. It appears an incorrect file note of the same date on a different
subject matter was erroneously
copied to the Board material. It appears in the
at page 284 of
as Document 18. That has loomed large in
the Complainants submissions to the Tribunal that the Investigation Report was
not fit for
purpose and no proper investigation occurred. We consider this in
respect of allegation ‘D’.
Consideration and Reasons
Between August 2009 and March 2011 (at the
time the writs were filed and served), the Practitioner failed to take
appropriate legal
action on behalf of the Complainants against the organisation
the ‘project manager’, or in the alternative, failed to
Complainants’ expressed instructions in relation to taking appropriate
legal action against the ‘project manager’.
Complainants summarized their position in their complaint as the
practitioner-
did all he could to delay taking action
against [the ‘project manager’] until he was absolutely forced to.
to make it that there was no action we could take against
He diminished and understated the extent of
the [‘project managers’] role at every opportunity
used the builder
as another means of
reducing if not
eliminating the case against [the project manager]. ”He would not invoke
Clause 10 of the builder’s contract
because it would have resulted in him
having no excuse not to issue the writ against [the ‘project
manager’]. Instead
to buy time he made the decision, without our prior
approval, to abrogate [the project manager]of their contractual responsibilities
and implemented a time frame on the builder. The builder was unable to/did not
do any work and [KBC] had to keep extending the time
Complainants detailed their perspective on events up to the filing of
proceedings on 18 March 2011.
All events or conduct described prior to the 3
of December 2010
concern matters more than 3 years prior to the complaint. The Board has made no
determination pursuant to s. 428
(2) (a) and (b) of the ‘LPA’ in
respect of those parts of this allegation that would enable them to be dealt
with, other
than by dismissal. It had power to do
The Board was bound to
dismiss those parts of the complaint allegation concerning conduct more than 3
years before the date of complaint
pursuant to s.433(1) (e). The Board
determined however to dismiss allegations
pursuant to s.451. It is the
matter relating to that determination we are re hearing under
s.458(1)(a).
19.1.3 It was
submitted by counsel for the practitioner that power exists for the Tribunal in
its discretion to dismiss the complaint
allegation on a rehearing pursuant to
Section.466(7) (c) which provides that the Tribunal”
dismiss a complaint if-
(iv) the application was made more than 3 years after the conduct complained
of is alleged to have occurred
The power to dismiss is by virtue of s.458(5), which provides -
The Tribunal may determine an application made to it under this section,
in accordance with Part 4.7, other than sections 464, 466(7)(b)
and 468, as if
the application were an application under Division 2 of that Part.
19.1.4 That is
the Tribunal has power to dismiss the complaint, notwithstanding we are not
hearing the complaint, and because the
application
to the Tribunal was
of August 2015, all conduct alleged to have occurred more
than 3 years before that date would be dismissed. That applies to all
complaints.
It is by no means clear summary dismissal should
complaint raises serious allegations, and we will evaluate the material before
the Board as to the potentiality the practitioner
would be guilty of
disciplinary conduct.
complainants have the onus of satisfying a disciplinary body that the allegation
amounts to unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct. The
standard of proof is on the balance of probabilities, but cogent evidence will
be required
to establish facts on which the allegations depend, and that
satisfaction will not be achieved by inexact proofs, indefinite testimony,
indirect references.
allegations made amount to the practitioner accused of breaching every duty a
lawyer has to a client including to consciously
opposition.
practitioner’s initial response to the complaint is conveniently set out
in the investigator’s report as follows.
the allegation he was motivated to protect [the ‘project manager’]
and says the allegation is scandalous and bizarre.
He explains it was his advice
to the complainants that [the ‘project manager’] would not be found
100 % liable for all
their losses and their legal action had to take account of
the builder’s role. He explains that the legal action against [the
‘project manager’] was subject to some risks or complexities because
of the agreement ...with [the ‘project manager’]
was open to
different and less comprehensive interpretations of [the ‘project
managers’] role than the view that the
complainants had of the
The investigator sets out the practitioner’s response to the Board on
this allegation in his letter to the Board –
“Immediate or earlier proceedings against [the ‘project
manager’] were clearly not justified because:
as to the role of the builder and the ongoing effect of the contract needed to
be resolved if it is accepted, as addressed
in the relevant section, that
proceedings against the builder needed to be deferred, then separate proceedings
against other parties
was absurd;
evidence as to the extent of the defects and the building issues were
solicitors for the builder declined to arrange for instructions to be given. The
complainants seem to think that a court order
might have been obtained that [the
project manager’] instruct the builder appropriately. This is not feasible
or realistic;
case was clearly one warranting involvement of counsel and the process of
briefing and settling court documents was naturally
time consuming’
investigator referenced matters of conduct occurring prior to 3 December 2010 so
that conduct between 3 December 2010 and
March 2011 could be better understood.
The practitioners file demonstrates when the complainants first instructed the
practitioner
the house was
unfinished where there was a contract between the Complainants and builder to
build to completion;
the building
work had been on hold from early 2009 due to dispute about the suitability of
windows and floor and cladding issues;
the windows had
been selected by the ‘project manager’’ and the Complainants
wanted them replaced and the builder
disputed that replacement was necessary and
could be made watertight in situ. The builder was in dispute with the window
builder’s position was he was willing to complete the build;
The Complainants
held the ‘project manager’ responsible for the problems, or majority
of them and initially wanted to
keep the builder out of the dispute;
Some expert
opinions had been sought about the windows agreeing there were defects in the
building, but costing of the alleged defects
by an independent expert had yet to
be obtained; and
There was a
standard building contract between the Complainants and the builder to build the
house to completion and a mixture of
written (an engagement letter dated 1 April
2008) and oral agreement between the complainants and the
designer/’project manager’
to “design and project manage the
construction.”
19.1.9 In the
period from 3 December 2010 and March 2011 the issues the Complainants say
indicate the practitioners’ protection
of the ‘project
manager’ include -
December 2010 not briefing counsel correctly by referring in the brief to the
‘project manager’ Design and Management
Agreement letter as there
being “uncertainty
‘project manager ‘] had”
referring to
the’ project manager’ in the brief as “
failed to adequately
monitor the project”
but did not list the myriad of
in preparing a
draft proof of witness of one or other of the Complainants used vague
expressions such as “
also mentioned”
understood”
perceived difficulties”
in referring to discussions with [‘LVR’] (of the
‘project manager) when these words were never used and nothing
merely mentioned’
pleadings to counsel he identified the builder as first respondent and the
‘project manager’ as second respondent.
This, the Complainants
contend deliberately diminished the ‘project managers’ role and was
aimed at protecting the ‘project
manager’. On settling pleadings
counsel had amended them so that the ‘project manager’ was first
respondent and
the builder was second respondent.
assumed the
practitioner was attempting to have counsel remove an allegation in the draft
Statement of Claim after seeing counsels’
advice that the ‘project
’ clearly took on a role of managing the construction...I advise
at this stage I do not feel inclined to suggest that this part
of the Statement
of Claim be removed. In my view it ought to be
maintained”.
19.1.10 The
Complainants conclude in hindsight that the practitioner was attempting to
remove liability from the ‘project
19.1.11 The
words of the allegation are a failure to take appropriate legal action against
the ‘project manager’. The
Complainants, however, in the material
before the Board elevate the allegation to more than simple failure but what
appears to them
a deliberate strategy to protect the ‘project
19.1.12 As to
the allegation that the practitioner failed to follow express instructions to
take appropriate action against the ‘project
manager’ the
Complainants’ material before the Board, was conduct all more than 3 years
prior to the complaint. However,
none were express or unequivocal instructions
as they asserted. The material was-
of March 2010 the Complainants emailed the practitioner
Can we encourage you to pursue [‘project manager’] with
the utmost vigour as soon as you are able?”
The practitioner’s
response was that normally he would but identified issue with the
builder’s contract as precursor
to enabling repudiation.
of May 2010 the Complainants emailed the practitioner
We are somewhat perplexed as to why you are not taking any action
against ‘the project manager’ at the same time as taking
against [the builder]. We would like to see some strong action taken against
them as soon as possible...’
The practitioner responded that the
extent of damage cannot crystallize until it is known what happens with the
19.1.13 There is
nothing to prove the practitioner’s advice and actions were anything but
sensible, cautious, and competent.
Appropriate legal steps and action were taken
without commencing proceedings, earlier than they were. The interests of the
Complainants
were only furthered. There is no material to indicate the
practitioner failed to follow any express instructions of the complainants.
the contrary, when urged to take some step not advisable in the
practitioners’ opinion he explained why. There were many
legal issues that
required caution. There was no credible material to suggest the practitioner
acted to protect the ‘project
manager’ who he evidently did not know
or have any relationship with at any
There is no
reasonable likelihood the practitioner would be found guilty by a disciplinary
body of unsatisfactory professional conduct
or professional misconduct from this
allegation.
20. Complaint Particular B
In or around April 2010 the Practitioner arranged for, and consented to ,the
‘project manager’ to be released from the
then current written
agreement dated 1
April 2008 between the ‘project
manager’ and the complainants, and in doing so.
i. acted without the Complainants’ expressed instructions; and
ii. acted negligently
This complaint
concerns conduct all occurring more than 3
years prior to the complaint being made.
Unless the Board was satisfied pursuant to s.428(2) (a) and (b) that
and fair to deal with the complaint having regard to the delay and reasons for
the delay; and
complaint involved an allegation of professional misconduct; and
it was in the public interest to deal with the complaint;
it had no power to deal with the complaint other than dismiss it which it did
under s.433(1).
20.2 Her Honour Wood J in
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v
Disciplinary Tribunal
that the Tribunals
s.433(1) by virtue of s.428(2)
20.3 The nature of the Tribunals inquiry on a rehearing where conduct
complained of is more than 3 years from the time of the complaint
was left open.
At a minimum the inquiry is to the timing of the conduct and whether 3 years had
expired without complaint or more
expansive and consider whether the Board was
correct to conclude it could not be satisfied of the matters under s.428(2)(a)
or at least one of the essential conditions provided for.
20.4. Section 421 of the LPA provides:
Professional Misconduct
(1). For the purposes of this Act –
professional misconduct includes
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of an Australian legal practitioner,
where the conduct involves a substantial or consistent
failure to reach or
maintain a reasonable standard of competence and diligence; and
(b) conduct of an Australian legal practitioner whether occurring in
connection with the practice of law or occurring otherwise than
in connection
with the practice of law that would, if established, justify a finding that the
practitioner is not a fit and proper
person to engage in legal practice.
(2). For finding that an Australian legal practitioner is not a fit and
proper person to engage in legal practice as mentioned in
subsection (1),
regard may be had to the suitability matters that would be considered if the
practitioner were an applicant for admission
to the legal profession under this
Act or for the grant or renewal of a local practicing certificate.
20.5 The Board in its determination set out that at common law, professional
misconduct is conduct which would be reasonably regarded
as disgraceful or
dishonourable by a practitioner’s brethren of good repute and
competency.
20.6 Our assessment is that the conduct the subject of the allegation was
out of time and the conduct complained of is not capable
of amounting to
professional misconduct.
20.7 The material indicates the complainants in early 2009 caused work to be
suspended on the build. In April 2010 the practitioner
wrote to the
‘project managers’ lawyer requesting the ‘project manager
’ to instruct the builder to complete
a specific set of tasks which at the
time was thought necessary to correct building defects. The ‘project
manager’ declined,
so the practitioner on behalf of the Complainants gave
the instruction. Doing so did not abrogate the responsibility of the
manager’ from obligations it had undertaken, and no release
of the ‘project manager’ was affected.
20.8 It was open to the Board to make no positive finding pursuant to
s.428(2)(a) and (b) of the ‘LPA’. The Board could
not deal with the
complaint except dismiss it.
Particular C
Between August 2009 and November 2010 provided
negligent legal advice to the Complainants in relation to the invoking of clause
of the building contract, or in the alternative, failed to follow the
Complainants expressed instructions regarding invoking clause
10 of the building
21.1 The allegation involves alleged conduct more than 3 years prior to the
complaint and the Board determined it did not involve
conduct which in the
circumstances could amount to professional misconduct, and for that reason it
made no determination under s.482(2)(a)and
(b)’LPA’ to enable it to
be dealt with other than to dismiss it.
21.2 Our assessment of the allegation and material before the Board is that
there was no cogent or factual evidence of negligent advice
in relation to the
invoking of or failure to invoke clause 10 of the building contract. There is
material that the Complainants disagreed
with the practitioner’s advice.
There is also material that the practitioner stood his ground and did not allow
his clients
to take control over this aspect at the expense of his own
independent judgment, but when circumstances changed his opinion changed.
negligence, even if occurred, would not be characterised as professional
misconduct.
21.3 As the complaint allegation relates to conduct occurring more than 3
years prior to the complaint, it was open to the Board
to make no positive
finding pursuant to s.428(2)(a) and (b) of the ‘LPA’. The Board
could not deal with the complaint
allegation other than dismiss it.
Particular D
Between March 2011 and September 2011, the
Practitioner failed to take appropriate legal action in relation to freezing the
of sale of the builder’s property, and in doing so failed to act
in the best interests of the Complainants, in circumstances
Practitioner:
been advised by Counsel acting for the Complainants that “serious
consideration” ought to be given to taking such
the builder’s property was subject to a contract of sale; and
the Complainants to believe he was monitoring the progress of sale of the
builder’s property and that he would take the
necessary action prior to
the completion of the property sale.
22.1 The material before the Board disclosed that from March 2011 the
Complainants made the practitioner aware the builders house
was for sale and
kept the practitioner abreast of what they knew of the progress of
. The practitioner monitored
dealings lodged on the title to the builder’s house by regular title
to obtaining a freezing order on the
proceeds of any sale of the asset but also alternatively obtaining an
undertaking from the builder
not to dispose of proceeds of sale, to avoid a
court application and the costs that may be involved.
22.2 The Investigation report discloses –
The Complainants
informed the practitioner a sold sticker appeared on the builder’s house
of June 2011.
The same day the
practitioner undertook work ascertaining relevant
Federal Court Rules
practice directions relating to freezing orders or Mareeva
injunctions.
The practitioner
wrote to counsel that day for advice. The advice sought, included an alternative
route as to whether the builder
should be asked to quarantine any proceeds of
sale with a view to avoiding the cost of a court application.
That counsel
spoke to the practitioner that serious consideration should be given to the
prospect of seeking the injunction.
No priority
notice appeared to have been lodged on the builder’s title by a purchaser,
indicating no contract of sale may have
been entered into by a
practitioners file contained searches dated 16 June and 23 June 2011, 5 July
2011 and unregistered dealings search on 19 July
2011(showing no unregistered
An unregistered
dealings search on 3 August 2011 showed a priority notice had been lodged naming
the transferee of the house property
to persons now the owners.
The practitioner
wrote to counsel on the 9 August
. It enclosed a copy of the
latest unregistered dealing search and asked -
Do you think that there is sufficient evidence to recommend to our
clients to proceed with an application?
Later asking “
consider putting the builder on a short deadline for him to agree to quarantine
the proceeds of sale, failure to respond
to which might be evidence of the
danger of dissipation of the asset?”.
There was no
written response from counsel, but the practitioner responded to the Board that
counsel advised he did not think that
the evidence was sufficient for an
application for a freezing order (Mareeva
injunction).
The investigator
observed there was no written response to the practitioner’s letter of the
9 August 2011 so contacted the practitioner
orally. With his assistance she
located a file note dated the 2 September 2011 where the freezing order was
noted as being discussed.
The Investigator records –
“ [Counsel] advice was that there was only a 25% chance of success
for such an application since the Federal court rules provide
that the purpose
of freezing orders is to prevent dissipation of assets rather than provide
security in respect of a judgment or
The same file
note indicates the practitioner did an unregistered dealings search to find out
that the property sale went through
the day before (on 1 September
22.3 In respect of the preceding dot point in paragraph 23.2 it is relevant
to further evaluate the material and information relating
to the file note.
22.4 The Complainants correctly point to the Investigation Report in
, and that an index of annexures at page 44, Document 18 is described as
Practitioners file note dated September 2011 about freezing order
.” appearing at page 284. In fact, the annexure Document 18
makes no reference to freezing orders or anything the investigator
reported as
set out in the last dot point in paragraph 23.2. The Complainants identify the
practitioners handwriting on Document
18 as referring to a building report and
the stump system, being relevant to building matters that were discussed that
day, but not
freezing orders.
22.5 The Tribunal on the application of the practitioner admitted as new
information a file note described as being of 5 pages dated
the 2 September 2011
annexed to counsels’ submission dated 6
February 2017 and
referred to at paragraph 52 of those submissions. It is exhibit
22.6 The practitioner says
is the correct file note supporting the
advice received that the investigator was referencing in her Investigation
Report. It recorded
that counsel advised of only a 25% chance of success in
obtaining a Mareeva injunction. The contents of the file note
consistent with the report of the investigator and falls within the description
in the index for Document 18 at page 44 of
22.7 It is also consistent with the investigator being assisted to locate a
file note by the practitioner indicating a response to
the practitioner’s
letter of the 9
of August to counsel. It is noted the investigator
only spoke to the practitioner on one occasion and it appears this may have been
the assistance given.
22.8 The Complainants in submissions accused the practitioner of lying and
creating this
file note as a cover
.There is no evidence to
support that contention, but the complainants say they heard no conversation by
counsel advising of only
a 25% chance of success between counsel and
practitioner whilst present.
22.9 It would be reasonably open for a fact finder in a disciplinary hearing
to hold the incorrect file note was mistakenly annexed
Document 18 instead of
22.10 The material and information before the Board also disclosed the
investigator reviewed the Federal Court rules and Practice
Note CM9, the
relevant practice note concerning applications for Mareeva injunctions at the
time. She stated the remedy to freeze
a respondent’s assets before
resolution can be granted in appropriate cases but will not be granted lightly
and not to provide
security in respect of a judgement or order.
22.11 Not mentioned by the investigator in her report but Practice Direction
CM 9 clause 12 also required any order to exclude dealings
by a respondent with
his or her assets for legitimate purposes such as payment of ordinary living
expenses; payment of reasonable
legal expenses; dealings and dispositions in the
ordinary and proper course of the respondents business, including paying
expenses bona fide properly incurred ; and dealings and dispositions in
discharge of obligations bona fide and properly incurred
under a contract
entered into before the order was made .
22.12 The information before the Board from the
Complainants
was that the
builder sold his house for $310,000.00 and had bought a block of land for
$105,000.00 possibly contracted for on the
22 June 2011 well before the house
sold date. There is no information concerning mortgages on the house or if the
land was settled
at the same time of sale of the house using its proceeds. There
was no information available to the practitioner what the proceeds
of sale might
have been from the house or what legitimate debts and obligations would have
been carved out of any proceeds. Indeed,
an expensive court application for a
freezing order could have failed, resulting in a costs order against the
Complainants. There
was no information of the builder leaving the jurisdiction,
only the contrary that he bought land to continue his occupation as a
22.13 On the 2 September 2011 in the presence of the Complainants a letter
dictated by counsel was sent to the builders’ solicitor
asking whether his
client would quarantine the balance of the proceeds of sale pending the outcome
of the litigation to avoid an
application for a freezing order. The solicitor
responded that the proceeds were utilised to pay debts and buy the land, but the
builder was prepared to undertake not to deal with the land until litigation was
22.14 We are of the opinion there is no reasonable likelihood the
practitioner would be found guilty of either unsatisfactory professional
or professional misconduct.
Particular E
Between December 2010 and August 2012, the
Practitioner knowingly provided Counsel acting for the Complainants with false
and misleading
information in relation to:
nature and extent of the ‘project managers’ duties and obligations
under contract to the Complainants.
Complainants’ understanding of the nature and scope of the written
agreement, dated 1 April 2008, between the ‘project
manager’ and the
Complainants.
effecting statutory building inspections on behalf of a licenced building
Date upon which the sale of the builder’s property
Decisions and Reasons issued by Work Place Standards (“WPS”)
regarding the Complainants’ complaints previously
documents; and
particulars
of loss and damage.
23.1 The allegation effectively is one of deceit. There is no material or
information that would give substance to such an allegation
before the Board.
We will deal however with information concerning each of the item’s i.
to vii. in turn as far as we can discover them in material
before the Board.
They largely overlap with complaint particular A and general grievances
identified by the
investigator.
23.2 As to i. and ii.- Counsel was supplied with information relating to the
contract with the ‘project manager’ including
a copy and draft
witness statements of the Complainants. The practitioners view supported by
authority indicated there was room for
argument as to the scope of the
‘project managers’ duties under the contract. The words of the
written part of the agreement
of April 2008 relied on
“Thank you for your instructions to [‘project manager’]
to proceed to design and project manage the construction
of your proposed
dwelling [in Southern
Tasmania].“
There was no specific service item listed for managing construction of the
building as there was with numerous other services set
out in the written
agreement of two pages as a letter. The Complainant’s statement of claim
was that the ‘project manager’
was hired amongst other tasks to
oversee the construction of the house by way of agreement being partly oral and
partly written.
The defence denied the claim
and asserted the services
provided were only those set out in the letter of the 1
There was no mention of
services for project management.
The practitioner conveyed to counsel that there was an issue as to the scope
of the duty owed in his brief and in his ‘Analysis
of Legal Issues’.
Counsel was quite content however to maintain pleadings that the ‘project
managers’ duty and
its scope extended to overseeing the construction of
the house. It remained an issue.
The Complainants saw the issue as a simple and clear cut one because of the
project manager
’ and their understanding at the time
of the engagement in meeting ‘LVR’ of the ‘project
The Complainants elevate the practitioners’ caution and advice on the
issue to deliberately assisting the ‘project manager’
as deceitful
because counsel was not as cautious and more in line with their position.
Our opinion is that there is no reasonable likelihood that a finding would be
made of unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct.
23.3. As to iii.-The material before the Board included the practitioner
advising all significant information was forwarded to counsel
The Complainants
provided material direct to counsel and counsel was asked to comment on a
comprehensive submission of the Complainants
direct to Workplace Standards.
Additionally, the decision of the Director of Building Control of Workplace
Standards was provided
to counsel at least prior to the mediation that was held
in September 2011
Counsel was provided with material the ‘project manager’ was
undertaking statutory building inspections for an
That was contained
within an expert report of [an expert] the practitioner had.
The investigators report records that counsel had been provided with amongst
other documents -
a brief in 2010
including copies of all documentary evidence then available including a schedule
of deficiencies prepared by experts
on 3 June 2011
Analysis of
legal issues on 19 July 2011.
August 2012 documents that included -
Draft amended
statement of claim
Report of an
expert ,including complainants inserted comments sent 16 March 2012
witnesses around 11 November 2011
standards complaint material 31 January 2012
Reports and
proofs from [another expert] and many other documents.
Complainants took issue with the practitioner’s ‘Analysis of Legal
Issues” memorandum of advice when he stated
However, as a certificate of currency, cannot constitute evidence
of non-compliance (section 262 Building Act) so the refusal to issue
certificate should not be taken, of itself, to be evidence of
noncompliance.”
The Complainants misunderstand what the practitioner was stating. It was that
evidence would need be given of what constituted noncompliance
and what works
were required to establish the Complainants’ civil rights for breach of
contract or tortious duty.
The Complainants received a copy of an investigation made for the Building
Appeals Board in about February 2015. It contained information
that an engineer
denied appointing [‘LVR’] of the ‘project manager’ his
agent or appointed him at all to
undertake building inspections or complete
written reports in his name for the build. The ‘project manager’ had
in an outline of evidence that he was the agent of ‘the engineer
The practitioner had obtained a copy of the engineers file in May 2012. The
practitioner had advised there was not much in it. With
this apparent
contradictory information, the Complainants contacted the investigator by email
adding to their complaint
The Complainants set out their assumptions of the conduct of the practitioner
to the investigator in the email as follows -
On receiving this file, we can only assume, [ practitioner] was
privy to the same information that the Appeal Board Investigator later
and was therefore aware of what [LVR] had done. Despite our requests for him to
inform us of what he found in the file he
never responded and certainly details
of[‘LVR’]s role as ‘Agent’ and the fraudulent documents
to light. He never told us and certainly nothing that [counsel] said
or wrote indicated he was aware of it. Clearly, [practitioner]
suppressed this
information- a further element to add to his protection of [LVR].”
The allegation is serious, and the assumption made is not well founded.
In our opinion there is no reasonable likelihood of the practitioner being
found guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct or
professional
misconduct.
23.4 As to iv.-This allegation stems from an attendance by the Complainants
with the practitioner and counsel on the 2 September 2011.
It relates to the
circumstances in complaint allegation D.
The practitioner had been monitoring the progress of sale of the
builder’s house by regular accessing searches for dealings
on LIST(Land
Information System Tasmania).
The information and material before the Board and
taken before us
discloses the following-
On the morning
of 2 September 2011 prior to attendance on the complainants an URDS
(unregistered dealings search) was undertaken on
the builder’s house
The URDS search
likely disclosed that a sale to Iverach by a memorandum of Transfer document was
registered the day before ( 1 September
2011) on the title. The Complainants and
practitioner moved from the practitioner’s office to counsel’s
chambers for
a conference about 9.50 am;
conference counsel asked the practitioner what the position was with the
builder’s house sale. The practitioner informed
counsel and the
complainants that it went “through yesterday”.
The Complainants
allege the practitioner lied. They allege the house sale had transpired earlier
and the practitioner had purposely
failed to capture the asset despite being
well informed of the progress of the
The Board had
information that new owners were in the house and sale had settled on 25 August
2011 from what the Complainants had
It was pointed
out that the practitioner’s words of it went “through
yesterday” were a result of that mornings urds
referring to actual registration of a Transfer on the house title transferring
legal ownership than the
right of legal possession after paying the purchase
monies and any earlier possession by the purchaser.
The exhibit P1
shows the handwritten note next to a note of the urds search “
through y’day
We do observe as
the Complainants have submitted that the
note also seems on its first
page to have a date 5/9/11 above and to the left of the date 2/9/11, but the
factual contents of the
note relate to events of the 2 September
In our opinion there is no reasonable likelihood the practitioner would be
found guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct or
professional
misconduct.
23.5 As to v.vi, and vii
Our evaluation
of the material before the Board in respect of the alleged deceit between
December 2010 and August 2012 in respect
of providing information to counsel
concerning these points are that there is no reasonable likelihood of the
practitioner being
found guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct or
professional misconduct.
In such serious allegations as these,
strict and unequivocal proof without conjecture or assumption would be required
to comfortably
satisfy a disciplinary body of
Complaint Particular F
In or around September 2012, the Practitioner engaged in disreputable conduct
in relation to withdrawing monies held in Trust on behalf
of the Complainants,
for payment of legal fees without the consent or authorisation of the
Complainants, in circumstances where the
Practitioner:
previously agreed to deposit the Complainants’ settlement monies into
their bank account; and
been made aware that the Firm’s accounts for legal services were disputed
by the Complainants.
24.1 The retainer or costs agreement for the practitioner to undertake legal
work for the Complainants was with the practitioner’s
employer [a law
firm] whose principal was QDW. It is dated the 28 August
It was accepted by email on
the 31 August 2009.
24.2 Clause 15 under the heading Trust Funds provides-
“We may ask you to provide us with trust funds. Trust funds provided by
you will be held by the Firm, in your name, on trust.
You authorise us to apply
trust funds provided by you or from any other source to any account rendered to
you by us.”
24.3 Section 310 LPA provides that subject to Division 5 and 7 of LPA a costs
agreement may be enforced like any other contract.
24.4 The investigation report set out the Complainant’s timeline and
email exchange with the practitioner. In short, the practitioner
informed the
Complainants that settlement funds had been received in trust and requested
their authority to pay outstanding firm
invoices. This was a matter of courtesy
rather than a requirement. The Complainants asked for the full settlement
amounts be transferred
to them and indicated that they would settle outstanding
accounts after they returned from holiday. The practitioner advised that
acceptable to the firms account department and that clause 15 of the terms of
engagement allowed the funds to be paid from
trust. The firm paid its
outstanding invoices from trust.
That was required by QDW.
24.5 When separates funds were received of $20,000.00 from the builder, the
whole amount was paid to the Complainants and when the
balance settlement funds
received the balance paid after deducting all outstanding invoices.
24.6 The funds were due to the law practice and the Complainants had an
obligation to pay and the law practice the right to take the
amount invoiced and
outstanding. The Complainants agreed the law practice had the legal right to
retain its costs.
Our assessment on the material and information is there is no reasonable
likelihood the practitioner would be found guilty of unsatisfactory
professional
conduct or professional misconduct.
Complaint Particular G
In or around September 2011, the Practitioner was ill-prepared for a
mediation conference and arranged for the Complainants to attend
from overseas
in circumstances where the Practitioner:
aware that no meaningful resolution in respect to a mediated outcome could be
25.1 The investigators report to the Board deals with this complaint
allegation at pages 19-to 24 of her report. A fresh date for
mediation in the
court was listed for 7 September 2011 and the Complainants were travelling to
Hobart from England. An earlier date
had been postponed to the dismay of the
Complainants.
25.2 The Complainants’ submission and the investigators’ result
or response from her findings are summarised -
Complaint that
the practitioner deliberately avoided them from about 26
August 2011. The investigator established the practitioner was
not in his office on the 26
August (and the Complainants were
advised of this by staff), he had court commitments the 29
August until after 5.05 pm but communicated to the other parties in the
litigation that evening and copied in the Complainants that
communication;
Complaint that
the practitioner did not tell them about the change of lawyers for the
‘project manager ’ and of an inspection
of the house had been
requested until the 31 August when they were in transit. The investigator
established the practitioner did
not know of the change of lawyer until Tuesday
30 August 2011 at 2.07 pm when an email was opened. He first new of a request
house inspection by telephone message on 31 August at 11.37
practitioner had them scrabbling around preparing material regarding quantum 24
hours before the mediation. The investigators’
report was that although
work in this respect was completed the day before the mediation, the substantial
work had been prepared
in respect of quantum in a timely way, The Scots schedule
completed, consequential loss details completed in July 2011 although updated
the Complainant’s attendance, and discussions on 2 September 2011 where
the Complainants and counsel and practitioner disagreed
as to advice regarding
quantum. The Complainants emailed the practitioner that they had reconsidered
everything but could see no
reason to reduce anything. The summary of losses
document for use at mediation was provided to the mediator and other parties the
of September 2011.
practitioner had not sent counsel a decision of the Director of Building Control
that was produced by ‘the project
managers ’ counsel during
mediation. The investigator reported the practitioner had given a copy to
counsel on the 11 May 2011
at 4.50 pm.
practitioner appeared not to have read a document entitled “
The Project
Manager Section revised July 2011
” about failures of the
‘project manager’ they had sent him. The investigator reported she
found the document in
the practitioners file as an attachment to an email dated
9 July 2011. There were numerous attachments like sticky notes, other than
own, suggesting someone other than her had read it. She discovered a file note
July 2011 showing the practitioner went through it between
9.15 and 10.15 that day.
practitioner did not say anything in the mediation. The investigator reported
her opinion that the advocacy was left to counsel.
The practitioner had
responded to the Board that the advocacy was left to counsel.
25.3 Following mediation the respondent parties made an offer to settle the
Complainants claim. The practitioner refutes that he knew
no meaningful
resolution could have been
25.4 Our evaluation is that there is no reasonable likelihood the
practitioner would be found guilty of either unsatisfactory professional
or professional misconduct.
Particular H
In or around June 2012, the Practitioner provided
negligent legal advice to the Complainants in relation to the
Complainants’
defence regarding an application brought by the other side
concerning the release of their ‘privileged documents’.
26.1 Mere negligence will not amount to misconduct of a
.Only when negligence is
in a form that goes beyond mere negligence or carelessness could it be
determined as a form of unsatisfactory
professional conduct or professional
conduct. The boundary may be unclear in specific instances. It is not every
departure, even
if gross, from proper standards of care and competence which
amounts to misconduct.
26.2 The Complainants set out their grievance in their complaint at
26.3 Discovery was made in the pre-trial stage of the Court litigation.
Privilege from production was claimed over various categories
of documents as
being their dominant purpose was provision of legal advice or legal proceedings.
The nature of the dispute meant
a substantial number of documents existed.
26.4 The ‘project managers’ solicitors disputed a claim for
privilege could be claimed by the Complainants over documents
relating to
workplace standards and those created before March 2011 when proceedings were
26.5 The Complainants were advised the claim for privilege in respect of some
of those claimed as privileged could not be sustained,
others were doubtfully
protected, and others even if were protected by privilege it was economically
better to discover them than
proceed with an expensive interlocutory hearing in
Melbourne made by the respondents. The Complainants resisted the further
disagreeing with the practitioner and counsel.
26.6 Essentially the Complainants view was that once the dispute arose in
2009 documents were created or arose in contemplation of
legal proceedings.
Counsel was engaged and produced two legal opinions in the short period of time
before the hearing of an interlocutory
hearing before a Judge.
26.7 The practitioner and counsel advised that it was the dominant purpose
test and not a test of contemplation of proceedings being
taken that was
required to maintain the privileged status of documents.
26.8 It is not unusual a lawyer’s advice as to whether a document is
privileged or not from production, to change once the full
details of the
provenance and purpose of the document becomes known and once an issue is raised
by the opposite party pointing to
why a claim possibly could not be made
26.9 Our evaluation of the material before the Board and submissions is that
there is no reasonable likelihood the practitioner would
be found guilty of
unprofessional conduct or professional misconduct to this complaint.
Particular I
Between approximately September 2011 and August
2012, the Practitioner provided negligent legal advice to the Complainants in
to their claim for loss and damage in circumstances where the
Practitioner:
to institute legal proceedings against the ‘project manager’ until
March 2011 which rendered invalid any claim
for loss and damage incurred prior
to March 2011, or in the alternative, prepared particulars of loss and damage
that were not legitimate.
27.1 Mere negligence will not constitute a form of professional
misconduct.
27.2 There is no material or information of the practitioner’s
negligence in this complaint at all. Further, the Complainants
misconceive the
situation as nothing prohibited their claim for damages for loss prior to March
2011 by proceedings not issued before
March 2011.
27.3 Our view is that there is no reasonable likelihood that the
practitioner would be found guilty of unsatisfactory professional
professional misconduct in respect of this complaint.
Particular J
Between August 2009 and August 2012, the
Practitioner overcharged for legal services, and or inappropriately charged for
legal services,
which were incurred as a result of negligent or useless legal
work effected in relation to that work particularised at allegations
“1” to “9” inclusive.
28.1 Those allegations of conduct prior to 3 December 2010 the Board could
not deal with but did so as the allegation concerned conduct
both before and
after the 3 December 2010. The investigator recommended and Board agreed and
determined there was no likelihood the
practitioner would be found guilty of
unprofessional conduct or professional misconduct. The complainants set out
their contentions
of complaint at
28.2 The effect of their complaint in 9 identified matters largely
replicating parts of all complaints, was more that they were charged
they thought was incompetently done, unnecessary or was undertaken in the
interests of the ‘project manager’
rather than them. It was not that
the amount charged was too high or work was not undertaken in our
assessment.
28.3 On our assessment there is no reasonable likelihood of the practitioner
being found guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
or professional
misconduct in relation to this complaint.
28.4 The Complainants took no steps to have the law practices costs referred
to a costs assessor or set aside the costs agreement.
Their attention was drawn
to their right to do so in each invoice and the retainer and costs
Particular K
Between August 2009 and August 2012, the
Practitioner made deliberate decisions and took actions that were not in the
Complainants’
best interests, and which advantaged [‘LVR’]and
the ’project manager’].
29.1 The Complainants set out their issues regarding this in their
It follows the line of
Complaint Particular A. That alleged conduct occurring prior to the 3 December
2010 cannot be dealt with by
the Board for the same reasons.
29.2 We reviewed the material before the Board and the submissions regarding
complaint particular A for the period ending 11 March
29.3 In summary the Tribunal is of the opinion it was reasonable for the
practitioner to take a cautious and competent view of the
terms of the agreement
with the ‘project manager’ as to the scope of its liability, as well
as to the terms of the builder’s
contract. There was a risk of triggering
arbitration with the builder under the building contract absent the
‘project manager’.
29.4 The information before the Board did not show the practitioners actions
were anything but in the Complainants’ interests.
29.5. The investigator set out the examples of the Complainants’
grievances after 11 March 2011, not previously the subject
of her report, they
said were not in their best interests and which advantaged the ‘project
29.6 The investigator reported to the Board that she was not able to share
the Complainants’ views. We have read the grievances
and the investigators
response to each from her investigation. It is unnecessary to set them out but
suffice to state that a theme
of alleged deceitful conduct by the practitioner
is levelled without any basis for doing so on the information before the
29.7 Our view is that there is no reasonable likelihood of the practitioner
being found guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
or professional
misconduct.
Particular L
Between August 2009 and August 2012, the
Practitioner provided inaccurate and misleading estimates of the costs to the
end of trial.
Between September 2011 and August 2012, the Practitioner failed to
provide an update to the legal fees and disbursements in circumstances
estimate given in September 2011 was $55,000 to complete the legal matter
however, by August 2012 despite no further estimate
or revision of estimate had
been given to the Complainants, the Complainants had in fact incurred additional
legal fees and disbursements
of approximately $81,000.00.
30.1 There are two parts to this complaint. Firstly, between 2009 and August
2012 inaccurate and misleading estimates of costs were
allegedly provided to the
end of trial. Secondly, a failure to provide an update of future estimated costs
from an estimate dated
of September 2011 until the estimate
dated the 8 August 2012.
30.2 The investigator set out tables showing the firms cost estimates sent by
the practitioner, actual amounts paid on invoices and
running totals of costs
incurred and estimates.
The costs estimates were -
the 28.8.2010 an estimate range of costs to trial of $26,500.00 (inc GST) -
$38,500 (inc GST).
It was thought the matter involved a quantum of $60,000.00 and could be
dealt with by the Magistrates Court if it turned out to be
$50,000 or less.
24.11.2010 an estimate of further costs to mediation $18,700 and to trial
1.06.2011 an estimate of further costs until end trial including counsel’s
fees and experts a further $42,500.
20.09.2011 an estimate of further costs to trial including counsel fees, court
filing fees expert fees and GST $55,000.0.
the 8.08.2012 an estimate of further costs to the end of trial, assuming a full
15-day hearing court fees, expert, and counsel
fees a further $100,000.00 to
$150,000.00.
30.3 The final legal costs including counsel fees was approximately
$160,288.00 and in addition there were experts’ fees.
30.4 An estimate recognises that in the future, when circumstances change and
matters not contemplated arise the estimate will turn
out to be wrong and a
different amount substituted. On the material before the Board the
practitioners’ estimates were realistic
at the time made on the
information he had.
30.5 The investigator reported that from her examination of the practitioners
the initial
instruction indicated it was a relatively minor dispute relating to
inappropriate windows and their cost of replacement.
developed to the Complainant’s wanting demolition and the house
factors arose out of the complaint to ‘Building Control’ and the
Building Appeals Board appeals and privilege
of documents issues that arose.
challenge to Jurisdiction of the Federal Court.
concerning quantum and remoteness of damage being far from the
the builder
being self-represented for some time.
requested to review the file shortly before settlement and the trial date and
the cost of that was unexpected.
The dispute
with counsel and some intransigence of
the Complainants.
30.6 In estimates prior to 8 August 2012 there was no provision for the
$24,875.00 in Federal Court hearing fees, provided for in
the last estimate. The
practitioner was intending to file a Writ commencing action in the Supreme Court
of Tasmania where hearing
fees would not have applied. The proceedings commenced
in the Federal Court of Australia instead by Application only on counsels’
advice in March 2011. An allowance was made in the estimate of the 8
August 2012 for those hearing fees as an invoice was received by the
practitioner from the Federal Court only the day before
.The fees were not later
required as settlement occurred and there was no trial.
30.7 Our evaluation of the material and information before the Board is there
is a reasonable explanation for the estimates up to
but not including the 8
August 2012, being less than the subsequent actual costs incurred.
30.8 To the first part of this complaint we are satisfied there is no
reasonable likelihood of the practitioner being found guilty
of unsatisfactory
professional conduct or professional misconduct.
30.9 The second part of this complaint is the involvement of the practitioner
in the alleged failure by [a law firm], a law practice
to comply with its
ongoing obligation to disclose any substantial change from anything included in
a disclosure already made as soon
as is reasonably practicable after the law
practice becomes aware of that change.
30.10 Section 291(1)( c) of ‘LPA’ provides that a law practice
must disclose to their client estimates or a range of estimates
of costs . They
are further obliged to update their estimate of costs pursuant to s.299 of
‘LPA’. which provides:
299. Ongoing obligations to disclose
A law practice must, in writing disclose to a client any
substantial change to
anything included in a disclosure already made
under this Division as soon as is reasonably practicable after the law practice
aware of that change.
Section 300(7) of the ‘LPA’ provides that:
Effect of failure to disclose.
Failure by a law practice to comply with this Division is capable
of constituting unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
on the part of any Australian legal practitioner or Australian registered
foreign lawyer involved in the failure
30.11 The practitioner was involved, because he gave each of the estimates as
to costs in the disclosures of the 20 September 2011
and 8 August 2012. He was
aware of all the law practices obligations as he sent the costs agreement
disclosing them and made 5 ongoing
updates. The last two being the 20 September
2011 and the 8 August 2012. The 8
of August 2012 update immediately
after notification of the Federal Court hearing fees and the trial allocation of
30.12 The issue for a disciplinary tribunal ever hearing and determining this
part of the complaint would be to identify not only
what the substantial change
to costs was but also when that occurred, and how soon after it occurred was it
practicable for the practitioner
in writing to disclose it to the client.
Once findings are made of those matters a breach by the law practice’s
obligation to comply with s. 299 may or may not be found.
If a finding was made of a failure to comply with s.299, then if
disciplinary action was contemplated, an assessment would need to
whether the practitioner’s involvement in the law practices failure,
though capable of amounting to unsatisfactory
professional conduct or
professional misconduct, it did.
30.13 Unsatisfactory professional conduct is defined in s. 420 of
“unsatisfactory professional conduct includes conduct of an
Australian legal practitioner occurring in connection with the practice
that falls short of the standard of competence and diligence that a member of
the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably
competent Australian legal
practitioner”.
30.14 The cost disclosure provisions are in Division 3 of Part 3.3 of the
‘LPA’. In that Division is s.300, subsections
(1) to (7) dealing
with the possible effects available of a breach, being a failure to disclose to
a client one or other of the requirements.
30.15 A failure to give an update of costs after a substantial change as soon
as practicable after the change could involve-
the client not
needing to pay costs unless they have been assessed.
the law practise
not able to maintain proceedings to recover costs unless the costs have been
the client may
apply to set the costs agreement aside.
costs may be
reduced by an assessor by an amount the assessor considers proportionate to the
seriousness of the failure to disclose.
30.16 It is clear from
s.300(7), that a failure by a law practice to meet the various requirements of
costs disclosures in Division
3 of the ‘LPA’ ‘’
an automatic ticket to professional discipline; implicit in being expressed to
be ‘capable of’ doing so (as opposed
to ‘is) as a recognition
that it may
30.17 There is no element of the practitioner acting unethically or generally
not meeting a competent professional standard, that
may otherwise attract
intervention by disciplinary proceedings.
30.18 From the material and information before the Board significant matters
arose between September 2011 the 8
of August 2012 a date only a
little under a month before trial.
They included-
the dispute
the issues about
quantum regarding vexation and stress where the complainant’s resistance
to accepting advice increased costs
with counsel and practitioner.
The unexpected
engagement of Mr QDW to review their situation as to damages and privilege in
August 2012
the necessity to
deal more extensively with the Complainants in explaining and researching
matters and providing them with written
advice increased costs more than was
ever contemplated or estimated.
the substantial
work in the period out from trial including dealing with other parties and
recognition that a trial date of 15 days
the invoice for
court hearing fees dated the 6 August 2012.
30.19 Our evaluation is
that there is no reasonable likelihood of the practitioner being found guilty of
unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct regarding this
complaint L.
On this rehearing of the Board’s determinations of the 24
of July 2015, and on the application pursuant to s.458(1)(a) ‘LPA’
for the Boards determinations to be determined by
the Tribunal, we determine
that, the Board not having made a determination under s.428(2) of the
‘LPA’, in respect of
complaint particulars B and C, that by virtue
of s.433(1) of ‘LPA’ those matters of complaint are dismissed.
In respect of complaint particulars, A, D to L inclusive, the Tribunal is
satisfied there is no reasonable likelihood the practitioner
will be found
guilty of either unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct
in respect of each of them. We determine
the Board in its discretion to dismiss
the complaint allegations pursuant to
Legal Profession Act
, was correct and they are dismissed.
s.428(2)(b)
The meaning of such conduct
As required by
The Complaint Report (
) of 8 pages is Item 1 in the ‘Material Before the Legal
Profession Board on which it made its Decision’ In this decision
) and is Item 2 of
(‘ Materials Before the
Legal Profession Board on which it made its Decision’) of 435
The summary of relevant
correspondence file 1 to file 58 @ pages 389-426
Profession Board Tasmania v Disciplinary Tribunal
[2022] TASSC 65
where her honour refers to the nature of the Boards task as
pre-hearing.
[2016] 26 Tas R444 and
Boland v Boxall
Also, ibid 9 Wood J that Tribunal has wide discretion to admit
additional material in its role of re hearing Board preliminary
determinations.
Profession Board of Tasmania v Disciplinary Tribunal
confirmed to Board
9.01.2014 (
PP 122 -123
the practitioner.
27.01.2016 ( approx. 80 pp)
Dated 15.01.2017
, dated 9.09.2019 In
Dated 27.02.2017 7pp
irrelevant.
Dated 9.9.2019 (18pp)
6.10.2019 (94pp
) CS4 in Index B
Dated 12.03.2020 (16pp)
response to practitioner submission allegation L.
@ page 9 letter Complainants to
IR Document
pages 12 ‘Headed MR [KBC’s] Protection of Peter Henry/Henry
Carr’ to page 24 and
Section 461A
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1933]HCA34 and as explained by the High Court in
Neat Holdings Pty Ltd v
Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
[1992]HCA 66
letter practitioner to Board IR pp 124-126
IR Document 4 letter to
Board by practitioner page 1.
[2022] TASS 65 at [95-98]
and see [ 63] as to
determinations subject to
43-45 of Complaint
Document 17
page 283 Letter TMC to
Document 4 page 127 Letter TMC to Board
page 9 first
27.01.2016 page 4 and 5;
dated October 2019 pages 57 -58;
dated 9.09.2019 page 2;
dated 15.01.2017 page
complaint Tab 3 page 44 -45
dated 15.01.2017 @page 3 of 63.
“[project manager] said they were not appointed to manage the construction
in the defence”.
p 15 as extracted by the
investigator.
Document 4 Letter TMC to Board 14.2.2014
page 20; and
Complaint Tab 1 page 9 [ and p 20 of IR]
Document 30
Page 434 – email Complainant to investigator
Complaint p25
256 annexures
a copy of the retainer
[1940] AC 282
@ 288 ;Pillai v Messiter (No 2) (1989)16 NSWLR 197.; Law
Society Tasmania v Turner [2001]TASSC 129 2 46;
annexures Tab 7
Complaint annexure Tab 13 pages 114-116
page 12- 30 Index A.
IR page 36-37 and
38-39 Index A
IR page 40-41
invoice dated the 6 August
GE Del Pont
Contextualising lawyer Overcharging [2016]Monash ULawRw9
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.25 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter