URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASRPDComm/2009/34.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:20:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Devonport & Environs Planning Scheme 1984 Amendment AM 2008/01 [2009] TASRPDComm 34 (28 July 2009)
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Land Use Planning and Approvals
Resource Planning and Development
Commission Act 1997
Decision and Reasons for the Decision
DEVONPORT AND ENVIRONS PLANNING SCHEME 1984
Draft Amendment AM 2008/01
S.43A Permit PA/SA 2008.0035
Draft Amendment
The certified amendment has the following parts:
To amend the scheme to insert at clause 8.19* provisions for a new zone,
‘Devonport Regional Homemaker Centre Zone’.
To amend the plan to rezone part of 88-102A Stony Rise Road from Closed
Residential to ‘Devonport Regional Homemaker Centre
To amend the plan to rezone 10 Gatenby Drive from Closed Residential to High
Density Residential Zone.
To amend Schedule 9 of the scheme by linking* a road link to Gatenby Drive as
shown on the Stony Rise Strategic Road Network Plan.
(*Note: drafting errors – the new clause should be 8.20 and
‘linking’ is meant to be ‘removing’)
S.43A Permit
Accompanying the draft amendment is a s43A permit for 88-102A Stony Rise Road
for development comprising the consolidation and resubdivision
of 6 existing
titles and the development and use of parts of the consolidated site for a
the following
Four individual
buildings on Site 3 built around a central car park and containing 11 tenancies
ranging in size from 360m
and with a total gross lettable area of
Two showroom
development sites (Sites 1 & 2) with a total floor area of
within the proposed zone, including a service
station on Site 1.
693 car parking
spaces on Sites 1, 2 &3.
A roundabout at
the junction of Stony Rise Road and the new access road to the homemaker
Proposed entry
from Bass Highway and Stony Rise Road and ingress/egress via Stony Rise
A new public
road linking Bass Highway and Stony Rise Road and serving the homemaker
Extension of
Gatenby Drive into Site 4.
Sites 5 and 6
within the current Closed Residential zone, for which no development proposals
have yet been submitted.
Signage and
landscaping.
meeting on 16 March 2009 and pursuant to Section 8 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission Act 1997
, the Commission
delegated to Mr John Vandenberg and Mr Robin Nolan jointly and
powers and functions under
sections 40
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
in relation to draft
amendment 2008/01 to the Devonport and Environs Planning Scheme 1984 and Permit
No:PA/SA 2008.0035; and
connection with the exercise of those powers in performance of those functions,
its powers under Part 3 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission
The proposal is to develop an 8.5 hectare site, located
adjacent to the westbound carriageway of the Bass Highway at Devonport, for
purpose of creating a ‘homemaker centre’, together with associated
access roads and car parking. The two main ‘anchor’
businesses are
Harvey Norman and an unnamed hardware business. Each occupies more than
of floor space.
Figure 1: Locality of the proposed Homemaker Centre, Devonport.
Ingress to the total site is proposed to be partly from the Bass Highway and
partly from a new access road to be constructed from
Stony Rise Road. Egress is
proposed to be to Stony Rise Road only.
The land is vacant, sloping gently towards the Bass Highway and covered by
degraded pasture and weeds, with stands of remnant eucalypt
forest beside the
Amalgamation and resubdivision of existing titles at 88-102A Stony Rise Road is
required to create three commercial development sites
served by the new access
road, two other sites served by the same new road and a residential development
site accessed separately
from Gatenby Drive.
The certified draft amendment seeks to create a new zone, Devonport Regional
to be applied to sites
1, 2 and 3 and a section of the new access road. The amendment proposes specific
use and development controls
for the zone. .
The amendment also seeks to rezone 10 Gatenby Drive (site 4 ) containing
, from Closed Residential to High Density
Residential. The current Closed Residential zone for sites 5 and 6 is not
proposed to be
altered at this time.
Representations
1. Mr Simon Buxton Director Traffic & Infrastructure Branch Department of
Infrastructure, Energy and Resources (DIER)
2. Mr Stan Tatlow
3. Ms Susanne Borg & G J Nevin obo Tarcisio Borg
4. Mr Phillip Cardenzana
5. Mr Steve Mahoney obo Mrs Valerie Mahoney
6. Ms Claire Armstrong of Lester Franks obo Australian Weaving Mills Pty
Issues raised in Representations
The issues raised in the representations relate to: -
design and layout of the proposed development and its impact on residential
amenity, visual amenity and natural values.
Inconsistency
with strategies that have been adopted by Council in response to: - - the
Devonport Retail Study 2008;
- the interim Residential Land Use and Development Strategy; and
- S9.5.1 of the Stony Rise Road Strategic Road Network Plan.
Contradictions
in the interpretation of ‘showroom’ between the scheme and the
The integrity of
the Bass Highway.
The clearance of
Eucalyptus ovata
E. viminalis
conflict with the surrounding Closed Residential zone.
Inadequacy of
the submitted Traffic Impact Assessment.
Concerns for the
safety of vehicles entering the proposed roundabout.
increased traffic on residents of Stony Rise Road causing loss of amenity.
traffic flows on Stony Rise Road will adversely impact future residential
developments.
Devaluation of
surrounding properties as a consequence of impacts associated with the proposed
Request for an 8
foot high fence be constructed along the boundaries of some adjacent properties.
Council’s Response to the Representations
In response to the representations, Council recommended that no changes be made
to the draft amendment. In summary, Council’s
responses were: –
DIER: Council was generally satisfied with the traffic aspects, but recognised
that detailed designs would need to be worked through
with the proponent and
DIER. Middle Road and Stony Rise Road were considered to have sufficient
capacity to accommodate forecast
traffic volumes.
Tatlow: The request for a high fence on the property boundary was not supported,
given the residential zoning of the intervening
Borg: The significance of the homemaker centre was considered to outweigh the
loss of some residential zoning. A new Council road
would provide alternative
ways of accessing the remainder of the Closed Residential zone between Stony
Rise Road and the Bass Highway.
Cardenzana: The request for a high fence was not supported and the traffic
assessment was considered satisfactory.
Mahoney: A roundabout in proximity to the representor’s property was still
the preferred option, but would require further
detailed design.
Lester Franks: The Devonport Retail Study had confirmed the capacity of
Devonport to support one homemaker centre and had nominated
Don Road as a
possible location but other sites were not excluded from consideration. The
proposed site represented a rare opportunity
for an integrated centre on an
accessible greenfields site. The loss of Closed Residential zoning was partially
offset by the proposal
for High Density Residential zoning for part of the
In response to the proponent’s requests, Council recommended two changes
to the amendment; allowing three signs along the Bass
Highway and allowing for a
24 hour operation at the proposed service station.
Date and Place of Hearing
May 2009 at the Council Chambers, Best Street,
Attendance at the Hearing
Mr Shaun McElwaine,
Ms Rebecca Wilson, town planner
Mr Simon Heung, engineer
Representors
Mr Stan Tatlow,
Mrs Val Mahoney,
Mahoney, architect
Mr Phillip Cardenzana,
Mr Malcolm Lester and Ms Claire
Armstrong obo Australian Weaving Mills
Mr Luke Henry-Middleton, DIER
Richard Burk, DIER
Mr Don Armstrong, lawyer
Mr Justin Ganly
Sharon Stewart, planning consultant
Mr Reece Humphries
Mr Doug Gray,
Launceston Gasworks
Mr Steve Evans, Leffler Simes Architects
Interested persons
Mr Eric Mobbs, Devonport Chamber of
Mr David Scurr, Harvey Norman Pty Ltd
Commission’s assessment of the draft amendment
In assessing the draft amendment, the full potential of
the proposed zone must be considered, not only the particular development
proposal that has been put forward at this time.
case for a homemaker centre in Devonport at the proposed site
The Devonport Retail Study 2008 sought, “
to provide for an integrated
the community associated
with this retail format
.” The Retail Study
proposed a retail hierarchy for Devonport and nominated the Steele Street/Don
Road area, as a ‘Major
floor area of 5690m
. However, the report also
Should it prove difficult for an integrated and purpose-built
to consider alternative locations
Key requirements for homemaker retailing were stated as: -
− “Large level site to accommodate large format stores and on-site
− High exposure to passing traffic,
− Convenient accessibility to the regional road network, and
− Relatively low site costs compared with those in retail activity
The location of the proposed Homemaker centre is not ruled out by the
recommendations of the retail study and satisfies all the key
requirements
listed in that study.
The economic justification for a regional–scale homemaker centre is
contained in the economic impact study prepared by Deep
End Services and
supplemented by the evidence given by Mr Ganly. The economic research was not
challenged by the representors and
was generally supported by Council and the
Chamber of Commerce.
In summary, the Deep End research found that the proposed centre could serve a
total catchment of almost 96,000 people and 36,000
private dwellings, according
to the 2006 Census. The catchment was divided into primary, secondary and
tertiary catchments for demographic
and economic analysis. The primary
catchment of 10km radius included Devonport, East Devonport, Latrobe and other
smaller settlements.
The secondary catchments took in Port Sorell/Shearwater,
Railton Sheffield, Ulverstone and Penguin. The tertiary catchment, up to
radius, included Deloraine, Mole Creek, Burnie, Somerset and
The population of the total catchment is forecast to exhibit modest growth of
0.3% p.a. to reach 105,600 by year 2021. The primary
catchment is forecast to
increase by approximately 1500 between years 2008 and 2021. However, while the
per capita spend on bulky
goods had grown at a greater rate than population in
the past decade it was still below the national average. There is currently
almost 68,000 m
of bulky goods floor space in the
catchment, with approximately 16,700m
of that total
located in the central Devonport City precinct and
at Steele Street/Don Road.
The size of the bulky goods market was estimated to be $M271.8 in 2007/08 and
was forecast to reach $M287.6 in 2011/12 and $M377.7
in 2020/21. The main
components of bulky goods spending are ‘home appliances and
entertainment’ (48%), ‘furniture
and furnishings’ (19%) and
‘hardware and garden’ (17%).
The consultants suggested that the current average trading level of
in annual sales reflected an undersupply of
floorspace rather than the quality of existing retailers or standard of the
from which they operated. They calculated that the level of
‘escape expenditure’ lost from the total catchment was $M93.8
of the residents’ total bulky goods expenditure.
Two economic impact scenarios were modelled to take account of whether or not
another 7500m
in Tasman Street proceeded. Under either scenario, the forecast trading levels
for the Bass
Highway homemaker centre remained above $3200/m
and this was considered to be attractive to potential tenants. Escape
expenditure would be reduced to $M57.4, if the Tasman Street
proposal did not
proceed and $M50.4 if it did.
Operation of the homemaker centre was forecast to create 247 direct retail
industry jobs and 153 indirect jobs on an ongoing basis.
Construction of the
centre would support 229 full time equivalent jobs in the region for a 12 month
period. Mr Scurr advised it was
a $M20 construction project. Other suggested
benefits included efficient use of a vacant site, a modern shopping environment
good arrangements for parking, storage and delivery, increased choice and
convenience for customers in the catchment, increased competition,
prices and increased rates to be paid to Council.
One-off impacts on sales levels of other bulky goods retailers (in the order of
negative 8-10%) were not seen as leading to closure
or blight of other centres
or precincts. Deep End concluded that the development of the homemaker centre
would deliver significant
community benefit.
At the hearing Mr Ganley submitted that other sites for the homemaker centre,
such as at Don Road or Steele Street, were not feasible
alternatives, due to
insufficient total area, lack of vacant land, fragmented ownership, and the
encumbrance of existing buildings.
Council tabled a peer review of the Deep End report, prepared by Essential
Economics, who were the authors of the Devonport Retail
Study 2008. The peer
review by Essential Economics generally supported the analysis and conclusions
of Deep End but had reservations
be recaptured by the homemaker centre(s). It doubted that the catchment could
both the Tasman Street and Bass Highway proposals. It concluded that the
overall trading viability of the Devonport CBD would not
be undermined but noted
that there may be some changes to the tenant mix and short term
The siting of the proposal in relation to the CBD is unavoidably
‘off-centre’ but not necessarily ‘out of centre’.
not a greenfields site that is far removed from the urban edge. Rather, it lies
at the urban edge, between two arterial roads
and with residential development
occurring to the east and southwest of it. Future development of existing
residential-zoned land
in the vicinity will result in the homemaker centre
becoming embedded in the wider urban form.
In light of the expert advice summarised above the demand for additional
is a suitable
location in terms of its retail catchment and the proposed zone offers the
nearest suitable-sized site to central Devonport.
Permissible
uses proposed by the amendment
The amendment appears to have been substantially drafted for the proponent by
consultants, ‘The Planning Group’ and adopted
by Council almost
verbatim (including clause numbering errors) into the certified amendment. Some
variations were made by Council
in regard to the range of permissible uses and
qualifications applying to them.
The certified amendment allows the following uses: - Car park (P), Car, Boat,
Caravan and Machinery Sales-yard (A), Community Centre
(A), Garden Centre (P),
Light Industry (A), Market Place (A), Private Recreation (A), Restaurant (A),
Service Industry (A), Service
Station (P), Showroom (P) and Take away food shop
(P). (Where ‘P’ means permitted and ‘A’ allows a
discretionary
In his closing written submission Mr McElwaine submitted that the following use
classes be omitted from the Table of Uses in the
certified amendment: - Car
Park, Community Centre, Light Industry.
Council’s certified amendment excludes some uses applied for, namely
Consulting Room, Health Centre, Hotel or Licensed Premises,
Rural Industry and
Tavern. A qualification is imposed on Restaurant, limiting the number to two
restaurants servicing the ‘immediate
needs of the zone’. There are
to be no more than 5 take-away food shops. The minimum floor area for a showroom
is required
rather than the
applied for. Advertising signage is limited to 2
pylon or panel signs along the Bass Highway, rather than the 4 applied
Ms Wilson explained that the requested uses excluded by Council were seen as
being more appropriately related to activities in other
commercial or industrial
zones. The homemaker centre was viewed by Council as not competing with or
replicating the role of the CBD,
but complementing it by filling a gap in the
market for an integrated homemaker centre. It was not thought to be inconsistent
Clause 8.17 of the scheme which says: -
The underlying objective of the CBD Zone is:
implement the key strategies outlined in the Devonport CBD Structure Plan 1997
which seeks to provide a framework for investment,
promote Devonport as a
tourism focus of State and regional significance, enhance employment
opportunities and improve the level of
service and amenity for shoppers and the
wider community.
(b) To address the fragmentation of core activities of the City:-
(i) By defining the physical limit of Devonport’s town centre, related
commercial use and development, and to restrict the gradual
erosion of the
residential edge;
(ii) By encouraging greater use and development of the river and foreshore
parklands for tourism and entertainment related activities;
(iii) By promoting specific areas for particular use and development, both to
reinforce the overall zone objective, and to provide
opportunities for new
sources of employment and investment.”
Discussion at the hearing revealed that the planning scheme’s definition
of ‘Showroom’ was imprecise and not adequately
distinguished from
‘Shop’. The relevant definitions are:
means any building or land in or on which goods are kept
exposed or offered for sale by retail but does not include a supermarket,
service shop, service premises, restaurant, car, boat, caravan and machinery
salesyard, showroom or any other commercial retail or
industrial use
specifically defined in this Clause.
means any building or part thereof over 150 square
metres in floor area, used or intended to be used for the display or sale or
of items such as furniture, carpets, electrical goods, or the like, which
requires an extensive display area.
The certified amendment seeks to refine the concept of a homemaker centre (but
without specifically defining the term) by reference
to the objectives and
intent of the Devonport Regional Homemaker Zone and by establishing conditions
and restrictions on the permitted
use ‘Showroom’.
The first part of the condition/restriction for the Showroom use class is,
“The total floor area on the land shall not exceed
26,000 square metres.
Car parking shall be provided at the rate of 2.2 spaces for each 100 square
metres of floor area.”
To clarify the intended scale and retail product mix for a Showroom in the
the minimum permitted floor area is 500m
specifies the (predominantly bulky) goods that may be displayed and sold. The
list includes furniture, floor coverings,
electrical appliances, white goods,
computer equipment, home entertainment equipment, manchester, curtains and
blinds, camping and
outdoor recreation equipment, office supplies, building,
construction and hardware goods, garden and landscaping materials, auto
accessories, or any combination of items on that list, provided that the sale of
footwear or clothing is not a predominant activity.
Mr Armstrong submitted that the amendment should be modified to allow a maximum
of two showrooms to have a floor area of not less
. This was to accommodate two traders of bulky
goods that prefer direct proximity to Harvey Norman stores but did not need
. Council opposed the suggestion, noting that
Essential Economics had strongly recommended enforcing a minimum tenancy of
to ensure that the functional
differences between the traditional and homemaker formats are
maintained.”
The clarification of the product mix offered by showrooms in the Homemaker Zone
is supported but Council’s position is preferred
‘Showroom’ in the Homemaker Zone should not be smaller than
lettable floor area for each tenancy to maintain
the distinction from other retail areas.
At the hearing there was discussion of the interpretation of Restaurant and Take
away food shop and of the implications of the condition/restriction
Restaurant stated as
“Not more than 2 restaurants. The restaurants must
service the immediate needs of the zone” and the condition/restriction
“No more than 5 take away food shops”
. It is uncertain from the
amendment wording whether these restrictions apply as an overarching limit for
the whole zone or a limit
for each site.
The scheme defines Restaurant and Take Away Food Shop: -
“Restaurant
means any building or land in or on which meals
are served to the public for gain or reward and includes cafes but does not
a hotel, motel or service premises.
Take Away Food Shop
means any land used for the preparation and sale of food for immediate
consumption exclusively or primarily off the premises.”
Ms Wilson submitted that the use of site 1, for example (i.e. the site closest
to the proposed off-ramp from the Bass Highway), could
involve a combined
Service Station and Take Away Food Shop but not a Service Station and Restaurant
if the restaurant was designed
to serve a wider clientele than just the shoppers
at the homemaker centre (e.g. westbound travellers on the Bass Highway). Any of
the well-known national take away food chains could establish a take away food
shop but restaurant use would not be permitted to
predominate, although it could
be considered as an ancillary use.
Mr Armstrong noted that national chain fast food businesses adopted various
configurations depending on context and location and
could not be simply
described by a brand name. This observation adds to the difficulty of defining
the use classification of any
food related proposal.
Mr Gray envisaged that on site 1 there could be a service station and a maximum
of three take away food shops, perhaps with a shared
dining area for customers
who wished to eat on the premises. This combination could be described
generically as a service centre
or roadhouse.
The interpretation of what kinds of food-serving premises might be allowable on
site 1 has implications for traffic generation and
highway signage that will be
returned to later in this decision.
It is considered that the amendment would be clearer if the
conditions/restrictions applying to Restaurant and Take Away Food Shop
stated as a development standard that applies to the whole Homemaker Zone,
“8.20.(3)(iii) Not more than 5 Take Away Food Shops and 2 Restaurants will
be granted a permit in the zone, whether as a single
use, a component of a
multiple use or as an ancillary use to a principal use. A Restaurant must
predominantly serve the needs of
shoppers and employees in the
The Table of Uses in the amendment is not clearly tied to the permit approval
process at clause 5.2 and the Table of Uses, Classes
and Zones that apply to the
rest of the planning area at Schedule 1. This aspect can be improved by
modification of the clause headed
Development and Use (draft clause 18.19.2) by
including reference to clause 5.2 and schedule 1.
3. Floor area
The drafting of the Showroom use class provisions raises questions of
interpretation.
− Is the prescription, ‘The total floor area on the land shall not
exceed 26,000 square metres’ to be applied to
all buildings (for all uses)
on the land or only to the floor area of showrooms?
− Does ‘the land’ refer to all the land in the Homemaker Zone
or the land in any one of the 3 sites shown on the
permit application?
The draft amendment interchangeably refers to ‘floor area’ and
‘floor space’. The planning scheme does not
define ‘floor
space’ but defines floor area as follows.
means the sum of the areas of all floors of a building or where more than one
building is situated on any site of all buildings including
the floor of any
basement, mezzanine or attic and the horizontal section of all walls at floor
level, including half the width of
party walls but excluding any part thereof
solely occupied by the plant required for the operation of air conditioning,
power supply, or lifts including lift wells, or set aside as a loading
dock or provided for the parking of vehicles.
The proponents for the permit describe the tenancies in terms of gross lettable
area (GLA). This measure of floor space appears to
closely correlate with
‘Floor Area’ as defined. Therefore in considering the draft
amendment and any modifications the
reference is to Floor Area as defined in the
planning scheme.
The Note to the amendment’s Table of Use Classes allows a discretionary
application to be made to increase the maximum showroom
“provided that such
does not exceed
28,000 square metres of floor area”
(our emphasis). Taken literally,
that could mean a total of 54,000 square metres (i.e. 26,000+28,000 increase)
could be applied for.
Council submitted that was not the intention; that the
sentence was meant to establish a cap of 28,000 square metres of showroom
floorspace of all showrooms within the zone.
That being the case then the potential still exists for showroom tenancies to be
converted to other permissible uses by later applications
and then replaced by
more showrooms or showroom extensions, so long as the upper bound of 26,000
of showroom Floor Area (or 28,000
if a discretionary application has been made) is not
exceeded. Furthermore additional non-showroom Floor Area (beyond what is shown
on the permit plans) could be applied for.
Mr Gray indicated that the scope for an extra 2000m
being sought was to enable non-showroom uses, once developed, to be converted to
showroom space if required.
Assuming the proposed limit on ‘maximum showroom floor space’
applies only to showrooms with a maximum zone floor area
and a discretion to a maximum of
, there is no upper limit on the floor area of
non-showroom uses. In other words the amount of floor space that could be
is potentially only limited by the physical capacity of the site and
compliance with the setbacks and height limit of 12 metres.
There is no overall
limit on floor space in the zone in terms of maximum plot ratio or site
coverage. Nothing in the zone prescriptions
would prevent construction of a
multi-level car park or floor space at first or second floor level, for
The development envisaged by the permit is not a necessary consequence of the
of the amount of ground
level floor space that could be developed on the 3 sites in that zone. By
reference to the permit plans the
following information can be extracted. (See
Table 1 below.)
It seems to have been assumed that most of the ‘unspecified’ floor
space will be taken up by showroom-type tenants. Indeed,
that was foreshadowed
by Mr Scurr and seems the most likely scenario, given the controlling influence
of the developer. Nevertheless,
zone prescriptions that are open-ended in terms
of ultimate floor area and building bulk are not favoured for zones that are for
a limited and specific purpose. It is considered that an upper limit on total
floor area should be established that would clarify
the amount of floor space
devoted to larger tenancies to be used as showrooms
Table 1. Indicative allocation of floor space in the Homemaker
Zoned Area (m
Area classified as Showroom
(Gross Lettable Area, m
Unspecified or Other Use Area (GLA, m
Service station and food outlets
tenancies assumed from elevation drawings
3 comprising
As detailed below (unit = tenancy)
Too small to be showrooms as defined.
800 (nursery)
3040 (hardware sales)
4165 (trade centre, yard)
Some components could be alternatively classified.
3500 +1500 (warehouse)
(Harvey Norman)
Warehouse must be ancillary to showroom
Subtotal site 3
Residual land in zone
Access roads, parking and landscaping
Total GLA in zone = 25,401
Source: Leffler Simes plan DA/02A, Artas plan A0005/P16
The layout and style of the homemaker centre as described on the permit
application establishes the amount of ground level floor
area that can
reasonably be provided in the zone. To maintain that general layout, while
allowing for modest expansion within the
proposed footprint, the maximum floor
area on the land in the zone should be capped at 28,000m
for all uses. Any further expansion proposals should be assessed via a
future scheme amendment. This capping of total floor area
is consistent with
the intent as described in Council’s documents for the zone to operate as
a distinct and complementary retail
area to the CBD and that does not compete
with the CBD for general retail functions. This as a policy matter is
considered next.
4. Devonport retail strategy
The next consideration is whether in terms of the policy of the planning scheme,
the draft amendment will support Devonport’s
retail strategy and be
complementary to the CBD. There should not be any ambiguity or latitude in the
interpretation of the provisions
of the Homemaker Zone that would allow it to
‘morph’ over time into a general shopping centre.
The potential provided by the Table of Uses to admit the separate use classes of
Car Park, Community Centre, Light Industry, Service
Industry and Private
Recreation does allow for other outcomes less appropriate for an integrated
Closed Residential zone, especially when the
broad range of activities embraced by the definitions of those uses (as shown
and their potential traffic generation is considered.
“Community Centre
means a building or land used or intended for use as a place of recreation,
entertainment or amusement and includes use as a theatre,
cinema, dance or
concert hall, casino, meeting hall, community centre non-residential club, bar,
and drinking booth, reception room
or for indoor sports and games, but does not
include recreational grounds or a church.
Light Industry
means any industry:-
(a) In which the buildings or works occupied, the processes carried on, the
materials or machinery used or stored and the transportation
of materials, goods
or commodities to and from the site will not cause injury to or prejudicially
affect the amenity of the locality
by reason of the appearance of such
buildings, works or materials or by reason of the emission of noise, vibration,
smell, fumes,
smoke, vapour, steam, soot, ash, dust, wastepaper, waste products,
grit, oil, or the presence of vermin or by electrical interference
or otherwise;
(b) the establishment of which will not or the conduct of which does not
impose an undue load on any existing or projected service
for the supply or
provision of water, gas, electricity, sewerage facilities or any other like
Private Recreation
means the use of land for recreational grounds or facilities such as squash and
tennis courts, bowls clubs, golf clubs, swimming
pools, playgrounds and similar
which are not normally open to the public without charge.
Service Industry
means a light industry in which goods intended
for sale on the site are manufactured or in which the processes are directed
the servicing of goods or land and buildings and used as a depot for
receiving goods to be serviced.”
To confine the zone to a homemaker centre, the use classes defined above should
not be permissible. Those use classes can be better
accommodated in other
zones. If a demonstrated need arises in the Homemaker Centre zone for a specific
use that complements the zone
but is not allowed for by the Table of Uses, then
that could be the subject of a future amendment.
A second potential mechanism that could transform an integrated homemaker centre
into a different kind of retail centre would be
by the subdivision of buildings
into many more showroom tenancies and ‘other use’ tenancies, if
either of the ‘anchor’
uses departed. Table 1 shows that there is
over 25,000 m
of lettable floor area proposed. With a
minimum floor area of 500m
qualifying for permitted
status as ‘Showroom’, it is hypothetically possible for the planned
buildings to contain up
to 50 showrooms and other uses.
Given the limited range of uses available and the explicit prohibition of the
Shop use class, that hypothetical transformation is
considered unlikely.
Nevertheless it illustrates the importance of maintaining the anchor tenancies
as entities with large floor
Even with the retention of two major anchor tenants, Essential Economics raised
concerns that, with a minimum Showroom floor area
(as suggested by the proponent),
“it would be possible for the North West Homemaker Centre to
accommodate 46 small stores...This is inappropriate in terms of
the intent of
the Retail Study 2007 (and strategic land use policy across Australia in
general) for homemaker retailing to operate
as a distinct and complementary
retail format to the traditional retail sector.”
The question of the balance between different sized tenancies was raised in the
documentation tabled by Council where there is the
potential risk of a homemaker
centre evolving into a general shopping centre through a preponderance of small
Table 1 shows the number and area of tenancies applied for by the proponent.
From that table the size distribution of tenancies
can be derived and this is
shown in Table 2, below.
Table 2. Size Distribution of Tenancies Applied for in the Homemaker
No. of tenancies proposed
Size class of tenancies (m
Total floor space * of tenancies in each size class
% of total floor area
* Measured as Gross Lettable Area, which as noted previously, may differ from
Floor Area as defined in the planning scheme.
Table 2 indicates what the proponent presumably considers to be a reasonable
balance of tenancy sizes, with over half the total floor
space shared between
the two anchor tenants and less than 5% of total floor space devoted to small
tenancies. It can be seen from
Table 2 that over 80% of the total floor space
is allocated to tenancies larger than 1000m
this example it is considered that additional controls are needed in the
amendment to maintain a balance of tenancy sizes
that will ensure a place for at
least two large stores and allow a range of smaller showrooms.
The following provision should be included in the draft amendment:
“8.20(3)(iv) The total floor area of all tenancies within the zone must
not exceed 28,000m
. The total floor area allocated to
tenancies must be not less than the following proportions of the total floor
area in the zone:
Tenancies larger than 3000 m
per tenancy 45%
Tenancies larger than 1000 m
but less than 3000
per tenancy 25%“
In terms of the policy of the planning scheme, modifications to the draft
amendment to reduce the available use classes and to set
standards on floor area
will assist in achieving the proposed objectives for the Homemaker Centre zone.
This is consistent with
supporting Devonport’s retail strategy and
complements the role of the CBD.
Turning to the matter of car parking required to be provided for the various
uses, it is noted that the proposed homemaker centre
substantially exceeds the
statutory requirements of the planning scheme and the certified amendment seeks
to incorporate a larger
quantum of car parking spaces in the
condition/restriction applying to the use class Showroom.
GTA Consultants reported that the statutory requirement in the planning scheme
(1 space for every 150m
of Showroom floor area) when
applied to a total floor area of 24,756 m
generated a
parking demand of 166 spaces. In addition the Service Station component required
24 spaces, giving a total of 190 spaces.
GTA undertook an empirical assessment
of parking demand at Harvey Norman Stores and Bunnings Hardware Warehouses. The
rates and requirements were recommended: -
Table 3. Car Parking
Recommendations
Size (GLFA, m
Empirical Parking Rate
(Spaces per 100m
Empirical Parking Requirement
Harvey Norman
Hardware Warehouse
General Bulky Goods
Service Station
4 spaces per bay
Source: GTA Consultants, Table 4.3, p.14.
The homemaker centre development volunteers to construct 693 spaces. When
questioned about the significant over-provision compared
to the statutory
requirement or GTA’s empirical assessment, Mr Scurr, for Harvey Norman,
explained that this was intended to
cater for the growth of the centre, the
possible future conversion of the warehouse component to retail floorspace and
the anticipated
longer parking durations in this retail catchment. The
company’s experience had been that a ratio of 1 space per
of floor area was required. In contrast the
hardware warehouse would have a higher turnover of vehicles spaces because
visits were
shorter. The company preferred to over-provide parking so as to
reduce the risk of customers having to queue or wait for
Mr Scurr’s rule of thumb (1 space per 45m
almost equivalent to the 2.2 spaces per 100m
by GTA Consultants. The parking demand for restaurants and takeaway food shops
has not been reported but the planning
scheme requires a restaurant to provide 1
space for every 4 persons the building can accommodate. No requirement is
specified for
take away food shop and the amount of parking is left for Council
to determine in each case.
If the Homemaker zone were fully developed to 28,000m
at a parking rate of, say, 2.2 spaces per 100m
Floor Area then 616 car parking spaces would be required.
On the above assessment the project is providing 77 spaces beyond that required
by the empirical evidence on required spaces. Car
spaces excess to requirements
reduce areas available for landscaping and amenity of the space and increase the
burden of stormwater
management and achievement of water quality in
stormwater.
Correlating with parking provision is access by other modes including public
transport and pedestrian and cycle access. Car transport
should not be a
necessary pre-requisite for shopping at a homemaker centre, especially where
arrangements are usually available for
the delivery of bulky goods.
In Clause 8.19.6 of the draft amendment ‘Access roads and car
parking’, sub clause (iii) says, “
Except for showroom, the
provision of car parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the Table
to Clause 7.3. The provision
of car parking may be staged in accordance with a
staging plan approved by Council
.” In the draft amendment the Showroom
conditions / restrictions in the Table of Use says, “Car parking shall be
at the rate of 2.2 spaces for each 100 square metres of floor
area.” This is a precise requirement that does not admit additional
to be voluntarily provided by the developer of a showroom.
Taking these two requirements together it appears that the number of car parking
spaces is a matter for Council to specify in accordance
with the scheme and need
not be tied to the developer's offer.
It is considered that the development standards contained in the amendment
should allow for a trade off between parking provision
and accessibility by
public transport services and that Council should exercise control over parking
provision to complement other
policy aims. For example, as a permit condition,
Council could establish a Part 5 agreement for the developer to contribute to
additional daily or week-end bus services to the homemaker centre
instead of requiring the quantum of parking provision set out in
the planning
scheme. The detail of that suggestion is a matter for a permit, however it is
considered that the amendment should enable
other transport policy options to be
explored by Council. The amendment should be modified to include the following,
suitably numbered,
“ Parking must be provided in accordance with the Table to Clause 7.3
except for Showroom where parking must be provided at
a rate of 2.2 spaces for
of floor area. The provision of car parking
may be staged in accordance with a staging plan approved by Council. Council may
or require the number of spaces in the zone as a whole to be less than
the total derived from the standards in the Table to Clause
7.3 and this Clause,
where it is satisfied that parking demand will be substituted by appropriate
public transport services.”
6. National Highway, local road network, and traffic
GTA Consultants (for the applicant), submitted to Council an initial Transport
Impact Statement dated 1 October 2008. This was exhibited
and became the basis
for detailed responses by DIER and Pitt & Sherry (for Lester Franks)
contained in their representations.
GTA then provided a revised report dated 3
March 2009 to include analysis based on a T-junction rather than a roundabout
access from
the subject land to Stony Rise Road as first proposed. Finally a
further revision dated 30 April 2009 was provided.
Each of the GTA reports included as an appendix, a report prepared by
sub-consultants Road Safety Audits Pty Ltd (RSA), which was
also periodically
revised in the light of road design changes. The most recent RSA report, dated
14 May was delivered following the
hearing. The following assessment is based on
the latest GTA and RSA reports.
Bass Highway
The proposed Homemaker Zone is located on land adjacent and immediately to the
south of the Bass Highway which is classified as a
Category 1 Road and part of
the National Highway (also known as the Auslink Network) where ‘Limited
Access’ controls
apply. It is a four lane, dual carriageway highway
carrying 11,500 vehicles per day. It has a posted speed limit of 110 km/hr for
1.8km stretch past the subject land but at the interchanges to the east and west
the speed limit is 90km/hr.
The proponent has applied to open an access, namely an exit ramp for westbound
traffic only, from the Bass Highway onto a road serving
the Homemaker Centre
Zone. This proponent-constructed road, between the Bass Highway road reserve
boundary and Stony Rise Road would
then become a public road under the control
of Council.
The start of the exit ramp is proposed to be located 215 m west of the
westernmost part of the on-ramp to the Bass Highway from the
Middle Road
interchange. The separation distance between the on-ramp from Middle Road and
the exit ramp to the Homemaker Zone is
a critical design parameter to allow for
the safe ‘weaving’ manoeuvre for vehicles entering or leaving the
lanes of the highway. The Traffic Impact Evidence presented by GTA
Consultants (30 April 2009) concluded that, post-development,
this section of
the highway would operate at not less than an acceptable Level of Service
‘B’ up to year 2020.
The latest addendum to the Road Safety Audit concluded that, “
weaving length of 215 metres shown on Drawing Number HM 10612-02, Issue P4 of
the original report is acceptable for the current
conditions i.e. at the posted
speed of 110 km/hr.”
(Ian R. Price, Senior Road Safety Auditor, 14
However the Auditor noted that the existing situation at the Middle Road
interchange was less satisfactory, although this lay outside
the scope of the
proposed works. The length of the on-ramp, at 100 metres, was considered too
short. Furthermore the Auditor noted
that to have a section of highway posted at
110 km/hr between two sections posted at 90 km/hr was not considered to be good
management practice and potentially confusing to drivers. He suggested
that the speed limit on the intervening section be reduced
to 90 km/hr. The
reduction of speed limit is not supported by DIER.
It is beyond the scope of this decision to assess the implications of lowering
the speed limit on the safety and efficiency of the
Bass Highway generally. It
is noted that the Bass Highway, a State Road that is part of the Auslink
network, is a national asset
and any potential diminution of its efficiency or
safety requires careful assessment at both levels of government.
The relevant road authority for the proposed exit ramp is the Department of
Infrastructure Energy and Resources but the Department
must obtain the approval
of the Commonwealth Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional
Development and Local Government before
creating a new access point to the Bass
Highway. Mr Henry-Middleton advised that the Commonwealth Department had been
informed of
the proposal and had not flagged any specific objection. He further
advised that the State has obligations to consider the integration
of transport
and land use at a network level and inform the Commonwealth of planning scheme
changes that may impact on the Auslink
network. The position seems to be that
although the Commonwealth might not oppose the construction of a new access
point approved
by DIER, it could express disapproval by withdrawing Auslink
funding for the affected section of highway.
DIER’s written responses to the application, endorsed by its
representatives at the hearing, appear somewhat equivocal, expressing
between the proclaimed limited access status of the Bass Highway and support for
economic development of adjacent land
in particular circumstances that offered a
regional benefit.
In its initial representation, DIER affirmed that it remained committed to
working with the developer regarding a number of technical
issues but that those
issues needed to be resolved.
The Department’s letter of 26 May 2009, as a written, closing submission
to the hearing said, in relation to the Bass Highway:
“Given the importance of the Bass Highway to the Northwest region, the
Limited Access status under the
Roads and Jetties Act 1935
and the Category 1
designation in the Tasmanian State Road Hierarchy, DIER reiterates that the
preferred position remains that no
direct access be provided to the
DIER has, however embarked on an exercise to determine if, technically, a
direct access in the form of an off-ramp is feasible.
In this respect, DIER notes that the findings contained in the Road Safety
Audit Report Addendum dated 14 May 2009 by Road Safety
Audits Pty Ltd (RSA) that
the weaving length of 215 metres is sufficient at
The same author followed up with a letter dated 29 May 2009 which said,
“On reviewing my correspondence of 26 May it is apparent that the
wording may not clearly articulate the position of the Department
DIER’s preferred position remains that no access be provided to the
Bass Highway; however given that this is a one-off major
development with
significant economic value to the Devonport area, DIER is prepared to accept,
in-principle, an access in this instance.
This in-principle acceptance is based on access being solely for this
development, meeting all contemporary technical standards, and
being subject to
a sunset period within which construction would need to commence. The sunset
period would need to be negotiated
but will be based on a reasonable period
between approval and construction.”
The upshot of this advice is that even if the Commission approves the amendment
and the permit, the Minister for the Department of
Infrastructure Energy and
Resources determines whether an off-ramp from the Bass Highway may be
constructed (under the
Roads and Jetties Act 1935
), based on Departmental
advice in relation to various technical issues related to highway engineering,
safety and traffic management.
In terms of DIER’s expressed wish for a sunset period, we note that
of LUPA provides that a permit lapses after 2 years if the development
in respect of which it is granted is not substantially commenced
within that
period. This is considered to be a reasonable period for DIER’s purposes,
but if that is insufficient application
can be made for an extension of time for
a further 2 years in which to commence the development.
DIER conditions also state the provision of an access off the Bass Highway is
based on access being solely for this development.
This contrasts to
Council’s report pursuant to
of LUPAA on the Borg representation
and advice to GJ Nevin representing Mr and Mrs Borg that implied that access
could be gained
to the adjoining property from the new Council road serving the
The proposal has so far been assessed by DIER at a conceptual level and detailed
traffic engineering issues require further consideration.
DIER remained
concerned about GTA’s traffic assignment assumptions, particularly the
predicted Level of Service at the Bass
Highway westbound off-ramp to Middle
Road, where traffic turns right, across the Middle Road traffic, to reach
central Devonport.
However Mr Burk concurred that the situation would be
somewhat self-regulating, as other routes into central Devonport were available.
Indeed, the traffic situation at the Middle Road interchange could become worse
if the homemaker centre was constructed with access
only from Stony Rise Road
and no direct off-ramp from the highway.
The expert traffic evidence is detailed and complex. It necessarily contains
assumptions about future economic growth, traffic growth
and destination choice
that can only be verified or rebutted by experience over the next 10-20 years.
The following summarises salient
facts and forecasts presented by the several
transport consultants and DIER.
The traffic analysis produced by GTA Consultants draws on the economic forecasts
prepared by Deep End Services, traffic generation
estimates from comparable
bulky goods retail complexes and actual traffic movement counts in the vicinity
of the site taken over
three days in August 2008.
Deep End forecast the percentage of bulky goods sales in each catchment sector
for year 2011-12. This distribution of sales was the
basis for GTA’s
traffic distribution. GTA appears to have further disaggregated the distribution
of sales within the primary
catchment sector to estimate the traffic volumes to
be assigned to each arterial route serving the homemaker centre.
There are intricacies with the traffic survey data, traffic volume growth rate
and the proportion of vehicles that might access the
site directly from the Bass
Highway. However, in terms of the draft amendment the assessment is limited to
whether an off-ramp is
appropriate, in terms of the planning for use and
development of the applicant’s land and other lands in the
Although the traffic volumes in GTA’s summary diagrams are almost
illegible, the diagrammatic traffic volume information has
been assessed by
cross-reference to the numerous traffic count tables. There are some
discrepancies between the tabulated data and
the traffic volumes shown in the
summary diagrams, but this may merely reflect misinterpretation or some
factoring adjustment in
the methodology.
The peak volumes recorded at intersections near the site occurred on Thursday
afternoon (generally 4.00-5.30pm), Friday morning
(generally 7.45 -9.00 am) and
Saturday morning (generally 11.15 am -12.45 pm), with the Thursday afternoon
peak being slightly larger
than the others.
The absolute traffic volumes are perhaps not as critical as the peak-hour
performance of key junctions along the routes to and from
the Homemaker Centre
Other potential sources of traffic that do not appear to have been considered by
GTA are the established suburb of Miandetta from
which Berrigan Road enters
Middle Road south of the interchange, and the growing population in newly
released subdivisions accessed
from Tugrah Road and Stony Rise Road as those
lots are developed.
A possibly unconsidered vehicle movement that might be preferred by eastbound
traffic on the Bass Highway would be to use the Middle
Road interchange in
preference to exiting at the Don Road junction and travelling along Stony Rise
Road. This alternative would traverse
the eastbound off-ramp, the overpass, the
westbound on-ramp and then the Homemaker off-ramp – in effect a grand
U-turn. This
would presumably add to congestion at the westbound off ramp at
Middle Road. (See diagram below.)
Figure 2. Possible movement at Middle Road interchange
The potential for congestion of the Bass Highway westbound on and off-ramps is
recognised by DIER as a concern. GTA analysed intersection
performance (Table
6.8). Intersection performance is measured or forecast in terms of ‘degree
of saturation’, ‘average
delay’ (in seconds) and
percentile queue length (metres). Degree of
Saturation (DOS) on a scale of 0 to 1+, can be translated into a Level of
Service that
ranges from A to F with A representing Excellent, (DOS <=0.5
for an unsignalised intersection); D representing Acceptable (DOS
0.8-0.9) and E
representing Poor (DOS 0.9- 1.0)
Currently all the intersections considered by GTA have a DOS less than 0.5. By
year 2020, post- development, the DOS forecast was
still below 0.6 for all
intersections except for the southern half of the Middle Road interchange. Here
the DOS is forecast to rise
to 0.92 for the afternoon peak (i.e. Poor service),
the average delay will be 78.5 seconds and the queue length will be 92 metres.
Growth in traffic volumes and performance through this intersection will need to
be monitored by DIER and declining performance may
force remedial works to be
undertaken.
On balance, in terms of land use planning for the local area, it is appropriate
to acknowledge that ingress only to the Homemaker
Centre zone from the Bass
Highway appears acceptable. It is further acknowledged that DIER’s
qualified support for the access
is based on access being solely for
this development, meeting all contemporary technical standards, and being
subject to a sunset
The relationship of the proposed off-ramp and subdivisional road to the rest of
the local road network remains to be considered.
There are two aspects to this;
the Homemaker Road (so named for the purpose of this decision) junction with
Stony Rise Road and the
application of the Stony Rise Strategic Road Network
Plan under Schedule 9 of the planning scheme.
The proposed access to Stony Rise Road
The permit proposed that access to Stony Rise Road would be by roundabout at the
junction with Homemaker Road. A later concept plan,
endorsed by Council and
DIER was to provide for an at-grade t-junction with passing lanes. The details
of this access have not been
well developed to a point that is acceptable to
granting a permit for this access and the matters raised by representor Mr
detail some of the design matters that are yet to be resolved. However
the access is subject to Schedule 9 of the planning scheme
and this has
significant implications as considered next.
Stony Rise Strategic Road Network Plan
The intent of the
Strategic Road Network Plan at Schedule 9 of the planning scheme is, “
to integrate road and land use planning for Stony Rise Road and the adjacent
land so as to balance transport requirements with land
use and development.
(S.9.1.1). It seeks to protect the arterial function of Stony Rise Road, allow
land to be serviced and developed to its full potential
in an efficient,
economic, fair and orderly way and provide as much certainty as possible in
relation to access requirements and
infrastructure provision (S 9.2). It
prevails over any other provision of the Planning Scheme to the extent of any
inconsistency
and applies to all use and development adjacent to a road section
specified in the Plan (S9.4).
There is no doubt that Schedule 9 applies to the land proposed for the
‘determined road reserve’ passing through the proposed Homemaker
Centre zone. The Plan also shows seven ‘specified
access points’,
none of which correspond to the two access points requested by the proponent or
approved by Council.
The language of Schedule 9 is mandatory, not merely advisory. The Plan shows
both ‘determined road reserves’ (mandatory)
and indicative road
reserves (advisory). Examples of the mandatory tone are (With our emphasis):
“S.9.5.1 Vehicular access to the specified road section
be made at a specified access point as shown on the Strategic Road
Network Plan.
S9.5.2 The access required under Clause S9.5.1
may only be varied
where agreement has been reached with both Council and DIER
the lodgement of an application
for a permit. “
S9.4.2 All use and development of land adjacent to the specified road section
that has the potential to generate vehicular movements
to that road
comply with the relevant requirements of this Schedule.
S9.6.1 A determined road reserve
must be incorporated into the design of a
subdivision or other development
as is shown required on the Strategic Road
Network Plan. “
At the hearing, Council’s representative suggested that the creation of
a new, unanticipated access point at Stony Rise Road
was merely a variation that
was acceptable to DIER. But the certified amendment proposes only to
“Amend the Plan associated
with the Stony Rise Road Strategic Network Plan
by linking (sic) the link with Gatenby Drive.”
Mr McElwaine acknowledged the drafting error and submitted that
‘linking’ should be replaced by ‘removing’
would be acceptable as a modification, if required.
Two matters arise out of Schedule 9. First, there is no evidence of
agreement between Council and DIER to vary the access prior to
the lodgement of
the permit application. Whilst presumably this is a matter that can be
rectified, the second and major issue is
that the power to vary in S9.5.2 is one
taken to allow variation on the identified access points and determined and
indicative road
reserves and not to create a new access point entirely unrelated
to the specified access points. Schedule 9 is part of the planning
new access must be defined through the planning scheme amendment process.
This issue is a matter for the permit and not the draft amendment. Given the
very clear and unambiguous statements contained in Schedule
9 and that the
permit issued by Council simply cannot comply with the provisions of the
Devonport and Environs Planning Scheme then
the permit must be refused. It is
most unfortunate that the fundamental difficulty posed by the current Stony Rise
Strategic Road
Network Plan was not detected much earlier in the process of
preparing the draft amendment.
Therefore before a permit for the project can be lodged the Strategic Road
Network Plan will need to be recast, in consultation with
DIER, to provide for
the road network and access to Stony Rise Road that is integral to the permit,
or the permit changed to satisfy
the current Network Plan. Any change to
Schedule 9 requires a planning scheme amendment. Consistent with the intent of
9, it would also be appropriate for any amendment to that schedule to
deal with the servicing of residential subdivision for land
adjoining the
proposed Homemaker zone. This is particularly relevant to respond to
DIER’s view that the exit ramp off the
Bass Highway should be solely for
the development of the homemaker centre.
Having reached this conclusion, that the permit must be refused as being
contrary to the planning scheme, there is no need to consider
the details of
that permit further.
Visual amenity and flora and fauna impacts
Consultants, The Planning Group reported that,
The frontage to the Bass Highway presently comprises dense vegetation
that presents an attractive edge to the Highway. However it
is noted that the
land is included in the Closed Residential Zone and that it is inevitable that
the vegetation would be wholly or
substantially removed to enable the land to be
developed for its best use. The proposed development provides a generous
edge to the Highway. In addition to the attractive building edges and
the signage the proposed Homemaker Centre will create an attractive
edge to the Highway that is consistent and suitable for this site being part of
the Devonport urban area.”
The Planning Group initially reported that the land did not contain any
significant native vegetation but later submitted to Council
a flora and fauna
report prepared by ECOtas (Mark Wapstra).
Council noted in its
report that, “
the removal of vegetation is
currently exempt...However once the site is rezoned a discretionary permit will
be required to remove
the vegetation from the site. ... There is approximately
3 ha of Dry Eucalyptus ovata-Eucalyptus viminalis forest (Eucalyptus ovata
forest and woodland).
Quoting Wapstra, Council reported, “
The presence of forest dominated by
Eucalyptus ovata means that part of the study area is classified as potential
foraging habitat
for the endangered Swift Parrot. The management of this species
is likely to be complex and require more extensive consultation with
and Commonwealth agencies during the development of the Forest Practices Plan
for the development.”
In other words a parallel process of approval (separate from LUPAA) is in train
for the removal of the vegetation under State and
Commonwealth biodiversity
legislation. At the hearing the applicant tabled correspondence from Adam
Pennington of the Tasmanian Forest
Practices Authority and forest consultant Joe
Hawkes, from TAS Land and Forest. This indicated that a final decision from the
Commonwealth
had not been received but that the Forest Practices Authority was
recommending approval to clear 8 ha of native forest and 7ha of
vegetation in the area under ‘exceptional circumstances’ and on
condition that an ‘offset’ be
provided backed by a binding deed of
As it is for other permit processes to decide on the clearing of native
vegetation, the draft amendment should address the landscaping
amenity for the site. The draft amendment requires a 20m building setback from
the highway and the current provisions
allow the setback to be used to
accommodate access lanes and parking areas. To maintain the prospect of a
landscaped edge the setback
from the highway should not be used for carparking
and the draft amendment modified accordingly. Reference to landscaping should
mentioned in the objectives for the zone at 8.20.1 (iv).
As an element of visual amenity, signage is relevant to the draft amendment.
Private advertising is not permitted by DIER to be
located within the Bass
Highway reservation. Only directional and advisory signage (i.e. generic,
non-corporate) may be permitted
as general information to the travelling public.
The draft amendment does not clearly state where signage may be placed. It says,
“...advertising signage may comprise: No more than two advertising pylons
or panels along the Bass Highway , each being no
higher than 10 metres.”
Council subsequently supported three advertising pylons or panels as part of its
of LUPAA report.
In view of the relatively short frontage to the Bass Highway the amendment
should be modified to clarify that advertising signage
that names or symbolises
the occupants of the Homemaker Zone must be located on the proponent’s
land and two panels or pylons,
no taller than 10 metres are considered
sufficient.
Drafting of the Amendment
Figure 1 shows the proposed rezoning. The red colouring of the Devonport
Regional Homemaker Centre Zone is too easily confused with
the residential
zones. It should be a blue shade, more in keeping with other commercial zones.
The Plan requires amendment accordingly
and the legend of the Plan will also
need to show the new zone that is proposed.
(sic, actually 2): As discussed, the proposed amendment to the Stony Rise
Strategic Road Network is inadequate to resolve the conflict
with the permit.
Nevertheless, this part of the amendment may remain as a prelude to a second
amendment that addresses the provisions
of the Stony Rise Road Strategic Road
Network Plan more widely should such amendment be initiated.
(sic, actually 3): The modifications required by the Commission follow
from the preceding assessment and are shown in Annexure A.
The wording of
Objective 8.19.1 point 3 (8.20.2(iii)) is clumsy and should be rephrased as it
appears some words have been transposed.
Some use classes are to be deleted from
the Table of Uses, as previously explained. Construction standards for
trafficable areas
are more appropriate to be part of permit conditions and
should be deleted from the amendment. Reference to Cradle Coast Water is
outdated. Advice that Council approval is required for subdivision is otiose.
Compliance with Schedule 9 needs to be reinforced.
Other minor wording changes
are required for clarity and certainty.
Application of State Policies
State Coastal Policy 1996
The site is located more than 1 kilometre
from the coastline and the Policy is not applicable.
State Policy on Water Quality Management 1997
The Policy is
applicable but the land is located within a fully serviced semi-urban area.
Water quality can be maintained by appropriate
conditions on any permit for
development or use.
Schedule 1 Objectives
Consistent with the objective to promote sustainable
use and development of natural and physical resources and the maintenance of
ecological processes, the clearing of threatened native vegetation has been
assessed under the relevant legislation to be acceptable,
on condition that
appropriate offsets are guaranteed.
The amendment has been assessed through a process that encourages public
involvement and the sharing of responsibility among the
different spheres of
government, community and industry. It will facilitate economic development in
accordance with the Schedule
1 objectives.
Conclusions
The Draft Amendment
The draft amendment builds on the strategic planning studies previously carried
out by Council. While the selected site for the
specifically identified by the Devonport Retail Study 2008, neither was it ruled
out in terms of the criteria
established in that study. The key requirements
for a homemaker centre location appear to have been satisfied.
The Homemaker Zone is a necessary strategic basis for an integrated, regional
to the range of
permissible use classes and clarification of use and development standards.
As access to Stony Rise Road in the proposed location
is prohibited by the planning scheme, the permit can not be approved and
must be refused.
Pursuant to
Section 41(ab)
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
the Commission modifies the draft amendment as set out in Annexure A and
gives its approval to the draft amendment as modified pursuant
to Section 42 of
Pursuant to
Section 43H
(1)(b)(i) of the
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act
the Commission refuses the permit.
John Vandenberg
Robin Nolan
Resource Planning and Development Commission
28 July 2009
Attachment:
Annexure A – The modified amendment
Annexure A – The modified amendment
Resource Planning and Development Commission
DEVONPORT AND ENVIRONS PLANNING SCHEME 1984
Draft Amendment AM 2008/01
The planning scheme is amended as follows: -
(i) Amendments to the plan
part of 88-102A Stony Rise Road from Closed Residential to ‘Devonport
Regional Homemaker Centre Zone’ and rezone
10 Gatenby Drive from Closed
Residential to High Density Residential Zone as shown in the following plan.
the plan to Schedule 9, delete the determined road reserve between Gatenby Drive
and the eastern boundary of the Devonport Regional
(ii) Amendments to the scheme.
clause 3.2.3:
‘3.2.3 If the proposed use or development is within the Devonport Regional
be in accordance with clause
the fourth part of the amendment and substitute the following: -
8.20 Devonport Regional Homemaker Centre Zone
8.20.1 This Clause applies to the land shown as the Devonport Regional Homemaker
Centre Zone on the plans.
8.20.2 Objectives
(i) To provide for integrated bulky goods showrooms and trade supplies including
associated food and drink outlets, car parking,
signage and landscaping to
enhance the development.
(ii) To ensure that development enhances the role of Devonport as the retail and
services regional centre for north-western Tasmania.
(iii) To ensure that development provides economic benefits including
competition, employment and provision of retail goods and services
not available
in other centres.
(iv) To ensure that development contributes positively to the character and
appearance of the area through the design of buildings,
access from the street
front, provision of active frontages to pedestrian areas, the treatment of the
fronts and backs of buildings,
outdoor advertising structures and landscaping
8.20.3 Use of Land
The Devonport Regional Homemaker Centre Zone is to be the principal location in
Devonport for showrooms that primarily sell household
items that require large
display areas.
(ii) Use of land
An application for a permit for use or development in this zone shall be
determined in accordance with the following Table of Use
Table of Use Classes – Devonport Regional Homemaker Centre
Conditions/Restrictions
Car, Boat, Caravan and Machinery Salesyard
Garden Centre
Market Place
See clause 8.20.3(iii) below
Service station
May operate 24 hours a day
Each showroom must not be less than 500 square metres floor area.
The goods that can be displayed and sold in any of the showrooms must largely
Furniture and
floor coverings
appliances, including whitegoods and computer equipment
entertainment equipment
Manchester,
curtains and blinds
Camping and
outdoor recreation equipment
construction hardware goods.
landscaping materials.
accessories
Any combination
of these goods, provided that the sale or hire of clothing or footwear is not a
predominant activity.
Take Away Food Shop
See clause 8.20.3(iii) below
Any other Use Class
Note: P Permitted - with or without conditions.
A Discretionary – may be refused or permitted with conditions.
X Prohibited.
(iii) Not more than 5 Take Away Food Shops and 2 Restaurants will be approved in
the zone, whether as a single use, a component of
a multiple use or as an
ancillary use to a principal use. A Restaurant must predominantly serve the
needs of shoppers and employees
in the zone.
(iv) Floor area
(a) The total
floor area of all tenancies within the zone must not exceed
(b) The total floor area allocated to tenancies must be not less than the
following proportions of the total floor area in the zone:
Tenancies larger than 3000 m
per tenancy 45%
Tenancies larger than 1000 m
per tenancy but less than
8.20.4 Development of Land
The maximum building height is 12 metres.
(ii) Front Setback
All buildings and parking spaces must be setback at least 20 metres from the
Bass Highway boundary. The setback area may include
an access road and approved
signage but must be landscaped in accordance with a landscape plan approved by
(iii) Side and rear Setbacks
All building must be setback at least 10 metres from the side and rear
boundaries of the overall development site. The setback area
on all boundaries
may include an access road but must be predominantly landscaped in accordance
with a landscape plan approved by
(iv) Buildings may vary from the standards set out in this Clause pursuant to
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
in respect of heights and
setbacks where the applicant demonstrates that the variance in the building
height or setback is necessary
to accommodate a use or development allowable
under this Clause and will not have a detrimental impact on the character and
of the area.
8.20.5 Development requirements
(i) Any development proposal is to demonstrate that it is fully integrated in
terms of building siting, mass and bulk, building design,
colours and external,
materials and finishes, access, circulation and car parking, advertising and
landscaping. Corporate colours
and signage will generally be supported provided
that they are consistent with the overall design themes for the zone and
contribute to the appearance and amenity of the zone.
(ii) Development is to demonstrate that it achieves a high quality of
architectural and urban design and creates a place that is
attractive,
convenient and safe for people working and visiting the development.
(iii) Proposals are to demonstrate that they include measures to contribute to
sustainable development, including recycling of water
and materials, protection
of biodiversity, natural lighting, transportation and energy use.
(iv) All landscaping and planting must be installed and maintained to the
satisfaction of Council. Beyond the approved footprint
of buildings, parking
areas, storage yards and access roads, vegetation must be managed to optimise
protection of threatened species,
weed control and fire
protection.
8.20.6 Access roads and car parking
(i) Not more than one access way comprising a left turn in shall be provided
into the zone from the Bass Highway. No vehicles shall
exit the zone directly
to the Bass Highway or to Gatenby Drive.
(ii) All vehicles must exit the site to Stony Rise Road.
(iii) Parking must be provided in accordance with the Table to Clause 7.3 except
for Showroom where parking must be provided at a
rate of 2.2 spaces for each
of floor area. The provision of car parking may
be staged in accordance with a staging plan approved by Council. Council may
or require the number of spaces in the zone as a whole to be less than
the total derived from the standards in the Table to Clause
7.3 and this clause,
where it is satisfied that parking demand will be substituted by appropriate
public transport services.
(iv) All internal access ways including parking areas, loading and unloading
areas and driveways must be designed and constructed
to a sufficient standard to
cater effectively for the volumes and types of traffic that will be generated by
(v) A safe and functional pedestrian network shall be provided from vehicle
parking areas to the entry to buildings. Pedestrian
and cycle access from the
adjacent residential areas into the site shall be provided separately from
vehicle access and shall be
safe, convenient and capable of being used in all
8.20.7 Advertising signage
(i) Notwithstanding the provisions of clause 7.5, advertising signage within the
zone may comprise:
more than two advertising pylons or panels on the proponent’s land
alongside the Bass Highway reservation, each being no
higher than 10
more than one advertising pylon, located on private land, at the Stony Rise Road
more than one sign no greater than 15 square metres for each tenancy and located
on the parapet of the roofline and generally
above the display
(ii) Signage on the display windows shall be no greater than 50 percent of the
display windows of each tenancy.
(iii) Advertising panels can be illuminated but shall not include flashing,
moving, rotating or reflecting elements.
8.20.8 Services
(i) All power and telephone mains must be located underground to the
satisfaction of Council.
(ii) All water and sewerage services and arrangements for the relocation of
existing pipes across the land must be to the satisfaction
of the North Western
Region Corporation.
(iii) Security lighting and other lighting to illuminate the exterior of the
development shall be designed and located in accordance
with Australian Standard
for Control of Obtrusive Effects of Outdoor Lighting (AS 4282 – 1997).
(iv) Arrangements to the satisfaction of Council shall be made for the retention
of stormwater drainage on the land, its re-use for
irrigation of landscaping and
dispersal to the stormwater drainage system.
8.20.9 Amenity of the area.
A use must not adversely affect the amenity of the neighbourhood through
(i) Transport of materials, goods or commodities to or from the land.
(ii) Appearance of any stored goods or materials.
(iii) Emission of noise, artificial light, vibration, odour, fumes, smoke,
vapour, stream, soot, ash, dust, waste water, waste products,
8.20.10 Subdivision and Access
(i) There is no minimum area or dimensions of lots.
(ii) In considering applications to subdivide land, the Council must ensure
lots have access to a road, but not the Bass Highway.
lots are capable of accommodating the uses and development for which the land is
Satisfactory
arrangements are made for the provision of utility services including water,
sewerage, drainage and electricity.
orderly development of the zone.
provisions of Schedule 9 Stony Rise Strategic Road Network Plan are complied
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.81 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter