URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASRPDComm/2009/37.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:20:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Clarence Planning Scheme 2007 Amendment A-2008/25 [2009] TASRPDComm 37 (26 August 2009)
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Planning and Approvals Act 1993
Resource Planning
and Development Commission Act 1997
Decision and Reasons for Decision
PLANNING SCHEME 2007
Draft Amendment A - 2008/25
Permit No D - 2008/97
The applications are to:
− Amend the plans to rezone land at 438, 450 and 456 South Arm Road,
Lauderdale from Rural Residential to Commercial and rezone
land at 444 South Arm
Road, Lauderdale from Local Business to Commercial.
− Grant a permit for a shopping centre comprising a supermarket, specialty
shops, plant nursery, medical centre and dental
clinic, internal road network
and car parking.
meeting on 15 June 2009 and pursuant to Section 8 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission Act 1997
, the Commission
delegated to Mr Robin Nolan and Commissioner Sandra Hogue jointly and
powers and functions under
sections 40
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
in relation to Draft
Amendment A-2008/25 and Permit Number D-2008/97 to the Clarence Planning Scheme
connection with the exercise of those powers in performance of those functions,
its powers under Part 3 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Commissioner Hogue was unable to take part in the hearing and the matter was
heard and determined by Mr Nolan.
Date and Place of Hearing: 29 - 30 July, 2009
RPDC Hearing Room,
Macquarie Street, Hobart.
Representations
Mr Gary Reed of Gary Reed Building Design on behalf of Mr John
Mr John Carter and Mr John Steinthal of Edward Baillie Capital Holdings Pty
Ms Irene Duckett of Ireneinc Planning on behalf of Nick
Mr Neil Shephard of Neil Shephard & Associates on behalf of Harmony Garden
Centre & KSK Property Group Pty Ltd
Mrs Georgina Skeggs for Traffic and Infrastructure Branch Department of
Infrastructure, Energy and Resources (DIER)
Ms Claire Armstrong for Lester Franks on behalf of ISPT Pty
Attendance at the Hearing
Mr M. O’Farrell of Counsel and Mr E. Boardman represented
Clarence City Council
Mr D. Polzin representing Southern Water
: Mr A. Spence, of Counsel
Mr N. Shephard, planning consultant
Mr K. de Keijzer, DKO Architects
Mr J. Malkiewicz, economist, Macroplan
Mr K. Poortenaar, engineer, GHD
Mr K. Midson, traffic engineer
Representors:
Mr L. Henry-Middleton, Ms G. Skeggs and Mr S. Brown
representing DIER
Mr S. McElwain, of Counsel, Ms I. Duckett, planning consultant and Mr C
Attwater economist, SGS on behalf of Mr N. Nikataras
Mr J. Carter for Edward Baillie Capital Holdings Pty Ltd
Issues Raised in the representations
The issues raised by the representors supported and objected to the draft
amendment and s.43A permit. The following provides a summary
of the main points
- The proposal is in the best interest of the local residents and
businesses.
- The draft amendment and s43A permit will have adverse impacts on the economic
viability of other commercial centres and retail
businesses and is contrary to
the retail strategy of the scheme; a comprehensive study of the existing retail
hierarchy should be
undertaken prior to approval.
- The draft amendment is contrary to Clause 2.2.3 (c), 2.3.1 (b) and 2.3.1(c) of
the scheme in that it represents an isolated rezoning
which has no strategic
land use planning justification, lacks explicit consideration of the impacts on
surrounding commercial operations
and undermines the existing broader retail
- There is no land use strategy for Lauderdale to guide the amount and location
of Commercial zoned land.
- The proposed development is inconsistent with the provisions of the Commercial
zone which requires streetscape values of commercial
areas to be enhanced and
active frontages to pedestrian areas to be maintained. The area of land subject
to the rezoning is not
sufficient to adequately fulfil the intent of the
Commercial zone.
- There is a lack of adequate economic and strategic consideration given to the
impacts of the range of potential uses which become
permitted or discretionary
as a consequence of the draft amendment.
- The surrounding population catchment is not large enough to support the
proposed centre and the scale of the existing shopping
centre is more
appropriate to service the needs of the local community.
- It is inappropriate to approve a new shopping centre in a location where such
use and development is not intended and which will
restrict the growth of the
existing shopping centre.
- The draft amendment represents a spot rezoning and Council should consider
rezoning other lots in the existing local business area
at Lauderdale to
Commercial.
- The use of hotel and bottleshop in the Commercial or Local Business zone in
the Lauderdale area should be prohibited except for
that existing at 464 South
Arm Road, Lauderdale.
- The site is located on low lying coastal land, the current zoning of Rural
Residential provides for low density development which
is considered more
appropriate for the site given its susceptibility to impacts of sea level rise
as a consequence of climate change.
- The proposed access to the shopping centre will have adverse impacts on the
safety and efficiency of South Arm Road.
- The proposal extends commercial ribbon development along South Arm Road
increasing the number and usage of accesses to the road
compromising the safety
and efficiency of the main road servicing South Arm peninsula.
Council’s response to the representations
Council’s s.39(2) report considered the issues raised by the
representations and resolved to recommend to the Commission that
the merits of
the representations warrant modification to the draft amendment and
Council recommended modifying the draft amendment to include an amendment to
Clause 6.6.3(g)(i) to state:
6.6.3(g)(i) The minimum setback from Front Boundaries to Bligh Street,
Bayfield Street, Ross Avenue and South Arm Road is 9.0m from
Council’s recommended modifications to the permit were to omit reference
to the retail fuel outlet in condition 5 and to insert
the following new
conditions relating to traffic and access:
proposed service access off South Arm Road is to be dedicated as such and
appropriate signage is to be erected at or on the access
advising that access is
for service vehicles only.
traffic management plan is to be provided to the satisfaction of Council’s
Group Manager Asset Management showing how 19m
semi-rigid trucks can gain access
to and unload on-site.
public road junctions, development access and other infrastructure within the
South Arm Road reservation must be approved by the
Department of Infrastructure,
Energy and Resources prior to any construction commencing.
service vehicle access on South Arm Road must be managed with traffic control
devices that prevent right turns into and out of
the site, to the satisfaction
of Council’s Group Manager Asset Management.
turns into South Arm Road
(from the service vehicle access)
prevented by the construction of a solid raised median traffic island. The
design and construction of this island and any
other roadworks within the South
Arm Road Reservation must be in accordance with the Department of
Infrastructure, Energy and Resources
standard specifications.
movements at the eastern-most Ringwood Road access are to provide for entry and
exit of vehicles.
pedestrian footpath is to be provided along the Ringwood Road frontage,
including across the entry and exit lanes to the satisfaction
of Council’s
Group Manager Asset Management.
Commission’s assessment of the draft amendment
The draft amendment
The draft amendment is to rezone 4.0465 ha of land at 438 (CT 20418/8), 444 (CT
32274/1), 450 (CT 33067/1) and 456 (CT 34257/1) South
Arm Road, Lauderdale from
Rural Residential and Local Business to Commercial.
Site and Locality
The site comprises the 4 titles described above that are located at Lauderdale
on the northern side of the junction of South Arm
Road and Ringwood Road. The
site is typically flat and low lying but represents one of the more elevated
sites at Lauderdale. Current
use and development of the land includes a garden
centre, glass houses, shade houses, dwellings, outbuildings, office,
surgery and car parking. The surrounding land use is
predominantly residential, comprising areas of rural residential sized lots
more dense residential development located either side of the canal and behind
Roches Beach. A primary school is located to the
north of the site and various
retail activities including a tavern, butchers, bakery, grocery stores and
service station are located
to the south along South Arm Road.
Relevant provisions of the scheme
The structure of the planning scheme is based on zones, overlays and specific
provisions. Each zone and overlay is directed at the
implementation of the
Planning Policy Framework. In the case of the Commercial zone the planning
scheme defines the purpose as:
(a) To implement the Planning Policy Framework.
(b) To encourage a range of business centres for retailing and other
complementary commercial, entertainment and community uses.
The Planning Policy Framework appears in section 2 of the scheme and
This section sets out the strategic planning policy framework for this
planning scheme. The Clarence Strategic Directions and Clarence
Policies must be taken into account when making decisions under this planning
scheme, or preparing amendments to it.
The Planning Policy Framework includes the ‘Clarence Strategic
Directions’ and ‘Clarence Planning Policies’.
The Clarence
Strategic Directions reiterates the role of the Planning Policy Framework where
As part of the Planning Policy Framework, the Clarence Strategic Directions
provides the basis for applying the Zones, Overlays and
Specific Provisions of
the planning scheme. Together with the Clarence Planning Policies, it guides
the exercise of discretion
and future planning scheme
amendments.
The Clarence Strategic Directions identify key issues, objectives and strategies
relevant to retail and commercial use and development
and the strategic
direction generally for urban development. Without reproducing extensive
extracts of the Planning Policy Framework,
the relevant policy settings are
identified below. These policy settings are drawn from the ‘Key
Issues’, ‘Objectives’
and ‘Strategies’ as detailed
in the scheme.
− The key areas and focus for future urban development is the
Howrah/Tranmere/Droughty corridor and Rokeby and Clarendon Vale.
These areas
have the greatest potential to supply housing and reticulated services.
− An urban growth boundary around the urban areas, including the
development corridor will ensure that the key location criteria
are met, while
non-urban areas are protected from inappropriate fragmentation.
− The creation of a hard urban growth boundary will be an important
planning outcome of future structure planning in the City’s
− Encouraging the development of land use patterns linked to social and
physical infrastructure.
− To ensure the long term viability of all of the City’s retail
− Maintain the City’s retail hierarchy, including the pre-eminence
of the Rosny Park business area.
− Rezoning of land for retail purposes on freestanding sites separated
from existing centres will not be supported.
− Apply the Business (Commercial) Zone to existing retail areas and to
limited areas which adjoin these areas so as to provide
for expansion which
reinforces the retail hierarchy and applying the Local Business Zone to existing
service business areas and to
local shopping centres.
− Implementing Clarence Policy - ‘Clarence Retail Policy’
which requires planning decisions to support the retail
hierarchy and be
consistent with the Land Use Strategy.
− (prepare) A comprehensive retail study of the hierarchy, in the context
of the greater Hobart area, examining the future
role of centres, potential
niche markets, the mix of shops, future floor space requirements and urban
design concepts.
− To consolidate and improve the existing hierarchy of retail centres
within the City.
− To encourage investment in retail development.
− To encourage new development which builds on the identified role and
character of each retail centre, to create a vibrant
retail sector.
− The need to protect the retail hierarchy and reinforce the established
retailing patterns.
− The need to encourage the development of attractive shopping venues.
− The desirability of new developments being designed to suit the urban
form of the particular centre, enhancing its special
characteristics.
Council’s report at the initiation of the draft amendment and with the
consideration of the representations did not give meaningful
consideration to
the Planning Policy Framework. The preference appears primarily to accept the
applicant’s submission about
retail demand. The consideration of
Commercial zoning is principally limited to a statement that:
Any of the permitted uses under the zone are considered appropriate for the
site. The discretionary uses under the zone, although
more expanded than those
provided for under the Local Business zone could be considered or refused as
part of any future development
application.
In support of the draft amendment, Mr Boardman submitted:
Council has not yet completed a comprehensive retail strategy however any
amendments to the planning scheme are not prefaced on such
a strategy being
completed. It is considered that the proposal should be considered on its
individual merits.
In respect to the Planning Policy Framework Mr Boardman referred to section
2.2.3(c) regarding economic development and stated:
This section of the scheme is part of the planning policy framework which is
a generalised set of key influences, overviews, objectives,
key issues and
strategies. This section of the scheme is general in nature and cannot be
relied upon to determine whether a specific
development itself should be
approved or refused. Its purpose is to facilitate a strategic approach toward
further growth and development
and to list certains (
) actions and
strategies for this to occur.
The application is to rezone the land. It is not initially about specific
development as referred to by Mr Boardman. In effect
the totality of the merit
of Commercial zoning is based on the permit application. This is reiterated by
Mr Boardman in respect
to the planning arguments for the specific site that was
summarised as:
Sufficient demand exists within the retail catchment to support
another supermarket within the region;
The existing Shoreline Shopping Centre is overtrading; and
Commercial zoning would provide for the uses as proposed.
It is not accepted that within the structure of the planning scheme the Planning
Policy Framework can be dismissed as some form of
general guide or that specific
elements can be taken to support specific arguments outside the context of the
overall framework.
This is particularly the case for amendments to planning
schemes where there are structural consequences to urban settlement. The
planning scheme directs the Planning Policy Framework ‘
must be taken
into account when...preparing amendments...’
Mr Shepherd principally avoided the Planning Policy Framework referring to
matters that were out of date or inaccurate. His submission
was to the effect
that there are no spatial development strategies or statements of future
character for commercial development for
Lauderdale in the 2007 planning scheme
and that this lack of strategic provision for Lauderdale was seen as an error or
This view is not accepted. Substantially there is a nexus between
the Planning Policy Framework and allocation of zones on the
plans and omission
or error cannot be simply assumed.
The earlier statements of policy drawn from the Planning Policy Framework
clearly identify a preferred growth area for the Howrah
and Tranmere corridor
and the Rokeby valley. The retail hierarchy is not defined beyond the policy to
retain the primacy of Rosny
Park and to build upon existing retail centres.
Urban development for the planning scheme is encapsulated in an urban growth
Lauderdale is not strategically defined as a growth area and the site
is not included in the urban growth boundary. Recent amendments
to the planning
scheme for additional residential zoning in the Rokeby valley have reinforced
the policy settings. For some of these
amendments there have been preceding or
concurrent amendments to the Planning Policy Framework including amendments to
growth boundary. In this case there has been no attempt to amend the
framework to build consistency between policy and zoning.
Further to this
difficulty without a proper policy construct for Commercial zoning, there is no
direction for similar applications
for other sites should they be proposed in
the future.
In essence the policy of the planning scheme does not support Commercial zoning
at Lauderdale. However before concluding on this,
the specific merits of
Commercial zoning at Lauderdale also require examination.
Commercial zoning of the site
Commercial zoning in the planning area is currently limited to certain existing
retail areas being Richmond, Lindisfarne, Rosny,
Bellerive, Howrah and Rokeby.
Commercial zoning allows for a wide range of central retail functions
principally as discretionary
activities. The use class shop and shopping centre
are discretionary in the commercial zone. These uses are defined as:
- Land used to sell goods or services, or to hire goods,
but does not include uses defined elsewhere in this clause.
Shopping Centre
– A group of 6 or more Local Shops,
Shops, Restaurants and/or Take Away Food Shops but may include other uses on the
Therefore the only difference between a number of shops on a site and a shopping
centre is in the number of premises forming the
Submissions in support of the draft amendment and that provide the rationale for
Commercial zoning at Lauderdale were centred on:
− Shopping Centre as an allowable use.
− Sufficient existing customer catchment in Lauderdale and South Arm to
support a full line supermarket.
− A sufficient separation from the supermarket at Howrah to not adversely
affect the viability of that supermarket (in the
same supermarket group as
proposing the draft amendment).
In contrast to Commercial zoning, Local Business zoning is applied to small
shopping and business centres in many localities in the
planning area. At
Lauderdale the Local Business zone applies to an extensive frontage of the South
Arm Road and is significantly
under developed. Local business zoning has the
use class ‘shop’ discretionary, but shopping centre is prohibited.
under the current provisions for the Local Business zone supermarkets
and a wide range of other shops are allowable so long as they
are not classed as
‘shopping centre’.
Coastal vulnerability
The site has been assessed as being capable through minimum floor levels to
satisfy current predictions from sea level rise and storm
surge to 2110. In
term of the planning scheme overlays, the site and most of the Local Business
zoning is not included in the Coastal
Management overlay. The site and sites
with Local Business zoning are identified as sites within the Potentially
Affected by Sea
Level Rise and Storm Surge overlay. In respect to the latter
overlay, the extent of being affected by sea level rise and storm surge
available, but prima-facie the site is less affected than the sites in the Local
Business zone. Coastal vulnerability is
not considered to be critical to
Commercial zoning of the site.
Roads and Infrastructure
The site fronts South Arm Road and Ringwood Road. South Arm Road (South Arm
Secondary Road) is a category 4 road in the Tasmanian
State Road hierarchy.
DIER submits that the road provides the only link with the South Arm Peninsula
and has a vital local transport
role. Nevertheless DIER submitted that the
traffic implications of the proposed development can be satisfactorily
accommodated.
Mr Midson prepared a transport impact assessment (TIA) for the permit
application. The TIA was confined to and substantially demonstrated
traffic impact for the proposed use could be accommodated on the road system.
Mr Midson’s work did not venture into
the merit of commercial zoning in a
transport context.
For the applicant, the imperative for the rezoning was to have South Arm Road
frontage but in terms of the functioning of the State
road this is additional
commercial road frontage that can be avoided.
Turning to the proposed use and development under the permit, the final
arrangements for access to the site cannot be determined
until decisions are
made on the proposed Lauderdale Quay development on the opposite side of South
Arm Road. Lauderdale Quay is
currently subject to a Project of State
Significance assessment. The evidence is that should Lauderdale Quay proceed,
the site would be via the fourth leg of a roundabout with Lauderdale
Quay’s northern access potentially requiring a substantial
adjustment to
the main access to the site.
The proposed development of the site also involves decisions concerning the
existing traffic arrangements. In respect to the Ringwood
Road junction with
South Arm Road, the submissions did not satisfactorily assess the function of
Ringwood Road for the residents
of Lauderdale living north of the canal along
Roches Beach. This appeared to particularly be the case where there was
foreshadowed
a possible requirement for a left turn only from Ringwood Road to
South Arm Road under the scenario for Lauderdale Quay with roundabouts
in the vicinity. The second point on existing road and traffic management was
Mr Midson’s submission to the effect
that the 70km per hour speed limit
for the South Arm Road should be reduced to 60km per hour due to increased
activity (pedestrians,
vehicle access, etc).
DIER’s position was that the South Arm Secondary Road was constructed to
provide for a 70kph speed zone and reducing the speed
limit and narrowing the
road in places would compromise the arterial function of the road. Although Mr
Brown for DIER submitted
that speed limits were not lowered to enable
development, there is the potential to compromise the arterial function of the
for specific development rather than have the development designed to
support the arterial function of the road.
Whilst on traffic grounds the proposed development can be satisfactorily
accommodated, this does not go into the merit of Commercial
zoning of the site.
The planning scheme Planning Policy Framework transportation first objective
‘To encourage the development of a transport network within the city
that is integral with the pattern of land use ensuring
the safe and cost
effective movement of people and goods.’
Commercial zoning and subsequent use that compromises the transport network and
adds to local congestion is not consistent with this
objective. In essence
Commercial zoning of the site will contribute to the overall extent of business
Road adding to the current ribbon development at
Lauderdale. In this context Commercial zoning of the site can be avoided as
are alternative sites.
Water and Sewerage Infrastructure
Water and sewerage services to the site are the responsibility of Southern
Water. Water services are available and no capacity constraints
identified. Sewerage service is the principal matter for consideration.
Clarence Council’s requirement under the permit
was for no development
until a reticulated sewer system is connected to the site.
The subsequent transfer of responsibilities to Southern Water was after
Council’s consideration of the permit and before the
Commission’s
assessment. Mr Polzin of Southern Water advised of the timetable for sewering
Lauderdale expected to be in place
by March 2010. This being the case water and
sewerage services are taken as available infrastructure for the site.
Economic Analysis
The Commission had the benefit of two submitters providing economic analysis in
respect to the draft amendment and permit.
In terms of the underlying data the submissions were in broad agreement on the
demand fundamentals to support a supermarket based
centre so in essence the task
is to draw out of the analysis those conclusions relevant to the draft amendment
and secondly the permit
in terms of a focus on supermarket type
Mr Malkiewicz’s position was that Lauderdale would cover a primary trade
area across South Arm, Acton and Clarendon Vale.
This was in the context of a
trade area for a full line supermarket that did not ‘cannibalise’
the Howrah supermarket
trade area that included Rokeby. Mr Malkiewicz submitted
that, in effect, Lauderdale was the only feasible site and, if approved,
would not be capacity for another national supermarket to trade in the area. Mr
Malkiewicz was of the view that the trade
area and assumptions on turnover were
based on demand from current population at Lauderdale and South Arm (70% of
catchment) and
not the prospective growth in demand in the northern part of the
catchment currently 30% of catchment. Mr Malkiewicz’s submission
acknowledge the planning strategy and preferred growth area in the planning area
as prescribed in the Planning Policy Framework.
Mr Malkiewicz did however contend that new retail development is not clearly
defined in the planning scheme but commented that new
retail development (at
Lauderdale) should not impact on existing centres (at Shoreline) to perform
their role within the hierarchy.
In essence the submission was that there was
insufficient demand for a supermarket based retail centre in Rokeby that will
not significantly
impact on existing retail centres and specifically would
reduce the viability of the Shoreline Shopping Centre and cause unsustainable
trading outcomes and potential closures.
Mr Attwater’s analysis took a different approach to that of Mr Malkiewicz.
Whilst Mr Attwater’s numbers did not differ
greatly, the fundamental
difference was on location for a village centre. Mr Attwater took greater
account of the areas of residential
growth and strategy to favour the Rokeby
valley over Lauderdale.
Whilst both economic analyses were for retailing clients, in the context of the
planning scheme amendment Mr Attwater ’s submission
is preferred. That
is, in determining the location of Commercial zoning, the strategy for growth
areas under the planning scheme
should prevail over the preferred ‘curve
up’ of catchment areas to suit the analysis of a particular supermarket
Mr Attwater ’s analysis was that the proposed development would represent
− 27% increase of Clarence’s existing total supermarket floor space.
− 21% increase of total retail floor space (excluding big box retail at
Cambridge).
− 11% increase of total retail floor space in retail centres.
Mr Attwater accepted that there was a need for an additional village centre but
contended that higher order ‘village centres’
should be located in
key residential (growth) areas. Rokeby would be a more appropriate location for
a future village centre because
Rokeby is the gravity centre of current and
projected population growth.
Finally Mr Attwater acknowledged the preferred location for a village centre at
Rokeby is not within the current commercial zoning
fronting Tollard Drive and
that the provision of a supermarket will not necessarily be in the short term.
Retail Hierarchy
The planning scheme strategy for retail centres refers to maintaining the
pre-eminence of Rosny Park and to consolidate and improve
the existing hierarchy
of retail centres.
The Planning Policy Framework retail strategy gives weight to retaining the
retail hierarchy. The applicant’s description
for the proposal at
Lauderdale was a village centre which in terms of location would not affect the
retail hierarchy.
Mr Carter’s submission provides a useful perspective on the size of the
proposed Commercial zone at Lauderdale and the potential
offered with a 4ha
Site area (ha)
Centre type
Woolworths, Coles, Kmart, BigW
15000 approx
Sub-regional
Neighbourhood
Mr Carter made the following points:
− Lauderdale is 89% the size of Eastlands (part of Rosny Park);
− More than 2 times the size of Shoreline; and
− Once zoned a larger centre could be proposed
In terms of retail hierarchy as noted above the planning scheme strategy refers
to maintaining a retail hierarchy but does not elaborate
on the hierarchy except
in respect to Rosny Park. In terms of identifying a concept of hierarchy Mr
Carter’s representation
included a hierarchy devised by the Property
Council of Australia that places a 15,000m
leasable centre as a sub-regional type centre providing capacity for comparison
or higher order shopping that would not support
the hierarchy based at Rosny
In terms of hierarchy and in reference to the strategy in the planning scheme
the site at Lauderdale offers the capacity for a considerably
larger centre that
would not ‘consolidate or improve the existing hierarchy of retail centres
within the city.’
The evidence for Mr Malkiewicz was clear that with a full line supermarket at
Lauderdale a similar facility could not be supported
at Rokeby and the corollary
is that a full line shopping centre at Rokeby would not be developed because it
would be detrimental
to the Shoreline shopping centre. This prescription may
suit this particular applicant, but this scenario means the policy of the
planning scheme is not being implemented and fails to give direction for the
market to respond in a strategic and coordinated manner.
Clearly notions of
retail strategy or hierarchy should not be taken in isolation of urban
strategies, as retailing is part of the
urban fabric. The strategy is that
Lauderdale and South Arm are not preferred growth areas. If there is valid
departure to the
planning scheme policy in terms of urban growth and the
location of retail centres this should be firstly addressed through the Planning
Policy Framework.
Structure planning
From the preceding considerations it is evident that what is needed is detailed
planning for the Rokeby valley growth corridor to
give effect to the strategy
embodied in the Planning Policy Framework. Detailed planning would confirm
zoning, provision of services,
placement of collector roads and consolidation of
a commercial centre. This detailed planning may include Lauderdale if assessed
as appropriate and the Planning Policy Framework is amended to support this
Commission’s assessment of the s.43A permit
permit is for a retail shopping centre with a proposed retail area of
(comprising 11,022m
floor space plus 3,027m
outdoor retail) internal road
network, parking spaces for 446 cars and comprising the following uses:
supermarket (3225m
), specialty shops (capacity for
some 27 speciality shops) and plant nursery. The medical centre and dental
clinic will add a further
floor space to the
above figures making a total area of 15,299m
above retail areas are taken from the Architect’s Site Floor Plan of 14
March 2008.)
The preceding provides a perspective on the proposed uses and development for
the site, however because of issues raised on the draft
amendment the permit
application does not require further analysis.
Application of State Policies
State Coastal Policy 1996
The site is in the coastal zone as defined in the Policy. Use and development
of the site is consistent with the Policy in terms
of the location of urban
development and that which has the capacity to minimise risk from coastal
processes and hazards.
State Policy on Water Quality Management 1997
The proposed use and development is capable of being prepared in accordance with
the Policy in terms of the disposal of waste water,
the minimization of erosion
and the management and disposal of stormwater.
The national Environmental
Protection Measures are not applicable to the draft amendment.
Schedule 1 Objectives
Part 1 objectives
promote the sustainable development of natural and physical resources and the
maintenance of ecological processes and genetic
Commercial zoning of the site furthers this objective in terms of there being no
defined threats to ecological processes or genetic
(b) to provide for the fair, orderly and sustainable use and development of
air, land and water.
Commercial zoning is not assessed as being fair, orderly or sustainable. The
draft amendment is not consistent with the policy of
the planning scheme and is
not fair or orderly in terms of location.
(c) to encourage public involvement in resource management and
The draft amendment has included public processes.
(d) to facilitate economic development in accordance with the objectives set
out in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c).
The draft amendment
facilitates economic development but not sufficiently in accordance with the
above objectives.
(e) to promote the sharing of responsibility for resource management and
planning between the different spheres of Government, the
community and industry
in the State.
The draft amendment does not further this objective as it is not consistent with
the policy of the planning scheme.
Part 2 Objectives
(a) to require sound strategic planning and
co-ordinated action by State and local government.
Commercial zoning does not demonstrate sound strategic planning for the site as
it does not implement the policy of the planning
(b) to establish a system of planning instruments to be the principal way of
setting objectives, policies and controls for the use,
development and
protection of land.
The draft amendment has largely disregarded the policy of the planning
(c) to ensure that the effects on the environment are considered and provide
for explicit consideration of social and economic effects
when decisions are
made about the use and development of land.
Commercial zoning of the site does not appropriately consider social and
economic effects where the preferred growth area will effectively
be denied a
retail centre.
(d) to require land use and development planning and policy to be easily
integrated with environmental, social, economic, conservation
and resource
management policies at State, regional and municipal levels.
The draft amendment does not represent effective policy
integration.
(e) to provide for the consolidation of approvals for land use or development
and related matters, and to co-ordinate planning approvals
with related
The draft amendment furthers this objective.
(f) to secure a pleasant, efficient and safe working, living and recreational
environment for all Tasmanians and visitors to Tasmania.
Commercial zoning of the site does not readily secure an efficient living
environment in terms of the preferred growth area.
(g) to conserve those buildings, areas or other places which are of
scientific, aesthetic, architectural or historical interest, or
otherwise of
special cultural value.
Commercial zoning of the site furthers this objective in that there is no
evidence of particular values applying.
(h) to protect public infrastructure and other assets and enable the orderly
provision and co-ordination of public utilities and other
facilities for the
benefit of the community.
Commercial zoning of the site has the prospect of not fully protecting South Arm
Road, but furthers the objective for public utilities
and potential benefit for
sections of the community.
(i) to provide a planning framework which fully considers land
capability.
Commercial zoning of the site furthers this objective in that site land
capability constraints, primarily in terms of sea level and
storm surge, have
been sufficiently addressed.
Conclusion on the draft amendment
Taken in isolation, Commercial zoning for the site and proposed use at
Lauderdale has no particular constraints. The rezoning is
solely prompted on
the basis of the permit application. This has led to the draft amendment being
advanced seemingly despite the
Planning Policy Framework and the proposed use
being promoted as essentially offering local retail facilities where the policy
be disregarded. However, the evidence is that there is only capacity in
the Rokeby valley, Lauderdale and South Arm areas for one
national tenant full
line supermarket and capacity for one shopping centre. Other evidence is that
the proposed Commercial zone
is of sufficient size to be classed as allowing for
a subregional centre which will affect the urban fabric for many years. It is
therefore not accepted that the Planning Policy Framework can be disregarded.
The Planning Policy Framework should prevail over
any specific merit for
Commercial zoning on the site.
The draft amendment should be rejected
Conclusion on the draft permit
As the draft amendment is rejected, the permit is refused.
The Commission rejects the draft amendment pursuant to
Section 41(b)
Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
) and refuses the permit.
Robin Nolan
Resource Planning and development Commission
26 August 2009
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (231 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter