URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFC/2025/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Weeding Party Hire Pty Ltd v Salters (Tas) Pty Ltd (No 2) [2025] TASFC 8 (22 September 2025)
[2025] TASFC 8
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (FULL
Weeding Party Hire Pty Ltd v Salters (Tas) Pty
[2025] TASFC 8
: WEEDING PARTY HIRE PTY
SALTERS (TAS) PTY LTD
NATION, Jarrod
3598/2023, 3359/2024
DELIVERED ON:
22 September
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Shanahan CJ, Pearce J, Cuthbertson J
Appeal and New Trial – Appeal - General principles –
Right of appeal – When appeal lies – Error of
Particular cases involving error of law – Denial of
natural justice – Failure to allow opportunity to be heard about
costs should be paid forthwith or "in any event".
Aust Dig Appeal and New Trial [22]
Appeal and New Trial – Appeal - General principles –
Interference with discretion of court below – Particular
– Other matters – Costs – Discretion to
order costs to be paid forthwith or "in any event".
Aust Dig Appeal and New Trial [65]
Procedure – Civil proceedings in State and Territory courts –
Costs – Recovery of costs – Time for payment
– Rule of Court
that costs in the cause of the party in whose favour application determined
– Power to "otherwise order"
– Operation of the general rule
delaying payment until the end of the principal proceedings – Where costs
a party otherwise than in accordance with rule – Whether party
should be entitled to immediate taxation and payment –
Aust Dig Procedure [1725]
Legislation:
Supreme Court Rules 2000
Gunns Limited v Alishah (No 3)
[2009] TASSC 103
19 Tas R 401
Woods v Deputy Commissioner of Taxation
[2012] TASSC 11
21 Tas R 234
REPRESENTATION
Wallis KC, N Willing
Respondents
Solicitors:
Respondents
Groom Kennedy Lawyers & Advisors
[2025] TASFC
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 8/2025
File No 3598/2023, 3359/2024
WEEDING PARTY HIRE PTY LTD v SALTERS (TAS) PTY
and JARROD NATION
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
SHANAHAN CJ
CUTHBERTSON
22 September 2025
of Marshall AJ made 18 March 2025 set aside.
that the respondents' costs thrown away by reason of the adjournment of the
trial granted by Marshall AJ on 6 February 2025
are to be paid by the appellant
in any event.
Serial No 8/2025
File Nos 3598/2023, 3359/2024
WEEDING PARTY HIRE PTY LTD v SALTERS (TAS) PTY
and JARROD NATION
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
SHANAHAN CJ
22 September 2025
have read the reasons for judgment of Pearce J. I agree that the appeal should
be upheld and would join in the orders
File No 3598/2023, 3359/2024
WEEDING PARTY HIRE PTY LTD v SALTERS (TAS) PTY
and JARROD NATION
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
22 September 2025
is an appeal from a costs order made by Marshall AJ. The order was made on 18
March 2025 following determination by his Honour
of the appellant's successful
application for adjournment of the trial of an action. The order is expressed in
these terms:
"The plaintiff is to pay forthwith the defendants'
costs thrown away by the adjournment."
this appeal the appellant does not challenge the order to the extent that it
provides that it should pay the costs thrown away
by the adjournment. What is
challenged is the order that the costs be paid "forthwith."
following reasons the appeal should be allowed.
costs issue arose in these circumstances. The action, brought by the appellant
as plaintiff, concerns a written agreement entered
into by the parties for the
sale of a business by the first respondent to the appellant for $5.5 million.
Part of the purchase price
was payable by a loan of $2,750,000 provided by the
appellant to the first respondent. It was a condition precedent to completion
the sale agreement that the loan agreement would be executed by the parties on
or before the completion date, specified as 1 September
2023 "or such other date
as the parties may agree in writing". The appellant seeks to enforce the
agreement. The determinative issue
on the pleadings is whether an agreement was
reached between the appellant and the first respondent to extend the date of
to 8 September 2023.
trial of the action was listed to begin on 24 February 2025. On 6 February 2025
the learned primary judge heard an application
made by the appellant for an
adjournment of the trial. The adjournment was sought to enable the appellant to
pursue appeals against
two interlocutory orders refusing access to documents on
the respondents' solicitors file which had been referred to in an
The first order appealed against was made by Daly AsJ on 6
December 2024 dismissing the appellant's application for further discovery.
second order was made by Marshall AJ on 9 December 2024 setting aside a subpoena
to produce documents. After hearing argument,
Marshall AJ allowed the
adjournment. His Honour pronounced his order in the following
"HIS HONOUR: All right, thank you. Thank you, counsel, for
your submissions. My major concern at the moment is that if the trial goes
on the dates indicated prior to the hearing of the appeals those appeals will be
more likely than not rendered nugatory. It's
unfortunate – extremely
unfortunate that we are in the current position given that the matter has
previously been adjourned.
I'm inclined to grant the adjournment and take into
account in doing so the undertaking of the plaintiff to seek an expedited
on the appeal. So, the orders of the Court are as follows. One, the
trial dates of 24, 25, 26 February 2025 are vacated. The matter
is adjourned for
hearing sine die on a date to be arranged by the parties with the civil listing
Honour, without interruption or calling for submissions, turned to the question
of the costs of the adjournment and continued:
"HIS HONOUR: And I'm
inclined, subject to any further submissions, to order that the plaintiff pay
the defendant's cost thrown away
by the adjournment. Now, I do so for the reason
that when the matter came before me in relation to permitting the subpoena to
and for documents to be produced pursuant to that subpoena. I effectively
formed the view that I thought Daly AsJ was being backdoored,
colloquially, and mentioned that I would form the same view as him, but thought
the expeditious way forward would be for
an appeal against him to another judge
of this court, not me, not at the Full Court level, could be arranged. And that
thought Mr McTaggart SC had agreed to do and I was stunned to find
that there was also an appeal against me. And even more stunned
to find a ground
relating to inadequate reasoning. So, I say no more about that. So in those
circumstances, unless the plaintiff
wants to argue the point, I want to –
I will order that the plaintiff pay the defendants' costs thrown away by the
adjournment."
to his Honour's remarks, neither counsel had raised the issue of costs or made
an application in any terms. The response of
counsel for the appellant is
recorded as follows:
"MR WALLIS KC: Yes, your Honour. If your
Honour, please.
HIS HONOUR: Nothing else?
MR WALLIS KC: No, your Honour. Nothing else, your Honour.
HIS HONOUR: All right. The Court will now adjourn."
only inference reasonably available from that brief exchange is that counsel for
the appellant did not, when the opportunity
was offered, seek to persuade the
Court to make a costs order different than the one suggested by his Honour.
Counsel for the respondents
said nothing. The Court's record of proceedings
recorded the costs order in these terms:
"The plaintiff [appellant]
is to pay the defendants' [respondents'] costs thrown away by the
adjournment."
the course of the following weeks there was correspondence between the
respective solicitors about the amount of costs claimed
by the respondents to
have been thrown away by the adjournment. In the course of that correspondence,
the solicitors for the appellant
wrote a letter sent by email to the solicitors
for the respondents on 27 February 2025 indicating disagreement with the amount
the costs claimed, but that "in any event, we note that the orders of Acting
Justice Marshall do not require the costs to be paid
forthwith. Accordingly, the
costs should not be taxed until the conclusion of the proceedings." The
solicitors for the respondents
took a different view. Following receipt of that
letter they, by email to the appellant's solicitors dated 14 March 2025,
an email to the judge's associate "in order to seek clarification on
the costs order and avoid the need to go back to Court". The
solicitors for the
appellant responded by email on 17 March 2025:
"It would be
inappropriate for you to write to the Court in the terms you suggested or at
The orders made are clear on their face. If your clients wished to seek
orders which operated forthwith, they ought to have sought
such orders in
Your proposed correspondence seeks to reagitate a matter which has been dealt
If despite what we have said above, your clients wish to write to the Court,
we ask that you include a copy of this email."
the appellant's protestation, the solicitors for the respondents did write to
the associate to Marshall AJ on 17 March 2025:
"We act for the
Defendants in the above proceeding.
As you may recall, on 6 February 2025 the Honourable Acting Justice Marshall
made an order that the Plaintiff pay the Defendants'
costs thrown away by reason
of the adjournment of the trial of the proceeding (as shown in the attached
record of proceedings). The
parties are in disagreement as to the proper
operation of his Honour's order.
Our understanding was that his Honour intended that the order had immediate
effect, and that the costs thrown away were to be payable
forthwith. The
Plaintiff's advisors believe that such costs are only recoverable at the
conclusion of the proceeding.
We are conscious that it may be an inefficient use of Court resources and/or
impossible to have the matter re-listed before his Honour
to clarify. We write
to therefore enquire whether his Honour would be prepared to clarify the
operation of the costs order 'on the
papers'/'in chambers' or if the Court can
otherwise assist?
Please let us know if anything further would be of assistance to the Court
(such as a solicitor's affidavit of the relevant correspondence).
We note that the solicitors for the Plaintiff are copied into this
correspondence, that we sent a copy of this correspondence to them
sending it and that they requested that a copy of their response to us be
included in this email (please see
further hearing was conducted. No other submissions to the Court were made or
invited on the issue of the meaning and effect of
the order which had already
been enunciated or whether some further order, in different terms, should be
made. However, on 18 March
2025 the associate to Marshall AJ sent an email to
the parties stating, "Please see attached a Memorandum of Order confirming that
costs are to be paid forthwith" and attaching the memorandum in the terms set
out at the beginning of these reasons. The notice of
this appeal was filed on 25
March 2025. The solicitor for the respondents subsequently wrote to the
solicitors for the appellants
seeking to enforce an order in the terms expressed
in the "Memorandum of Order". The order was then entered in accordance with r
813 after having been drawn up and sealed by the Court on 18 June 2025. The
sealed order was expressed to have been obtained "upon
the Memorandum of Order
dated 18 March 2025."
power to award costs is a discretionary power. In this jurisdiction it derives
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act
Act), s 12, and the
Supreme Court Rules 2000
(the SCR), r 57. A court has
discretion to order that a party who applies for an adjournment pay the costs of
the application, which
may include the costs thrown away by reason of the
adjournment. Where such an order is made, the court has a further discretion to
order that the costs be paid either forthwith or "in any event". In both cases,
a party will have the costs regardless of the outcome
of the action. Where costs
are payable forthwith, the costs are payable immediately. Where costs are to be
paid "in any event", payment
of the costs is delayed until the conclusion of the
principal proceedings. Moreover, r 65(1) of the SCR provides that "unless the
Court or a judge otherwise orders... the costs of an opposed application in a
proceeding are part of the costs of the cause of the
party in whose favour the
application is determined." That provision was considered and explained by
Porter J (as he then was) in
Limited v Alishah (No 3)
[2009] TASSC 103
19 Tas R 401
v Deputy Commissioner of Taxation
[2012] TASSC 11
There is no need to repeat much of what his Honour said in those cases, but
I would respectfully agree with and adopt his Honour's
reasons. His Honour
determined that r 65 creates a default provision unless the court, in the
exercise of an unfettered discretion,
"otherwise orders". His Honour undertook a
detailed analysis of two of the ways in which a court may "otherwise order" and
the circumstances
which justify a departure from the default position. The first
was the power to order that the party should have the costs "in any
Another way in which the court may "otherwise order" is by providing that the
costs be payable forthwith. His Honour considered,
in both cases, that there is
no threshold requirement of exceptional circumstances to permit departure from
the default position,
but the power is to be exercised when the interests of
justice in a particular case require a departure from the rule.
at [13] Porter AJ set out a number of the policy
considerations behind a rule which delays payment of costs for interlocutory
applications
until the conclusion of the principal proceedings. I would add that
the policy considerations are relevant to the exercise of the
costs discretion
regardless of the effect of the rule. One such consideration is that it is
usually inappropriate to require a party
to pay interlocutory costs immediately,
since that party might ultimately succeed in the substantive proceedings, and
set-offs can
be made in light of the ultimate orders as to costs. At [15] his
Honour set out a non-exhaustive list of the factors relevant to
the exercise of
the discretion to order that costs of interlocutory proceedings be taxed and
payable forthwith:
"Factors which have been identified are:
interlocutory proceedings are sufficiently self-contained and detached, or a
discrete issue has been resolved;
principal proceedings are not likely to be resolved for some time, thus denying
the successful party access to the costs;
interlocutory proceeding has had the effect of resolving a substantive part of
the principal proceedings;
financial position of the party in whose favour the order is made is such that
their ability to continue in the litigation
may be affected ( and the same
effect on the party liable is not likely as a result of paying
immediately);
where there
appears no real likelihood of multiple applications for costs to be taxed and
payable forthwith as the interlocutory proceedings
where there has
been some unreasonable conduct by the party against whom the costs have been
this is an appeal from an order as to costs only, involving the exercise of a
discretionary judgment,
Supreme Court Civil
Procedure Act
have application.
Section 44(1)
applies to costs appeals
and provides:
"44(1) No appeal shall lie to a Full Court from any
judgment or order given or made by a judge, whether sitting in court or in
as to costs only, which are by any statute or any Order or Rule of
Court left to the discretion of the judge, except –
(a) by leave of the judge giving such judgment
or making such order;
(b) in cases in which the judge has declined or
failed to exercise the discretion; or
(c) in cases in which the judge has proceeded on a
wrong principle or otherwise contrary to law, or on irrelevant or insufficient
materials, or has failed to consider any material fact."
this case no leave was sought from Marshall AJ. It is not asserted that his
Honour "declined or failed to exercise the discretion"
although one ground of
appeal alleges that his Honour failed to exercise the discretion judicially.
However, the appellant claims
that the primary judge proceeded "contrary to law"
within the operation of
s 44(1)(c).
applies to appeals from discretionary judgments and
"45(1) A Full Court, on the
hearing of any appeal from any judgment, order, or other determination (whether
final or otherwise) of
a judge, shall not reverse or vary any adjudication of
the judge which is, or purports to be, only the exercise of a discretion which
the judge was entitled by law to exercise, unless it appears to the Full Court
(a) the judge has, in fact, declined or failed
to exercise the discretion;
(b) the judge has proceeded on a wrong principle
or otherwise contrary to law, or on irrelevant or insufficient materials, or has
misapprehended the facts or has failed to consider any material fact;
(c) the adjudication is founded wholly or in part
on an erroneous finding of fact or an erroneous determination in point of law;
(d) by reason of further evidence received by the
Full Court in exercise of the powers conferred by
special circumstance, the adjudication should be reversed or varied."
appellant's notice of appeal advances three grounds:
received email correspondence from the respondents' solicitors which the
appellant had expressly objected to being sent to
the Court, the learned Acting
Justice Marshall erred in law by making the order appealed from
(a) any formal application seeking orders;
(b) having any evidence to support the making of the order; or
(c) providing the plaintiff/appellant any opportunity to be heard;
thereby denying the plaintiff/appellant natural justice and
procedural fairness.
Honour erred in law by failing to judicially exercise the discretion as to
whether the defendants'/respondents' costs of the adjournment
should be paid
3 His Honour erred in law by failing to give any reasons
for making the order.
1(c) of the appeal is made out. Ground 1(a) and ground 2 are very closely
related. Ground 2 is subsumed by ground 1(c) because
the assertion that his
Honour failed to exercise the discretion judicially is based on the failure to
provide the appellant an opportunity
to be heard. In my view, the discretion did
not miscarry as a result of making an order without evidence as asserted in
ground 1(b).
Costs orders are frequently made on the basis of material advanced
in submissions without formal evidence.
is a fundamental principle of the system of justice that courts are obliged to
accord procedural fairness to parties to a proceeding:
HT v The Queen
[2019] HCA 40
, 269 CLR 403 per Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ at [17]. As their
Honours continued at [18], the concern of the law is the avoidance
of practical
injustice. Although the content of procedural fairness may vary according to the
circumstances of particular cases,
the obligation of a court is to give a person
against whom a claim is made a reasonable opportunity to he heard, to appear and
his or her case. In
International Finance Trust Company Ltd v
New South Wales Crimes Commission
(2009) 240 CLR 319
, French CJ said at
"Procedural fairness or natural justice lies at the heart of
the judicial function. In the federal constitutional context, it is an
of the judicial power exercised pursuant to Ch III of the
Constitution
requires that a court be and appear to be impartial, and provide each party to
the proceedings before it with an opportunity
to be heard, to advance its own
case and to answer, by evidence and argument, the case put against it..."
order made by Marshall AJ as enunciated on 6 February 2025 was silent as to when
the costs which were the subject of the order
were to be paid. The time for
payment of those costs was not a matter adverted to by his Honour on that day.
It was not the subject
of any application made by counsel for the respondent or
a submission by either party. At the very least, the meaning and effect
order enunciated on 6 February 2025, as it concerned the time for payment of the
costs thrown away, was uncertain.
appellant submits, correctly in my respectful view, that the email sent by the
solicitors for the respondents to the primary
judge's associate on 17 March 2025
enlivened the exercise of discretion by the primary judge in two respects. The
first question
was whether the respondent ought to be permitted to re-open the
question of costs. The second question was, if the terms of the costs
enunciated on 6 February 2025 were to be reconsidered, how the costs discretion
should then be exercised.
to the first discretion, the order made by Marshall AJ on 6 February 2025 was
not perfected. Until a formal order has been entered
and filed, a judge has the
power to recall or vary that order:
Plimsoll v Drake (No 3)
[1996] TASSC
, after citing
In re Harrison's Share Under a
(1955) Ch 260
[1960] VicRp 101
(1960) VR 651
, Zeeman J concluded that an
order pronounced by a judge can be withdrawn, altered or modified by that judge
until it is drawn up,
passed and entered. I would now also refer to
Autodesk Inc v Dyason (No 2)
176 CLR 300
per Mason CJ at 302, Brennan J at 308, Gaudron J at
DJL v Central Authority
[2000] HCA 17
Burrell v The Queen
238 CLR 218
, all cited in this Court in
[2024] TASFC 6.
However, the power is to be exercised
sparingly and only in appropriate cases:
Oxenbould v The Solicitors' Trust
[2011] TASSC 63
per Blow J (as he then was) at [17]. Blow J's
decision was challenged on appeal but not on this point. In
Zeeman J pointed out that the question of whether to permit a party to re-open a
question of costs which had previously been determined
involved the exercise of
discretion, and it was incumbent on an applicant to establish sufficient reasons
to justify a favourable
exercise of the discretion. His Honour continued at
"It would be inconsistent with the proper administration of
justice if a party could request the Court or a judge to reconsider an
previously made, merely because that party makes that request and wishes to
address some argument in support of the proposition
that an order in an amended
form would be a proper disposition of the original application. The public
interest requires that there
be some finality to litigation. Prima facie that
means that an applicant should place before the judge all the relevant evidence
and address all the relevant arguments in the first instance."
Mason CJ stated in
Autodesk v Dyason
at 303, "the jurisdiction is not to
be exercised for the purpose of re-agitating arguments already considered by the
Court; nor is
it to be exercised simply because the party seeking a rehearing
has failed to present the argument in all its aspects or as well
as it might
have been put."
to the exercise of the second discretion, to be exercised only if the
application to re-open was permitted, the question of whether
the costs thrown
away by reason of the adjournment were payable forthwith required, in the
circumstances of this case, consideration
and application of the issues of
policy and principle discussed in
Gunns Limited v Alishah (No 3)
Woods v Deputy Commissioner of Taxation.
That seems to me to be
particularly so when the appellant's application for an adjournment was
successful, had arisen because of
the failure or refusal of the respondents to
produce documents and that the result of the appeals from the decisions allowing
refusal was then unknown.
fairness demanded that an opportunity be allowed for the appellant to be heard
on both discretionary issues. A decision
on those questions could be reached
only after having given the parties an opportunity to be heard. The appellant
was permitted no
opportunity to be heard on either question. The submission of
counsel for the respondent that the letter written by the appellant's
on 17 March 2025 amounted to an opportunity to be heard should be rejected. To
the contrary, that letter objected to the
issue being "reagitated" and
demonstrated the inability of the appellant to make relevant submissions. With
great respect to the
primary judge, it was procedurally unfair for his Honour,
on the following day, without further hearing or submission and despite
letter from the appellant's solicitors, to make an amended order in Chambers
expressly providing for payment of costs "forthwith".
No notice of an intention
to make an amended order was given. Although the approach made by the solicitors
for the respondents to
the primary judge was expressed in terms of a wish to
"clarify" his Honour's intention, the amended order materially altered the
substance of the order which had previously been enunciated. By failing to allow
an opportunity for the appellant to be heard on
these issues, his Honour
proceeded in a manner which was contrary to law within the operation of the SCCP
Act, s 44(1)(c) and s 45(1)(b).
cannot be determined whether his Honour proceeded on a wrong principle of law,
or on irrelevant or insufficient materials, or
failed to consider any material
fact on the issue which is the subject of this appeal because no reasons for the
order contained
in the later memorandum of order were given. That leads to
consideration of the third ground of appeal. As has been explained in
many cases, for example by the Court of Appeal in Victoria in
[2017] VSCA 173
, reasons are a necessary incident of the judicial process and
are important not simply as a means of enabling appeals to be properly
and determined, but also so as to enable parties to perceive that justice has
been done. I do not intend to suggest that
reasons for costs rulings need to be
lengthy or detailed. In some cases only very brief reasons are required.
However, in this case,
where exercise of the discretion to reconsider an order
already enunciated and order payment of costs forthwith required consideration
of the principles stated earlier in these reasons, a failure to expose any path
of reasoning was an error of law:
Hunter v Transport Accident Commission
[2005] VSCA 1;
those reasons I would allow the appeal and set aside the order made 18 March
issue then arises of what, if any, consequential order should be made. As has
already been made clear, the appellant does not
challenge the order enunciated
by Marshall AJ on 6 February 2025 that it pay the respondents' costs thrown away
by the adjournment.
In my respectful view this Court should remedy any
uncertainty about the terms of that order as it concerns the timing of the
to pay the costs. This Court has, on the hearing of the appeal, power
to make any order or determination which ought to have been
made by the primary
judge: SCCP Act, s 47(1). The Court should reconsider the question of when the
costs of the adjournment should
be paid and re-exercise the discretion. One
reason is that the appointment of Marshall AJ as an acting judge has expired and
Honour is no longer available to determine the matter were it to be remitted
to him. Another reason is to avoid any further cost
and delay. The appropriate
order is that the costs thrown away by the adjournment should be paid by the
appellant in any event. It
was not suggested that the respondents would be shut
out from the litigation if they did not receive the costs forthwith. I think
would be quite difficult for a taxing officer to determine what costs of the
adjournment were, in fact, wasted by the adjournment
until the action is heard
and concluded. Some of the work done to prepare for trial may not need to be
done again, with the result
that the cost was not "thrown away". In that
context, the costs are not inherently self-contained and there remains a real
costs claimed for preparation for trial are duplicated. This is a case
in which it would be inappropriate to require the appellant
to pay interlocutory
costs immediately. If the appellant ultimately succeeds in the action, set-offs
can be made in light of the
ultimate orders as to costs. It was not unreasonable
for the appellant to seek to pursue the appeals against the interlocutory orders
made by Daly AsJ and Marshall AJ and to apply for an adjournment of the trial to
enable it to do so. The application for an adjournment
was allowed. Although it
is not determinative of the issue, this Court is now aware (although the primary
judge was not) that the
interlocutory appeals were successful on the basis that
this Court considered that the disputed documents were relevant and not subject
to legal professional privilege.
File Nos 3598/2023, 3359/2024
WEEDING PARTY HIRE PTY LTD v SALTERS (TAS) PTY
and JARROD NATION
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
CUTHBERTSON J
22 September 2025
have read the reasons for judgment of Pearce J and agree that the appeal should
be upheld for the reasons he has given. I also
agree with the orders he
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (220 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter