URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFC/2025/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Von Stalheim v Director of Housing [2025] TASFC 2 (3 March 2025)
[2025] TASFC 2
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (FULL
Von Stalheim v Director of Housing
: VON STALHEIM, Kurt
DIRECTOR OF
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Brett J, Jago J
Procedure – State and territory courts: jurisdiction, powers and
generally – Other matters – Associate judge or
master – Appeal
against associate judge orders – Notice of appeal filed out of time
– Application for extension
of time for appeal – Merits considered
– No duty for respondent to facilitate sale of homes to tenants like
– No private right of action created by
No viable cause of action disclosed – Grounds of appeal devoid of merit
– Futile exercise to extend time for
grounds that must fail.
Procedure [1073]
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
203 CLR 172
Blue Derby Wild Inc v Forest Practices Authority
[2024] TASFC 1
Elliott v Harris
(1974) 8 SASR 458
Magenta Nominees Pty Ltd
(1999) FCA 152
161 ALR 458
Pyrenees Shire
Council v Day
(1998) HCA 3
192 CLR 330
Sovar v Henry Lane Park Pty
[1967] HCA 31
116 CLR 397
State of Tasmania v MFC
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
262 CLR 362
Legislation:
Supreme Court Civil
Procedure Act
Supreme Court Rules
259, r 680A(2), r 680A(3)(a)
s 6A(3A), s 6B, s
15AA(1), s 17(1)
Acts Interpretation Act 1931
REPRESENTATION
: Self-represented
Solicitors:
Respondent:
State Litigation Office
Judgment Number:
[2025] TASFC 2
paragraphs:
Serial No 2/2025
File No 2151/2021
KURT VON STALHEIM v DIRECTOR OF HOUSING
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
3 March 2025
of the Court:
1 Application dismissed.
Serial No 2/2025
File No: 2151/2021
KURT VON STALHEIM v DIRECTOR OF HOUSING
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
3 March 2025
On 3 March 2025, the Court made an order dismissing the application for
extension of time. We indicated then that we would publish
our reasons for doing
so shortly after. These are those reasons. The substantive reasons are explained
in the judgment of Jago J.
I agree with her Honour. I will, however, spend a few
moments briefly outlining the procedural history of this matter.
The application for extension of time was heard on 10 October 2022, by a Full
Court comprised of Jago and Geason JJ and myself.
It is a matter of record now
that, for reasons described by Martin AJ in
Blue Derby Wild Inc v Forest
Practices Authority
[2024] TASFC 1
, Geason J did not sit as a judge
after November 2023. His Honour resigned as a puisne judge of this Court on 18
November 2024. He
has not written a judgment in this case.
It is clear that Jago J and I retain jurisdiction to determine this case,
notwithstanding the resignation of Geason J. In
Blue Derby Wild Inc v Forest
Practices Authority,
Martin AJ cited a decision of the Full Court of South
Australia in
Elliott v Harris
(1974) 8 SASR 458
, as authority for the
proposition “that if a judge of an appellate court desists from hearing a
case or dies during the hearing,
but a quorum remains, ‘then that quorum
can continue with the hearing and the decision of the members of the quorum will
the decision of the court’”. In this case, a quorum is
constituted by two judges, by virtue of
Supreme Court Civil
Procedure Act
. This authority is directly applicable, given that Geason
J is no longer a Judge, and does not have the authority to give judgment
Notwithstanding that we retain jurisdiction to determine the application, we
conducted a directions hearing for the purpose of inviting
submissions from the
parties as to our proposed course, including whether any injustice arises from
the fact that the original hearing
was conducted by three judges but only two
will now be delivering a decision. The respondent appeared at the directions
and did not argue against the position explained above. The applicant
did not appear. In any event, we are satisfied that no injustice
arises. Jago J
and I are in agreement and our decision would have prevailed in the event of any
dissent by Geason J. There is no
other proper basis for a claim of injustice.
Further, given that our conclusion is that we retain jurisdiction to determine
the matter,
it is arguable that there is no proper basis in any event for us to
decline to do so. This would require the reconstitution of the
Full Court and
the rehearing of the application. This, in our view, would be contrary to the
interests of justice.
Accordingly, the Court made the order dismissing the
application.
KURT VON STALHEIM v DIRECTOR OF HOUSING
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
3 March 2025
appellant appeals an order made by Holt AsJ on 2 August 2021 dismissing an
action commenced by the appellant by writ dated 18
March 2021.
notice of appeal was filed on 24 August 2021. Pursuant to r 680A(3)(a) of the
Supreme Court Rules
an appeal is to be instituted in the case of an
appeal from a final judgment, within 21 days of or after the judgment was
pronounced.
Prima facie then, the appeal is out of time, although I note the
appellant contends to the contrary. At the hearing of the appeal
determined that this Court would defer making a decision as to the extension of
time until it had heard and considered submissions
relevant to the merit of the
appeal generally. The respondent opposes any application to extend time on the
basis that the notice
of appeal must fail on its merits, but not otherwise.
Consideration of the merits of the appeal generally will be the determinative
factor in respect to the application to extend time.
appellant's grounds of appeal
appellant relies upon three grounds of appeal as follows:
AsJ erred in law by misconceiving the nature of the Director of Housing's duties
as a trustee for the Crown and the effect that
this has on the duties imposed
upon that office by the
and how this affects the
interpretation of each and every provision contained therein;
AsJ erred in determining the elements of the tort of breach of a statutory duty,
when concluding that the tort of breach of a
statutory duty must permit a
private action, whilst the law states that the relevant statute must preclude a
private action;
AsJ erred in law when determining the issues relating to damages by failing to
note that courts are required to assume, in the
absence of other evidence, that
public officers will lawfully apply the law as required by statute and that
courts are not entitled
to assume that public officers will misuse a public
office contrary to the law, with the results that, absent other evidence to the
contrary, I would have received the builders grant and hence my loss of this
represents damages to me.
I understand the appellant's contentions the grounds of appeal require a
consideration of:
s 6B of the
compelled the respondent to take actions – in
particular provide the appellant with land and/or finance – such that the
appellant would have been placed in a position whereby he could have satisfied
the eligibility requirements for the Commonwealth
therefore be entitled to receive a benefit of $25,000, and whether the
respondent's failure to do so amounted
to a breach of a statutory duty;
provides the appellant with a private right of action such
that upon proof of a breach of statutory duty, such as alleged above,
appellant is entitled to claim monetary damages; and
Holt AsJ erred by not
the appellant would have received the
benefit of the HomeBuilder Grant had he been able to meet eligibility criteria,
and therefore
upon proof of it being the Director's failure that gave rise to
the appellant not meeting eligibility criteria, Holt AsJ should have
on the basis that damages in the form of the lost HomeBuilder grant
automatically flowed to the appellant, rather than
requiring proof that the
appellant would otherwise be eligible for the HomeBuilder
factual matters which formed the basis of the proceedings before Holt AsJ are
comprehensively set out in the respondents written
submissions:
"3 On 10 March 2021, the appellant filed a writ. The
writ was generally endorsed and the appellant indicated the endorsement was the
statement of claim ('Statement of Claim').
22 April 2021, the respondent filed an interlocutory application to strike out,
and on 30 April 2021 the respondent filed submissions
upon its interlocutory
application to strike out.
29 April 2021, the appellant filed an interlocutory application for summary
applications referred to in [4] and [5] were heard on 5 May 2021. Holt AsJ made
orders, including granting the appellant leave
to amend his statement of
1 June 2021, the appellant filed a writ which was generally endorsed ('Amended
Statement of Claim').
23 June 2021, the respondent filed a further interlocutory application to strike
out, and on 6 July 2021 the respondent filed submissions
upon its interlocutory
application to strike out.
9 July 2021, Holt AsJ provided the appellant with a further opportunity to state
with specificity the various steps that he says
the respondent was under a duty
to perform which would have resulted in the appellant receiving a benefit of
$25,000.00.
13 July 2021, the appellant filed a document titled 'Steps for Liability'.
19 July 2021, the appellant filed a document titled 'Steps for Liability
2 August 2021, the interlocutory applications were heard. That same day, the
learned Associate Judge pronounced judgment on the
interlocutory applications
– his Honour ordered that the action is dismissed, with judgment to be
entered for the defendant,
and with the plaintiff to pay the defendant’s
24 August 2021, the appellant filed the notice of appeal.
7 October 2021, the respondent received a copy of the notice of
Proceedings before Associate Judge
pleadings relied upon by the appellant before Holt AsJ stated that the cause of
action was "a tort, breach of a statutory duty".
The appellant in his argument
before Holt AsJ contended, in summary, that s 6B of the
duties on the respondent to do a number of things, and had the respondent done
those things, the appellant would have received
the Commonwealth Home Builder
essence of the pleadings filed by the appellant were summarised by Holt AsJ as
"6 The plaintiff's amended statement of claim comprises 43
paragraphs. The plaintiff says in his pleading that he has been a tenant
defendant since 1996. The pleading goes on to say that Commonwealth grants of
$25,000 each were available for people who were
to be the owner/occupiers of
houses built pursuant to a building contract entered into between 4 June and 31
December 2020, and that
reduced grants of $15,000 were available for building
contracts entered into between 1 January 2021 and 1 April 2021. By implication
from the pleading the assertion is that the defendant could have provided land
and finance so that Housing Department tenants, including
the plaintiff, could
have accessed the grant. It is said that the failure to do so constituted a
breach of statutory duty, and in
particular a breach of the duty to take into
account a number of the matters set out in the Act.
7 Section 6B of the Act relevantly provides:
'6B Purposes to be taken into account by Director
In performing a function, or exercising a power or duty, under this Act, the
Director must, to the extent practicable given the financial
constraints on the performance or exercise of those functions, powers or duties,
take into account the following purposes
of this Act:
(a) to enable persons to reside in residential accommodation that is safe,
secure, appropriate and affordable;
(b) to promote, and enable, the provision of safe, secure, appropriate and
affordable residential accommodation;
(c) to provide housing assistance, and enable the provision of housing support
services, so as to assist in the economic and social
participation of persons
who, without such provision, may be restricted, in whole or in part, from
economic or social participation
in society;
(d) to encourage and enable the integration, into existing and new housing
communities, of –
(i) persons with diverse characteristics and diverse financial, social and
personal circumstances; and
(ii) residential accommodation that is owned or leased by such persons who
reside in it or that is provided to such persons by way
assistance;
(e) to ensure that housing assistance is, and that housing support services are,
able to be, provided –
(i) to the persons most in need of such assistance and services; and
(ii) for the period that such assistance and services are required to be
provided to those persons;
(f) to encourage the development of flexible and innovative financial
arrangements that facilitate the ownership, leasehold, or occupation,
residential accommodation by persons on low or moderate incomes;
(g) to recognise and respect the wishes and needs of persons to whom housing
assistance is to be provided, and those persons with
whom they reside or are to
(h) to provide housing assistance, and assist in the provision of housing
support services, in a manner that enables effective scrutiny
of such provision
and assistance."
plaintiff's case is that had the defendant considered the matters it was
required to consider, it would have exercised its powers
under the Act so that
the Commonwealth grant would have been made, with the plaintiff receiving the
benefit of it."
argument was rejected by Holt AsJ. He said at [16]-[17]:
being nothing in the wording of the Act
which could arguably lead to a
conclusion as a matter of statutory construction that the Act affords a private
right of action sounding
in damages for breach of statutory duty, I conclude on
this basis that the plaintiff's claim is so clearly untenable that it should
summarily dismissed with judgment.
17 Even if it were arguable that the Act confers a private right of action
sounding in damages, there is nothing in the facts currently
pleaded, nor in the
matters referred to by the plaintiff in his argument, which could possibly
result in him recovering the relief
sought, namely damages in the sum of
at [22]–[ 23] he said;
"22 There is nothing in either the
existing statement of claim or in the steps identified by the plaintiff, which
might form part
of an amended statement of claim, to show how the grant might
have come into the hands of the plaintiff through the exercise of the
powers of the defendant.
23 If through some mechanism such as the defendant acquiring land, putting it
into the name of the plaintiff and then lending or giving
the plaintiff
sufficient funds for the plaintiff to construct a residence, a grant could have
been obtained, it is impossible to
conceive of any process of reasoning which
could result in a finding that the defendant had a duty to the plaintiff to do
these things,
such duty being conformable with the broad purposes, specified in
s 6B of the Act to be taken into account in their entirety for
the benefit of
all Tasmanians needing housing assistance."
concluded the appellant's claim was "clearly untenable" Holt AsJ summarily
dismissed it pursuant to r 259 of the
Supreme Court Rules
basis that on the face of the claim it was "without any prospect of success". It
is not asserted on the appeal that Holt
AsJ misapplied the legal principles
relevant to an interlocutory application to strike out. Rather the appellant
complains Holt AsJ
erred in his conclusion that the claim was "without any
prospect of success".
The nature of the appeal
appeal is brought pursuant to r 680A(2) of the
Supreme Court Rules
which provides:
"(2) A person affected by a judgment of the
Associate Judge may appeal against the whole or any part of the judgment by a
appeal to –
(a) the Full Court, if the judgment was a final judgment; or
(b) a judge sitting in chambers, if the judgment was an interlocutory
judgment and was given in chambers; or
(c) a judge sitting in court, if the judgment was an interlocutory judgment
and was given in court."
This was a final judgment.
State of Tasmania v MFC
[2020] TASSC 23
it was noted that to succeed the
appellant must demonstrate "some legal, factual or discretionary error"
infecting the orders made
by Holt AsJ.
Section 191B
Supreme Court
Civil Procedure Act
provides for appeals against orders by the
Associate Judge is to be an appeal by way of a re-hearing.
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
203 CLR 172
, Gaudron, McHugh,
Gummow and Hayne JJ said in relation to the distinction between an appeal by way
of re-hearing and an appeal by
way of a hearing de novo:
former case, the powers of the appellant court are exercisable only where the
appellant can demonstrate that, having regard
to the evidence now before the
appellant court, the order that is the subject of the appeal is the result of
some legal, factual
or discretionary error, whereas, in the latter case those
powers may be exercised regardless of error."
Accordingly
for the appellant to be successful on this appeal he must demonstrate "some
legal factual or discretionary error" infecting
the orders made by the Associate
ground 1, the appellant asserts that the Associate Judge erred in some undefined
way in his assessment of the respondent's duties.
As I understand the
appellant's arguments, he contends s 6B of the
imposed a duty
upon the respondent to provide the appellant with affordable accommodation that
may be purchased by him, and secondly
imposed a duty upon the respondent to
provide the appellant with flexible and innovative financial arrangements that
would facilitate
such a purchase. The appellant contends that if the respondent
had fulfilled these duties, the appellant would have been in a position
satisfy the eligibility requirements for the Commonwealth HomeBuilder Grant and
would therefore have received a benefit of $25,000.
The respondent's failure to
fulfil such duties amounts to a breach of statutory duty.
oral argument before this Court the appellant, in reference to this ground
"The core fundamental point is that the Director of
Housing, whilst being a corporation sole, is also in the position of acting as
trustee for the Crown. That is to say that he has certain properties and powers
which he holds for the benefit of the Crown, as
with any other trustee, and he
has an Act which specifies how they are to be used and for what purpose. A
failure to utilise them
for that purpose under any circumstances leads any
decision or any action of the Director of Housing as being corrupt and
appellant further submitted:
"The long title of the Housing Act
states that the purpose of Act is the provision of housing assistance and
improvement of housing
conditions and purpose – of persons in this State,
the provision of assistance to persons or bodies providing housing support
services, and the undertaking of activities that are consistent with the
achievement of those purposes. It is my contention, your
Honour, that this is
not inconsistent with the duties imposed by s6B, and equally, in reverse, the
duties contained within s6B are
not inconsistent with the long title of the
The director, therefore, must act to ensure that at some point a person is
given the opportunity to buy their own home, as contained
in s6B and in my case,
given the nature and extent of the conduct directed against me over a large
number of years, there was a reasonable
expectation of compensation which could
be used to pay for such a dwelling, either with or without litigation.
The Director of Housing's duties contained in s6B require him to use the
powers within the Act to provide housing for those who are
eligible and by
saying that it is to provide housing, I’m not merely referring to rental
housing, I am referring to the whole
range of support contained within the Act.
For the Director of Housing to act in any other way is inherently void and
corrupt, and
hence invalid. The associate justice in his decision at paragraphs
21 to 24 stated that I did not provide a mechanism by which I
could conceivably
become eligible for the home builders grant.
The avenue I provided was s17, which allows for the rental purchase of homes,
which would have allowed for ownership for the purposes
of the Commonwealth
. This combined with
the director’s duties imposed by the statute and the fact that he is
required as a trustee of the Crown
provide new to home ownership to the extent
desired by a person ought to be enough to satisfy any court.
...the core fundamental point is that the
is designed to provide a
pathway to home ownership. The director had a duty imposed by statute to
provide this avenue where a person
desires to achieve home ownership and this
was pointed to a court."
paras [21] to [23] of his decision Holt AsJ said:
"[21] According to
information published by the Tasmanian Government, and publicly available, under
the scheme of grants referred
to by the plaintiff, applicants had to satisfy
eligibility criteria starting with an applicant having to be a natural person.
criterion is that the applicant owns the land upon which the house is to
be built at the time at which the applicant enters into
the building contract
for the construction of a house. There are several other eligibility criteria
which I need not mention.
[22] There is nothing in either the existing statement of claim or in the
steps identified by the plaintiff, which might form part
of an amended statement
of claim, to show how the grant might have come into the hands of the plaintiff
through the exercise of the
statutory powers of the defendant.
[23] If through some mechanism such as the defendant acquiring land, putting
it into the name of the plaintiff and then lending or
giving the plaintiff
sufficient funds for the plaintiff to construct a residence, a grant could have
been obtained, it is impossible
to conceive of any process of reasoning which
could result in a finding that the defendant had a duty to the plaintiff to do
things, such duty being conformable with the broad purposes, specified in
s 6B of the Act to be taken into account in their entirety
for the benefit of
all Tasmanians needing housing assistance".
appellant's contention that the respondent had an obligation pursuant to s 6B of
to take action to his benefit is flawed. Section 6B of the
as set out at [6] above imposes no obligation upon the
respondent to do any such thing. Moreover, the appellant has failed to identify
with any precision what specific duty he says was imposed upon the respondent
which if carried out would have resulted in him being
positioned to satisfy the
eligibility criteria of the HomeBuilder Grant. For example, he does not identify
any obligation upon the
respondent to facilitate land or home ownership for his
benefit, or any obligation to provide monies which might lead to home or
ownership, and therefore satisfy a fundamental criteria of the HomeBuilders
Eligibility
requirements for the Commonwealth HomeBuilder Grant are set out in
. Relevantly here, in the case of a
renovation the applicant must own the home and be utilising it as their
principle place of residence,
and in the case of a new build, own the land upon
which the residence is to be built at the time the building contract is entered
into. There is nothing contained in the pleadings which were before Holt AsJ to
establish what duty the respondent had to facilitate
the appellant being placed
into either of these positions, such that he might become eligible to receive
the HomeBuilder Grant.
Holt AsJ was correct to conclude there was "nothing in
the existing statement of claim or in the steps identified by the plaintiff
which might form part of an amended statement of claim, to show how the grant
might have come into the hands of the plaintiff through
the exercise of the
statutory powers of the defendant".
error is demonstrated in the Associate Judge's conclusion that there was nothing
in the pleadings to show how the grant may have
come into the appellants hands
through the exercise of the statutory powers of the respondent.
this Court the appellant relied upon s 17 of the
, and argued
the respondent had an obligation to offer him a pathway to homeownership either
through a direct purchase or through
a rental purchase. Again, the appellant's
argument ignores the wording of the legislative provision.
17 relevantly provides:
"17 Sale of land, whether or not
dwelling-house situated on the land
(1) Subject to this Act, the Director may sell to any eligible person land
or a share of or interest in land, whether or not there
is a dwelling-house
situated on the land, if such person or his or her spouse, if any, is not the
owner of a dwelling-house within
this State.
(1AA) For the purposes of subsection (1), a spouse includes the person with
whom a person is in a significant relationship, within
the meaning of the
Relationships Act 2003
(1A) A person who desires to purchase land or a share of or interest in land
under subsection (1) shall make application in that
behalf, as prescribed, to
the Director.
(1B) On receipt of an application under subsection (1A) of this section, the
Director, if he or she is satisfied that it is proper
that the application be
granted, may enter into a contract for the sale to the applicant, or to the
applicant and any other eligible
person stipulated by the applicant, in
accordance with the provisions of this Part of the land or a share of or
interest in the land.
(2) The sale may be at such price and upon such terms and conditions as may
be determined by the Director.
(5) The purchaser of land on which a dwelling-house is situated may occupy
as a tenant the dwelling-house–
(a) on such terms and conditions as the Director may determine; and
(6) Subject to this section, if the purchaser has complied to the
satisfaction of the Director with the conditions contained in the
contract of
sale the Director, upon payment by the purchaser to the Director of all moneys
owing to the Director under the contract
of sale, may transfer land or a share
of or interest in land to the purchaser.
executed in pursuance of this section shall be borne by the purchaser."
application of basic principles of statutory interpretation, and an application
Acts Interpretation Act 1931
which provides in any
act the word "may" is to be construed as discretionary, leads to a conclusion
that the section is discretionary
in nature, and enlivened by an application
being made by a prospective purchaser. It in no way mandates the respondent to
the sale of homes to tenants such as the appellant. It would be
inapposite for the provision to be interpreted as imposing a duty
respondent to be proactive and bring about such sales absent appropriate
applications. In any event, there was nothing within
the pleadings before Holt
AsJ which set out the facts the appellant relied upon to demonstrate the
respondent had an obligation or
duty pursuant to this legislative provision to
facilitate land or home ownership for his benefit. Indeed, it is hard to
the factual basis that might exist, let alone be pleaded, that would
establish such an obligation or duty upon the respondent.
1 is without merit and must fail.
By ground 2 the appellant asserts Holt AsJ fell into error when he determined
the question of whether a statute confers a private
right of action is a matter
of statutory construction; and secondly by rejecting the proposition that for no
private right of action
to arise, the statute must expressly preclude it.
[16] Holt AsJ said;
"There being nothing in the wording of the Act
which could arguably lead to a conclusion
as a matter of statutory
construction
that the Act affords a private right of action sounding in
damages for breach of statutory duty, I conclude on this basis the plaintiff's
claim is so clearly untenable that it should be summarily dismissed with
judgement" (emphasis added).
starting point for ascertaining the meaning of any statutory provision is always
the words themselves, read with an understanding
of the context and purpose of
the legislation.
In SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2017] HCA 34
262 CLR 362
Kiefel CJ, Nettle and Gordon JJ said
"The starting point for the ascertainment of the meaning of
a statutory provision is the text of the statute whilst, at the same time,
regard is had to its context and purpose. Context should be regarded at this
first stage and not at some later stage and it should
be regarded in its widest
sense. This is not to deny the importance of the natural and ordinary meaning
of a word, namely how it
is ordinarily understood in discourse, to the process
of construction. Considerations of context and purpose simply recognise that,
understood in its statutory, historical or other context, some other meaning of
a word may be suggested, and so too, if its ordinary
meaning is not consistent
with the statutory purpose, that meaning must be rejected." (footnotes
Whether or not a statute provides for a private right of action clearly
necessitates an exercise in statutory interpretation. I
do not understand how
the appellant asserts a determination can be made as to whether parliament
intended to create a private actionable
right within a particular legislative
provision, without embarking upon an exercise of statutory interpretation. The
gravamen of
the appellant's argument seemed to me to rest in the assertion that
Holt AsJ erred in concluding no private right of action arose
in circumstances
where it had not been expressly precluded by the words of the statute. To this
extent the appellant's argument
is circular because the very exercise the
appellant seeks this Court to undertake involves an exercise in statutory
interpretation.
Nevertheless, the appellant did not disavow reliance on this
aspect of ground 2, and to the extent it is necessary to determine it,
appellant's argument is clearly without foundation.
Sovar v Henry Lane Park Pty Ltd
[1967] HCA 31
116 CLR 397
"The intention that such a private right shall exist is
not, as some observations made in the Supreme Court in this case may be thought
to suggest, conjured up by judges to give effect to their own ideas of policy
and then 'imputed' to the legislature. The legitimate
endeavour of the courts is
to determine what inference really arises, on a balance of considerations, from
the nature, scope and
terms of the statute, including the nature of the evil
against which it is directed, the nature of the conduct prescribed, the
pre-existing
state of the law, and, generally, the whole range of circumstances
relevant upon a question of statutory interpretation : see Martin
District of the Australasian Coal and Shale Employees' Federation Workers'
Industrial Union of Australia (Mining Department)
[1934] NSWStRp 57
(1934) 34 SR (NSW) 593
596 , and cases there cited. It is not a question of the actual intention of the
legislators, but of the proper inference to
be perceived upon a consideration of
the document in the light of all its surrounding circumstances. Of course, as
reported cases
illustrate again and again, decisions given upon enactments which
seem fairly comparable will not always be easy to reconcile with
one another,
for upon questions of inference some lack of uniformity of opinion is to be
expected. But that is no justification,
it seems to me, for seeing the task as
other than a genuine exercise in interpretation."
There is nothing within the wording of the
to directly suggest
it gives rise to a private right of action. Equally, there is no provision which
expressly precludes the availability
of such a right of action. Therefore the
question becomes whether there is a basis from which the court can properly
a private right of action arises. In the absence of clear words of
legislative intent to suggest such a right arises, it is difficult
to see upon
what basis such an inference can be reasonably and properly drawn.
Pyrenees Shire Council v Day
(1998) HCA 3
192 CLR 330
at 347 Brennan CJ
"No duty breach of which sounds in damages can be imposed
when the power is intended to be exercised for the benefit of the public
generally and not for the protection of the person or property of members of a
particular class..."
is necessary to consider then whether the statutory obligations contained within
exist for the benefit of the general public or a particular
person or class of persons.
is a scheme of social welfare for the provision of housing
assistance. The long title of the
provides that it
"An Act relating to the provision of housing assistance to, and
improving the housing conditions of, persons in this State, the provision
assistance to persons or bodies providing housing support services, and the
undertaking of activities that are consistent with
the achievement of those
with this, s 2 of the
states that the purposes of the Act are:
(a) to provide, or to enable the provision of, housing assistance
to eligible persons; and
(b) to assist in the provision of housing support services to eligible
purpose and intent of the
weighs in favour of it being a
statutory scheme directed at the benefit of the community at large, rather than
a specified class
of individuals. It speaks in terms of "persons in this State".
The provision of housing assistance creates benefit to the community
by improving health outcomes, decreasing the likelihood of involvement with the
criminal justice system and enhancing
employment and educational opportunities
with a resultant economic benefit to society via future costs savings. The Act
the respondent with various discretionary powers directed at furthering
the purposes of the Act, but the Act does not create a duty
to act in any
particular way to any specified person or class of persons.
can identify no provision within the
that imposes upon the
respondent a duty to act for the benefit of the appellant. Moreover, the
appellant throughout the course of
his submissions did not identify any such
provision. Indeed, in the main, the
is not proscriptive in
terms of actions that the respondent must take to protect an individual against
a particular type of harm.
Instead it provides the respondent with various
powers expressed in permissive language, which are directed at furthering the
of the Act. For example, see s 6A(3A), s 6B, s 15AA(1), s 17(1) of the
my view, it would be extraordinary to extrapolate from such discretionary
provisions, a conclusion such as that which is contended
for by the appellant
namely; that the respondent owed him a duty to provide affordable and
appropriate accommodation which may be
purchased by him via innovative financial
arrangements, and if the respondent failed to provide him with the opportunity
such a purchase, it amounted to a breach of statutory duty such that he
is entitled to a claim for monetary damages. Such a conclusion
nonsensical and contrary to the text and context of the Act.
regard to the nature and purpose of the
there is no proper
basis from which it could be inferred that the intention of the legislature was
to create a private right. Clearly,
the respondent is required to exercise its
powers in a manner that benefits the public generally. The operation of the
is not limited to the benefit of a specified class of persons,
as evidenced by provisions such as s 6B, which refers to a wide variety
persons including:
generally: s 6B(a):
persons who,
without the provision of housing assistance and housing support services, may be
restricted in whole or in part, from
economic or social participation in
society: s 6B(c);
communities of
persons with diverse characteristics with diverse financial, social and personal
circumstances and residential accommodation
that is owned or leased by such
persons who reside in it, or that is provided to such persons by way of housing
assistance: s 6B(d);
the persons most
in need of housing assistance and housing support services: s 6B(e);
persons to whom
housing assistance is provided: s 6B(f).
reading of the whole of the
supports a conclusion that the
statutory obligations operate for the benefit of the public at large and not
just a specified class
of persons. I can identify no rational reason to infer a
legislative intention to create a private right of action which sounds in
though I am of the view the
does not create a private right for
any individual, I add for the sake of completeness that, even if it did, the
pleadings that were
before Holt AsJ did not disclose a reasonable cause of
action. The pleadings obtusely stated the cause of action to be "a tort, breach
of statutory duty" but they did not plead the statutory provision said to give
rise to the duty, they did not plead the facts alleged
to amount to the breach
of the purported duty, they did not plead the basis upon which the appellant
claimed he was a person to whom
the duty was owed, they did not plead the facts
relied upon to demonstrate the appellant would have received the benefit of the
had the duty been fulfilled, nor did they plead the basis upon which the
appellant asserted he was entitled to relief. When considering
the allegations
of fact contained within the pleadings, it is difficult to comprehend how Holt
AsJ could have concluded anything
other than, the cause of action was "so
obviously untenable that it could not possibly succeed". See
Magenta Nominees Pty Ltd
(1999) FCA 152
161 ALR 458
ground must fail.
I understand the appellant's third ground of appeal, he asserts Holt AsJ fell
into error by not proceeding upon a presumption
that if the appellant had been
in a position to purchase or build a home, he would inevitably have received the
benefit of the HomeBuilder
Grant, regardless of the existence of the other
eligibility criteria as set out in
, and therefore it follows that upon proof of the Director's failure
to fulfil his duty to position the appellant to purchase or build
a home, his
loss of the benefit of the $25,000.00 HomeBuilder Grant can be presumed without
the need for the appellant to establish
any further entitlement to relief.
appellant has referred to no authority which supports his proposition. The
eligibility criteria is relatively detailed. It includes
for example, criteria
relevant to citizenship, taxable income, length of occupation of premises and/or
ownership of land, prior receipt
of like grants, specifications as to the
contractors who may be engaged to undertake work pursuant to a grant, and time
periods for
commencement of works. They are criteria directed at maximising the
beneficial use of public monies. Entitlement to the HomeBuilder
Grant was not
simply premised upon being a home or land owner. It was far more complicated
than that. I can identify no sensible
reason why the presumption the appellant
argues for should arise. Indeed, the contrary conclusion is supported by the
detail associated
with the eligibility criteria. If Parliament intended that
land or home ownership be the fundamental eligibility criteria, and proof
balance of the criteria was assisted by a presumption, even if rebuttable, they
would have said so. There is no justification
to cast aside the need to prove
the balance of the eligibility criteria. It was therefore necessary for the
appellant to demonstrate
through his pleadings, why he would, independent from
the question of land ownership, meet eligibility criteria. At the very least,
fundamental considerations such as whether the appellant had the financial means
to enter into a building contract had to be addressed.
It was not at all
appropriate for eligibility to be presumed.
any event, the difficulty the appellant faces in successfully agitating this
ground of appeal again lies in his pleadings. It
is necessary to repeat what
Holt AsJ said in his decision at [6]:
"The plaintiff's amended
statement of claim comprises 43 paragraphs. The plaintiff says in his pleading
that he has been a tenant
of the defendant since 1996. The pleading goes on to
say that Commonwealth Grants of $25,000 each were available for people who
to be the owner/occupiers of houses built pursuant to a building contract
entered into between 4 June and 31 December 2020,
and that reduced grants of
$15,000 were available for building contracts entered into between 1 January
2021 and 1 April 2021. By
implication from the pleading, the assertion is that
the defendant could have provided land and finance so that Housing Department
tenants, including the plaintiff, could have accessed the grant. It is said
that the failure to do so constituted a breach of statutory
duty, and in
particular a breach of the duty to take into account a number of the matters set
out in the Act ...particularly s 6B."
further at [17] and [22]
"[17] ...there is nothing in the facts,
currently pleaded, nor in the matters referred to by the plaintiff in his
argument, which
could possibly result in him recovering the relief sought,
namely damages in the sum of $25,000...
[22] There is nothing in either the existing statement of claim or in the
steps identified by the plaintiff, which might form part
of an amended statement
of claim, to show how the grant might have come into the hands of the plaintiff
through the exercise of the
statutory powers of the defendant."
remained fundamental to the appellant having a reasonable cause of action that
he plead how the respondent's failure to perform
his purported duty caused him
to suffer loss. To suffer such loss it was necessary for the appellant to
establish he had an entitlement
to the HomeBuilder Grant. To simply assert that
the only reason he was not eligible for the HomeBuilder Grant was because the
had not fulfilled his duty to offer him a home or land to purchase,
is tautological. It presumes the very conclusion that purports
to be presented
as a material fact.
appellant's statement of claim and documents subsequently filed which Holt AsJ
treated as an amended statement of claim, disclosed
no viable cause of action.
The appellant simply did not plead the material facts relevant to show that the
respondent was a person
on whom the statute cast a duty, that he was a person
for whose benefit the duty was created and that the respondent had failed to
perform the duty in a manner which gave rise to suffering a loss and having an
entitlement to relief.
can detect no error in the approach taken by Holt AsJ. This ground of appeal
Is leave to extend time required?
The appellant contends he does not require leave to extend time for the filing
of the appeal because he filed the appeal with the
Supreme Court Registry on 24
August, and pursuant to
Acts Interpretation Act
he had until that
date to file his appeal.
Acts Interpretation Act
29 Reckoning of time
(1) Where by or under any Act any period of time,
dated or reckoned from a given day, act, or event, is prescribed or allowed for
any purpose that period of time shall be reckoned exclusively of that day, or of
the day of that act or event, as the case may be.
(2) Where by or under an Act a period is expressed
to be a specified number of clear days or a specified number of days at least,
that period shall be reckoned exclusively both of the given day or of the day of
the specified act or event and also of the day on
which the purpose is to be
fulfilled."
What the appellant's submission fails to recognise however is that r 680A(3)(a)
Supreme Court Rules
provides an appeal is to be instituted in
the case of an appeal from a final judgment, within 21 days of or after the
judgment was
pronounced. What amounts to the institution of an appeal is
defined by r 680A(4) and involves a two-step process. Not only does
of appeal have to be filed, but it must also be served on each party directly
affected by it. The notice of appeal was
not served upon the respondent until 7
October, so even with the reckoning of time provided for by
Interpretation Act
, the appellant did not complete the process necessary to
validly institute the appeal in time. He requires leave to extend the time
the filing of the appeal.
Disposition
Because I am of the view that the appellant's grounds of appeal are devoid of
merit and must fail, the application to extend time
for instituting an appeal is
refused. It would be a futile exercise to extend time.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (190 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter