URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASADT/2020/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:11:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Capocchi v West & Bates [2020] TASADT 8 (25 November 2020)
[2020] TASADT 8
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
Capocchi v West & Bates
[2020] TASADT
CAPOCCHI, Zoe
WEST, Roderick
BATES, Celeste
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
12 November 2020
DELIVERED ON:
25 November 2020
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Chairperson Clues
CATCHWORDS:
Review of dismissal – indirect discrimination
– direct discrimination – prohibited conduct
Anti-Discrimination Act
Work Health and Safety Act
State of Tasmania v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal & Ors
Cain v The Australian Red Cross Society
[2009] TASADT 3
Telstra Corporation
[2008] VCAT 2630
Arkley v Catholic Care Tasmania
[2017] TASADT 3
Costello v Tasmania Police
[2012] TASADT
DETERMINATION:
Decision of the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner to
dismiss the complaint was the correct decision.
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant:
Respondents:
Solicitors:
Complainant:
Respondent:
Fitzgerald & Browne Lawyers
[2020] TASADT 8
Chairperson Clues
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. The complainant has applied to the Anti-Discrimination
Tribunal (the Tribunal) to review a determination made by the
Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner (the Commissioner) on 31 July 2020 dismissing
her complaint.
2. The application, dated 4 August 2020, is made pursuant to
s71(3) of the Anti-Discrimination Act 1998 (the Act) and it is made within
28 days prescribed by s71(4) of the Act.
3. The complainant lodged a complaint with the Commissioner on
19 December 2019 against the respondents.
4. In summary, the complainant
alleges discrimination and conduct which is offensive, humiliating,
intimidating, insulting or ridiculing
on the basis of lawful sexual activity in
connection with accommodation.
5. After conducting an investigation, the
Commissioner dismissed the complaint on the basis that it did not
• indirect discrimination;
discrimination;
• offensive, humiliating, intimidating, insulting or
ridiculing conduct on the basis of lawful sexual activity;
• any other
breach of the Act.
The Nature of the Review Process
6. In State of Tasmania v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal &
[2009] TASSC 48
Porter J discussed the nature of a review under s72 of the
Act. At [39] he held:
conclude that the review carried out by the Tribunal under s72 is a
‘comprehensive’ merits review, and is not
confined to the material
which was before the Commissioner. I think that the proper meaning of the
scheme is that in carrying out
a review, the Tribunal may take into account such
material as it thinks fit.”
7. Porter J went on to say at [42]:
“Under the terms of
s72, the Tribunal is only concerned with whether or not it is satisfied that the
Commissioner made a correct
decision. On those bases, the question for the
Tribunal is what decision ought to have been made, and the Tribunal has to
the same issues as did the
Commissioner.”
8. This review involves a re-examination of the relevant
material, that is, the material considered by the Commissioner, together
any other relevant material provided to the Tribunal. If the Tribunal is
satisfied the Commissioner’s decision was correct,
the complaint lapses.
If it is not so satisfied, the Tribunal is to deal with the complaint as if it
were an inquiry.
The Complainant’s Case
9. The complainant alleges she was the recipient of:
• Indirect discrimination in breach of s15 of the
• Direct discrimination in breach of s14 of the
• Conduct that is offensive, humiliating, intimidating, insulting
or ridiculing on the basis of lawful sexual activity in connection
accommodation (in breach of ss17(1), 16(d) and 22(1)(d) of the Act).
10. In support of her complaint, the complainant relies upon
the following documents that were before the Commissioner as part of
investigation:
(a) the complaint received on 19 December 2019 together with
the following attachments:
• various Facebook and text messages and Rental Agreement
(b) the complainant’s response to the
respondents’ reply (C10);
(c) email from the complainant’s lawyer
(BDF Law) dated 18 June 2020 (C11);
(d) letter from Tasmania Police to BDF
Law dated 4 June 2020 (C12).
11. In summary, the complainant alleges she was indirectly
discriminated against by the respondents. In support of the claim of indirect
discrimination the complainant submits:
• Everyone that books the respondents’ rooms at
Studio 14 and Studio 152 are sex workers who run their own independent
businesses. They are not in an employment relationship with the
respondents.
• It is unreasonable for the respondents to impose the
following condition on the renting of their rooms at Studio 14 and Studio
of the rooms is solely for sensual adult massage. Sex of any kind is not
permitted.”
• Due to the fact that it is unlawful for any person
other than a sex worker to manage their own sexual services business, it
never be reasonable for someone else to control what a sex worker does with
their body or how they conduct their business.
12. The complainant alleges she was directly discriminated
against by the respondents because on 18 November 2019 she was ejected
“Celestial Suite” which was not connected to the rental of rooms at
Studio 14 or Studio 152 and which she had
paid for, for her own personal
13. In support of the claim for prohibited conduct which the complainant
says she was offended, humiliated, intimidated or ridiculed
her on the basis of
lawful sexual activity in connection with accommodation. She relies upon a text
message sent to her by the first
respondent on 19 November 2019 which states as
you lowlife. You have the Studio website on your Locanto ad saying you do full
service at Studio 152 and the photos Celeste
took of you for free in the Studio
you are using those to try to take business away from the other Angels at the
Studio. How dare
you. You really must fucking hate Celeste and want to do
everything you can to hurt her. Ok it’s on. We were going to let
but it’s on. We will brief our barrister and you can expect a writ soon
for breach of contract. You can expect everything
now and everyone to know.
Your ad massively damages the Studio reputation as well in addition to
breaches of your contract. Clients are ringing asking for
full service all
morning. We will he
pursuing you for full damages. We have copies
of the ad.”
The Respondents’ Case
14. In defence of the complaint, the respondents’ rely
upon the following documents that were before the Commissioner as part
investigation:
(a) the complaint received on 19 December 2019 together with
attachments (C4);
(b) the response from the respondents to the complaint
(c) emails and attachments from the first respondent (C13 and
15. The respondents also rely upon the following further
documents tendered in evidence at the review hearing:
(a) October 2020 Survey of Renters (R1);
documents (R2);
(c) letters exchanged between the Commissioner of Police and
R Browne dated 24 October 2018, 22 November 2018, 29 April 2019 and 7
(d) statement of Roderick West (R4).
16. With respect to the complaint of indirect discrimination,
the respondents submit that the imposition of condition 12 in relation
prohibition of sex in the rental agreement (C4) was not unreasonable in the
circumstances because:
(a) The intention of that condition was to protect the
health, welfare and safety of renters of those rooms.
(b) The overwhelming
majority of the renters want the conditions because otherwise they are put under
too much pressure by clients
to have sex. It is easier for them to refuse on
the basis that it is against the rules.
(c) The rooms are used by
subcontractors as their workplace and as a result the respondents have
management or control of fixtures,
fittings or plant in that workplace.
Accordingly they have a duty to ensure the health and safety of the renters and
minimise risks
to them. See
Work Health and Safety Act
(d) By not allowing sex, the following risks are minimised:
• pressure on women to have sex when they do not want
• sexual assault;
• injury (for example, as a result of
having sex on a massage table);
• contracting sexually transmitted
infections.
17. The respondents say there was no direct discrimination on
the basis that the condition imposed by the rental agreement applied
renters equally. All of the terms and conditions of the rental agreement were
accepted by each of the renters every time
they made a booking via the Skedda
platform to rent a room at either Studio 14 or Studio 152.
18. In relation to
the complaint that the eviction from the Celestial Suite on 18 November 2019 was
direct discrimination the respondents
submit, first that I have no jurisdiction
to deal with this complaint as it was not part of the original complaint made to
the Commissioner.
Secondly, and in the alternative, if I do have jurisdiction
there was no direct discrimination in any event, as the terms and conditions
relating to the hire of that room were different and not relevant to the issues
raised in the complaint. Further, the complainant
was evicted as a result of
deceiving the respondents not as a result of her lawful sexual activity.
Deception is not an attribute
in s16 of the Act.
19. In defence of the
complaint of prohibited the respondents say that whilst the choice of language
used the text sent by the first
respondent to the complainant on 19 November
2019 was poor, it was the result of the respondents being very upset that the
complainant
had used the photographs taken at Studio 152 and their website
address to promote her own private business on the Locanto advertising
The photographs were taken for free by the second respondent of the complainant
in Studio 152. They contained “iconic”
furniture and fittings from
that studio. Further, the fact that the complainant used those photographs and
the respondents’
website in her advertisements, directly linked her
business of providing “full service” to the respondents’
where full service was not offered.
20. The text was not sent as a
result of the complainant’s “lawful sexual activity” of
offering full service in
her own business but rather it was sent because the
respondents were very upset that the complainant had directly connected her own
private business with the respondents’ premises.
21. Prior to the review hearing the parties filed a statement
of agreed facts (C1). The following facts are agreed:
(a) At all material times, the complainant was a sole trader
who operated a business providing sexual services.
(b) At all material times,
the second respondent was the registered proprietor of premises known as
premises known as “Studio
152”, which is located at 152 Bathurst
Street in Launceston. The second respondent was responsible for the management
(c) The complainant rented rooms from the second respondent at
Studio 152 on several occasions, and a room from the first respondent
for the owner) at “Studio 14” at 14 Golbourn Street in Hobart on one
occasion only, during the period of 19
July 2019 until about 18 November
(d) At present, there are 35 women currently renting rooms at Studio
152 and Studio 14. These include students earning money to put
through university, women with partners or husbands supporting their families or
trying to buy a house, and single mothers
who do erotic massage work to support
their children so they can earn a higher income. Tenants also include single
women saving
to buy a house.
Mechanisms for renting rooms
(e) Rooms at the
premises owned by the second respondent and rented through the first respondent
were booked by tenants through Skedda
(an online platform) and clients booking
services using “Setmore” via the respondents’ website, via
telephone calls
and by text messages to the telephone number provided by the
respondents’ website. Services were also booked by calls and
texts to the
tenant’s own phones.
(f) Skedda and Setmore are both online booking
platforms which are owned and operated independently of the first and second and
respondents.
(g) The first and second respondents have accounts on Skedda
which allows for tenants to book rooms for periods of time.
respondents do not have control over the complainant’s access to Locanto.
During the period July – December 2019
tenants were free to advertise
their services as they chose. The respondents did not have control over the
tenant’s own advertising.
Nature of sexual services provided by the
complainant
(i) In the sex industry, penetrative sexual services (including
vaginal and anal intercourse) are colloquially referred to as “full
(j) The complainant provided erotic massage services and
sexual services.
(k) The complainant did not consult with the respondents
regarding her provision of “full service” to clients.
agreement and the meeting at Pigeon Hole Café
(l) On or about 18
November 2019 at approximately 2:00pm, the first and second respondents met with
the complainant at the Pigeon
Hole Café in Hobart.
(m) In the course
of the meeting, the complainant volunteered and admitted that she had engaged in
“full service” on the
premises rented from the second
respondent.
(n) The respondents and the complainant left the café at
approximately 2:30pm.
(o) The respondents determined at that time that the
complainant had breached the conditions of her rental agreement.
3:00pm, the complainant was advised by text message from the first respondent
that “we are terminating our rental agreement”.
(q) Following
receipt of that text message, the complainant packed her things and left Studio
(r) The complainant has had no further direct contact with either of the
respondents since this time.
22. The text message referred to in paragraph 9(p) reads as
thank you so much for being honest. However we do need to terminate your
rentals including at Studio 14. We would appreciate
if you could pack up and
leave Studio 14 now that includes access to the Celestial Suite. Warm wishes
Rod and Celeste.”
23. In addition to the agreed facts referred to above, I make
the following findings of fact based on the evidence:
(a) At all material times the respondents are in the
business of renting rooms to renters who wish to provide sensual adult massage.
The rental agreement imposed the following condition or requirement:
of the rooms is solely for sensual adult massage. Sex of any kind is not
permitted.”
(b) Sex of any kind means full service which includes
vaginal penetration, vaginal oral, oral on the penis and anal
penetration.
(c) Each time a room is booked via Skedda, the renter agrees to
accept the terms and conditions of the rental agreement including
condition 12
referred to in paragraph 23(a) above.
(d) The respondents receive the same
amount of rental from each room booked regardless of how much each renter earns
whilst operating
their own business from the rooms.
(e) The reasons the
respondents give for not permitting full service are as follows:
• It is not the business they are in.
majority of renters want sex prohibited because if one renter offers full
service, this puts pressure on the others
to do it and it takes business away
from those who refuse to do it.
• The renters regard sensual massage as
different to full service. The renters (and in some cases their partners)
support sensual
massage as a way of deriving income, but not full
• Allowing full service would turn the premises into a brothel
which is a completely different business and tends to attract
“underworld” including bikies and drug dealers.
• The risks
and danger associated with working in a brothel are much higher to
• Sensual massage includes massaging the entire body,
including the genitals. The client and the masseuse are generally naked.
is different to full service.
• The majority of renters want to offer
sensual massage and not full service.
• Most rooms only have massage
tables and are only suitable for massage.
• Full service increases
health and safety risks. It involves a higher risk of contracting sexually
transmitted infections.
• The majority of clients at Studio 14 and
Studio 152 do not want full service and would not come to a brothel offering
particularly female clients and couples.
• The respondents and
renters want to operate within the law.
• The renters want a place
where people can operate their business in a safe, secure, clean and well
organised environment.
(f) Studio 14 and Studio 152 have a number of safety
features including multiple CCTV cameras, video doorbells and panic
(g) As part of the rental price, the respondents advertise in the
local newspaper and provided a listing on their website for the
renter if they
(h) There is no restriction on renters doing their own advertising
or providing their own phone number in their private advertisements
or The Examiner or any other advertising platform except for Setmore.
complainant and all of the renters are sex workers. The complainant and the
other renters were/are independent contractors
who rent Studio 14 and Studio 152
as their workplace. Therefore pursuant to
Work Health
and Safety Act 2012
the respondents had/have a duty to all renters to ensure
their health and safety and minimise risks to them.
(j) If renters wish to
use the rooms at Studio 14 and Studio 152 they must abide by the conditions of
the rental agreement.
(k) When the complainant commenced renting rooms at
Studio 152 she accepted the conditions imposed by the respondents in the rental
agreement but after about 2 months she decided that providing full service was
something she could do. She commenced providing full
service to clients at the
respondents’ premises even though she knew she was breaching the terms of
the rental agreement.
(l) The complainant could earn more money if she
performed full service with clients.
(m) On at least one occasion the
complainant complained about another renter who was purportedly providing full
service to clients.
This complaint was made by text on 29 August 2019. The
second respondent responded as follows:
I really don’t want to be known as a brothel.
Not that there’s anything wrong with that.
But it’s not what we created”
The complainant responded:
“I understand. We get
paid more. I know but she can rent a hotel. I can’t and don’t want
to compete with that.”
The second respondent responded:
It wrecks it for u girls.
Totally wrecks it for everyone”
(n) The complainant was privately advertising her services
of “erotic massage” in The Examiner newspaper and on an advertising
platform known as Locanto.
(o) The respondents did remove renters’
private phone numbers from their website.
(p) For several months, the
relationship between the complainant and the respondents was very amicable. On
4 November 2019 the following
text exchange took place between the first
respondent and the complainant. The first respondent stated:
appreciate all you do so much and want to give back where we can and make the
whole thing simpler and easier. There are
some things that have become a but
confusing and a barrier to your booking. We also need to make it
set without changes so it doesn’t keep changing for
The complainant responded:
“I know you do. And
you care, our safety is first.
Spending time with you guys was
wonderful.”
(q) Between 13 and 18 November 2020 the complainant
expressed a number of concerns in relation to the terms and conditions of the
rental agreement. The complainant made a number of complaints including the
A. The cancellation policy made her life a lot more difficult
in terms of childcare.
B. The rent was high enough.
C. She loved working
there but knew she could pick up and work anywhere.
D. She needed to pay for
her own advertising in order to do well.
E. She respected the way the
respondents wanted to run their rental property but it was not cost effective to
her if she had to pay
F. She was thinking about her options.
accepted it was not her rental property and she could either “take it or
H. She did not want to be under a contract as she worked for
I. The Studio phone hardly ever rang.
J. She would prefer not to
be on Setmore as it takes away her control over bookings.
(r) As a result of receiving these complaints it seems the
first respondent made a number of changes to the rental agreement and the
the rooms were booked. The changes included:
A. A 7 day cancellation policy.
B. A set rate for each
C. No private numbers on the website because this resulted in a higher
booking rate and focussed on the renter working on the day.
D. Private phone
numbers could be advertised in any private advertisements.
(s) The text from the first respondent outlining these
changes concludes as follows:
provide incredible support and a place to get angels going in this business. It
would be very sad if you started here and
then fucked Celeste over by leaving
and going privately. Yes you could do it privately but you never would have
even started and
have this amazing opportunity to transform your life. The
studio provides everything and Celeste has literally spent tens of thousands
create the place and security so you are safe. Working from hotels is illegal
and they will throw you out. The rental rates
on the mainland are 3 times as
much and they take a percentage of each client. If you make $1000 Celeste still
only gets the same
The updated rental agreements will be sent shortly and need to be
Hopefully that covers everything. We try to make it work for everyone and
best agreement. The main thing also is that it is set and
does not change. How does all that sound?”
(t) On 18 November 2020 the complainant booked Studio 14 in
Hobart which included access to the Celestial Suite.
(u) The complainant met
with the respondents at the Pigeon Hole Café on that date. At the
meeting the complainant admitted
she had been providing full service to clients
at Studio 152.
(v) After that meeting the respondents sent the following text
to the complainant:
thank you so much for being honest. However we do need to terminate your
rentals including at Studio 14. We would appreciate
if you could pack up and
leave Studio 14 now that includes access to the Celestial Suite. Warm wishes
Rod and Celeste.”
(w) On or about 19 November 2019 the respondents discovered
the complainant had used photos taken of her by the second respondent
152 featuring “iconic” furnishings and fittings from that property
and further that she had referred to the
Studio 152 website on her own Locanto
advertisement, where she was advertising that “**FULL SERVICE NOW
AVAILABLE**”.
(x) The respondents formed the view that the complainant
did this to take business away from the other renters at Studio 152, to hurt
second respondent and damage the reputation of Studio 152 by allowing clients to
believe that full service was now being offered
at Studio 152.
The Commissioner’s Decision
24. With respect to indirect discrimination the Commissioner
determined that the reasons advanced in favour of the conditions imposed
rental agreement “are significant and persuasive”. She said at page
7 of her investigation decision and reasons
for decision (C15):
consider it would not be reasonable for the Act to be used to diminish or
eliminate existing measures that are in place for
women’s safety and to
ensure women are not pressured into having sexual intercourse.
I therefore do not consider the condition to be unreasonable in the
circumstances. As a result, the complaint does not disclose possible
discrimination.”
25. With respect to direct discrimination the Commissioner
stated at page 7 of her decision (C15):
“In this case, Ms
Capocchi has the attribute lawful sexual activity, and the people that the
respondents rent the premises to
also have the attribute lawful sexual activity.
Ms Capocchi is seeking to engage in lawful sexual activity that is contrary to
rental agreement, however.
It appears from the information provided the respondents was
treating all masseuses renting their studios equally, and would have treated
any one who did not comply with the condition in the
rental agreement the same
way. As a result, I consider the complaint does not disclose possible direct
discrimination.”
26. The Commissioner makes no reference to whether the
respondents’ eviction of the complainant from the Celestial Suite on
November 2019 amounted to direct discrimination as alleged by the complainant at
the review hearing. There is no mention of the
Celestial Suite in the
complaint. There is a vague reference in the complaint to the respondents
refusing to allow the complainant
to continue to hire their Airbnb premises from
18 November 2019 but there was no further mention of the Celestial Suite until
for the complainant made her closing submissions at the review
27. In relation to conduct that is offensive, humiliating,
intimidating, insulting or ridiculing on the basis of lawful sexual activity
connection with accommodation the Commissioner says at page 8 of her decision
language used in the messages was not moderate and I accept the messages would
be offensive, insulting and intimidating
to Ms Capocchi.
From the information provided, however, it is clear that the basis for the
messages was not Ms Capocchi’s lawful sexual activity,
but rather that Ms
Capocchi no longer worked out of the respondents’ studios, but had put an
advertisement online stating that
her website was that of the respondents’
studio, used pictures that were taken in the respondents’ studio, and
SERVICE NOW AVAILABLE’.”
28. The Commissioner continues:
“It is clear that this
was the basis for the conduct, rather than Ms Capocchi’s lawful sexual
The complainant therefore does not disclose possible offensive, humiliating,
intimidating, insulting or ridiculing conduct on the
basis of lawful sexual
Preliminary Issues
29. First, the attribute relevant to the allegations of
indirect discrimination (s15), direct discrimination (s14), and prohibited
conduct (s17) is “lawful sexual activity” (s16(d)) and the activity
is in connection with accommodation (s22(1)(d)).
Therefore the threshold
requirements for the Act to apply to the complaint have been
30. Secondly, at the review hearing, counsel for the complainant
submitted in her closing submissions that the complainant had been
subjected to
direct discrimination because on 18 November 2019 she was evicted from the
Celestial Suite on the basis of lawful sexual
activity. She submitted that the
Celestial Suite was unconnected to Studio 14 or Studio 152 and that the
complainant had rented
the Celestial Suite for her own personal
31. Counsel for the respondents submits that the Tribunal has no
complaint and
there was no evidence about it.
32. In the complaint it states:
to the fact that I did not agree to sign the Rental Agreement both Celeste Bates
or Roderick West refused to allow me to
continue to hire their Airbnb premises
from the 18 November 2019, which means I have been discriminated for lawful
sexual activity.”
33. There is no mention of the Celestial Suite in the
investigation material.
34. In the complainant’s response to the
respondents’ reply, the termination on 18 November 2019 is referred to in
following terms:
[the respondents]
advised Zoe by text message ‘We are terminating
our rental agreement right now’. Zoe is aware the respondents tried to
re-rent that room that day.”
35. The only reference is to a single room at Studio
36. The Commissioner makes no reference to the Celestial Suite in her
decision. At the review hearing there was no evidence led about
the terms of
the rental of the Celestial Suite. The only mention of the Celestial Suite in
the evidence is in the attached text
message to the agreed facts. (C1)
consider the eviction from the Celestial Suite to be a new complaint and the
Tribunal has no power to receive a new complaint,
only the Commissioner has that
In the circumstances I determine that I have no jurisdiction to deal with the
allegation of direct discrimination as a result of
the complainant being evicted
from the Celestial Suite.
Indirect Discrimination
38. The case of Cain v The Australian Red Cross Society
sets out the elements of indirect discrimination at [56] and
elements of indirect discrimination are set out in
in the following terms:
‘(1) Indirect discrimination takes place if a person imposes a
condition, requirement or practice which is unreasonable in the
circumstances
and has the effect of disadvantaging a member of a group of people who -
(a) share, or are believed to share, a prescribed attribute; or
(b) share, or are believed to share, any of the characteristics
to that attribute-
more than a person who is not a member of that group.
(2) For indirect discrimination to take place, it is not necessary that the
person who discriminates is aware that the condition,
requirement or practice
disadvantages the group of people.’
[57] The elements of
are as follows:
1. Imposition of ‘condition, requirement or
condition, requirement or practice is unreasonable in all the
circumstances.
3. It has the effect of disadvantaging a
complainant.
complainant is disadvantaged as a member of a group of people who share or are
believed to share a prescribed attribute more than
a person who is not a member
of that group.”
39. In this case, the respondents imposed a condition in their
rental agreement (C4) that renters could not provide full service to
whilst renting rooms at Studio 14 or Studio 152.
40. The question of whether
the imposition of that condition is unreasonable must be determined with
reference to the activity in
which the putative discriminator is engaged. When
assessing what is reasonable, health and safety requirements are factors that
can be taken into
issue arising from s15 is whether the condition imposed to disallow renters from
providing full service to clients whilst
renting the respondent’s premises
is reasonable.
42. The respondents’ position is that the condition is
reasonable for the reasons outlined in paragraph 23(e) above (the
43. The complainant’s position is that the condition is
unreasonable because she runs her own independent business as a sex
it is unreasonable for the respondents to control what lawful sexual activity
she offers or how she conducts her business.
44. The Tribunal accepts that
there are negative consequences that flow from the imposition of this condition
upon the complainant
or any other sex worker who wishes to offer full service at
the respondents’ premises.
45. From the perspective of the complainant
the condition seems unfair. She claims she adopts safe sex practices whilst
sensual adult massage or full service
46. The complainant argues
that the condition is unlawful on the basis that the respondents cannot control
what she does with her
body. She claims that a condition that is unlawful
cannot be reasonable.
47. The Tasmania Police wrote to the
complainant’s counsel on 4 June 2020 (C12) and advised as follows:
Commissioner has no proffered any opinion as to the lawfulness of the agreement
forwarded with your letter. Solicitors
acting for Mr West and Ms Bates have in
the past forwarded him a copy of a pro-forma agreement in similar terms and
asked him to
advise whether he has formed the belief referred to in section
16(1) of the Sex Industry Offences Act 1991 in relation to the premises
Bathurst Street, Launceston. He responded that he had not formed that belief.
He did not consider the lawfulness of the
agreement.”
48. There is no evidence before the Tribunal that the condition
imposed (condition 12) in the rental agreement is unlawful. The Tribunal
that the condition serves a legitimate purpose and is not unreasonable. The
Tribunal finds that the condition imposed is for
the benefit of the majority of
the renters of the premises and that the reasons the respondents provide for the
imposition of the
condition are not unreasonable.
Direct Discrimination
49. Direct discrimination is defined in s14 of the Act which
discrimination
(1) Discrimination to which this Act applies is direct or indirect
discrimination on the grounds of any prescribed attribute.
(2) Direct discrimination takes place if a person treats another person on
the basis of any prescribed attribute, imputed prescribed
attribute or a
characteristic imputed to that attribute less favourably than a person without
that attribute or characteristic.
(3) For direct discrimination to take place, it is not necessary -
(a) that the prescribed attribute be the sole or dominant ground for the
unfavourable treatment; or
(b) that the person who discriminates regards the treatment as unfavourable;
(c) that the person who discriminates has any particular motive in
discriminating.”
50. In Cain v The Australian Red Cross Society (supra) at [405]
the Tribunal set out the following issues that need to be determined
in order to
decide whether conduct amounts to direct discrimination:
“1. Whether the reason
for the treatment is on the basis of the prescribed attributes of lawful sexual
activity or sexual orientation
or a characteristic imputed to that
the treatment of the complainant was less favourable or equal
identification of the comparator - the person without that attribute or
characteristic.
4. Whether the complainant suffered a
detriment.”
51. The submission of the complainant is that the reason why
she was evicted from the respondents’ premises was because of the
prescribed attribute of lawful sexual activity. The complainant submits that
the reason for her eviction was because she admitted
she had provided full
service to clients at the respondents’ premises in breach of the rental
agreement. It was argued on
behalf of the complainant that full service is a
fundamental characteristic of the prescribed attribute of lawful sexual
52. It is the respondents’ submission that the reason for
evicting the complainant from their premises was not because she was
worker offering full service to clients but because she wanted to provide full
service at their premises and that did not fit
within their unique business
model where the focus is on adult sensual massage and where the wish of the
respondents and the majority
of other renters is to maintain that focus to
reduce the health and safety risks to the renters who operate adult sensual
businesses from the respondents’ premises.
53. As stated by the
Tribunal in Cain v The Australian Red Cross Society (supra) at [410] the first
step for the Tribunal to take
is to ascertain the “true reason” or
the “genuine reason” for the alleged discriminator’s act and
answer the question “Why was the aggrieved person treated as she
54. The evidence does not support a finding that the complainant
was evicted from the respondents’ premises because she is a
sex worker who
wishes to offer full service but because sex workers who offer full service do
not fit within the respondents’
business model and pose a higher risk to
health and safety to renters of the respondents’ premises.
Tribunal finds that the reason for the respondents’ conduct in evicting
the complainant from their premises was not
because she was a lawfully employed
sex worker who offered full service (the protected attribute) but because she
had performed and
proposed to perform in the future full service at the
respondents’ premises in breach of the rental agreement. This is not
distinguishing characteristic of lawful sexual activity.
56. On behalf of the
complainant it was argued that she wanted to perform full service at the
respondents’ premises and the
respondents treated her unfavourably by not
allowing her to do so.
57. The evidence was that at the meeting at the Pigeon
Hole Café on 18 November 2019, the complainant was not prepared to accept
the terms and conditions imposed by respondents in relation to the use of their
premises and she had not accepted them for some months.
The response of the
respondents was that if the complainant did not want to accept the terms and
conditions she could not rent their
58. This leads to the question of
how would a person without the attribute of lawful sexual activity have been
treated by the respondents?
59. The Tribunal finds, based on the evidence,
that anyone who breached the rental agreement had been evicted and would have
evicted, so in that respect the respondents’ conduct towards the
complainant was fair and even-handed.
60. There is no doubt that the
complainant suffered a detriment as a result of the respondents evicting her
from their premises.
She lost the opportunity to work from the
respondents’ premises on 18 November 2019 and in the future. She also
lost the opportunity
to earn more money providing full service rather than
limiting herself to sensual adult massage.
61. The critical issue in relation
to direct discrimination is the real and genuine reason for the treatment and
not the issue of
detriment. Whilst the complainant has established that she
suffered a detriment, she has not established the reason for the conduct
attribute or a characteristic imputed to that attribute and she has not shown
that another person in the same circumstance
would not have been treated in that
way. In conclusion, the complainant has failed to establish that she was
subjected to direct
discrimination as defined by the Act; see Cain v The
Australian Red Cross Society (supra) at [449].
62. In the case of Drummond v
Telstra Corporation Ltd
[2008] VCAT 2630
Deputy President McNamara said at
people in one form or another possess most of the attributes. It is a frequent
experience in this List that people who
feel they have been unjustly dealt with
whether in employment or other contexts identify what they see as unfair
treatment and their
possession of one or more attributes leaping to the
allegation then that they have been the victims of direct
discrimination.
If this mode of argument were acceptable every instance of unfair dismissal
for instance would also be an instance of direct discrimination
because every
unjustly or allegedly unjustly dismissed employee possesses certain
attributes.”
63. In the case of Arkley v Catholic Care Tasmania & Witt
[2017] TASADT 3
Chairperson Webster (as he then was) stated:
“No complaint of
direct discrimination can be proven or be other than frivolous and lacking in
substance, unless, the prescribed
attribute was a ground for the unfavourable
treatment noting it need not be the sole or dominant ground; see s14(3)(a) of
64. In this case, what the complainant is inviting the Tribunal
to do is find that she was singled out for less favourable treatment
respondents by reason of her lawful sexual activity being her entitlement to
provide full service at the respondents’
65. The evidence is
that the respondents had no problem with sex workers who wanted to provide full
service. They just did not want
sex workers providing full service at their
66. The fact that the complainant feels she has been treated
unfairly does not mean she has been discriminated against. I find there
direct link between the respondents’ decision to cease renting premises to
the complainant and her prescribed attribute
of lawful sexual
67. Based on the above, if the Tribunal is wrong in finding that it
has no jurisdiction to determine the complaint relating to the
complainant’s eviction from the Celestial Suite, the Tribunal further
finds there was no direct discrimination in relation
to the cessation of the
rental of the Celestial Suite as there was no link to that conduct and the
complainant’s attribute
of lawful sexual activity.
Prohibited Conduct
68. Section 17(1) of the Act provides as follows:
person must not engage in any conduct which offends, humiliates, intimidates,
insults or ridicules another person on the
basis of an attribute referred to in
section 16(e), (f), (fa), (g), (h) or (j) in circumstances in which a reasonable
person, having
regard to all the circumstances, would have anticipated that the
other person would be offended, humiliated, intimidated, insulted
ridiculed.”
69. To substantiate a claim pursuant to s17(1) of the Act, the
complainant needs to establish that she was offended, humiliated, intimidated,
insulted or ridiculed on the basis of her lawful sexual activity in
circumstances in which a reasonable person, having regard to
circumstances, would have anticipated that the complainant would be offended,
humiliated, intimidated, insulted or ridiculed.
70. I find that the text
message that the first respondent sent to the complainant on 19 November 2019 in
which he referred to her
as a “lowlife”, threatened legal action and
said “you can expect everything now and everyone to know” was
conduct in which a reasonable person, having regard to all the circumstances,
would have anticipated that the complainant would have
been offended,
humiliated, intimidated or insulted. However, that is not sufficient; the
question that needs to be determined is
whether that conduct was on the basis of
lawful sexual activity.
71. In the case of Costello v Tasmania Police
the Tribunal said at [37]:
complainant asserts that he possesses certain attributes. In this case those
relate to his sexual orientation and disability.
He is, essentially,
dissatisfied with his treatment at the hands of the respondent. He has formed
the view that the basis of the
respondent’s conduct and decision making in
his regard is based upon those attributes. At base he asks that an inference
be drawn that the Act has been transgressed because of the existence of
an attribute and his dissatisfaction with the respondent’s
decisions. There is no evidence to support that conclusion that there is any
link between the two.”
72. The evidence is that neither of the respondents had
anything against sex workers who wanted to provide full service. However,
the reasons that have been referred to, they did not want their premises to be
known as a brothel.
73. After the meeting at the Pigeon Hole Café
where the complainant admitted that she had been providing full service sex to
clients at the respondents’ premises, the respondents sought to end the
relationship amicably. After the meeting at the Pigeon
Hole Café the
first respondent sent a text message to the complainant in the following
thank you so much for being honest. However we do need to terminate your
rentals including at Studio 14. We would appreciate
could pack up and leave Studio 14 now that includes access to the Celestial
Suite. Warm wishes Rod and Celeste.”
74. It was not until 19 November 2019 that the
respondents’ desire to end the relationship amicably changed. This was as
result of the complainant using photographs taken of her at Studio 152 and
using the Studio 152 website address on her own Locanto
advertisement which
stated in bold type “**FULL SERVICE NOW AVAILABLE**”
75. Section 17 requires ascertainment of the true reason for the first
respondent’s conduct. It is the view of the Tribunal
that the comments
made to the complainant by text on 19 November 2019 were not linked to the
prescribed attribute of lawful sexual
activity but rather the comments were in
relation to her use of photographs taken at Studio 152 and the Studio 152
website being
used to promote her own business which provided full service. It
is clearly arguable that the use of the photographs and the website
linked the availability of full service to Studio 152 which was something the
respondents did not want conducted at their
76. In the text message
that the first respondent sent to the complainant on 19 November 2019 he said
“Clients are ringing asking
for full service all morning”. This is
the exact thing that the respondents had been attempting to avoid pursuant to
of the rental agreement.
77. In conclusion, the Tribunal finds that
whilst the text message did contain offensive, humiliating, intimidating and
language directed at the complainant there is no link between that
conduct and the complainant’s attribute of lawful sexual
78. Having considered all of the material and the evidence
before me at the review hearing the Tribunal determines that the decision
Commissioner to dismiss the complainant’s complaint was the correct
decision and accordingly the complaint lapses.
CHAIRPERSON
See s62 of the
Waters v Public
Transport Corporation
[1991] HCA 49
[1991] 173 CLR 349
at pages 378 and
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (212 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter