URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFC/2025/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Weeding Party Hire Pty Ltd v Salters (Tas) Pty Ltd [2025] TASFC 4 (30 May 2025)
[2025] TASFC 4
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (FULL
Weeding Party Hire Pty Ltd v Salters (Tas) Pty
[2025] TASFC 4
: WEEDING PARTY HIRE PTY
SALTERS (TAS) PTY LTD
NATION, Jarrod
3598/2023, 3359/2024
APPEALED FROM:
Weeding Party Hire Pty Ltd v Salters (Tas) Pty Ltd
[2024] TASSC 75
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Wood J, Pearce J, Brett J
Procedure – State and territory courts: jurisdiction, powers and
generally – Discovery and interrogatories – Discovery
and inspection
of documents – Production and inspection of documents – General
matters – Appeals against two interlocutory
decisions heard together
– Interlocutory decision refusing discovery and production of documents on
respondents' solicitor's
file – Documents relevant and legal professional
privilege waived by inconsistent conduct – Interlocutory decision setting
aside subpoena – Legitimate forensic purpose – Appeals
Aust Dig Procedure
[1245-1249]
Legislation:
Evidence Act 2001
Court Civil Procedure Act 1932
Supreme Court Rules
Cases cited:
Comcare v John Holland Rail Pty Ltd
[2011] FCA 622
Compagnie Financiere Du Pacifique v Peruvian
(1883) UK Law Rp KQB 95
(1882) 11 QBD 55
Dorajay Pty Ltd v
Aristocrat Leisure Ltd
[2005] FCA 588
Minister for Immigration v
[2018] HCA 30
, 264 CLR 54
Mount Bruce Mining Pty Limited v
Wright Prospecting Pty Limited
[2015] HCA 37
256 CLR 104
Infrastructure Pty Limited v Downer EDI Engineering Power Pty Limited
[2012] FCA 143
Quenchy Crusta Sales Pty Ltd v Logi-tech Pty Ltd
[2002] SASC 374
223 LSJS 266
Solemn Equities Corporation Ltd (in
liquidation) v Arthur Andersen & Co (No 5)
[2001] SASC 335
v Hydro-Electric Corporation, Hydro-Electric Corporation v Strang
REPRESENTATION
Wallis KC and N Willing
Respondents
: J Peters KC and T
Solicitors:
Respondents
Groom Kennedy Lawyers &
Judgment Number:
[2025] TASFC 4
paragraphs:
Serial No 4/2025
File No 3598/2023 & 3359/2024
WEEDING PARTY HIRE PTY LTD v SALTERS (TAS) PTY
and JARROD NATION
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
of the Court:
of the Associate Judge and Acting Judge dismissing the interlocutory
applications be set aside.
Applications
remitted to the Associate Judge to be determined according to
Serial No 4/2025
File Nos 3598/2023 & 3359/2024
WEEDING PARTY HIRE PTY LTD v SALTERS (TAS) PTY
and JARROD NATION
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
30 May 2025
agree with the reasons of Brett J and his conclusion that the appeals should be
upheld, and the applications remitted to the associate
judge for determination.
File Nos 3598/2023 & 3359/2024
WEEDING PARTY HIRE PTY LTD v SALTERS (TAS) PTY
and JARROD NATION
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
30 May 2025
I agree with Brett J.
File Nos 3598/2023 & 3359/2024
WEEDING PARTY HIRE PTY LTD
v SALTERS (TAS) PTY LTD
and JARROD NATION
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
30 May 2025
decision concerns two appeals against separate interlocutory decisions in the
same action. The appeals were heard together,
and ultimately relate to the same
issue, which is whether the appellant should have access to documents on the
respondents' solicitors
file. The respondents claim legal professional privilege
in respect of those documents. The first appeal is from a decision of Daly
refusing the appellant's application for discovery and production of the said
documents. The basis of his Honour's decision
was that the documents were not
relevant to the issues arising on the pleadings. The second appeal is from a
decision of Marshall
AJ setting aside a subpoena relating to the same documents.
The basis of his Honour's determination was again relevance, leading
determination that there was no legitimate forensic purpose with respect to the
subpoena. His Honour also upheld the claim
of privilege.
appellant's action concerns a written agreement entered into by the parties for
the sale of a business by the first respondent
to the appellant. The agreement
provided for a purchase price of $5.5 million payable by way of an initial
instalment of $500,000
on 19 July 2023, with a second instalment equivalent to
the balance remaining, less $2,750,000, payable on the completion date. The
sum of $2,750,000 was to be the subject of a loan agreement between the parties.
It is a condition precedent to completion of
the sale agreement that the loan
agreement would be executed by the parties on or before the completion date.
The completion date
is specified as 1 September 2023 "or such other date as the
parties may agree in writing".
is common ground on the pleadings that the initial instalment was duly paid on
19 July 2023 and further that as at 31 August 2023,
the terms of all documents
required for the purpose of the loan agreement had been agreed. This agreement
was contained in a series
of emails between the solicitors for each party.
However, it is also common ground that completion did not take place on 1
2023, and that the loan agreement was not executed until 4 September.
By email sent by the respondent's solicitor to the appellant's
solicitor at
4.50pm on 4 September 2023, the respondents purported to terminate the agreement
because of the appellant's failure
to complete.
determinative issue which arises on the pleadings is whether an agreement was
reached between the appellant and the first respondent
to extend the date of
completion to 8 September 2023. The statement of claim alleges that such an
agreement was reached on the basis
of an exchange of text messages and emails
between the solicitors for each party between 1 September and 4 September 2023.
The appellant's
claim that the completion date was extended by agreement depends
on the agreement arising by implication from the content of the
said messages
and emails. It is not alleged that there was express agreement to that effect.
In submissions on the hearing of the
appeal, senior counsel for the appellant
described the agreement as arising from "a course of conduct", constituted by
the communications
which are particularised in the statement of claim.
pleaded exchange commences with an email from the appellant's solicitor to the
respondents' solicitor informing the latter that
the appellant would not be in a
position to settle that day but would make arrangements to do so as soon as
possible. It is alleged
that on 2 September 2023 there was an exchange of text
messages between Sam Pope, a representative of the appellant and Jarrod Nation,
the second respondent and a director of the first respondent concerning
alternative arrangements for settlement. The pleading also
alleges emails
exchanged between the solicitors for each party on 4 September 2023 concerning
arrangements for the execution of the
Loan Agreement, and which include an email
confirming that the condition precedent had been satisfied.
statement of claim pleads that by reason of these "matters", the parties "have
agreed (including in writing) that the Completion
Date would be on or before 8
September 2023" and "to extend the time for compliance with execution of the
Loan Agreement Condition
Precedent until it was satisfied on 4 September 2023".
The appellant's pleaded case is that because of this extension, the respondents'
purported termination of the contract constituted an anticipatory breach and
repudiation of the contract. The appellant seeks specific
performance of the
respondents dispute that there was any concluded agreement to extend the
completion date. The defence admits the existence of
the messages and emails,
but denies that they constitute or give rise to an agreement. Further, the
admission of their existence
is subject to the production of the relevant
messages and emails at trial "and reference to their full terms and effect,
the context in which they were sent (including by reference to all
earlier documentation, conversations and correspondence)".
16 May 2024, Daly AsJ made trial directions which included orders for evidence
to be given by affidavit. In due course, a trial
date was set for 11 December
2024. In accordance with his Honour's direction, the parties filed affidavits in
preparation for the
of the affidavits filed on behalf of the respondents was an affidavit by the
second respondent, which was filed on 15 October
2024. Contained in that
affidavit were a number of paragraphs which are critical to the issue arising on
this appeal:
"6 On 31 August 2023 at approximately 8.30 am, I
attended a meeting with Mr Marriner and Mr Pope in Hobart. They informed me that
they may not be in a position to settle until the week commencing 4 September
2023. At this meeting I expressly and explicitly stated
that there would be no
agreement to extend settlement.
31 August 2023 at 9.32 am, I sent a text message to Sam Pope further confirming
that there was no agreement to extend the completion
date from 1 September 2023,
as discussed in our meeting referred to in paragraph 6 above. A copy of this
text message appears at
CB page 257,
in a grey box.
1 September 2023 at 6.38 am, I sent an email to Miguel Martinez and Marcus
Christie confirming that I was preparing for settlement
that day, as per the
BSA. A copy of this email appears at
CB page 1605.
no point did I agree to, or provide instructions to my solicitor to agree to,
extend the completion date from 1 September 2023
or waive any of the conditions
the plaintiffs failure to satisfy the conditions precedent by the date required
(being 1 September 2023), I instructed my
solicitor, Mr John Wilson, to
terminate the BSA on 4 September 2023.
the extent relevant, a large part of the reason I instructed Mr Wilson to
terminate (as opposed to indulge the plaintiff with agreed
extensions) was
because the BSA provided for only part payment of the purchase price upfront,
and therefore the first defendant would
be committed to a vendor fmance
relationship with the plaintiff for the remaining balance (which constituted
over half of the purchase
price). As a result of the plaintiffs conduct up until
that date, culminating in the completion payment deadline being missed, I
confidence that they would repay the loan on time or at all. More specifically,
in my experience, past business conduct is
a reasonably good predictor of future
business conduct. If Mr Marriner and the plaintiff were already unable to meet
their obligations
at the outset of the BSA, it was highly likely that they would
be defaulting on their commitments when it came to repaying the loan.
have left the parties in a position where the plaintiff would seek to
renegotiate the purchase price and if not agreed,
I would have no choice but to
commence proceedings to recover the loan. This is the antithesis of how I like
to do business. In my
view, if you cannot trust a proposed business counterpart,
you should do your utmost to completely avoid any transactions with them.
also motivated by the fact that Mr Marriner himself had steadfastly refused to
provide personal guarantees in the BSA."
addition to the conversation, text message and email referred to by Mr Nation,
there is other evidence concerning the email exchange
referred to in the
statement of claim. Some relevant aspects of this exchange are as follows:
At 1.04pm on 31
August, the respondents' solicitor sent an email to the appellant's solicitor
which contained the following passage:
"As noted to David
and Sam when they spoke this morning, Jarrod does not accept a delay to the
completion date. We are ready to complete
as planned tomorrow. Please ensure
that your client will be in a position to transfer the funds so that they are
received into Jarrod's
nominated account tomorrow."
At 8.44am on 1
September, the respondents' solicitor sent to the appellant's solicitor an email
confirming that he held the "wet ink
signature pages of all completion
documents" and finished with this paragraph":
"Please confirm that
your client is able to transfer the completion funds so that it is received by
the vendor today. My client is
ready, willing and able to complete today as
At 4.08pm on 1
September, the appellant's solicitor sent an email to the respondents' solicitor
advising that his "client was not
in a position to settle today" and has taken
"steps...to be in a position to settle as soon as possible" and "will commit to
settlement date once it is in a position to do so with certainty".
At 7.07am on 4
September, the respondents' solicitor sent to the appellant's solicitor an email
which contained the following:
"As I am sure you can appreciate, my
client is extremely disappointed that the timetable set out in the BSA has not
been adhered to.
Jarrod and his team have worked tirelessly over the past few
weeks to ensure a smooth handover on 1 September and expects your client
approach this transaction with similar levels of speed and professionalism.
I understand that Sam Pope has suggested to Jarrod that your client will have
the funds available for settlement by, at the latest,
Friday 8 September. Could
you please let me know as soon as possible if there is any delay to that timing.
I note your comments on
the adjustments spreadsheet and will consider these with
Jarrod once we have some certainty from the purchaser on when funds will
available."
28 March 2024, the respondents purported to provide discovery by way of an
affidavit of the second respondent verifying a list
of documents. On 8 November
2024, the appellant applied for an order that the respondents make further
discovery of and produce documents
from the respondents' solicitors file which
are said to relate to the instructions given by Mr Nation to his solicitor which
referred to in his affidavit. Those documents were identified as
"1 All documents which comprise, evidence or record
instructions given by the Second Defendant, Jarrod Leigh Nation, to his
or the First Defendant's solicitor between 31 August 2023 and 4
September 2023, inclusive.
documents which comprise, evidence or record the instructions given by Mr
Nation, to his solicitor or the First Defendant's solicitor,
as referred to in
paragraph 10 of Mr Nation's affidavit sworn on 15 October 2024 and filed in this
proceeding (
Nation Affidavit
documents which comprise, evidence or record Mr Nation's state of mind as
asserted in paragraph 11 of the Nation Affidavit, including
any communication
with Mr Nation's solicitor or the First Defendant's solicitor in that
I will discuss in more detail shortly, these documents, if they were included at
all, arguably were contained in the respondents
list of documents in a general
description of legal documents from the solicitor's file. The list noted that
the respondents objected
to production of the documents so described on the
basis of legal professional privilege.
application was heard by Daly AsJ on 28 November 2024. In essence, the
appellant's argument before his Honour was that the documents
were made relevant
for the purpose of discovery by the contents of Mr Nation's affidavit, and that
his description of the nature
of his instructions to his solicitor set out in
the affidavit had the effect of waiving privilege. It was submitted that the
category was relevant to whether or not Mr Nation provided the
instructions to his solicitor asserted in paragraph 9 of his affidavit
second category related to documents relevant to the instructions asserted in
paragraph 10. The third category was also said
to be made relevant by virtue of
paragraph 11 but on the hearing of the appeal the appellant's counsel abandoned
any argument in
respect of this category. The respondents resisted the
application on the grounds of relevance and further that there had not been
waiver of legal professional privilege.
Honour published a written decision on 6 December 2024. The application was
dismissed on the basis that none of the documents
were relevant to an issue
"raised by the pleadings". His Honour determined that because "the plaintiff
pleads that the agreement
to extend the date for completion was in writing, the
parole [sic] evidence rule applies". His Honour reasoned that this rule would
exclude Mr Nation's evidence as to his instructions to his solicitor, because
his subjective state of mind would not be relevant
to the Court's interpretation
of the alleged agreement. His Honour summarised his conclusion as
"On the materials before me, there is no appreciable
prospect that Mr Nation's evidence would be admitted as evidence which could
'subtract from, add to, vary or contradict' the written agreement as pleaded,
because there is no issue on the pleadings that the
documents comprising the
agreement to extend time are unclear, ambiguous or susceptible to more than one
Honour did not determine the question of legal professional privilege.
Immediately
after the dismissal of the discovery application, the appellant applied for the
issue of a subpoena addressed to the
respondents' solicitors seeking production
of the same documents. The return of the subpoena came before Marshall AJ on 9
2024. At that hearing, the respondents applied to have the subpoena
set aside on the basis that it served no legitimate forensic
purpose and further
that the respondents had not waived legal professional privilege. The appellant
foreshadowed an appeal against
the discovery decision, but did not reassert
relevance on the pleadings as a forensic purpose for the subpoena. Instead, it
that the documents sought by the subpoena would be relevant to Mr
Nation's credit with respect to the evidence asserted in his affidavit.
difficulty with this approach is immediately apparent. If the decision of Daly
AsJ is correct, and the only issues raised by
the pleadings depend solely on the
objective interpretation of written communications, then it is difficult to see
how an assessment
of Mr Nation's credit could have any legitimate forensic
any event, Marshall AJ rejected the appellant's arguments and set aside the
subpoena. His Honour's reasons are brief, and were
delivered ex tempore. They
"Having heard the submissions of the parties, I'm not satisfied
that an issue of credit arises in respect of the paragraph that says:
'At no point did I agree to extend completion date from 1 September 2023 or
waive any of the conditions precedent.'
The materials relied on to assert the contrary are stated clearly in his
statement of claim and I'm not satisfied that legal professional
privilege has
been waived. So, in my view, the subpoena doesn't serve an appropriate forensic
purpose and should be set aside."
Nature of each appeal
appeal came before this Court by a different legislative path. The appeal from
Marshall AJ is authorised, as with any appeal
from a judge, by
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act
. An appeal from the associate
judge is authorised by r 680A of the
Supreme Court Rules 2000
this appeal is in respect of an interlocutory judgment, it is to a single judge.
However, by virtue of r 680A(8), the judge
may refer the appeal for
determination by this Court. That is what happened in this case.
parties accept that each appeal is in the nature of a re-hearing. This is
clearly correct: see
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act
However, there did seem to be some confusion on the part of counsel for each
party as to exactly what this meant. For example, senior
counsel for the
respondent submitted that error must be shown on the part of Daly AsJ in respect
of the appeal against him. It was
unclear whether it was being suggested that
this must be a specific error that appears on the face of the record.
question of the standard to be applied on an appeal by way of rehearing is well
settled. The appeal court is required to determine
the correctness of the
decision below on the basis of the evidence and materials before the primary
decision-maker, together with
any further evidence that the appeal court may
allow to be adduced on the appeal, and on the law as it stands at the time of
see Kiefel CJ and Gageler J (as his Honour then was) in
Minister for
Immigration v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
, 264 CLR 54. Although it is necessary to
show error, in a case which does not involve an exercise of discretion, and
where there
is only one "unique outcome" the error, if it exists and is not
otherwise demonstrated in the reasons of the primary judge, will
appear from the
correctness of the final decision. This is the correctness standard of appeal,
and was explained by Gageler J in
Minister for Immigration v SZVFW
"The course of High Court authority since
has accordingly proceeded on a consistent understanding of how
the line of demarcation is to be drawn between those of a primary judge's
conclusions which attract the correctness standard of appellate review
reaffirmed in that case and those which attract the deferential
applicable to appellate review of an exercise of judicial discretion.
Without excluding the potential for other considerations
to affect the standard
of appellate review in a particular category of case, the understanding provides
a principled basis for making
at least the principal distinction.
The line is not drawn by reference to whether the primary judge's process of
reasoning to reach a conclusion can be characterised
as evaluative or is on a
topic on which judicial minds might reasonably differ. The line is drawn
by reference to whether the legal
criterion applied or purportedly applied by
the primary judge to reach the conclusion demands a unique outcome, in which
correctness standard applies, or tolerates a range of outcomes, in
which case the
House v The King
standard applies. The
resultant line is not bright; but it is tolerably clear and workable."
respect of both discovery and setting aside a subpoena, there are aspects of the
determination which require the exercise of discretion.
For example, the
discovery process generally, which ultimately includes the question of whether
the Court should make an order for
discovery, is discretionary.
Infrastructure Pty Limited v Downer EDI Engineering Power Pty Limited
[2012] FCA 143
per Katzmann J at [14]. However, the grounds of each
appeal in this case raise, in essence, two substantive issues: the relevance
the documents for the purpose of each procedure, and whether there has been a
waiver of legal professional privilege in respect
of them. Neither
determination involves an exercise of discretion, there is only one correct
answer to both questions. Accordingly,
the correctness standard will apply to
each appeal.
appellant's grounds of appeal with respect to the discovery decision raises
three discrete arguments. I will deal with each in
1, 5(a) and 5(b)
order to understand the argument advanced under these grounds, it is necessary
to consider the detail of the proceedings before
Daly AsJ in a little more
Strang v Hydro-Electric Corporation, Hydro-Electric Corporation v Strang
[2022] TASSC 49
, I briefly discussed the scheme provided for discovery under the
Supreme Court Rules
"Division 1A of the Rules provides an
integrated scheme dealing with discovery and inspection of documents. Rule
383(1) imposes an
obligation on a party to make discovery upon request by notice
by any other party, at any time after the pleadings between them are
be closed. The discovery obligation activated by this request is to produce for
inspection all discoverable documents in
respect of which privilege is not
claimed. 'Discoverable documents' are defined by r 382. If the notice so
requires, then the party
required to make discovery must also make and serve a
list of all discoverable documents. Discovery must be made within 14 days after
receipt of the notice or such further time as agreed or allowed by the court or
interlocutory application sought orders that the respondents provide further
discovery of the said documents pursuant to r 388
and produce those documents
for inspection and determination of "a claim for privilege" pursuant to r 395.
Rule 388 permits a court
to order a party to make, file and serve an affidavit
discovering a discoverable document or class of discoverable documents where
there are grounds for belief that such documents are in the possession of a
party. The rule is clearly intended to provide relief
where a party has not
discovered the relevant documents in accordance with its obligation to do so
under other provisions of Div
1A, for example where the documents have not been
produced or referred to in a list pursuant to a notice under r 383(1). Much of
the argument before his Honour was concerned with the question of relevance,
within the context of determination of the question
of whether the documents
were "discoverable documents" within the meaning of r 382. However, at the
conclusion of the hearing, the
associate judge found that the documents had in
any event already been discovered in the list of documents provided by the
respondents.
In particular, his Honour concluded that the documents were
contained in the general description of documents in Part 11 of the First
Schedule in the list. This description encompassed the class of documents of
which discovery was sought in the application, such
as documents "comprising
instructions to the defendant's solicitors". Of course, the list noted that the
respondents objected to
production of such documents for inspection on the
grounds that they were subject to legal professional privilege.
made that finding, his Honour effectively acceded to the second order sought in
the interlocutory application, that is that
those documents be produced to him
under r 395 so that he could determine the objection to production. In the
course of oral discussion
with the parties, his Honour noted that the
respondents objected to production, at least to the appellant, not just on the
of legal professional privilege as stated in the affidavit but also on the
ground of relevance. His Honour then adjourned to enable
the documents to be
produced, and as far as I am aware did not reconvene prior to his decision on 6
December 2024. As I have already
noted, by that decision, his Honour refused to
order the production of the documents to the appellant on the basis of lack of
but did not consider it necessary to determine the question of legal
professional privilege.
appellant's argument under the stated grounds, as I understand it, is that
having concluded that the documents had been discovered,
the associate judge was
not entitled to refuse their production on the ground of relevance. The argument
is that inclusion of the
documents in the list concedes and establishes that
they are discoverable documents, and hence their underlying relevance, leaving
legal professional privilege as the only basis for objection to production, and
his Honour did not determine that question. Because
the appellant contends that
the respondents have waived their right to claim legal professional privilege in
respect of the documents,
the asserted outcome is that the documents ought be
produced to the appellant.
my view, there is a fundamental difficulty with the appellant's argument. In
particular, the interlocutory application did not
seek an order that the
documents be produced to the appellant. The orders sought were an application
for discovery under r 388, an
order which his Honour considered otiose because
the documents had already been discovered, and a further order that they be
under r 395 "for inspection and determination of a claim for
privilege". Rule 395 provides for the production of those documents
to the Court
for that purpose. This is the precise course taken by the associate judge. It
may well be that the appellant framed
the application in those terms because it
did not appreciate that the documents had in fact already been discovered in the
If they had in fact been included in the list, the pathway to production
to the appellant was to seek an order for production for
inspection under r 392.
It is at that point that any objection to production would be determined, and
production to the Court under
rr 394 or 395 is available for the purpose of that
determination. However, as already noted, his Honour did not have before him an
application under r 392, and the appellant did not seek to remedy this omission
in the hearing at first instance.
this, there is no question that both parties have conducted the appeal on the
basis that the appellant is seeking production
of the documents to it, and the
respondents are resisting this outcome on the basis of both relevance and
privilege. The fact that
technically the pathway to that order was not
enlivened by the application should not be permitted to avoid determination of
substantive question. On the other hand, the respondents should not be
prevented from objecting to production on the ground of relevance
technical basis that the documents have already been included in a general
description of such documents contained in the
original list of documents. The
rules clearly envisage that only documents which fall properly within the
definition of discoverable
documents, the definition of which rests upon the
notion of relevance as defined in rr 382(1) and (2), should be subject to
and inspection. The appellant should not be entitled to avoid
determination of these fundamental questions on a technical basis,
while seeking
the courts indulgence to ignore the technical position with respect to the
adequacy of its application.
although neither party has challenged his Honour's finding that the documents
were already discovered by their inclusion
in the list, there must be some doubt
associate judge, the
description is in general terms commonly used to
collectively capture all documents which are on a solicitor's file, and hence
to a claim of legal professional privilege. It does not describe each
document separately. When a question arises as to whether any
specific document
falling within the ambit of that general description is in issue, the first
question is whether the specific document
is a discoverable document, which
necessarily entails a consideration of the relevance of that document. It is a
reasonable assumption
that such a description is intended to include only
documents which are relevant in the r 382 sense, and hence discoverable. Hence,
it is arguable that the r 388 application was not in fact resolved by the list,
and is properly available in respect of documents
which the discovering party
says are not discoverable in the first place.
these reasons, the question of relevance in respect of the specific documents
under consideration is properly before this Court
and requires determination. I
reject the argument raised by these grounds.
Grounds 2 and 3:
grounds attack his Honour's finding in respect of relevance, in particular the
finding that cl 9 and 10 of Mr Nation's affidavit
are irrelevant to issues
raised on the pleadings by virtue of the parol evidence rule. The focus on those
clauses is appropriate
because it is their inclusion in a trial affidavit which
is said to underpin their relevance. At the appeal, the appellant abandoned
reliance on the contents of cl 11, and has been noted, no longer seeks discovery
and production of the documents referred to in category
application.
already discussed, the question of relevance for the purpose of discovery is
determined by whether the document falls within the
definition of a discoverable
document under r 382 of the
Supreme Court Rules
Rule 382(1)
that a discoverable document is a document which is "directly relevant to the
issues raised by the pleadings".
provides that for the purpose of that
definition, the documents must meet at least one of the following
"(a) The documents are those on which the party intends to
(b) The documents adversely affect the parties own case.
(c) The documents support another party's case.
(d) The documents adversely affect another party's case."
is clear that relevance as defined for the purpose of discovery is more
restricted than that applicable for evidentiary admissibility
Evidence Act
of that Act, the test of relevance is whether
the evidence, "if it were accepted, could rationally affect, directly or
indirectly,
the assessment of the probability of the existence of a fact in
issue in the proceeding". The test of direct relevance applicable
under r 382,
mirrors that adopted in other jurisdictions in respect of discovery, including
Federal Court Rules
. The selection of this test has been judicially
observed to give effect to an intention to restrict the ambit of discovery to a
greater extent than that which previously applied, which required discovery of
documents which were not only directly relevant but
which also may fairly lead
to a train of enquiry which might advance the case of the party seeking
discovery or damage the case of
an adversary: see
Compagnie Financiere Du
Pacifique v Peruvian Guano Co
(1883) UK Law Rp KQB 95
(1882) 11 QBD 55.
However, the cases are also clear that the requirement of direct relevance,
although more restrictive, must still be applied in
a common sense way. In
Solemn Equities Corporation Ltd (in liquidation) v Arthur Andersen & Co
[2001] SASC 335
commented on the requirement of
direct relevance as follows:
"However, there is a further
qualification, in that the documents must be 'directly' relevant. I doubt
whether that qualification
effectively narrows, for the purposes of discovery,
ordinary concepts of relevance for the purpose of admissibility into evidence.
In my opinion, it cannot mean, if the document is not itself proof of a fact in
issue but is merely a piece of circumstantial evidence
tending, along with other
evidence, to prove the fact in issue, that it is not discoverable. Many a case
is provable and in fact
proved by circumstantial evidence, including documents.
I note that a similar view was expressed by Demack J in
Robson v REB
Engineering Pty
(1997) 2 Qd R 102
105 in respect of a similar rule in Queensland. The Rule cannot be allowed
to govern in practice the admission of
documents into evidence merely because
they have not been revealed in the discovery process."
Quenchy Crusta Sales Pty Ltd v Logi-tech Pty Ltd
[2002] SASC 374
, Doyle CJ said at 11:
"It is not wise to attempt to state
in comprehensive terms the effect of the requirement that the document be
'directly relevant'.
The adverb 'directly' is probably intended to
emphasise the requirement of relevance, and to be used in the sense of requiring
the document be directly in point, excluding as sufficient indirect
relevance which might be established through another linking
circumstance.
That is not to say, as I have already said, that a document is not directly
relevant if it is merely a piece of circumstantial
evidence. The point is
that a document will not be directly relevant if, rather than tending to prove
an issue on the pleadings,
it merely tends to prove something that may be
relevant to an issue."
this case, the associate judge was clearly concerned to determine relevance by
reference to his interpretation of the "issues
raised by the pleadings". In
particular, his Honour interpreted the statement of claim as alleging that the
extension of the completion
date arose exclusively from an agreement in writing.
Hence, his Honour reasoned, the evidence contained in the relevant paragraphs
Mr Nation's affidavit would be excluded under the parol evidence rule. The
appellant attacks this finding and reasoning. The
argument is that the relevant
provisions of the statement of claim do not assert an agreement in writing, but
rather an agreement
which arises by implication from a course of conduct, which
includes but is not limited to written communications. Although no oral
conversations are particularised in the statement of claim, it is submitted that
such conversations are relevant to the objective
determination of the context
and effect of the emails and text messages exchanged by the parties during and
as part of the alleged
course of conduct, and are generally relevant to whether
an agreement arose by implication.
parol evidence rule is simply a rule of evidence that gives effect to the
objective theory of contract. That theory requires
that the question of whether
an agreement has been formed must be assessed objectively, that is "whether or
not a reasonable bystander
would construe agreement from the parties'
statements, conduct, and other relevant circumstances of the particular case",
Laws of Australia
at [7.1.680]. This also applies to the
interpretation of the terms of an agreement. In making an objective assessment,
context may
have an important role to play. These objective events and
circumstances can be distinguished from evidence of subjective perception
intent. As was explained by French CJ, Nettle and Gordon JJ in
Mount Bruce
Mining Pty Limited v Wright Prospecting Pty Limited
[2015] HCA 37
"[50] Each of the events, circumstances and things external to
the contract to which recourse may be had is objective. What may be
referred to
are events, circumstances and things external to the contract which are known to
the parties or which assist in identifying
the purpose or object of the
transaction, which may include its history, background and context and the
market in which the parties
were operating. What is inadmissible is evidence of
the parties' statements and actions reflecting their actual intentions and
expectations."
this case, it is clear in my view that the statement of claim does not allege
that the agreement as to the completion date was
varied by an express written
agreement but rather from an agreement arising from a course of conduct. The
determinative allegation
is contained in cl 10:
"[10] In the
premises, by reason of the matters referred to at paragraphs 6 to 9 above, as at
4.20 pm on 4 September 2023:
(a) the plaintiff and the defendants have agreed (including in writing) that
the Completion Date would be on or before 8 September
(b) the plaintiff and the defendants have agreed (including in writing) to
extend the time for compliance with execution of the Loan
Agreement Condition
Precedent until it was satisfied on 4 September 2023."
only reasonable interpretation of this clause, read in the context of the
various written communications particularised in preceding
paragraphs, is that
the agreement arises by implication, from the circumstances referred to in
paragraphs 6 to 9 of the pleading.
It is important to note that the reliance on
the written communications is to found the allegation that an agreement is to be
not to constitute the agreement itself. Accordingly, although the
conclusions to be drawn from the parties conduct and communications
will require
objective assessment, that assessment will be conducted in the context of
surrounding events, which may include oral
conversations.
understanding of the issue raised by the statement of claim is consistent with
the manner in which the respondents have joined
issue in the defence. It is
clear that the defence puts in issue the objective interpretation of the conduct
and communications between
the parties and gives notice of reliance upon, among
other things, conversations. This is demonstrated by the pleading which
to paragraph 10:
"[10] They deny paragraph 10.
PARTICULARS
On a proper construction of the SBA as a whole (including clauses 4.4 and
17.7 referred to above) and the emails and SMS messages
relied upon, including
in the context in which they were sent (including by reference to all earlier
documentation, conversations
and correspondence), there was no agreement to vary
the terms of the SBA, in the way alleged or at all."
should also be noted that the defence does not raise an argument that the
contract itself provides that the completion date may
only be "such other date
as the parties may agree in writing". This is understandable, there is ample
authority for the proposition
that such a stipulation will not apply if the
provision is varied by the parties. However, the absence of reliance by the
respondents
on this point reinforces the understanding that the issue raised by
the pleadings is whether the contract has been so varied by implication.
Nation's evidence must be considered in the context of the issue defined in this
way. In paragraph 6, his affidavit alleges a
conversation on 31 August 2023,
the purpose of which seems to be the assertion of his clear oral communication
that "there would
be no agreement to extend settlement". Presumably, this is to
leave open an argument that subsequent emails and text messages must
be assessed
in the light of this communication. Such a fact, if accepted, has direct
relevance to the question of whether an agreement
can be implied from conduct,
which is an issue raised by the pleadings.
question which then arises is how Mr Nation's instructions to his solicitor,
asserted in paragraphs 9 and 10 of his affidavit
can bear on an objective
assessment of these communications. The only possible relevance could be to
bolster the credibility of
his assertion in paragraph 6. For example, if his
version of that conversation is disputed, and it was conceded in argument that
it may well be, then it can be asserted on his behalf that it is more probable
that he would have taken an attitude in that meeting
consistent with his
subsequent instructions to his solicitor, rather than inconsistent with them.
Whether such evidence is ultimately
admitted on this basis is beside the point.
The evidence is relevant for the purposes of discovery. The chain of relevance
to documents on the solicitors file that have a bearing on the
probability of the existence of those instructions. Because the enquiry
point is that posed by r 388, it can be concluded that there are reasonable
grounds for a belief that such documents are
in the possession of the
respondents and are discoverable documents in the sense that they will either
support or be adverse to the
case of the appellant. Accordingly, the test of
direct relevance is satisfied.
follows that the learned associate judge was in error in determining that any
such documents were not relevant. Subject to the
question of legal professional
privilege, this Court should order that such documents be produced for
inspection by the appellant.
It is arguable, however, that the description of
documents referred to in paragraph 1 is too wide in that it relates to all
instructions
and not just those of the type referred to in paragraph 9 of Mr
Nation's affidavit. In my view, the discovery documents should be
documents which "comprise evidence or record instructions" given by the second
defendant to his solicitor or the first
defendant's solicitor of the nature
referred to in cl 9 of Mr Nation's affidavit, sworn on 15 October 2024. This
restriction is already
applied by paragraph 2, which is relevant to cl 10 of the
Ground 4: Legal professional privilege
complaint made by this ground is that his Honour did not determine the claim of
legal professional privilege. Clearly, this should
have been determined because
there were reasonable grounds for a belief that the documents existed and were
discoverable. The claim
of privilege was determinative of the question of
production. By virtue of
Evidence Act
, the question of
whether production can be resisted on the basis of client legal privilege falls
to be determined in accordance with
the relevant provisions of that Act. There
is no dispute between the parties that the documents sought to be discovered are
confidential
communications which are protected from disclosure by virtue of
of the Act. The matter in issue is whether there has been a loss of
client legal privilege pursuant to
, because of inconsistent conduct. The
claim of inconsistency is on a narrow basis, and this Court is in as good a
position as the
primary judge to determine it, and should do so.
relevant provision is
which provides in effect that privilege will be
lost if the "party concerned has acted in a way that is inconsistent with" the
maintenance
of the privilege.
Section 122(3)
provides as
"(3) Without limiting subsection (2) , a
client or party is taken to have so acted if –
(a) the client or party knowingly and
voluntarily disclosed the substance of the evidence to another person; or
(b) the substance of the evidence has been
disclosed with the express or implied consent of the client or party."
"evidence" which is the subject of the privilege in this case includes the
documents on the solicitor's file which if adduced,
would "result in disclosure
of ... a confidential communication made between the client and a lawyer" for
the dominant purpose of
the lawyer providing legal advice to the client, see
As noted, it is not disputed that the documents sought in category 1 and 2
fall within that description. The question, therefore,
is whether Mr Nation has
disclosed the substance of that evidence in cl 9 and 10 of his affidavit.
my view, there is no doubt that he has done so. Both clauses assert the
substance of the instructions provided to the solicitor.
This has clearly been
done deliberately for the purpose of bolstering the acceptance of Mr Nation's
version of the conversation
in paragraph 6. This is not a case where Mr Nation
has simply asserted the provision of instructions without identifying what they
are, he has described the substance of the instructions.
respondents object to the width of the description of the class of documents
sought to be discovered, on the basis that the description
goes beyond that in
respect of which privilege has been waived. I agree that there is a need for
care in this respect. The privilege
afforded by
evidence which "would result in disclosure of" the relevant confidential
communication. The waiver attaches to the communication
in question. Because
discovery is dealing with documents, the privilege would prevent discovery of
documents which would result in
disclosure of the relevant confidential
communication. If this privilege is lost, then evidence which would result in
of the communication is discoverable. This would apply to documents
which comprise evidence or record the relevant communication.
In my view, that
is an appropriate description and makes an adequate distinction between
documents to which the privilege applies
and those to which it does not. There
may be difficulties if the relevant document contains more than simply
disclosure of the relevant
communication. In my view, that would be a matter
for the exercise of appropriate discretion and management by the Court. I note
that pursuant to r 394 the Court has power to order production of a discoverable
document, and deal with the document in any appropriate
follows that the appeal in respect of discovery must succeed. The associate
judge's dismissal of the interlocutory application
should be set aside. In my
view, the appropriate procedure is for the matter to be remitted to his Honour
for determination in accordance
with law. In particular, this would involve his
Honour restricting discovery to documents identified in accordance with the
set out in these reasons.
The subpoena
determination of the issues of relevance and waiver of privilege are also
relevant to the question of the appeal in respect of
the setting aside of the
subpoena. However, the considerations applicable to that question are different
to those which apply in
respect of discovery. As already noted, a subpoena may
be set aside where it lacks a legitimate forensic purpose. The test of a
legitimate forensic purpose is relevance. In
Comcare v John Holland Rail Pty
[2011] FCA 622
, Bromberg J concluded that "the test for the
existence of a legitimate forensic purpose is that of apparent relevance". His
went on to rely on the analysis of Stone J in
Dorajay Pty Ltd v
Aristocrat Leisure Ltd
[2005] FCA 588
in reaching the conclusion "that
apparent relevance to an issue is demonstrated where the material sought could
reasonably be expected
to throw light on the issue in the proceeding and not
simply where the material 'might permit a case to be made'." His Honour also
observed that a subpoena "is not to be used as a fishing or trawling exercise".
However, he went on to say that it will not be fishing
"when there are
reasonable grounds to think that fish of the relevant type are in the pond, or
as has been expressed in other cases,
that it is on the cards that relevant
documents (even if they are relevant only to credit) will be elicited by the
Liristis v Gadelrabb
[2009] NSWSC 441
per Brereton
this case, senior counsel for the respondents argues that the subpoena was
necessarily a trawling exercise because the appellant,
and the Court, cannot
know whether the documents exist. However, it is not trawling when there are
reasonable grounds to conclude
their existence. Such grounds exist in this case.
Firstly, there is the general reference to such documents in the list of
Secondly, as Mr Nation has sworn to the conversations with his
solicitor, it is a reasonable inference that those conversations would
recorded by the solicitor and retained on the file. Finally, in an email from
the respondents' solicitor to the appellant's
solicitor dated 31 October 2024
which responded to an email foreshadowing the issue of the subpoena, the
respondent indicated that
it would resist production on the basis that the
documents were not relevant and were subject to privilege. It did not dispute
existence. Further, it is not to the point that the documents may well
support or corroborate Mr Nation's evidence. The fact remains
that the documents
are relevant, notwithstanding that they may not be utilised by the
the circumstances, I am of the view that the subpoena should not have been set
aside on the grounds of either relevance or privilege.
There is a legitimate
forensic purpose, which is to obtain evidence which is apparently relevant to
the assertions made by Mr Nation
in paragraphs 9 and 10.
appeal in respect of the subpoena should be upheld. I conclude that this
question should also be returned to the associate judge
for determination. It
is clearly established that the Court may require documents under subpoena to be
produced to it, so that it
can then determine what is to be done with those
documents and in particular whether or not they should be disclosed to the
This will involve a similar, if not identical, exercise to that
involved in his Honour's inspection of the documents for the purposes
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (259 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter