URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASWRCT/2021/33.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:23:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Toll Transport Pty Ltd v M. [2021] TASWRCT 33 (21 September 2021)
[2021] TASWRCT 33
WORKERS REHABILITATION AND COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
Toll Transport Pty Ltd v M.
[2021] TASWRCT 33
TOLL TRANSPORT PTY LTD
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
30 August 2021
DELIVERED ON:
21 September 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Chief Commissioner Clues
CATCHWORDS:
Entitlement to compensation – reasonably arguable
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
Tasmania v Rattigan
[2021] TASSC 28
St Helens Oysters Pty Ltd v
[2007] TASSC 90
(2007) 17 Tas R 43
GIO Australia Ltd v
[2000] TASSC 75
Lamont v MRD Supermarkets Pty Ltd
Bradshaw v Tasmanian Networks Pty Ltd
[2020] TASFC 2
DETERMINATION:
A reasonably arguable case exists
REPRESENTATION:
Solicitors:
Seager Lawyers
[2021] TASWRCT 33
Chief Commissioner Clues
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
1. The worker is employed as a truck driver by the employer.
He made a claim for workers compensation dated 16 February 2020. In
that claim he provided an initial workers compensation medical certificate dated
5 February 2020. In that certificate
it states the worker presented with
symptoms of “Left shoulder pain”. The condition is described as a
disease, symptoms
of which became evident on 5 February 2020 that arose from
“Repetitive lifting of ‘keg gates’ resulting in the
pain”. It was described as an aggravation of an existing condition. The
worker was certified as fit for pre-injury duties
but required
2. A similar certificate was provided dated 26 February 2020. It
included a diagnosis of subacromial bursitis and recommended a restriction
“Avoid keg-gate handling and repetitive activities that aggravate the left
shoulder”. However no incapacity was certified.
3. On 20 May 2020 a
further certificate was provided certifying for the first time that the worker
was partially incapacitated for
work from 20 May 2020 to 20 June 2020.
8 September 2020 a further certificate was provided certifying a further partial
incapacity for work from 8 September 2020 to
22 September 2020.
March 2021 a certificate was provided describing the worker’s presenting
symptoms as “Pain in left shoulder with
radiculopathy into the left
arm/hand”. The details provided are that this is an exacerbation of an
existing issue with extension
of neurological symptoms namely hand tingling and
weakness that became worse on 9 March 2021. The worker was certified as fit for
pre-injury duties but required treatment. On 17 March 2021 a similar
certificate was provided.
6. On 18 May 2021, a further certificate was
provided. This certificate only refers to left hand weakness/pain and certifies
incapacity for work namely that the worker is fit for suitable duties
from 18 May 2021 to 15 June 2021.
7. The period specified in the last
certificate certifying incapacity expired on 22 September 2020. The next
certificate provided
by the worker certifying a period of incapacity is dated 18
May 2021. As this certificate is provided more than 14 days after the
expiration of the previous specified period, the employer has elected to treat
that certificate as a claim for compensation to which
applies (see
The Dispute
8. The employer’s grounds for disputing liability are as
(a) The worker did not suffer an injury arising out of or in
the course of his employment.
(b) The worker did not suffer a disease to
which his employment contributed to a substantial degree.
(c) The worker did
not suffer a recurrence, aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or
deterioration of a pre-existing injury or disease
in respect of which his
employment was the major or most significant contributing factor.
9. The issue for the Tribunal to determine is whether the
employer has established a reasonably arguable case to dispute liability
compensation to the worker in relation to his claim.
The Evidence
10. The employer tendered and relied upon the following
documents that were filed with the
(a) Workers compensation claim form dated 16 February
(b) Initial workers compensation medical certificate dated 5 February
(c) Further workers compensation medical certificates dated 26 February
2020, 20 May 2020, 8 September 2020, 16 March 2021, 17 March
2021, 18 May 2021,
9 June 2021 and 7 July 2021.
(d) Letter of dispute to the worker dated 9
August 2021.
(e) Report of Dr Timothy Stewart dated 9 August
11. The employer primarily relied upon the report of Dr
Stewart. Under the heading “Opinion” Dr Stewart summarises his
opinion about the worker’s claim as follows:
is a 57 year old who has experienced problems in recent times with
both his shoulders. The first shoulder, namely his right shoulder,
required him
to have a rotator cuff repair which was performed successfully some three years
ago. During the time that
[the worker]
experienced problems with his
right shoulder, he tended to favour the left shoulder and began to develop a
dull ache in the left shoulder.
It was thought that this was due to bursitis
but injections of steroid on three occasions into the bursa on the left side,
make any difference, whatsoever. Anti-inflammatory medication has not
made any significant difference either. It was apparent that
[the worker]
has early Dupuytren’s contractures on the palm of both hands, which may
partly explain the fact that he experiences some difficulty
with clenching of
the fist with his left hand.
Apart from that, there is no obvious pathology identified in this situation,
other than the suggestion that he has symptoms which
may be due to degenerative
changes and also the fact that he is comprising the oxygen carrying capacity of
the blood with the cigarette
The Dupuytren’s contracture may also be playing a part in his symptoms.
I believe that
[the worker]
is due to have two physiotherapy sessions on
his left upper arm, in the biceps area. I believe that this may help him in the
time but I suspect it is more likely than not, that he will have to live
with the problems that he experiences as this is due to
degenerative changes in
his left arm and also the compromised oxygen carrying capacity in the blood due
to his cigarette smoking.”
12. The worker submitted that after he had surgery on his right
arm he kept working and developed pain in his left arm. His left
arm started
hurting at work. Before he started working for the employer the strength in
both of his arms was good and smoking had
never caused him a problem.
Consideration
13. With respect to the first ground of dispute Dr Stewart
states that he believes the worker’s left arm and hand problems may
to degenerative change and favouring his left arm when he was having surgery and
subsequent rehabilitation with his right
arm. He says there is early
Dupuytren’s contracture in both palms of the hands which may explain the
worker’s left hand
symptoms and the difficulty that he experiences with
making a fist with his left hand. Dr Stewart does not believe that the worker
The first ground is made out.
14. With respect to the second ground of
dispute Dr Stewart says he believes it is more likely than not that the worker
has an injury
which can be defined as a disease and that he has an element
disorder, defect or morbid condition, which is of gradual development;
am not convinced that [the worker’s] employment has contributed to a
substantial degree to the disease process. I
appreciate that substantial is
defined as major or most significant and I do not see that [the worker’s]
has been the major
or most significant factor in the development of his current
condition.”
second ground is made out.
15. With respect to the third ground of dispute,
Dr Stewart was not specifically asked to provide an opinion on whether the
is suffering from a recurrence, aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation
or deterioration of a pre-existing injury or disease to which
his employment
with the employer has been the major or most significant contributing
16. However, Dr Stewart does say the following:
suspect it is more likely than not, that he will have to live with the problems
that he experiences as this is due
to degenerative changes in his left arm and
also the compromised oxygen carrying capacity in the blood due to his cigarette
believe that it is much more likely that the symptoms that he experiences,
whilst they may have been associated with dysfunction
on his right shoulder
initially but are more likely to be due to the effect of cigarette smoking, than
any other major
not believe that he would be in this situation without the decreased oxygen
associated with the blood carrying capacity
due to his chronic cigarette
opinion, he does not have a problem with his left shoulder and arm which can be
attributed to his employment.”
Is the evidence of Dr Stewart sufficient to establish a
reasonably arguable case?
17. In the case of Tasmania v Rattigan
[2021] TASSC 28
Pearce J. held that the expression of the doctor’s opinion in that case
that there was an absence of evidence of causal connection
between the
worker’s symptoms and his employment was sufficient to compel the
conclusion that the employer had demonstrated
an arguable case that the
worker’s employment was not the major or most significant contributing
factor to any recurrence,
aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or
deterioration of any pre-existing disease.
18. In that case Pearce J. held
that the medical evidence has to be considered in context. In that case the
doctor found that the
worker had suffered an injury which was a disease but he
could not state that the employment was the cause of the
In the same case Pearce J. noted:
“A recurrence, aggravation, acceleration,
exacerbation and deterioration may arise as a result of external stimuli, or as
result of natural progression of the condition or
19. It is clear from Dr Stewart’s report that he has
formed the view that the worker suffered an injury which is a disease but
could not state that the worker’s employment was the cause of his current
symptoms. Therefore, I am of the view that in
the context of his report no
adverse inference can be drawn from the fact that he has not expressly dealt
with the extended definition
of injury as referred to in the third ground of
dispute in the employer’s referral.
20. Dr Stewart is of the opinion
that the worker does not have a problem with his left shoulder and arm which can
be attributed to
his employment. He is of the view that the problems the worker
experiences are due to degenerative changes in his left arm and further
worker would not be in the same situation without the decrease in oxygen
associated with the blood carrying capacity due
to his chronic cigarette
21. Due to Dr Stewart’s opinion in relation to causation, he
did not need to specifically deal with the extended definition
of injury in
It is apparent from his report that he did not consider there had been
any recurrence, aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or
deterioration of any
pre-existing injury or disease but if there was, the major or most significant
contributing factor was the natural
progression of pre-existing degenerative
changes in his left arm and his compromised oxygen carrying capacity in the
blood due to
his cigarette smoking. Therefore, ground three has been made
22. To determine whether a reasonably arguable case exists
requires the Tribunal to apply the test outlined by Evans J. in St Helens
Oysters Pty Ltd v Coatsworth
[2007] TASSC 90
(2007) 17 Tas R 43
Honour said at [10]:
case will not be reasonably arguable unless the case itself is reasonable in the
sense that there is a reasonable prospect
of the claim being rejected following
a final hearing...The very notion of a ‘reasonably arguable case’
like the very
notion of a ‘prima facie case’ precludes a final
determination of a disputed question of fact...on the face of
section 81A
reasonably arguable case will exist concerning the liability of an employer to
pay a worker if it is reasonably arguable on the
material available in relation
to the claim or identified deficiencies or weaknesses in the claim that,
following a contested hearing,
23. In the same case Evans J. held at [14]:
“...where there are a
variety of potential causes for the condition, an employer may show a reasonably
arguable case concerning
liability by providing evidence of plausible potential
causes that are inconsistent with
liability.”
24. It is clear from GIO Australia Ltd v Lovell
[2000] TASSC 75
and Lamont v MRD Supermarkets Pty Ltd
[2016] TASSC 16
, that the employer bears
the onus of proof in establishing a reasonably arguable case. However, as
explained by Estcourt J. in the
decision of Bradshaw v Tasmanian Networks Pty
[2020] TASFC 2
“Whilst the employer
carries the onus of proof in a
section 81A
application, I accept the
submission...that what the employer is required to prove is not that there is no
liability under
of the Act, but only that there exists, on the
evidentiary material the employer relies upon in the
section 81A
proceedings, a
reasonable chance that the worker will be unable to discharge the onus of proof
that will ultimately rest with the
worker...on a final hearing of the
worker’s claim.”
25. In the same paragraph, Estcourt J. said he accepted
“the employer was certainly not required in this instance to positively
prove that some specific factor other than the worker’s employment was the
major or most significant contributing factor.”
26. Whether or not the
worker has a compensable claim cannot finally be determined on this referral.
What can be said at this stage
is that if Dr Stewart’s opinion was
accepted following a contested hearing, the employer may avoid liability for
this claim.
27. In this case the employer has shown that a reasonably
arguable case exists on the basis that there are plausible potential other
causes of the worker’s incapacity for work that are inconsistent with
liability. Dr Stewart says the problems with the worker’s
left shoulder
and arm is due to the degenerative changes that exist and also the compromised
oxygen carrying capacity in the blood
due to the worker’s’ cigarette
Determination
28. I am satisfied, on the evidence before the Tribunal that a
reasonably arguable case exists concerning the liability of the employer
compensation. I determine that a reasonably arguable case exists and there will
be orders pursuant to
CHIEF COMMISSIONER
See Dr Stewart’s report,
page 5, answers to question 3 and
See Dr Stewart’s
report, pages 5 and 6, answer to question
See Dr Stewart’s
report, page 5 under the heading
Stewart’s report, page 6, answer to question
See Dr Stewart’s
report, page 6, answer to question
Tasmania v Rattigan
(supra) at [24].
Cook v Midpart Pty Ltd
[2008] NSWCR 151
, 6DDCR 316 at [41]-[49].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (121 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (254 KB)
Plain text (ASCII) (15.1 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter