URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASHPT/2019/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Medical Board of Australia v Dr Christopher Kwan Chen Lee (No 2) [2019] TASHPT 6 (17 September 2019)
[2019] TASHPT 6
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL
Medical Board of Australia v Dr Christopher Kwan Chen Lee
[2019] TASHPT 6
MEDICAL BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
LEE, Dr Christopher Kwan Chen
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
By written submissions received from a health
practitioner dated 31 May, 9 July and 16 August 2019 and from the Medical Board
Australia dated 29 July 2019.
DELIVERED ON:
17 September 2019
DECISION OF:
Chairperson Webster
CATCHWORDS:
Application to redact published decision – whether
the Tribunal has jurisdiction
Health Practitioners Tribunal Act
[2011] TASSC 28
R v Resource Management and Planning Appeal
Tribunal; Ex parte North West Rendering Pty Ltd
[2005] TASSC 8
and Midwifery Board of Australia v Barrell
[2017] TASHPT 5.
DETERMINATION:
The Tribunal does not have the power to grant the
application.
REPRESENTATION:
J. Shears (Australian Health Practitioner Regulation
Respondent:
R. Kovacs (Avant Law)
[2019] TASHPT 6
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. By letter dated 31 May 2019, the Tribunal received an
application on behalf of the medical practitioner who had provided a reference
for the respondent to publish a redacted version of its decision dated 16 April
2019. Submissions in support of that application
were provided in that letter
and further submissions were provided in letters dated 9 July and 16 August
2019. In its letter of
29 July 2019 the Australian Health Practitioner
Regulation Agency (AHPRA), on behalf of the Medical Board of Australia
Board”) did not support or oppose the application but made a
number of observations which it submitted may assist the Tribunal
in reaching
the correct and preferable result.
Background Facts
2. The Board filed an application against the respondent
practitioner on 20 December 2018 in which it alleged professional misconduct.
conducted a directions hearing on 10 January 2019 and this matter then quickly
proceeded to conciliation on 22 January 2019 before
it came back to me for
determination on 25 March 2019. I determined the respondent was guilty of
professional misconduct and sanctions
were imposed. The reasons for my
determination were published on 16 April 2019.
The Application and the Submissions
3. On behalf of the medical practitioner who provided the
reference for the respondent the application was:
(a) the reasons for determination be amended to delete any
reference to his name or any information which could reasonably lead to
identification; and
(b) that paragraphs 5 and 16 of the decision be amended
to accurately reflect that:
(i) he did not accompany the respondent to the
mediation/conciliation; and
(ii) he was not fully aware of the conduct the
respondent had admitted to either at the time he authored the reference or at
it was provided to the Tribunal and attached to the joint submission of
the parties.
4. In relation to paragraph 3(a) it was submitted the reference
was communicated to the Board in confidence and the disclosure of
information in the reference by the Tribunal has been unfairly prejudicial to
the medical practitioner’s reputation and
that these matters are relevant
to an application under
Health Practitioners Tribunal Act 2010
(“the Act”). It was
contended the medical practitioner was denied the opportunity to make an
application under
given he was not a party and he was unaware a copy
of his reference would be provided to the Tribunal with the intent that it would
form part of any publicly available decision.
5. As to paragraph 3(b), I was
advised the medical practitioner did not accompany the respondent to the
conciliation conference but
instead called the respondent on his mobile and
listened to parts of the discussion at the conciliation conference over the
in the role of a support person. It was also denied “he was
fully aware of the conduct the respondent had admitted to”
having attended
the conciliation conference with the respondent. The medical
practitioner’s position is he was unaware of
the respondent’s
specific comments until the decision was handed down and media articles were
published which detailed those
6. Subsequently the medical
practitioner’s solicitors advised the Tribunal in their letter of 9 July
2019, the medical practitioner
was informed a copy of his reference would be
provided to the Tribunal at the time it was provided to AHPRA. He says he was
made aware the reference would be released publicly. That letter also
advised the medical practitioner was provided with a draft
copy of the joint
submission as to determinations and orders sought by the parties but he did not
read that document in any detail
and he maintains he was unaware of the
specifics of the respondent’s online posts. Accordingly the medical
practitioner maintained
his application.
7. In response, the Board made the
following observations which it submitted may assist the Tribunal:
(a) There was no evidence before the Tribunal as to the
extent of the medical practitioner’s knowledge of the contents of the
joint submission nor his knowledge of the specifics of the online posts at any
particular time, or at all. That evidence cannot
be provided after the hearing
has concluded. It was reasonable for the Tribunal to conclude the relevant
issues had been discussed
between the respondent and the medical practitioner
during the conciliation process.
(b) AHPRA acknowledges the medical
practitioner did not physically accompany the respondent to the conciliation
conference. It understands
the respondent attended the conciliation conference
by video link from Morwell in Victoria while the medical practitioner joined
separately by telephone. It was the Board’s understanding the medical
practitioner’s role at the conciliation conference
was that of a support
person to the respondent.
(c) The decision of Nursing & Midwifery Board
of Australia v Barrell
[2017] TASHPT 5
was relevant to the medical
practitioner’s application.
8. In reply the medical practitioner’s solicitors
submitted there was no basis for the finding the medical practitioner was
aware of the conduct the respondent had admitted and to having attended the
conciliation conference with the respondent. In
addition the medical
practitioner’s solicitors submitted the case cited by the Board was
distinguishable on the basis the medical
practitioner was not a party to the
proceedings.
9. Section 51 of the Act provides:
“51. Publication
of decisions of Tribunal
The Tribunal may, as it thinks fit, publish in the manner it thinks fit, or
refuse to publish, a decision of the Tribunal in respect
of proceedings under
10. That provision provides the Tribunal with a wide and
unfettered discretion to publish or refuse to publish one of its decisions
any manner it thinks fit.
11. In this case the medical practitioner’s
solicitors have referred to s30. That section provides, by subsection (1), that
“[e]xcept as provided by this section, a hearing of the Tribunal is to be
open to the public”. Given that provision
I take the view the starting
point is it is important for this Tribunal to publish its decisions so that
health practitioners and
the general public are aware of the work of the
Tribunal. Some decisions contain discussion of relevant principles and legal
that are a valuable resource to not only legal practitioners, health
practitioners and others with ongoing involvement in this jurisdiction
to the community generally. My practice, therefore, is to publish all decisions
as I am entitled to pursuant to s51.
12. However, s30(1) is subject to
subsection (2) which provides:
“(2) During
any hearing in proceedings the Tribunal may, on the application of a party to
the proceedings or on the Tribunal's
own initiative, do either or both of the
following, if it considers that there are compelling grounds to do so:
(a) make an order excluding any person from the
(b) make an order prohibiting the reporting or
other disclosure of all or any part of the proceedings or prohibiting the
or other disclosure of particular information in respect of the
proceedings.”
13. The grounds which might be relevant for the purposes of the
Tribunal exercising the power set out in subsection (2) are set out
subsection (3) and include:
“(a) it is dealing with
privileged information or information that has been communicated to the National
Board or the Tribunal
in confidence; or
(b) ...; or
(c) the disclosure of the information may be
unfairly prejudicial to the reputation of a
14. There are two preconditions which must be met before an
order can be made under s30(2). First the power exercised must be during
hearing of the proceedings and second the power may be exercised on the
application of a party to the proceedings or on the Tribunal’s
initiative. The hearing had long since been completed when the Tribunal
received the letter from the medical practitioner’s
solicitors of 31 May
2019. In addition the medical practitioner was not a party to the proceedings.
I also note that since his
solicitor’s letter of 31 May 2019 the medical
practitioner has withdrawn his assertion he was unaware his reference would be
provided to the Tribunal.
15. The issue in this case, as it was in Nursing
& Midwifery Board of Australia v Barrell (supra), is whether the Tribunal
the power to consider the medical practitioner’s application given the
hearing has concluded and I have published my decision.
In essence then the
issue is whether the Tribunal has any power to consider this application because
it is functus officio. That
is, once the Tribunal made its determination and
published that decision its work was at an end. The application of s30 suggests
I have no such power.
16. In Jackson v Purton
[2011] TASSC 28
Wood J. at [66]
referred to the rationale for this doctrine which was stated by Finkelstein J.
in Leung v Minister for Immigration
[1997] FCA 1313
(1997) 79 FCR 400
following terms:
origin of the principle of
functus officio
as that expression is
currently employed is to be found in the latter part of the last century in
England when it was decided that
a final decision of a court could not be
reopened. The reason given was that the power to reopen a dispute had been
transferred to
the court of appeal:
Re St Nazaire Co
[1879] UKLawRpCh 217
(1879) 12 Ch D
17. It seems clear that doctrine is applicable to this
Tribunal. At [68] of Wood J.’s judgment in Jackson v Purton (supra),
cited with approval the comments of Evans J. in R v Resource Management &
Planning Appeal Tribunal: Ex parte North West Rendering
[2005] TASSC 8
where his Honour said at [17]:
functus officio’
describes a consequence of the performance
of a function by an authorised entity having regard to the statutory power or
to perform that function. The consequence is that once the statutory
function is performed, there is no further function or act for
authorised under the statute to carry
18. Evans J. went further in the passage cited in paragraph 17
in R v Resource Management & Planning Appeal Tribunal: Ex parte
Rendering Pty Ltd (supra). He said at [17] that as the consequence of the
doctrine of functus officio is well settled
then “legislation conferring a
power to act or make decisions commonly contains provisions that modify or
reduce the impact
of the consequence. In this instance, the applicable
legislation contains some provisions that have that effect.”
addition, Wood J. in Jackson v Purton (supra) said at [86]:
conclude that it is well-settled that the questions of whether a tribunal has
power to reconsider an earlier decision, and
whether the doctrine of
applies to that earlier decision are resolved by construing the
statute under which the tribunal was acting. Resort to the statute
to ascertain
whether the function is indeed complete, and, if not, what was intended as a
consequence, seems a natural consequence
of the rationale of the doctrine of
functus officio
. If a statutory tribunal has only the power that
Parliament bestows upon it, scrutiny of the relevant legislation to ascertain
legal consequences of failing to discharge its functions seems inescapably
to follow as the correct approach.”
20. Wood J.’s decision in Jackson v Purton (supra) was
the subject of an appeal to the Full Court, but there is nothing in the
Court’s decision which disturbs the statement of principle to which her
Honour referred and which is set out above.
21. It is therefore necessary to
examine the Act to see whether or not it contains any provisions that modify or
reduce the impact
of the doctrine of functus officio. For example,
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
provides a mechanism which
modifies or reduces the impact of that doctrine. Similarly, as Evans J. noted
in R v Resource Management
and Planning Appeal Tribunal: Ex parte North West
Rendering Pty Ltd (supra), ss23(5) and (6) of the
Resource Management and
Planning Appeal Tribunal Act 1993
provides the Resource Management and Planning
Appeal Tribunal limited powers in relation to the correction and amendment of a
22. I have considered the provisions in the Act in this case and
note s35 provides the Tribunal with limited power to correct mistakes
That section provides:
Tribunal may correct an order made by it if the order
(a) a clerical mistake; or
(b) an error arising from an accidental slip or
omission; or
(c) a material miscalculation of figures or a
material mistake in the description of any person, thing or matter referred to
(d) a defect of form.
(2) A correction of an order may be made on the
application of a party to the proceedings or on the Tribunal's own
initiative.”
23. Accordingly, the Tribunal is empowered to correct a
clerical mistake, an error arising from any accidental slip or omission, a
material miscalculation of figures or a material mistake in the description of
any person, thing or matter referred to in the order
or a defect of form. In my
view it is clear this power is limited to correcting clerical mistakes, slips,
omissions, miscalculations
and/or misdescriptions in the orders that give effect
to the Tribunal’s determination. What the medical practitioner has
is the publication of a redacted version of the reasons for the
determination in this matter and an amendment to paragraphs 5 and
16 to reflect
what the medical practitioner says is the true state of affairs.
the following in Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia v Barrell (supra) at
distinction between a Tribunal’s order and its reasons for making that
order are made clear by s33 of the Act. The
power to correct mistakes, slips,
omissions, miscalculations and/or misdescriptions is limited to the order not
the reasons.”
25. In this case the medical practitioner’s application
is not seeking the correction of a clerical mistake, slip, omission,
miscalculation or misdescription in the Tribunal’s orders. He is seeking a
redaction of parts of the Tribunal’s reasons
and an alteration to two
paragraphs. I take the view I simply do not have the power to consider this
application once the hearing
has been held and the Tribunal’s
determination has been published and s35 does not permit me to grant the
application. I therefore
dismiss the medical practitioner’s application
for lack of jurisdiction.
26. While it is true the medical practitioner did
not physically accompany the respondent to the conciliation conference, he was
by telephone. In addition I was entitled to infer, given the medical
practitioner was providing a reference to a disciplinary tribunal
considering serious allegations of professional misconduct, the medical
practitioner would have discussed in full the nature
of the alleged conduct and
the circumstances in which it occurred with the respondent before agreeing to
provide the reference. If
he did not do that then there is a question mark over
the force of the comments the medical practitioner makes about the respondent
the reference. It is a great surprise to me the medical practitioner contends
he was not fully aware of the respondent’s
admitted conduct.
R. B. WEBSTER
CHAIRPERSON
Health Practitioners Tribunal Act
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (154 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter