URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASSC/2025/41.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:21:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McDougall v JSA Consulting Engineers Pty Ltd [2025] TASSC 41 (3 September 2025)
[2025] TASSC 41
: SUPREME COURT OF
McDougall v JSA Consulting Engineers Pty
[2025] TASSC 41
: McDOUGALL, Campbell
JSA CONSULTING ENGINEERS PTY LTD
(ACN 165 277
DELIVERED ON:
3 September
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
15, 19, 22 – 26, 29 – 31 July; 1, 15
August 2024
Written submissions: 9, 30 October; 6 November
JUDGMENT OF:
Torts – Negligence – Pure economic loss – Particular cases
of economic loss – Defective buildings - Damages
– Assessment of
damages in tort – Property loss – Heads of loss – Economic
loss generally – Renovations
of residence including addition of second
floor level – Original footings inadequate to carry additional load
– Resultant
subsidence and cracking – Defendant negligent in failing
to adequately assess existing footings in prevailing soil conditions
advise of the need for underpinning – Finding that cause of damage was
insufficiency of existing footings.
Aust Dig Torts [1207]
Damages – Assessment of damages in tort – Property loss –
Heads of loss – Economic loss generally –
Renovations of residence
including addition of second floor level – Original footings inadequate to
carry additional load –
Resultant subsidence and cracking – Internal
defects to the structure – Loss suffered is accordingly pure economic loss
– Damages to be reduced by amount plaintiff would have spent on
underpinning had the problem been identified at the time of
renovations.
Woolcock Street Investments Pty Ltd v CDG Pty Ltd
216 CLR 515
Auburn Municipal Council v ARC Engineering
[1973] 1 NSWLR 513
Bevan Investments Limited v Blackhall and
Struthers (No 2)
De Pasquale Bros Pty Ltd v
Cavanagh Biggs & Partners Pty Ltd
[1999] QSC 171
[2000] 2 Qd R 461
Aust Dig Damages [1083]
Damages – Assessment of damages in tort – Property loss –
Particular interests – Interests in land or buildings
– Generally
– Renovations of residence including addition of significant second floor
level – Measure of damages
agreed to be costs of restoration – Where
significant differences in scope and costs of methods of restoration proposed by
each party – Method adopted has to be reasonable – Defendant's
proposal would leave plaintiff with a doubtful remedy
and a real risk of further
and increasing damage.
Bellgrove v Eldridge
[1954] HCA 36
(1954) 90 CLR 613
Kirkby v Coote
[2006] QCA 61
Metricon Homes Pty Ltd v
[2016] VSCA 60
, 49 VR 746; applied.
Aust Dig Damages
REPRESENTATION
Jackson SC, A Vince
: A Mills, C
Solicitors:
Dobson Mitchell Allport
[2025] TASSC 41
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 41/2025
File No 844/2019
CAMPBELL SYDNEY McDOUGALL v JSA CONSULTING ENGINEERS
(ACN 165 277 681)
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT PORTER AJ
3 SEPTEMBER 2025
Introduction
This is an action for damages. It is about a house at Woodbridge, bought in
2010 by Campbell McDougall and his wife Linda McDougall,
into which they moved
in February 2011. The house was built in 1983. Once renovated, it was intended
to be a "retirement home" for
the couple. The renovations involved alterations
and extensions to the existing lower-level footprint but, more significantly,
construction
of an extended upper level containing a study, sunroom, living
space, bedroom and separate bathroom. At the time of purchase, the
house had an
upper level but of much lesser dimensions than the one proposed, and one which
could properly be described as a loft
or attic. The new upper storey brought a
substantial increase in the floor area to that which existed before.
The house is, very generally, a rectangular shape and is orientated on a
northwest/southeast line but for convenience was mostly
referred to in the trial
as being on a north/south line. The renovations started in March 2013 and were
completed in November of
that year. In February 2014, a crack appeared in the
brickwork near the front door. Since then, damage by cracking has progressively
spread and worsened, inside and out. This cracking is at various points in the
house, mainly on the lower level and particularly
at the southern end. There is
common ground that movement in at least part of the house has occurred through
its existing footings,
but none in relation to whether those footings were
adequate for the purposes of the renovations nor, it seems whether movement is
continuing.
Sadly, Mrs McDougall passed away in April 2024. She was a plaintiff in these
proceedings, but her name has been removed from the
action's title. As Mrs
McDougall was involved in relevant events, there are times in these reasons
where I will, as appropriate
to the context, refer to "the plaintiffs" or to her
by name. References to "the plaintiff" are to Mr McDougall.
original plans for the renovations were drawn by an architect in November 2012.
The architect contacted Matthew Horsham who was
a principal in the business
known as JSA Consulting Engineers conducted by the defendant company. As a
structural engineer, Mr Horsham
was engaged to provide engineering design
services for the renovation. He was to assist the architect in preparing "a set
drawings" as he put it in evidence. Ultimately, the architect did not
carry on with the project and Mr Horsham arranged for a building
designer to
complete the plans to building permit standard.
of the quotation which was provided to the plaintiffs by the defendant refer to
"Consultation on engineering design during
the development of the building
application documentation" and "Design footings, timber and steel framing,
bracing, lintels and roof
modifications." It is common ground that Mr Horsham
provided engineering input and approved, from his perspective, the plans
to the council for a building permit in February 2013. He had carried
out at least one site inspection by that time, and thereafter
a few more before
completion and the lodgement of the relevant documents with the council.
it is the suitability of the footings of the original building to the extent
shown by the designer's drawings and as revealed
by such inspections as were
carried out by Mr Horsham which is at the heart of the dispute. Only two
additional strip footings which
related to a dining room on the eastern side and
kitchen on the northern end were to be added in the renovation process. Some pad
footings were added which related to extensions to a deck. The plaintiff's case
is that the footings for the whole of the renovated
house were inadequate to
support the new upper level. In short summary, he alleges the defendant is
liable for Mr Horsham's negligence
in failing to adequately investigate the
dimensions of the existing footings and failing to carry out a sufficient
investigation
of the whole of the site.
defendant's position is that there was no breach of duty in that Mr. Horsham
exercised the care and skill required of him in
the circumstances. Further, in
essence, the defendant says the movement is caused by the presence of a tree
which was removed in
2015, and by excessive moisture levels in the soil at the
southern end with varying causes. More broadly, the defendant's expert
is that irrespective of the added level and associated renovations, the house
would have subsided and suffered similar damage
in any event. It follows that
negligence, including the scope of the duty of care and any breach of that duty,
and causation are
in dispute. A further issue is the best method of
rectification. There is expert evidence on both sides of the arguments. The
by subsidence and cracking is very substantial with damages claimed in
the order of $1.5 million. In addition to the evidence of
quite a few experts
and a plethora of reports, plans, and photographs, I have had the benefit of a
view of the house and surrounds.
The state of the house before
the renovations
Russell Kingston, a forensic structural engineer called by the defendant, takes
the view that in support of the notion that the
house would have suffered the
same damage in any event given the prevailing ground conditions, there is
evidence of movement in the
house causing cracking before the renovations began.
Both John Bryant, the owner who sold the property to the plaintiffs, and Eric
Bound, a builder who provided to the plaintiffs a building inspection report,
gave evidence. Mr Bound's report is dated 6 November
2010. It contains notes as
to each room, other areas of the house and the exterior. Among other things, Mr
Bound noted minor cracking
to a cornice above cupboards in the kitchen, minor
cracking to the walls on the landing and rumpus room and minor cracking to some
external brickwork.
In his evidence, Mr Bound was shown photographs of cracking in two internal
areas more at the northern end of the house and asked
whether the cracking shown
was the sort he would describe as minor such as was seen at the time of his
inspection. He said this was
definitely not the case. He explained minor
cracking would be up to a millimetre and would usually be at sheet joints
whether they
be on the one plane or in a corner. What is shown in one photograph
is actually ripping apart of the plaster sheet as opposed to
a joint cracking.
That simply indicates an amazing amount of movement for that to
Bound inspected the house on 21 June 2024 which was the first time he had been
there since his report in November 2011. He walked
around the whole house. He
said he saw a significant amount of cracking and tearing of plaster work. When
asked whether what he saw
as comparable to what he saw in November 2011 he said
that it was a totally different scenario. To illustrate, he said he questioned
himself as to whether it was really the same house. The difference was so
pronounced he was shocked.
Bryant bought the house in 1991. Having spent some 44 years in the building
industry as a builder and architectural designer,
he retired in 2011. The
plaintiffs bought the property from him. In 2004 he designed and built himself
an extension of the northern
end of the house. That was constructed on a
concrete slab. He said that during the time he owned and occupied the house,
no evidence that it had suffered or was suffering structural damage of
some kind. He saw no damage to plaster work or any specific
signs of movement in
the house. As to the outside of the building, he did not notice any signs of
movement, cracking or breaking
in the brick work. He thought that the brick work
in the house was of very good quality.
inspected the house when he purchased it and took note of the brickwork. He
thought it was a very well-built work: "
I was most satisfied that the brick
work was sound as was the rest of the house.
" As to the mortar he said that
it was fine and explained that there may be variations in colour and texture of
mortar which can depend
on a number of factors. There was no need to repoint any
of the brick work during his occupancy, nor carry out any remedial work
part of the building.
cross-examination Mr Bryant was taken to some much more recent photographs of
various cracks in the house. Without exception he
said there were no such cracks
when he lived there, nor did he have to repair any. Mr Bryant was then taken to
some specific aspects.
Some of the matters raised came from the Bound report
while others came from the report of Russell Kingston, a forensic structural
engineer called by the defendant. The first thing was mesh in the brickwork at
around the south-eastern corner. Mr Bryant said that
he did not put it there and
would not have known if it was there because the brick work was intact. (This
mesh was later explained
by Mr McDougall who said that he put it there to stop
vermin getting in.) As to photographs showing small sections of slightly
coloured mortar from surrounding parts, Mr Bryant said that he was not
responsible. Next, he said that he was not aware of what is
now an internal
crack from the area of the door from the sunroom to the veranda and had not
repaired any crack.
relation to some cracking to the cornice above the kitchen cupboards, he said
that it would surprise him if it were present, as
he had put the kitchen in, but
he was not aware of it. Nor was he aware of the door to the veranda catching on
the door sill as it
was opened. He agreed that it was possible that there were
"twisting" wardrobe doors. He said a 16 mm gap between the wall and the
architrave in the downstairs bathroom was remedied by replacing a couple of
"missing" wind moulds. He said he regarded the
Bound report as being about
fairly minor issues, and he did as much as he could to satisfy the points. The
only external cracking
he saw was at each side of the front door where the
bricks were vertically laid, and any cracking would have been minor and in the
mortar, he was able to identify that cracking in a more recent photograph.
Mr McDougall said that when he inspected the property, he did not see anything
that led him to think that it had undergone substantial
repairs of any kind at
some stage. He saw no problems with the brickwork, or any internal damage apart
from what was noted by Mr
Bound. He saw no signs of movement or subsidence in or
of the building. He said that between when they moved in and the start of
renovations, they did not carry out any alterations to the exterior of the
building; in particular, the brick work. He did not
notice any signs of damage
deterioration or failure in any of the exterior brick work, either the bricks or
the mortar. He was taken
through more recent photographs and confirmed that
there was nothing of that type evident when they moved in.
cross-examination, Mr McDougall agreed that when they moved into the house, he
was satisfied that most of the issues identified
by Mr Bound had been resolved.
He was not challenged about his observations of the building before the
renovations were carried out.
Peter Holmes, a structural engineer called by the
plaintiff, said the Bound report mentioned minor cosmetic issues that needed to
be addressed. He said he saw nothing in it to raise any concern about building
movement; "
I am seeing quite the opposite; [the] building is in need of some
TLC, some maintenance
Mr Horsham gave evidence. He said that on 24 October 2012 he went to the
property with the architect, Craig Meredith, and met the
plaintiffs. He carried
out an inspection of the property, principally to look at the health of the
house. He understood that the
house was about 25 years old, and he was looking
for tell-tale signs which can include cracks in ceilings, uneven floors and that
He said he had "
a pretty good eye at spotting stress in houses
." That was
principally what he was looking for. He said it is typically shown up in the
ceilings of most rooms with cracks in the
plaster, and he could not spot
anything; it was in very good condition.
of his concerns was with the weight of the building and what was carrying the
load. Because of that he was particularly interested
to look for whether the
building had articulation in the masonry, which is built into allow a building
to move as foundations move,
and brick is brittle. The articulation is a 10 mm
gap which effectively acts as a flexibile joint. He did not find articulation.
He was also looking for telltale signs of stress in the building, adding that it
very, very hard to hide stress in masonry
because ... it is very brittle, and so the slightest of movements – you
will see stress
develop in one way or another
". He inspected the entire
perimeter of the building and took a series of photographs. He described a high
level of scrutiny to the
brick wall work in order to detect movement and said
apart from some unusual discolouring on some brick, "
the house was in
remarkably good condition for its age
defendant's expert, Mr Kingston, gave evidence of an inspection of the property
over two days in April 2024. A lengthy written
report constituted much of his
evidence-in -chief. Notwithstanding what Mr Horsham said he saw in 2012, Mr
Kingston says his reported
measurements and observations show settlement of the
building at the southern end before completion of the renovations, and also
"previous repairs". As to the suggested settlement before completion, in the
order in which they appear in the report, Mr Kingston
(a) A "built-in horizontal misalignment" between the top of the gallery west
wall cupboards
and the ceiling, the
distances being 78 mm at the northern end and 110 mm at the southern end.
(b) Horizontal misalignment of the downstairs bathroom/bedroom doorway (bathroom
side) where the top of the architrave to the cornice
on the western side is
lower by 8 mm than the other side, said to be "consistent with the floor having
relative settlement towards
the west and a new horizontal ceiling having been
installed.";
(c) Compared to the upper floor levels, the lower floor levels generally have a
greater fall to the south, starting approximately
in the midline of the
building, with the lower floor levels falling by 60 mm compared to 40 mm for the
upper floor levels.
As to evidence of previous repairs, again in the order in which they appear in
the report, Mr Kingston notes the following.
(a) The reopening of a previous repair above the window in the eastern wall of
the lower-level bathroom. Photographs show a crack
running at an angle from the
point near the right corner of the window to the cornice.
(b) "Mesh within re-opening of previous crack repairs." This is identified in
two separate areas of the laundry/store area at the
southern end of the
building, and in the lightwell, also at the southern end. Photographs show a
form of white or light-coloured
mesh behind and in cracks in plasterboard.
(c) Areas of lighter and darker mortar in the brickwork at the southern end of
the house, the properties of which indicate the lighter
coloured mortar is newer
"and may be associated with previous repairs." In light of what Mr Kingston says
in an earlier part of the
report, the reference to the southern end includes a
reference to the "Store eastern wall." In that part of the report, he says the
lighter mortar is "
most likely
a previous repair." [My emphasis]
(d) A "previous mortar repair" in the north-eastern corner brickwork of the
downstairs bedroom on south-eastern side of the building;
"[T]he owner was not
aware of this crack having been repaired since his purchase, therefore it has
been pre-existing to 2010."
(e) The extent of internal distress within the south end of the house is not
consistent with the extent of brickwork distress, "suggesting
that previous
internal repairs may have been carried out."
The plaintiff objected to the admissibility of this "previous repair" evidence.
The grounds included relevance and a failure to
satisfy the requirements of s
79(1) of the
Evidence Act
After submissions were
made, it was agreed the evidence be taken provisionally. The evidence referred
to in pars [19](a), (b) and
(e), can be quickly dealt with. The plaintiff did
not object to Mr Kingston's expertise as a structural engineer, specialising in
forensic work. The relevant parts of the report outline what he saw with
cross-references to photographs he took at the time of
his inspection. I am
satisfied that his opinions in relation to previous repairs, are wholly or
substantially based on his specialised
knowledge, as that requirement is
explained in
Dasreef Limited v Hawchar
243 CLR 588
Honeysett v The Queen
, 253 CLR 122. Parts of
the report that relate to the matters referred to in pars 19(a), (b) and (e) are
arguably quite sparse in
terms of reasoning sufficient to show that the opinion
was properly based, but greater clarity emerged in oral evidence. Those
expressions
of opinion will be admitted. Weight is a separate
consideration.
As to pars [19](c) and (d), the grounds of objection to the evidence about the
lighter brick mortar colour and the likelihood of
repairs include relevance, as
well as the requirement in the second limb of s 79(1). During his inspection,
Mr Kingston was able
to observe and photograph differences in mortar colour in
three small areas of the southern end of the building. The photographs
for themselves in any event. He had samples taken of mortar from cracks in some
places, as well as drill dust samples. It is
his opinion that the differences
between samples evidence previous repairs is the subject of the dispute.
The argument arises because Mr Kingston's opinion that the lighter mortar
colour is evidence of previous brickwork repairs is based
on the testing of the
mortar samples, carried out by an independent organisation, CMET Technology Pty
Ltd, Corrosion Materials &
Testing Consultants. The CMET report is attached
to Mr Kingston's report, but it is separately in evidence by agreement which
that resort does not need to be had to s 60 of the
Evidence Act
to the facts or data contained in it. The suggested issues relate to the terms
of the CMET report and Mr Kingston's adoption or
interpretation of it.
samples were taken from stepped cracks and drilled holes from and in two
separate areas: the downstairs laundry west wall
and the downstairs bathroom
eastern wall. These became samples A and B respectively, with B described by
CMET as "light coloured."
Samples of dark and lighter mortar, C and D
respectively, were taken from an area of the eastern wall of the store where
presently no cracking. CMET determined that crack samples A and B were
of a similar age, and concluded they had been open for a significant
estimated to be in the range of five to ten years. It was possible sample B was
a different mortar to A. CMET's analysis
as to mortar age indicated the lighter
coloured mortar in D was a relatively newer mortar than in C, "possibly used to
repair cracks
in the brickwork." Further, the mortar in B is similar to that in
D, and that in A is similar to that in C.
From this, Mr Kingston has concluded that the lighter mortar in D from the
Store eastern wall is most likely a previous repair.
Although not stated by Mr
Kingston, the obvious inference from the CMET results is that, as the properties
of sample B are similar
to those of D, the crack in the bathroom eastern wall
had previously appeared but had been repaired and had since reopened.
Mr Kingston also stated that lighter coloured mortar in an area of the
north-eastern corner of a downstairs bedroom is evidence
of a previous repair.
No explanation is offered and there is no reference to the CMET results. It may
be he has adopted the results
for other areas and applied it to this area. The
evidence is objected to, but for reasons which will shortly appear, other
satisfies me that there was a repair, but it was one necessitated by
the renovation works.
The objections are essentially to Mr Kingston's evidence, not so much the CMET
report. Given that the report is in evidence, the
stated facts and opinions are
available and can be assessed subject to other evidence. That the CMET report
puts previous repairs
as possibilities does not affect admissibility:
Langmaid v Dobsons Vegetable Machinery Pty Ltd
[2014] TASSC 6
and the cases cited. The issue is one of weight. To the extent that
Mr Kingston advances the opinions as to previous repairs as
his own, they appear
to be based on the CMET report, and in strict terms, his evidence would be
inadmissible as not complying with
either limb of s 79(1) of the
. To the extent that he has adopted, advanced and exaggerated CMET
conclusions, as he has done in relation to the Store eastern wall,
the evidence
is inadmissible.
argument, Mr Groves for the defendant suggested that all Mr Kingston was
offering was that repairs of some description might have
been, or had been, made
with the reason "to obscure to be identified". It was suggested that if there
was work by which original
mortar was replaced by newer mortar, that was a
proper use of the word "repair". This is a little odd because Mr Kingston's
distress having occurred before the plaintiff's purchase in
2010, "with previous
repairs having been made" before then. In closing, the defendant submitted that
Mr Kingston's opinion about
the primary cause of the structural distress –
the presence of water in clay soils – was not reliant on the issue of
previous repairs but was bolstered by it. It is quite clear to me that the
subject evidence was being offered to suggest repairs
to cracking caused by
movement in the building
the renovations.
plaintiff also argues that the evidence about the age of the stepped cracks is
irrelevant because of the stated range of five
to ten years which only takes
things back to April 2014, some six months after the completion of the
renovations. I am not persuaded
that there is such a bright line of delineation
that would compel the view that the evidence is irrelevant. It is really a
As to the effect of the evidence itself, I have just mentioned the ultimate
context of these matters; that is, the defendant's advanced
primary cause of the
structural distress is not reliant on the issue of previous repairs but is
bolstered by it. Mr Kingston was
cross-examined about several of the items. Many
of his answers, or his manner of answering, were reflective of his evidence in
cross-examination
generally, and cause me to have reservations about the cogency
of his views. To my mind, Mr Kingston had great difficulty in responding
directly, or in any meaningful responsive way, to many questions and was often
reluctant to make concessions about obvious points.
I will need to again refer
to this later.
I turn to the par [18](a) matter. The evidence of Mr McDougall about the
gallery cupboards is that they are in two sections, one
a little longer than the
other, and which has been stepped further out. That is because there was a new
wall put in behind that section,
whereas the shorter cupboard section has the
old wall behind it. That shorter cupboard section is to the south. Photographs
that the section measured by Mr Kingston in the longer cupboard. Mr
McDougall said that not long before the trial commenced, he measured
section in the same way Mr Kingston had the longer part – from each end of
the relevant section to the ceiling –
and could find no discrepancy at
all. His photographs show the floor level behind each cupboard section as being
generally the same.
Other measurements taken by Mr Kingston in this area have some relevance. In
the renovations a new roof ridge beam was installed
extending to a point
approximately above the southern end of the cupboard measured by Mr McDougall.
Mr Kingston assumed that it had
been installed horizontally, and his
measurements show a slight elevation of the south of 2 mm. If there was a
previously sloping
floor and a horizontal underside of the ceiling, it would
explain the horizontal misalignment. However, the original ridge beam to
southern end of the house drops to 16 mm at its southern end point. Mr
Kingston's measurements show a drop of 12 mm in the upper
floor level from a
point about halfway along the total cupboard storage area to its end, with then
a further drop to 40 mm at the
end of the house. That seems to be evidenced by
cracking between the southern end of the cupboard and the adjacent wall.
Kingston said that he would not disagree with the proposition that some portion
of his measured drop of 16 mm would have occurred
since the renovations. In my
assessment, the fall of 12 mm in floor level does not correlate with the
approximate 30 mm cupboard
to ceiling differential, and Mr McDougall's
unchallenged measurements of the southern cupboard section remain unexplained.
Mr Holmes's
view is that the probable cause of the differential is that the wall
at that point is not parallel with the ridge beam, the possibility
of which Mr
Kingston conceded. The general question of different floor levels in this area
– par [18](c) – was largely
visited in the exchange about the
gallery cupboards. I do not believe this issue has any real significance given
the state of the
As to the similar "misalignment" issue relating to a downstairs bedroom doorway
referred to in [18](b), I do not find this to be
of any consequence. The
disparity from one end of the top of the architrave to the other is only 8 mm,
and Mr Kingston's observation
that there is a drop in the floor level to the
west, explicitly assumes a new ceiling was installed at that point, something
which there is no evidence. There is nothing to suggest that any
discrepancy had not been present since 1983. I should also observe
are in fact three horizontal surfaces at play, a discrepancy at each of which or
any combination could explain the differential.
There is the top of the
architrave itself, the cornice attached to the wall/ceiling joint, and the
plasterboard no doubt attached
to the ceiling battens. Photographs also reveal a
crack running from the "lower" top of the architrave on the left at an upward
from the corner.
turn to par [19](a), the suggested previous repair of a crack in the eastern
wall of the downstairs bathroom as shown in photographs
taken by Mr Kingston. In
cross-examination, he said he would not be surprised to learn that the crack in
fact extended downwards
to the left to the floor level, running behind a hand
basin on that wall. He said that he did not note the crack to that extent and
did not take photographs of that part. He agreed the crack was not the opening
of a join in the plaster sheets but what he seemed
to prefer to call a "distress
crack", rather than a "tear" but in any case, agreed with the proposition that
it was "a horizontal
movement apart of the plaster sheet, [an] opening up of the
plaster sheet." His explanation as to why the crack he observed suggested
previous repair is that close examination showed an outer jagged edge to the
plaster work and wallpaper, but behind which was a
smooth or even line in the
inner edge. There is no evidence of loose plaster in the crack suggestive of
Kingston started to explain what the smooth line represents but interrupted
himself to say that normally plaster fails and becomes
jagged but when there is
a smooth line behind the face of the actual crack, "
like a knife has gone
", that is evidence of previous repair. In the end, despite
requests to explain why that is evidence of previous repair, no clear
emerged that I could detect. In that state of uncertainty, it is not possible to
take anything from this suggestion of previous
The exchanges on this issue led to the broader issue of Mr Kingston's
observations as referred to in par [19](e), inconsistency
of cracking, internal
to external. The discussion was focused on the particular crack, but the
evidence is relevant to the general
proposition. As I understand it, Mr
Kingston's opinion as to previous repairs is based in part on the fact the
internal cracking
was much less than the adjacent external brick cracking. It
was put to him that the greater movement in the brickwork was explicable
basis that that was not tied to any structure, whereas plaster sheeting was
nailed and glued to the studs. Mr Kingston acknowledged
could be the
" that the plaster, when it begins to tear apart, is inevitably not
going to move as much as the unrestrained brickwork.
That brings me to par [19](b) issue; the presence of mesh in plaster cracks
suggesting previous repairs. There are several photographs
in evidence which
relate to the three different areas. Each photograph shows cracking on
horizontal or vertical lines. In cross-examination,
Mr Kingston was taken
through the suggested ordinary plaster boarding progress. He agreed that plaster
sheets have recessed edges
to form butt jointing. He agreed that adhesive
plastering tape is then run along the joint with jointing plaster applied over
joint to make the surface level which, when hardened, is sanded. He agreed
that if the joint cracked open, one would see the mesh.
When it was put to him
this is what the photograph show, he replied, "
Potentially. I mean, it
– well, where I was – if you look at the external photos 27 and 28,
I think they are. ... [They
show] horizontal settlement of the brickwork on the
other side of that particular crack ... .
When pressed as to why the presence of mesh was evidence of a previous repair,
and what that had to do with the brickwork outside,
he said that it was almost
in the same location and that they were reflective type cracks. Mr Jackson
suggested this was not surprising
as the building was moving in that area, Mr
Kingston's response to which was that he could not be certain the crack was
joint. At that time the focus was on a particular photograph but
showing similar things to the others. The following exchange
That's a joint in the plaster sheets, isn't
it?......You'd have to measure it from the floor. Generally they're about 1.2,
could well be, it could well be. I'm not just saying it's not,
The end result of this is that, having regard to what the photographs show of
the linear nature of the relevant cracks, taken along
with the other evidence
earlier outlined, I am satisfied that these areas are not areas of previous
repairs in plaster.
I have already dealt with the par [19](c) issue in some detail. The evidence
can be put no higher than the possibility of a previous
repair. The cause of
any previous repair is speculation. Mr Holmes was asked in cross-examination
mortar on the downstairs bathroom eastern wall
in respect of which, as noted above, the asserted inference is of a previous
brickwork crack, since re-opened. Mr Holmes agreed with the proposition
that differences in mortar colour are suggestive of repair
but explained that
the reason for the repair can be many fold, and that it did not necessarily
signify movement. He explained that
the quality of mortar varies dramatically,
and that it is not uncommon for repairs to be carried out because the mortar has
re-pointing is done to prevent damage occurring to the brickwork. He
pointed out that repointing is repair.
further explained that the crux of the matter was whether in an area of
suggested repair, the joints in the brickwork were relevantly
even. He said he
did not see anything at the time of his inspection in 2017 that suggested joint
width was different. He saw very
substantial cracking in discrete areas,
but nothing sprang out that we were looking at something that had extensive
repairs carried out to it. Whilst there may be different
coloured mortar does
not necessarily reflect any serious damage had occurred to the property in the
Lastly, as to Mr Kingston's opinions in these respects, there is par [19](d),
being the alleged previous mortar repair in the north-eastern
corner brickwork
of the downstairs bedroom on the southern-eastern side. This area is just the
under a fixed canopy over a box bay
window. As noted, he says Mr McDougall told
him that he was not aware of the crack having been repaired since his purchase,
Mr Kingston
therefore concluding that it pre-existed 2010. Mr McDougall was
cross-examined about what he had told Mr Kingston. He said it was
not correct
to say that he was not aware of the repair until Mr Kingston pointed it out to
him. He said there had been a discussion
but he was fully aware that this area had been re-bricked. He said he did not
recall making
the comment, "
when I knew it had been repaired.
McDougall had explained in his evidence-in-chief what had happened in the area.
He said the renovation required demolition of
the roof above the particular area
and removal of the bricks to allow the insertion of a large laminated veneer
lumber beam (LVL)
which he said was actually a "double beam". Above where that
beam now is, there was originally a veranda roof. To facilitate renovations
that area, brickwork had to be removed and replaced. In Mr Kingston's cross
examination, he was shown a photograph of the wall
in question taken by Mr
Horsham during his inspection in October 2013. Mr Kingston agreed that
differences in mortar colour were
not discernible. He agreed it seemed there had
been a lot of work done on and around the wall in question, including the
of an old bay window. After being taken through the details of the
likely reconstruction works, he was asked about the need for mortar
being necessary because the brickwork had been knocked. Despite the question, Mr
Kingston said he thought it would be probably
unlikely that the brickwork in
would have collapsed but when the question was put again, he conceded that
something could have caused
it to crack.
Generally, I found Mr McDougall's evidence to be persuasive. Although there is
a lot at stake for him, he did not appear to be inclined
to exaggerate, and he
made concessions where appropriate, quickly acknowledging possible deficiencies
in his recollection. I am not
satisfied that he told Mr Kingston that he did not
know of the repair of the brick work in the relevant area, and I am not
to the degree the court is being asked to infer previous repairs due
to cracked brickwork caused by movement of the building, that
the different
mortar colour is evidence of a pre-2013 repair of a distress crack.
On the whole of the evidence, I am satisfied the house was performing
satisfactorily, if it can be put that way, at the time the
renovations were
commenced. As with most houses, settling and some minor cracking appears over
time. Although it might be said
that a house as purchased by the plaintiffs had
been "patched and painted" for the purposes of sale, I am satisfied that nothing
significant had then emerged in terms of significant movement of the building
causing distress and damage.
retainer and the duty of care
The relevant events unfolded as follows. The plaintiffs engaged Mr Meredith as
architect. He drew up a set of plans which was finalised
with input from the
plaintiffs. Mr Meredith asked Mr Horsham to become involved. They went to the
site around 24 October 2012 at
which time Mr Horsham carried out the inspection
referred to earlier. Mr Meredith's drawings were the subject of an application
a development application granted in December 2012. Around that time, he
became unable to continue. Further plans needed to be drawn
for which Mr
Horsham's engineering advice and detail were required. Mr. Horsham suggested
getting a builder designer rather than
architect, and recommended Greg Tilley.
The plaintiff recalls a discussion with Mr Horsham about Mr Tilley's engagement.
it was the drawings prepared by Mr Tilley and certified by Mr Horsham
on 6 February 2013 which were the subject of an application
for building and
plumbing permits.
In evidence is a quotation from the defendant dated 21 November 2012. I have
already referred to two items noted as being part of
the scope of
In addition, the scope of
the work included the provision of hand sketches and markups to be documented by
the architect and the
preparation of documentation for submission to the
council. In cross-examination the plaintiff said he would have contacted Mr
to agree to the costing; he could not remember whether it was by phone
Mr Horsham's evidence was that he provided the quotation after his initial
inspection. He said that in it, he described what his
"active scope of works"
was intended to be and the cost. That cost was $1,850 plus GST. At the foot of
the document is a recommendation
that the client engage the firm to carry out
structural inspections during the build, which are charged at $150 plus GST per
The document goes on to say that JSA typically inspect the footings and
slab preparation, and reports are provided for the council
or building surveyor,
via email to the builder and client.
Horsham said he did not hear anything for about three or four weeks after
sending the quotation to the plaintiffs before Mr Meredith
rang to say he was
indisposed for four weeks. It was then that Mr Tilley was contacted. However, in
later evidence he said he got
a phone call from the plaintiff which related to
his engagement, and in which the plaintiff said in effect, "Get on with it."
generally accords with the plaintiff's evidence. Mr Horsham also spoke to a
building surveyor he had recommended to the plaintiffs,
and arranged a site
visit with Mr Tilley in January 2013. Mr Horsham said his initial responsibility
was to assess and review the
structural design shown on the Tilley drawings. He
explained that he was to certify the structural components while the building
surveyor was to certify the architectural documents.
coming later in time, there are further documents which shed light on the scope
of the retainer. There is invoice dated
8 February 2013 from the defendant to
the plaintiffs, two items of which are "Structural Design Review, Sketches &
Certification
– $1,850" and "Professional consulting services –
$450". There is a later invoice dated 13 November 2013 for $247.50
contains two items: "Mandatory Structural Inspection ... 27-6-2013 –
$175.00" and "Form 55 – Inspections –
$50.00". There is an
inspection report from Mr Horsham dated 27 June 2013, in evidence but which the
plaintiff said he did not see.
That refers to "Inspection of footing preparation
for decks and kitchen extension" and "Inspection of steel & timber framing
for lower and upper storey".
A Form 55 is a "Certificate of specialist or other person (building work)". The
purpose of the form is, as may be expected, to certify
specific aspects of
building work, and is an important part of building permit application process.
There are two in evidence, the
first dated 6 February 2013, the second 13
November 2013. The "Certificate type" in the first one is described as
"Structural" with
"Structural inspection" appearing in the second. Relevant
documents are noted in the first as certified design drawings for the plaintiffs
by Greg Tilley dated 4 February 2013 and certified by the engineer on 6 February
2013. The second refers to "Inspection records dated
27-6-2013".
The duty of care and its scope
The pleaded case is that the defendant was retained by Mr Meredith, but the
defendant accepts that the evidence shows otherwise.
I find that the plaintiffs
directly engaged the defendant. The next thing is that this is a claim for
economic loss as distinct
from, and not consequent on ordinary damage to
Bryan v Maloney
(1995) 182 CLR 609 at 617-618;
Street Investments Pty Ltd v CDG Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 16
216 CLR 515
Makawe Pty Ltd v Randwick City Council
[2009] NSWCA 412
De Pasquale Bros Pty Ltd v Cavanagh Biggs & Partners Pty
[1999] QSC 171
[2000] 2 Qd R 461
The defendant accepts it had
duty of care in respect of such loss – foreseeability of injury
is accepted – and there is agreement as to how that duty
is to be broadly
expressed. Based on cases such as
Voli v Inglewood Shire Council
[1963] HCA 15
per Windeyer J at 84 and
Brickhill v Cooke
[1984] 3 NSWLR 396
at 399, the duty is formulated as one to exercise such care as would be shown by
a reasonably competent and ordinarily skilled and
qualified engineer retained
for the purpose in hand.
However, there is a marked divergence in relation to the scope of the duty. The
defendant's case is that the duty is further confined
and only extended as far
as the performance of the services the subject of the contract; that is, the
duty was one only with respect
to the tasks contracted to be done and performed
for the extension
. The defendant says it does not seek to ignore the
existing footings because "inevitably, they have to be taken into account", but
argues it was not engaged to redesign the dwelling as a whole nor carry out a
building superintendent/project supervisor type role.
It is said that the task
was to provide input adequate for the extension, and the reference in the
quotation to designing footings
has to be restricted to those few footings
supporting the extension. Accordingly, there was no obligation to redesign the
footings and, "... any duty of the defendant was limited to
understanding and accommodating the capacity of the existing footings,
situated within the soils identified by a reasonably conducted investigation,
for the [designed] extension."
In closing submissions, the defendant did not argue the point in any greater
detail and the plaintiff seemed to proceed on the assumption
that the duty was
of the broader scope. There is no reason to think other than the proper approach
to the issue is the same as would
be taken in relation to the
of a duty of care in an economic loss case. That question was recently the
subject of consideration by the High Court in
Mallonland Pty Ltd v Advanta
Seeds Pty Ltd
[2024] HCA 25
, 98 ALJR 946. There, at [33] of the plurality
judgment, the criterion of assumed responsibility was confirmed as a basis for
existence of a duty of care notwithstanding criticism that had been made of
the term. Further "salient
, the presence of which
may indicate a duty, were discussed at [38] and following. Actual or
constructive knowledge of a risk to a
person or class of persons of the
particular type of economic loss that eventuated and the magnitude of the
economic loss that risk
entails, strengthens the case for the finding of the
duty of care.
matter that has been identified is a plaintiff's vulnerability to the type of
economic loss that eventuated. A mere likelihood
of suffering economic loss if
reasonable care is not taken will not amount to vulnerability, but the point is
the plaintiff's inability
to protect themselves that eventuated as a consequence
of a defendant's carelessness, either entirely or in a way that would cast
consequence of loss on the defendant. Reliance was not separately considered in
Mallonland,
it may be seen as part of the concept of an
assumption of responsibility although absence of reliance is not necessarily
the establishment of a duty of care:
Surrey County
[2023] UKSC 52
[2024] 1 WLR 335
, [108]. Reliance may be taken as
established where there is a relationship between a professional person and the
Pullen v Gutteridge Haskins & Davey Pty Ltd
[1993] VicRp 4
[1993] 1 VR 27
The plaintiff's case relies on the existence of a duty arising in the context
of an undertaking to engineer an extensive range of
alterations, not only to the
main part of the existing building at ground level, but more significantly it
might be thought, to the
addition to the existing structure. That structure
amounts to a much bigger second level – with bath, glass shower
partitions,
tiling etc – in place of a very lightly constructed
partitioning of an attic. The plaintiff says it is impossible to ignore
overall purpose and effect of the renovation project that was undertaken. The
plans show that the expanded upper level increased
the floor space of that level
by about 62 per cent. In his evidence-in-chief Mr Horsham described the new
upper level as a "storey",
but in cross-examination he very strongly disagreed
with calling it such, but I note that Mr Kingston seemed quite comfortable in
continually referring to it as a 'storey'.
For those reasons, I need to look at Mr Horsham's evidence. He said that Mr
Meredith had done quite a detailed section in his development
drawings which was
useful because he had done the hard work to assist him, as a structural
engineer, to work out what Mr Meredith's
intention was. In the preliminary
discussion with the plaintiff, Mr Horsham advised he would be assisting Mr
to put together a set of working drawings
from which the
project could be built
" [My emphasis]. More particularly, he later said
that, although with some reluctance because he assumed the building surveyor had
carried out his own inspections, he completed the Form 55 certificate dated 13
November 2013 which referred to an inspection and
report dated 27 June 2013. He
I didn't do this lightly, but I was satisfied with what I had seen
that I could give the building surveyor some comfort that
the works were fit for purpose
" [My emphasis].
addition, there is the evidence I have already mentioned; that is, Mr Horsham
said that one of his concerns was with the weight
of the building and what was
carrying the load. Obviously, that concern would be carried forward into the
advice and design input
he assumed responsibility for and chose to give. Mr
Horsham gave evidence of a site visit in March 2013, during which he had the
opportunity to inspect a part of the existing footing on the eastern side. He
said he told the plaintiff that the footing was a suitable
depth and was sitting
in good material; "
I was quite clear on this, I said in this area I was
satisfied that we wouldn't require to do any additional works to those
." Further still, in cross-examination Mr Horsham agreed that the
request to inspect demolition, footing preparation etc set out in
the Form 55 of
6 February 2013, was prompted by the design of the building and its height.
On one view, the broader scope of the duty might well have arisen simply
because of the language in the quotation. That describes
consultation on
engineering design generally and is not confined. "Designing" is not confined to
the footings but covers timber and
steel framing, which was to occur in both
upstairs and downstairs, and roof modifications. The whole of the extensions and
would accordingly be encompassed. In any event, it is clear, and I
find, that on the evidence the defendant, through Mr Horsham,
responsibility for giving advice and design work for, and to enable, the
renovations as an entire exercise; to draw plans
"from which the project could
be built." In that respect, there was reliance by the plaintiffs. It is not at
all clear to me quite
what counsel for the defendant intended by the concession
that the existing footings had to be "taken into account".
defendant knew or ought to have known of the risk of internal distress to the
building with consequent economic loss if the completed
renovation works were
"not fit for purpose." To the extent it is necessary to go further, in the
circumstances of the respective
positions of the plaintiff's and the defendant,
the plaintiffs were vulnerable to the type of loss suffered.
the focus is on the adequacy of the footings of the building as a whole, it
might pay to note that in
Woolcock Street Investments Pty Ltd v CDJ Capitals
(above) at [76], McHugh J observed that courts "have long held that
engineers engaged in connection with the design of a building
have a duty to
examine the site to see whether the nature of the sub-soil is adequate for the
proposed building". Inextricably allied
to that is the question of design. It is
not a large step at all from the design of a new building to that for an upper
an existing building. Of course, questions of the scope of a duty of
care and are not to be judged with the benefit of hindsight
having regard to the
outcome. All things considered, I hold that the scope of the defendant's duty
extended to consideration of the
suitability and sufficiency of the existing
footings, and to carry out such examinations and investigations, including soil
investigations
as may reasonably have been required, to ensure they "would be up
to the task" as it was put. And if not, to determine what work
might be needed
to achieve that and advise accordingly.
– Residential slabs and footings
The 2013 alterations and additions to the property were the subject of the
provisions of the
Building Act 2000
of that Act provided that
building works was to comply with the Building Code of Australia (BCA), in
addition to the Act's provisions.
The BCA is to be found within the National
Construction Code. Under the BCA, Australian Standard 2870-2011 (the Standard)
"acceptable construction manual". Compliance is necessary unless the
proposed works are based solely on performance solutions. The
defendant places
heavy reliance on the Standard in its argument about breach of duty. It is best
to explore it now.
The stated objective of the Standard is to specify performance criteria and
specific designs for footing systems for foundation
conditions commonly found in
Australia and to provide guidance on the design of footing systems by
engineering principles. Clause
1.8.25 provides that a "footing system" is "a
general term used to refer to slabs, footings, piers, and pile systems that
load form superstructure to the foundation." Section 2.2 deals with
"Methods for Site Classification". Clause 2.2.2 provides that
classification based on identification of the soil profile is to include one or
more of specified methods. Relevantly, cl 2.2.2(b)
refers to "Identification of
the soil profile and interpretation of the current performance of existing
buildings" and continues:
"The soil profile shall be confirmed by
inspection of soil from a bore hole(s) or other excavational sampling method in
with Clauses 2.4.3 and 2.4.4. Interpretation of the performance of
existing residential footing systems within the region that are
not less than 10
years and are founded on a similar soil profile shall be in accordance with
Table 2.2. ...".
Table 2.2 deals with "Classification of normal sites by the interpretation of
footing performance of existing buildings". It does
so by reference to the
degree of damage to existing walls. In the case of masonry veneer, which this
building is, site classifications
may be 'S', 'M', 'H1', 'H2' or 'E'. In this
case it is not contentious that the site classification for the property is 'M';
is, moderately reactive clay or silt which may experience moderate ground
movement from moisture changes. Clause 2.4 deals with "Site
Investigation
Requirements". Clause 2.4.5(a) provides that the determination of adequate
bearing strength is to be considered on
the basis the design bearing capacity of
foundation level is to be not less than 100 kPa for strip and pad footings. A
footnote to
clause 2.4.5 provides that determination of bearing capacity is to
consider the weakest state of the foundation under normal site
conditions, with
local knowledge to be used where available.
The subject matter of Section 3 of AS 2870 is "Standard Designs". Clause 3.1 is
entitled "Selection of footing systems". There is
some debate about the
application of cl 3.1.5 – "Design for outbuildings and extensions to
dwellings" which provides that the
footing system design given in the section
"shall be used for outbuildings and extensions". An "extension" is defined in
to be an "Additional construction abutting an existing building." In
any event, cl 3.1.5 goes on to provide that footings of similar
proportions and
details to those used in an existing building on the same allotment may be used,
provided the performance of the
existing building has been satisfactory over at
least 10 years after construction and there are no unusual moisture conditions.
cl 3.3, in the case of site classification class "M", footings for masonry
veneer structures are to be 500 mm deep by 300 mm wide
with the top of the
footing to be 500 mm below finished ground surface level.
Standard has a commentary section which provides explanations for the operation
of various clauses. That for cl 3.1 contains
a table of typical applied bearing
pressures under strip footings. For a single storey masonry veneer building, it
is 50 kPa; for
a double storey it is 65 kPa.
Work done by Mr
is no dispute about the fact that Mr Horsham inspected the property in late
October 2012, as I have previously outlined. Further,
although Mr McDougall
seemed uncertain about whether it was June or July 2013, there is little doubt
that on or near 27 June 2013,
Mr Horsham inspected the ongoing renovations
leading to the previously mentioned written report bearing that date. However,
is no consensus between the plaintiff and Mr Horsham as to the timing or
circumstances of any other site visits or inspections between
demolition commenced on 1 March 2013 and the completion of the project. At the
heart of things is Mr Horsham's evidence
that on two occasions he was able to
inspect existing perimeter footings, with a particular opportunity on the first
occasion to
assess soil type. It is not so much the timing of these inspections
which is an issue, but rather the question of what he inspected
or saw, or was
able to inspect and see, and what conclusions could reasonably be drawn. That
said, credibility does have a role
to play and questions of timing and how the
visits were characterised by Mr Horsham have relevance to that issue.
I will start with Mr Horsham's evidence as to starting on the project and how
he approached his tasks. Some of his evidence does
not easily bear
summarisation; it is best set out and left unedited. Having described his
inspection of the house in October 2012
and his conclusions as to its integrity,
his evidence-in-chief continued as follows:
Did you have any
discussion with Mr McDougall at this time about the assessment of ground
conditions and footings?......I did. I did.
There was discussion – I might
stray for a moment. Architects are terrible about discussing the cost of a
project with a client,
and typically I raise the question about what the
intended budget was. The reason I do that is to assist me in scoping what my fee
structure's going to be, because as a guidance, I – I charge typically a
percentage. And because it's an existing house and
the extension was
predominantly in the centre of the house, the areas were covered with decks. And
I made a comment that I thought
the foundations were in good condition given
that the house was 25 years old, and that I could see no visible stress, aka
in the masonry. But I did say that you've always got to consider a
contingency, because until I actually see the foundations myself,
we've just got
to assume that they may need some work. And then there was a discussion about
what that work may entail, and I said,
'Well, it's – it's typically
– there's a few methods available, but typically it's a process called
underpinning, where
you may be strengthening the footing.' But I said that it's
difficult to predict the cost of underpinning because you have to be
that you don't underpin one section of the house because you can actually cause
more damage, and typically when underpinning
is done it's the entire house,
because you're trying to stabilise the entire strip footing. And then a –
I can't remember if
I offered it or if it was asked. I said, 'Look, if worse'
– I said, 'Worst-case scenario, it might cost, like, an extra hundred
thousand dollars'".
He said that conversation did not end very well, but no further detail was
given. Mr Horsham was asked whether he had arranged
a soil test. He said he
did not at that time because he "
was not engaged
." After describing at
some length the course of events leading to Mr Tilley taking over from Mr
Meredith, Mr Horsham was asked about
the visit to the property in January 2013
with Mr Tilley. Mr Horsham said he had arranged that with Mrs McDougall. He
and Mr Tilley
went to the property, but he could not recall who was actually
there at the time.
Horsham was asked whether he again inspected the property when he went to the
site with Mr Tilley, and then whether he made any
assessment or classification
of the soil and its bearing capacity. His answers to these questions were very
lengthy and discursive.
He referred
to the "Code" instead of the Standard as such, but the intent was plain. What
can be gleaned is as follows. He had a
copy of a geological plan which gave him
an understanding of the underlying geology. From that, and his inspection of the
knew he was dealing with soils and not rock. He said he had 25 years of
data by way of the house, with the Code providing for making
an assessment of
how the existing foundation has performed and what that equates to in soil
reactivity. This seems to be a reference
to cl 2.2.2(b) despite the reference to
soil reactivity
, and although that
clause refers to the performance of existing residential footing systems within
the region that are founded on
a similar soil profile. Having assessed the
condition of the house and with the benefit of the geological plan, he assessed
as class 'M'. (As earlier noted, that classification is not in
Mr Horsham was then asked whether he designed or reviewed the plans with a
bearing capacity in mind. The following exchange occurred:
at that stage, we're – I'm still sort of – I'm still mid-January.
The actual foundation design happened a week or
two later. Did you want me to
lead to that or –
Yes?......Yep, okay. So, again you have to keep in mind that AS 2870 was
developed I believe in the mid-'80s, refined a few times,
but in effect, it's
– it's taking actually an economic view of foundation design. And there's
some interesting commentary inside
it, but in effect, it – engineers are
like this. They put a – an economic cost to the country of – you
don't we just design every house with two metre deep footings? So, we
don't do that, and in effect, what AS 2870 allows you to do
is to design
alterations based on some sections in the Code. So, I think it's – there's
a clause – so – so my point
is, the Code is written for new houses
primarily, and there's a tiny little paragraph which is quite common with the
Code, all the
good stuff's hidden. But there is a tiny paragraph, I think it's
clause 3.1.5 in the 2011 version that says:
For alterations and additions, that for a clad-framed house or extension to a
I should correct myself:
For a clad-framed –
You know, what does clad-framed mean? Clad-framed means lightweight
construction. Weatherboards over timber. Highly flexible. For
a clad-framed
extension, you can actually take the soil classification back a step. So, if
you've said it's an M, if you're doing
a clad framed structure, you can actually
say it's an S. Now, that's in clause 3.1.5. Now, it also says for masonry veneer
extensions.
And I'm sure there's been great debate over whether this is a single
or a two-storey or whatever, but principally, AS 2870 says this
design of class 1 dwellings. Class 1 dwellings being residential. You can also
use it for sheds and extensions. But principally,
it helps the design. It helps
the designer because again, keep in mind, I'm a specialist. I'm a structural
engineer, a lot of people
don't realise this, but AS 2870 can be used by a lot
of different building practitioners. So a lot of people don't realise this,
you don't actually need an engineer to design your foundation if it's M class or
less. So why is that relevant? Because there's
some juicy stuff in the Code that
possibly only engineers understand, and there's some stuff for the lay person.
So typically, that
Code is deemed to satisfy. So deemed to satisfy footing and
slab design for residences. Now, drawing to your question on bearing
So a Code is meant to make the process of design two things, in my opinion.
Efficient and standardised. Efficient and standardised.
So the Code actually
tells you in its commentary. So the cool thing with the Code is you've got the
standard and then you've got
commentary. And in the 2011 version they've put the
two together. So the commentary gives you some assistance to understand it, but
the actual Code tells you that these designs are based on certain bearing
capacities. So there's a little table in the – in
the commentary that says
if you've got clad framed, if you've got brick veneer, or if you've got full
masonry, double masonry, you
– they give you numbers in kilopascals, so
pressure, as to what you would anticipate those footings being able to
So in effectively
it says, you know, for a single
storey brick veneer it might be, say, 50 kPa. If it's double storey, it will
bear about 65.
Now, let's just be
clear on this. The Standard actually tells you that these are the weights that
you're going to get with a full
storey, two-storey house. So this is two levels
of – of brick veneer. It states that you'd expect to get about 65 kPa.
why is that relevant? Because you know that, for a – the Code also
tells you that for a slab on ground – and slabs typically
are used where
you've got softer material. So we use slabs to distribute force, distribute
pressure, and –
Perhaps if I can just interrupt you there?......Yep.
We're not dealing with a slab here?......Yes.
What – what bearing capacity did you – ?......Yes.
– prescribe for this – ?......Okay.
– this project?......I almost got there. So a slab allows you to
design for 50 kPa, and it say, however, if you're doing footings,
so isolated
footings, and they assume that – or the Code, again, to make it simple,
states everything's 300 millimetres wide.
So based – these – these
likely bearing capacities based on a 300 mil wide footing. And they –and
it states that
you – you need to – that you – you can't put
them in anything less than 100
. And is that the – the number that you
. And you know that because of the condition of
the property
." [Emphasis added]
Mr Horsham went on to explain that the Code says that what is to be expected in
terms of loading on a strip footing for that type
of building and based on his
assessment that the house was in fairly good condition after 25 years, he
made the call
" that the bearing capacity in the area, without seeing the
footings at the design time, was achieving that.
following seems to have been involved in the approach to design. Mr Horsham
first had recourse to cl 3.1 .5 – Design for
extensions to dwellings
– which enables the use of footings of similar proportions and details to
those used in an existing
building on the same allotment, provided there has
been satisfactory performance over at least 10 years and there are no unusual
moisture conditions. That led to the commentary to cl 3.1 which gives 65 kPa as
the typical applied bearing pressure under strip
footings for a double storey.
The exercise then went back to clause 2.4.5(a) which prescribes a design bearing
capacity at foundation
level of not less than 100 kPa for strip and pad
footings. Mr Horsham used that minimum figure. The statement that this bearing
was used or prescribed for "this project" is ambiguous. It might mean
the design of the new footings, or it could relate to an assessment
of footings
for the whole of the existing structure. Counsel for the defendant did not
explore the matter further but went on to
lead evidence about site inspections.
I will return to this point.
The evidence about Mr Horsham's inspections of the original footings is as
follows. In evidence-in-chief he said that he became
aware that work had
commenced around 13 March 2013 when he was driving to Woodbridge and saw a
tarpaulin on the roof of the house.
That indicated to him that demolition was
under way, and he needed to see that part of the works. He went there the next
Both the builder and the plaintiff were there. A section of the deck on
the eastern side had been removed which gave him an opportunity
to look at the
existing footing at that location. The builder took a spade, the footing was
relatively close to the ground, and
he dragged the material away. Mr Horsham
saw it was relatively loamy material at the top "getting stiffer" and he was
able to see
firsthand the concrete strip footing at that point.
asked whether he tested the soils in any way, he did not directly respond, but
said he was in close proximity to the ground
and could tell by the way the
material was being removed that it was extremely hard. He used his experience
and visualisation to
see that there was no moisture; it was very, very dry,
having a gravelly clay consistency. He thought it was good material and
why the house, being the age it was, was in good condition.
Horsham also said Mr McDougall was digging a hole in preparation for a pad
footing. He asked Mr McDougall how hard the ground
was and was told it was
"very hard". He told Mr McDougall that the footing he inspected was at a
suitable depth and was sitting
in good material: "
In this area, I was quite
– quite clear on this, I said in this area, I was satisfied that we
wouldn't require
to do any additional works to those
The next visit was said to be a formal inspection on 27 June 2013. Some things
were discussed with the builder. After that there
was a visit in mid-July when
he was invited back for a further look at things. Mr Horsham said he saw
footings on the north-west
side associated with the kitchen extension. He took
photographs but the SIM card malfunctioned. He described the condition of the
soil as excellent. It was dry with sandy loam on the top, the same gravelly clay
side. The next visit after
that was in November 2013 after the plaintiff rang him and said the building
surveyor wanted a final inspection.
Mr Horsham said that this did not make him
very happy as he thought the surveyor had been carrying out his own inspections.
consideration he issued the last Form 55 certificate.
Before cross-examination about visits and inspections, questions were asked
that he knew Mr Tilley
was not aware of the footings that existed under the original
, but agreed that
although Mr Meredith's plans show detail of the footing locations, they were
shown as just having a nominal depth.
He agreed that where Mr Meredith's
drawings have references to footings, there is the notation "to structural
engineers design".
Mr Horsham was reminded of the quotation which indicated structural inspections
would be carried out and was asked whether it was
correct that he had only ever
provided one inspection report; that dated 27 June 2013. Mr Horsham disagreed,
saying the Form 55 certification
was a cover-all document
". He was asked
The other three inspection reports
[sic]...weren't inspections. The very first visit to site, for example, was just
a preliminary,
effectively talk to Mr McDougall and the builder. That wasn't an
inspection, as such.
" There followed this exchange:
"The March inspection was. In fact, it was an inspection you
specifically requested permission to make?......That's not correct.
Oh, I'm sorry. I thought you told me you were driving past the property,
saw a tarp up there, rang Mr McDougall and asked if you could
come and inspect
it, and he said, 'Fine', and you did so the next day. Wasn't that your
evidence?......I don't agree with you –
your terminology. You're implying
it was an inspection. It effectively was a visit to site to meet the builder and
the client and
to assess how far they had got. That wasn't an
Mr Horsham said he thought there were two visits in July, a couple of weeks
apart, which he was happy to call site inspections.
No report was produced from
either; he said it was in the "cover-all" Form 55. He took photographs on both
inspections in July but
lost them sometime in between July and November in that
year, although he did not lose the June ones. There was no other record made
the July visits.
Mr Horsham was then taken to the entry "Footings and concrete padding
inspection 27-6-2013" in the Form 55 certificate dated 13
November 2013. He did
not agree he was intending to certify to an inspection of footings and concrete
pads on that date but said
"[I]t's implying that it's in reference to the
[sic]", the report being the one of 27 June. He was asked what he was
intending to convey when he wrote those words. He said it was
just to say that
he done the report, not certifying the carrying out of those inspections, but
"referencing the document"; it referenced
the report of the same date, or at
least the photographs within that report
confess to having difficulty following his evidence. The report refers to
"Inspection of footing preparation for decks and kitchen
extension." Mr Horsham
was asked as to when he inspected footing preparation for the decks. His reply
was that it was earlier than,
or in a different timeframe to, the kitchen. The
question was put again. He said it would have been in two time periods, one in
March and one in July. When asked about inspecting footing preparation for
decks in March, he said that it refers to the "deck column"
being the one he
described as Mr McDougall preparing, and about the soil on which Mr McDougall
Horsham agreed that his request noted in the first Form 55 in February 2013 for
an inspection of demolition, footing preparing
and framing was, as evident from
the document, prompted by building design and height. He confirmed the
demolition was underway
when he went to the site in March. He did not inspect
the demolition because he repeated that it was not a request for him to inspect
the demolition, it was him introducing himself to the builder. He also agreed
that although driving past on the previous day and
seeing the tarpaulin on the
roof raised some concerns, he did not in fact inspect any demolition when he
went. He said, "
It wasn't an inspection
asked what he actually did on 14 March, Mr Horsham said "
So this project
required good communication between myself and the builder.
" He was asked
again what he actually did, to which he replied that a strip footing was exposed
with the builder's assistance. This
was one relating to the dining room
extension. When pressed about whether that was actually in March, he said he
could not honestly
say that it was on that day; it was sometime between 14 March
and 27 June, that he could not categorically say that he went back
at some time
in that period. He could not give a date as to when it was, he thought the
builder scraped away some dirt from the existing
footings. Some cavilling about
the nature of the March visit continued. When referred to the note about
periodic inspections in the
second Form 55, Mr Horsham conceded that it included
the March visit. Later however, he repeated his assertion that he did not go
there at that time to inspect demolition progress and did not do that when he
was there. The purpose of the visit was to introduce
himself to the
questioning, the reference to the builder scraping away dirt changed to an
assertion that the builder dug a hole to expose
the footing. Mr Horsham said
that he was satisfied that the hole that was dug gave sufficient information to
at that point in the house
" that the ground material had good
bearing capacity. He did not get the builder to dig another hole somewhere else
around the building
perimeter because that was to be at the time when the
footing for the kitchen extension was to be prepared. On the visit when he
the footing for the kitchen extension a hole had been dug, effectively he
agreed, under the point where existing French doors
opened onto the sunroom that
Mr Bryant had built. Mr Horsham said he was not aware that it had been built in
is clear from the cross-examination on the contemporary photographs that the
hole which Mr Horsham was then looking at was one
dug down beside the concrete
slab for the sunroom extension. When it was suggested to him that it would say
nothing about the existing
footings of the house, Mr Horsham said the point was
that he was looking for bearing capacity; material "
that your're founded
." When the question was pressed, he said that he could understand the
point, adding that you could not exclude the newer part of
the building as part
of the works. However, he agreed the sunroom was largely unaffected by the new
renovations in terms of the additional
Following on from the cross-examination about what Mr Horsham actually looked
at, he was asked questions about what he did not do.
In the context of the
inspection of the point next to the sunroom, he disagreed with the proposition
that a more productive location
to examine the existing footings would have been
at the other end of the building. This disagreement was based on the fact that
were no additional loads being put over that area. He disagreed with the
contrary view expressed by Mr Holmes. He said that in terms
of a percentage of
what was there, the addition of greater structure elements was relatively small.
Going back to the inspection
of the edge of the 2004 slab, Mr Horsham said that
he had seen the column preparation which was only a few metres away, he could
see the footing at the dining at the extension and was satisfied that he did not
need to see anything further.
As to the inspection of the footing near the dining room extension, he said
that he saw that it was 300 mm deep and found it in
the gravelly clay material.
He said that it was not necessarily the case that the new footings to be
installed had to be at least
450 mm deep under the Standard. The following
exchange occurred:
Class M requires for masonry veneer a depth
of 500 and a width of 300, doesn't it?......Yes.
Yep?......You're – you're referencing the table here? Yes.
If you'd been building this house in 2013, to the design – to the
1983 design, you'd – those are the footings you'd require,
aren't they?
Once you were satisfied of the class M site?......No, that's not
Why is it incorrect, Mr Horsham?......Well, in this – if you look at
the elevation of the – did you call it a living room,
dining room? Are we
agreed – a living room that it's – there's no – there's no
masonry at the top of it.
I'm sorry, there's no – ?......There's no masonry.
I'm talking about the entire house, the footings around the perimeter of
this entire house. The strip footings would have been required
if you were
building it in 2013, to be those dimensions, minimum?......I disagree.
Do you just ignore the standard?......No, that's incorrect, I actually
comply with the standard clause 3.15.
So what do you say that clause 3.1.5 tells us that's relevant to the
proposition that I'm putting to you?......May I have a copy?
[The witness was referred to a page in the court book]
[M]y first question is, Mr Horsham, if you were building the original
building to the original design in 2013, the standard would
require you to have
those minimum sized footings that I've just put to you, from the table. And you
said, “No”, and
then you referred to 3.1.5, I think?......Which I
haven't got it. I need the second page please
[An additional page number was given and cl 3.1.5 read out]
[M]y point is this. You don't have an existing building – you've
got a vacant block of land at 3315 Channel Highway, Woodbridge.
If you came
along to build a house on it to the design – the 1983 design, your
footings would have been required to be a minimum
of – according to the
table?......I'm not going to speculate on that. I think that's an unreasonable
proposition.
That's what the standard says, isn't it, Mr Horsham?......I've just read
the part of the standard, yes.
Sorry?......I've read the part of the standard that I was referencing as
part of my design.
HIS HONOUR: But that's not the question. The question is a hypothetical
one. If you were building the original structure in 2013,
you would have had to
go to the standards and the table we were looking at for the depth of the
WITNESS: Yes. I agree, that's the approach but I don't – I'm not
– I don't wish to put forward a design for a hypothetical
Jackson then moved to the application of cl 3.1.5 and suggested that the
relevant table gave dimensions for footings if a ground
level extension was
being built. Mr Horsham agreed that this was correct as a starting point.
Counsel pointed out that cl 3.1.5 does
not specifically deal with the situation
where what was being built amounted, in practical terms, to a new storey, and on
the importance of knowing what was there by way of existing footings
could not be ignored. Mr Horsham disagreed, simply saying that
this was not a
new storey.
Lastly, when further questioned about the ease with which other parts of
building could have been checked by simply digging a hole
against the wall down
to the footing, Mr Horsham repeated that he was satisfied with what he had seen.
not necessarily"
the case that he could easily have done what was
suggested. When asked about what he meant by that he said, "
opportunity presented itself because
[the builder]
was working in the
There is a report in evidence prepared for the defendant by Dr Wayne Griffioen
of Tasman Geotechnics dated 7 June 2024, although
Dr Griffioen was not called.
On his investigations he established that on the south-western side of the
building the strip footing
was only 200 mm deep and 280 mm
. Mr Horsham said that he
would not have been concerned had he known that in 2013 as to whether the
proposed extension would be supportable.
He was not concerned that the building
was to be overloaded because the 25 years' performance was sufficient evidence
that the footings
were satisfactory for what was being proposed. He disagreed
with the proposition of the risk of overloading the footings. He said
satisfied where the main loads were on the house, and the inspections he had
done and the material he saw gave him confidence.
Apparently,
he used a computer program to calculate what sort of extra weight was being put
onto the building. Subsequent questioning
went as follows:
sort of weights did you come up with for the total new structure
didn't do a total new structure calculation.
So I concentrated
area on the eastern side
So do you have any recollection at all of reaching some calculated
assessment of the
likely weight of the new upper storey
and it was far less than what the Code stipulates as being allowable.
Yeah, but can you give us a figure?......No, I can't. It's
You would still have those calculations?......No, I don't.
You don't?......No.
Mr Holmes, I can tell you, calculated that the additional flooring timber
joists, the new joists that were to go in alone, were a
total sum of two and
three quarter tonnes. Would you dispute that?......
I – I can't
Did you ever do any calculation of that kind?......Typically weight of
the structure is far less than the dead and live load
Sorry?......So, calculating the weight of a house you'll find that the
actual live loads are far in excess. So, generally there's
a – an allowed
loading for a – for a floor.
Let's be clear, dead weight is the structure – structural elements
– ?......Yes.
Live load is things like, people, furniture – ?......Yes.
– and things you put into storage areas that might be moved around.
They're transient loads?......No. ... No, that's dead loads
Mr Horsham was taken to Mr Holmes's calculations as to the structural elements.
He disagreed with the proposition that a substantial
weight was to be added to
the upper storey. When queried whether that imposed no extra load on the
building, he replied, "
Houses – houses weigh tens of tonnes".
pressed about the extra load on the building he said that it posed a load that
was satisfactory.
I have set out this evidence in some detail, as an appreciation of what Mr
Horsham did and did not do is the critical question.
The way he gave his
evidence is also important. I have to say that I found him to be an unconvincing
witness. With due respect, there
were many occasions when he was discursive,
didactic and unresponsive to the question, preferring to argue and qualify. In
submissions, counsel for the plaintiff suggested it might be doubted
that Mr Horsham examined any part of the existing footings at
all but argued the
case on the assumption that his inspections were as outlined. On balance, I am
prepared to so find.
might be expected that Mr Horsham would have inspected the footing near the
dining room extension because the plans called for
that footing to be connected
to a new strip footing and the dimensions of the existing footing have some
relevance in that sense.
The hole in the ground in the location of the kitchen
extension would have revealed nothing about relevant footings, although it
provided an appreciation of the nature of the soil. That said, there is no
evidence as to how deep the top of the footing on the
eastern side was below
ground surface level, nor of the depth of the hole on the northern, or kitchen,
end of the building. (I should
here note that the proposed new strip footing for
the kitchen extension was not proceeded with but substituted, with Mr Horsham's
approval, with one or two pad footings.)
much for the nature of the soil. As I have mentioned, there is ambiguity in what
Mr Horsham said about to what aspect of design
the figure of the 100 kPa was
applied. It is implicit in the defendant's argument that such design bearing
capacity was used in respect
of the existing perimeter and other strip footings.
Assuming that to be so, there is still the question of whether the building
and construction materials used for the upper level would result in an
overload on those footings in any event. It will be recalled
that this was
touched on in cross-examination. It is possible that Mr Horsham considered the
bearing capacity of the footings on
the eastern side of the house where there
was to be a new strip footing, but I am not satisfied that the exercise in
relation to
the load imposed by the extent of the upper storey was considered in
any reasonably purposeful way.
passage I have set out in par [91] above – and which in my view contains a
clear contradiction – does not inspire
confidence that any meaningful
calculations were done. The issue was not raised in evidence-in-chief and only
emerged in cross-examination.
As ultimately put in the plaintiff's case, the question is whether there was a
breach of duty by failing to exercise the level of
care and skill to be expected
of a reasonably qualified structural engineer by the failure to carry out
adequate investigations of
the dimensions of the existing footings and the
ground conditions in which they sat. This, with a view to seeing whether the
footings were sufficient to support the loads likely to be imposed as a
result of the additions.
In Mr Kingston's report of 14 June 2022, after setting out a description of the
building on site, and noting that the Standard was
first introduced in 1986, he
"Residential footings designed and constructed prior to the
introduction of AS 2870 are known (at least by structural engineers) to
of a lesser standard than those designed to AS2870."
His position on this in cross-examination is interesting. He first confirmed
the common ground that the house was built in 1983
and therefore not built to
the Standard. It was then suggested that it was also known, "...
think you have told us, that buildings constructed in that era ... are known to
have, not infrequently, insufficient foundations
." He replied "
don’t think I said that. But if – it can – it can occur, yes,
Mr Kingston's cross-examination continued into the next day, and counsel
returned to this point. Having read out the extract from
the report as
requested, Mr Kingston was asked to confirm whether it was his view, he said,
It can be, yes. I have no reason to doubt it. It just depends on the day you
have – whether an engineer was actually involved
in the design of the
footings or not.
" In answer to the question of whether that was something
known by structural engineers in his experience, he answered "
footings as best they can to the available guides at the time?
Despite the enigmatic and obscure answers, I take it that Mr Kingston adhered to
his report.
When asked about this statement, Mr Holmes said he did not think it was valid,
but his explanation effectively put him in the same
position as Mr Kingston. Mr
Holmes said the benefit of the Standard was it recognised there were differences
between sites, and there
cannot be a single footings system that will work on
every site. He said that it did not mean that old footings were necessarily
inappropriate and was smaller than they needed to be.
The defendant largely relies on asserted compliance with the Standard as it
relates to site conditions. It argues Mr Horsham acted
in accordance with a
reasonable interpretation of cl 2.2.2(b), in examining the house of signs of
movement and inspecting the soils
during construction. I have already commented
on the latter. In terms of cl 2.2.2(b), the "reasonable interpretation" can be
as a reference to Mr Holmes's agreement that an examination of the
residence the subject of the project would fall within the provision.
the view that the terms of the clause are plain enough; it relates to existing
residential footings systems within the
region on not less than 10 years vintage
which are founded on a similar soil profile
. In any case, it is not
the site classification as such that is an issue. Leaving aside the requirements
of a determination of adequate
bearing strength set out in cl 2.4.5, site
classification leads to what parts of section 3 – Standard Designs –
are applicable;
in this case cl 3.6 – Strip Footings, class 'M' - masonry
veneer. In that context, the defendant argues that there was nothing
Horsham on notice of any factors relevant to the site calling for caution.
is perhaps worth noting that under the Standard, the next classification class
after 'M' is 'P'. The characteristics of that class
are set out in cl 1.3.3
which relate to abnormal moisture conditions, being conditions other than those
caused by seasonal and regular
climatic effects and normal garden conditions.
Under cl 2.1.3 sites with inadequate bearing strength or where ground movement
be significantly affected by factors other than reactive soil movements due
to normal moisture conditions, are to be classified as
'P'. In particular, a
site is to be classified as class 'P' if, among other things, the bearing
strength is less than that specified
in cl 2.4.5, or excessive foundation
settlement may occur due to loading on the foundation. As it will be recalled,
under cl 2.4.5
determination of bearing capacity is to consider the weakest
state of the foundation under normal site conditions. The whole of section
does not apply to class 'P' site, and so the prescribed dimensions for strip
footings does not apply.
It is submitted that Mr Horsham correctly adopted the bearing capacity of 100
kPa for the purpose of his design works, consistent
with cl 2.4.5(a). The
defendant says that Mr Horsham's admittedly "limited weight calculation" given
in evidence which, it is argued,
seemed to bring the weight of the extension
well with what could be expected, with all that was required of the hypothetical
exercising reasonable care and skill. I record the fact that there is
no evidence from Mr Horsham that he considered the weakest
state of the
foundation.
to the existing footings, the defendant recognises that the footings of pre-1996
residences – that being when the Standard
was first introduced –
were unlikely to comply, but points out the evidence establishes that this does
not mean they were necessarily
inadequate. The short point of this is that
defendant relies on Mr Horsham's inspections of the soil, about the facts of
have also commented. I would also make the obvious point, as did Mr
Holmes in cross-examination, that an excavation to footing depth
will only show
the soil conditions to that depth and will not reveal what is underneath. As
mentioned earlier, there is no evidence
considering the standard of care on the part of a professional, a court may have
regard to a reasonable or responsible body of
expert opinion, although questions
of standard and breach are ultimately a matter for the court to decide. A body
of opinion may
be treated as reasonable or responsible if it can be shown to
have a logical basis. See
Rogers v Whitaker
[1992] HCA 58
(1992) 175 CLR 479
Queensland v Masson
[2020] HCA 28
94 ALJR 785
In a report dated 16 April 2018, Mr Holmes noted it was apparent from the plans
that some significant load points were to be applied
to the original footings.
The drawings note "Retain existing ceilings – floor joists and place new
floor joists parallel to
the existing". Mr Holmes says that this indicated there
would be a significant increase in the loads applied to the existing footings,
especially when account is taken of the new roof and wall framing and cladding,
double glazed windows and doors, together with extensive
tiling and a large
bath. Mr Holmes also referred to a note on Mr Tilley's plans to the effect that
he could not guarantee the accuracy
of the rooms or existing window sizes due to
him not being able to get on the site to take measurements, and that he had done
best of his ability to scale off existing plans. Mr Holmes's view is that
this should have flagged the need for careful site investigation
existing floor framework, to ensure loads were transferred directly to footings,
and check to ensure that they had the capacity
to carry the load.
He returned to this theme in a subsequent report on 22 October 2022. He again
noted that the Tilley plans did not contain any details
of the existing strip
footing system. They had not been specified on the original house drawings nor
on the 2013 drawings, so the
capacity of the existing footing system was unknown
except to the extent of the pad footings on the original plans, the dimensions
of which would now comply with the Standard for classes 'A' and 'S' but not for
a class 'M' site. He continued:
Since the design intent was to
change the existing loading pattern, and increase loads applied to existing and
strip pad footings,
as well as applying concentrated loads to new strip and pad
footings, investigation and evidence of the adequacy of the existing
pad footings, and of the soil profile, to carry such loads, was
The plaintiff also called Dennis Florent, a building surveyor. He has been in
that occupation since 2011, before which he was a
builder, a building inspector,
a construction manager and energy assessor. In a report dated 7 September 2020,
Mr Florent said that
he had reviewed all the documentation which included the
Tilley drawings that were certified in 2013, the Form 55 certificate of
inspection and various permits issued by the council. From that, he said that it
appeared the defendant provided structural
assessment based on an assumed site
classification without further investigation of soil bearing capacities and soil
Mr Florent's opinion, it follows that without initial investigation of the
original footing size and construction in conjunction
with further soil
investigation, it would be inconclusive to assess the existing footings as
suitable, particularly in light of the
increased overall distributed and applied
point loads resulting from the alterations and additions. He added that
investigation and
determination of the construction of the existing footings
would be necessary during the design phase to fully enable determination
their suitability for the proposed design load.
In cross-examination it was put to Mr Florent that in the case of designing and
certifying an extension such as that which occurred
in this case, the assessment
is for the extension and not one in respect of the construction of the original
house. Mr Florent said
that was not necessarily the case; if the existing
building was being modified, such as by way of increased loading by an addition
on top of it, the whole of the building had to be considered.
As to the soil profile, in cross-examination Mr Holmes was asked about the
application of cl 2.2.2.(b). He agreed the existing building
could be properly
treated as a building in the neighbourhood within the meaning of the clause and
that the performance of the building
could be used as a guide to future
performance
However, he said, "...
but that is totally governed by
what you are about to do with that building
", adding that there would need
to be a thorough inspection including exposing soils and soil sampling. Mr
Holmes agreed with the
commentary to the clause which says the simplest method
based on the history of performance should not be underrated. But he qualified
the proposition that examining the history of performance is an appropriate
methodology, by saying "
Again, I come back to what you are about to do to the
Apart from what might be inferred from Mr Horsham's evidence, no witness who
was called expressed a contrary view to those of the
plaintiff's experts. There
is no rational reason to reject it. At least as far as inspections are
concerned, to an extent this evidence
is confirmed by some evidence Mr Horsham
gave. When describing his inspection of the house in October 2012, he said that
he was looking
at the brick veneer structure as being relevant to him because
you're concerning yourself with the weight of the building and also what's
carrying the load.
" Further, in the passage set out above that related to
his conversation with the plaintiff on the first visit, he says he spoke about
the need to consider contingencies because, until he actually saw the
foundations, he had to assume that they may need some work.
following is contained in the plaintiff's written submissions in closing. I
agree with this analysis of the evidence.
"The reality is:
(a) Mr. Horsham knew from the outset of the works that the architect designed
the upper storey extension apparently knowing nothing
the building's existing footings.
(b) He knew or ought to have known that the upper storey addition would
substantially increase the weight of the structure and resulting
loadings on the
existing footings. Whilst he challenges the proposition that the renovations
added substantial additional weight,
he could produce no evidence to establish
he ever really addressed that question. He says he did some calculations but it
that if he did, those were superficially limited to only an unspecified
part of the additional structure.
(c) He knew (to at least within a year or two) the age of the building and hence
the age of those existing footings, and hence the
obvious fact the footings
would not have been designed with regard to the relevant standard that applied
to design and construction
of the alterations in 2013 (that is, AS 2870).
(d) He must be taken to have known that there was at least a good chance that
the design and construction of those existing footings
would not have been to
dimensions that would meet the standards imposed by AS 2870, for a building
constructed in 2013 to the original
1983 design, assuming his assessment of the
classification under that standard as 'Class M' to be correct.
(e) He must be taken to have known that there was at least a good chance that
the design and construction of those existing footings
would not have been to
dimensions that would meet the standards imposed by AS 2870, for a building
constructed from scratch in 2013
to Mr. Tilley's design, with the new upper
storey, assuming Mr. Horsham's assessment of the site classification under that
as 'Class M' to be correct."
Questions of footing investigations, soil investigations and consideration of
the load to be applied, overlap. It will be recalled
that the plans as certified
by Mr Horsham were submitted to the council in February 2013. The Form 55
completed by him that month
noted a request to inspect among other things,
"footing preparation". It is clear he had in mind the need for additional works;
said as much to Mr McDougall. In my view, the investigation of existing
footings was inadequate. This is a large, generally rectangular
building of
considerable length. The one footing that might have revealed any information
is quite a long way from the
southern end of the building. That is where ultimately some shallower footings
were discovered and where
the area of greater subsidence is. There was no
impediment of any significance to having the builder dig holes to uncover the
at that end of the building, or indeed any point on the south-eastern
or western sides.
to that, I do not think an obligation to carry out extensive geotechnical
assessments as were later done, could then be reasonably
imposed, but a limited
investigative exercise at a few points around the perimeter ought reasonably to
have been done. For instance,
during his site inspections in September 2021, Mr
Holmes used a basic manual tool of 12 mm diameter called a "Mighty Probe" to
soil conditions at numerous points around the perimeter. At that time at
least, he was able to push it to its full depth of about
1100 mm with minimal
effort and withdrawing it caused a sucking noise, consistent with a saturated
clay subgrade. No doubt such a
mechanism was available in 2012.
in this respect, Mr Holmes referred to the geological atlas issued by the
Department of Mines – most likely the same
or similar document as referred
to by Mr Horsham – as showing a considerable variation in the geology area
of the point on
the Channel where the plaintiff's house is located. A site
classification of a particular class does not guarantee consistent soils
the whole of the site; the size of the building must be taken into account.
accept the plaintiff's submission that there is a lack of merit in Mr Horsham's
persistent reliance on cl 3.1.5 and cl 3.6 for
footing design to justify his
lack of detailed investigations and consideration of the state of the existing
footings and soil in
which they were located. That clause is very clearly
concerned with footing systems for ground level extensions. This reliance shows
a misunderstanding of, or a disregard, for the plain text. To return to an
earlier point, it might show that he was purely focused
on the design of the new
defendant criticised Mr Holmes's assessments of the additional load to be
applied by the upper storey, a matter which is perhaps
more relevant to
causation. But in this context, I think a consideration of the sort of
additional load would be something that the
hypothetical structural engineer
would carry out. Mr Horsham did not do this in any meaningful way.
foreseeable risk of harm arising from footings failure created by possibly
inadequate footings as such, or in possibly adverse
soil conditions, and the
additional load applied was not insignificant. The risk was one of substance and
not fanciful with a real
likelihood of significant loss. Ameliorating steps
could have been readily taken, and a reasonable person in the same position
have taken precautions to obviate or minimise the risk. The defendant
ought to have carried out footings and soil investigations
of not unreasonable
scope but considerably beyond what was done, and provided advice to the
plaintiffs about the need for underpinning.
I find that the defendant was in breach of its duty.
after the renovations
There is some dispute between the plaintiff and Mr Horsham about some of what
follows, but I do not consider it to be of any real
consequence. The essential
features are the same. The plaintiff said that the first visible crack was in
February 2014 inside the
front door. Several others then appeared at the end of
the upstairs hallway and in the downstairs bathroom. He arranged for a plasterer
to patch them up. That patching did not last very long at all; the same cracks
reappeared. He then arranged for the builder to come
back. Covers were put over
some gaps and repainted. Things continued to worsen. In early 2015 the plaintiff
At that stage the cracking in the house was predominantly
in the south-western corner. There was external cracking on the outside
downstairs bathroom and cracking around the laundry door. Cracking was also
appearing at the northern end of the building.
July 2015 Mr Horsham went to the property. There was a relatively large tree in
a corner at the south-western end close to the
house. Mr Horsham suggested that
it be cut down as subsidence was caused by the ground drying out, hence the need
to remove the tree.
There was discussion about keeping the area stable in terms
of moisture content with no major fluctuations. I am satisfied that
included putting water on the general area of the tree once it had gone. The
plaintiff removed the tree within a week by cutting
it off to ground level. The
cracking worsened. There was noticeable movement in floor levels upstairs and
downstairs, more noticeably
downstairs. The first exterior cracking of any
significance emerged in late 2015. There was another meeting with Mr Horsham in
because of the continuing damage. On either version there seems to
have been a heated discussion, mainly about the cause of what
was happening. In
2017 the plaintiff consulted Mr Holmes. Mr Holmes suggested complete soil
testing, the taking of levels and plumbing
check for all leaks.
plumbers found a crack in an underground stormwater pipe on the western side of
the building. It formed part of a section from
the downpipe located on the
brickwork which led to a tank
This pipe was of short length less than a metre from the bottom of a downpipe
where it joined a charged pipe. No other pipe cracks
were found. No other sign
of leaking pipes or other source of water was detected. After that piece of pipe
was replaced, there was
no sign of further leakage of water of inundation. The
plaintiff was not aware of any other damage to the catchment system or the
charged storm water pipes. Mr Holmes also suggested that an agricultural drain
be installed. That was done in April 2018 to try to
stabilise the southern end
of the house by addressing any drainage problems. That drain was run for a
distance of about four metres
from the house, starting from the western side
across the southern side, and drained over an escarpment on the eastern side.
to the plaster on the inside of the house started in the kitchen on the northern
end. A major crack in the ceiling started
in October 2023. Before then there was
a wall crack, and pantry benches and cupboards out of alignment.
In this case, the question of whether the defendant's breach of duty has caused
the plaintiff's loss is, as it was argued, answered
by reference to the cause of
the subsidence and resultant damage. A great deal of time was spent on this
issue. As I mentioned in
the beginning, there are two opposing views, one taken
by Mr Holmes the other by Mr
The debate is between
the loads created by the new upper level, and a now cut down tree together with
excessive moisture due to a
now fixed leaking pipe and general drainage issues.
Before dealing with all that evidence, there is evidence of the state of the
soil conditions which, for the sake of completeness
I should set out. Mr
William Cromer, an environmental engineering and ground water geologist carried
out investigations in June/July
2017. There is also evidence from Dr Griffioen
in the form of a report following his investigation in April 2024. Neither was
to give evidence. It is agreed that the results of these investigations
do not necessarily reflect the ground conditions in 2012/2013.
Both men carried
out Dynamic Cone Penetrometer (DCP) tests at various locations around the house
perimeter but with some concentration
on the southern end of the building. The
DCP is a device enabling a set weight to be dropped a set distance onto an anvil
block attached
to a rod. The rod is driven to the ground by a series of hammer
blows and the resultant data is used to calculate the penetration
and resistance
of the soil.
four of his locations (1, 6, 8, and 9) Mr Cromer found very soft to firm soils
with an "unconfined compression strength" range
of 25-50 kPa, which translated
into a bearing strength of less than 50 kPa. Points 1 and 9 were on the
southwestern corner. Point
1 is on the southern side of a bedroom which extends
out beyond the general line of the house and has a bay window. Point 6 is the
other side of the bay window, while point 9 is slightly to the south of point 1.
Point 8 is located at about halfway along the building's
length on the western
side. Additionally, Mr Cromer dug three pits, one on each side of the building
at the southern end, A and B,
and another, C, at the very north-eastern corner.
He found silty clay on the south-western corner which had a higher moisture
than the other two. In his report he expressed the firm view that the
variability in the DCP results across the 12 profiles around
the house was
real, reliably reflecting variability in soil strength
In broad terms Dr Griffioen duplicated Mr Cromer's tests although he dug two
pits one on the south-eastern corner, the other on
the south-western corner
close to Mr Cromer's (since filled in) pits, and carried out DCP testing at nine
locations which were of
a similar distribution. He found that the soil strengths
at points 1 and 9 had increased significantly since June 2017, although
1 there was a little strength increase from 1.4 m to 1.9 m below ground level.
Points 6 and 8 had similar profiles to the
June 2017 results. As to the moisture
content in his pits A and B, that in A had reduced between June 2017 and April
2024, and was
approaching similar moisture content to B, although still somewhat
higher. That in pit B was effectively the same for the two years.
The moisture
level in pit C in 2017 was about that of pit B but there does not seem to be a
comparison with a 2024 test or his DCP
5 at that location. In 2017 pit A had a
different and unusual moisture "trend" to pits B and C, attributed by Dr
Griffioen to the
leak in the stormwater pipe. The slightly higher moisture
content in pit A compared to B in 2024. could be caused by poor site drainage.
There is agreement about a basic cause of varying moisture levels, Mr Holmes
noted the phenomenon of seasonal movements due to drying
and wetting of
expansive reactive clays while Mr Kingston also referred to minor differential
movements that equate with seasonal
variations.
The plaintiff's case is expressly, and rightly, put as a circumstantial one.
Broadly, it is argued that the footings of the building
that existed to 2013 had
been sufficient to cope with the loads imposed but were not sufficient to cope
with the additional loads
created by the renovations.
Principally, the plaintiff relies on the following matters.
At the time the
renovations started the house was about 30 years old, in sound condition with no
signs of instability or movement
of any significance.
The renovations
started in March 2013 and were finished in about November of that year. They
substantially increased the area and
living spaces of the upper level.
That part of the
renovations, in particular, added considerable weight with consequential
redistribution of loads through to the footings
to the extent of overloading and
exceeding their bearing capacity.
It follows that
the existing footings were too small for the purposes of the new completed
structure. There is some fluctuation in
the extent and direction of movement at
various locations but overall, the footings had subsided to varying degrees
around the building
which has manifested itself extensive damage to exterior
brickwork, tearing and cracking of interior plaster work and alteration
level. This extends into the northern part of the building.
temporal and logical connection between the damage and the renovations. The
building could cope before the renovations;
it could not cope
afterwards.
Some of these matters require exploration. Mr Holmes explained his view about
the additional load imposed by the extended upper
level. He first described the
previous upstairs attic area. This was a modest living space with limited head
room. The original ceiling
was lined with lightweight canite as opposed to
plaster which was a lot heavier and denser. In the renovation, the height of the
windows was increased and the roof line changed dramatically from the steeply
slopping dorm/attic space. The new format maintained
parts of the western side,
but for the large part of the eastern side, a total new roof structure was
constructed at a shallow pitch
to maximise the amount of glazing that could be
installed on the windows facing the east. Insulation was installed which
cumulatively
amounted to quite a large amount of weight. I note that photographs
show, (and my inspection revealed), substantial window glazing
across a large
part of the eastern side of the upstairs area. Fewer in number but there are
also new windows on the western side,
Using information from building component sources, the plans and the many
photographs that the plaintiff took in the course of the
renovations, Mr Holmes
was able to make estimates of items such as the plaster weight, the LVL beams
which were required for new
floor joists and other supports. It is apparent to
me that he was conservative in his approach of assessing quantities from the
information
he had. He did not include the tongue and groove flooring which he
described as heavy illustrating that by saying it normally took
two men to lift
a sheet of it. He did not include in his calculation things such as additional
stud framing, cement sheet overlays,
components for the flatter roof along the
eastern side, cement sheet flooring for the bathroom and toilet area, wall
tiling and a
230 mm deep parallel steel flange channel installed over sliding
doors downstairs which alone was a relatively heavy piece of steel.
On the upper-level floor framing plan, as certified by Mr Horsham and submitted
to the council, Mr Holmes identified 12 "landing"
or load points which were
imposed by the new upper-level structures. These are fairly widely distributed
through the structure and
include two internal points – one on each side
of the building on the southern side – with one on a mid-point on the
southern wall. These "point of load concentrations" were described as
A load from an upper floor can either be transferred to
the wall below as a distributed load, i.e. all the joists land on that wall
they each in turn spread the load across the top of a wall. In a situation
where you have a supporting beam that supports the
joists that either frame into
the side of it in the form of a trimmer, or their – or the member is
underneath in the form of
a bearer with the joists either sitting on it or going
over the top of it, the load of all those joists just go into that beam.
beam then is supported at two or more discrete points. If it is a continuous
member, it might have one or two intermediate columns.
Each of those columns
provide what you class as a point load that loads discretely through a column or
a double stud onto the floor
structure below and into the foundation wall and
into the footings, and ultimately – yeah, down to the footing
These load points were explained in greater detail but there is no need for me
to set any of that out. The simple effect of Mr Holmes
evidence is that there
was a very substantial weight increase in the upper floor which was distributed
both within the building itself
and around the perimeter and uniformly so,
except for the northern end where the upper floor did not extend out over it. I
add that during the view I saw in the upstairs bedroom quite a large bath
and a separate shower enclosed by four very large sections
partitioning, one
of which includes the shower door.
The evidence shows that a survey of levels throughout the building was done in
2017, with Mr Kingston doing a further set of levels
in 2024. Mr Holmes reviewed
the figures from the surveys. He concluded that while soil moisture had an
impact, the additional load
applied to the original footing system had a far
greater impact based on the overall trend as being for the house to sink into
ground. He explained that there had been seasonal fluctuations up and down,
but overall the levels indicated that the overall trend
was downwards. The
building did not come back every year and then gradually drop and then come
It goes up a little bit, goes down further, comes back up, goes down
further. There is a gradual trend for it to drop in the ground."
This was at
varying rates across the building and the subsidence was not uniform. What can
now be seen is "
movement in different directions in different parts of the
Mr Holmes was asked about whether the fact that the house stood for 30 years
without any apparent damage or evidence of movement
in the footings, countered
the proposition that soil moisture conditions had caused it. He
I believe so. If the original footings had supported the
building through 30 years of seasonal fluctuations in moisture, and we have
periods of five or six or seven years of really dry summers, we’ve had
some periods in that time of really wet winters,
that house had performed in its
original configuration for 30 years to a standard that people were comfortable
to live in it and
weren’t concerned about undue cracking or creaking or
movement whatever. So, the footings were performing in a satisfactory
So the shrink swell movement of the clay was not adversely affecting the
original house structure.
The defendant is critical of Mr Holmes's evidence in a number of respects. In
the main, they relate to his methodology and calculating
the weight of
constructions materials, and the lack of assessment of certain items. As stated
above, the weight of essential construction
items came to three and three
quarter tonnes. It is true, as the defendant submits, that no specific weights
were attributed to other
materials referred to, but I do not think the exercise
required precise calculations as to every single component. It is also true
the calculation of extra loads should be that which could be done from the plans
and based on experience, but that is more relevant
to the question of breach. In
any event, the submission proceeds to the point that Mr Holmes calculations are
of no, or insufficient,
probative value.
While Mr Kingston agreed with the location of Mr Holmes's load points, being
those identified points taking additional loads by
virtue of the extensions. The
issue is the extent of additional load. In broad terms, although he had not
done any detailed calculations
at all to ascertain the weight of what went into
the upper storey, Mr Kingston disagreed with the characterisation of the main
components as heavy. For instance, the timber flooring was
necessarily significantly heavy
"; the large double-glazed widows were "
quarter of the weight of brickwork
." But he did agree that all internal
tiling and fittings, including such things as the bath and shower, would have to
be taken into
account, and that the house had to carry more weight than what
re-examination it emerged that he did not disagree with Mr Holmes's estimate of
additional weight, but that the calculations he,
Mr Kingston, used for the
purpose of assessing on the laundry and bathroom strip footings were
inconsistent in that live loads were
included whereas Mr Holmes used dead loads.
This had not been raised with Mr Holmes and the calculations are not in
evidence. Nor
is there any explanation of the import of that.
Mr Kingston said he did not think that the works done at the southern end caused
any great load, with the other points
not carrying sufficient loads to amount to
overloading on the foundations and consequent distress. In broad terms, it is
that if subsidence was due to the imposition of loads, you would expect
to see cracking primarily at the load points with reflected
distress upstairs,
if excessive settlement was happening. Each load point has different loads; if
you are getting settlement at
one location, you would expect to see resultant
distress at that location. At the south end, where there is significant
happening, there is a lot of distress consistent with that
settlement, but he did not see that.
Mr Holmes disagreed as to the effects of loading. He said that distress can
occur in proximity to where a load point exists, not
necessarily immediately at
that point. As to the southern end, in cross-examination he agreed that there
was a fall to the south.
When it was suggested that this was not the same as
subsidence at the points of load, he said there is subsidence at the points of
load, but they do not necessarily correlate directly. If a load was applied to
the southern end wall, and clearly the southern end
has dropped, there is a
correlation. "
It's taking the whole wall down with it
The question of distress at each end of the house is of some significance.
Staying with the southern end for the moment, Mr Kingston
estimated the load on
two of Mr Holmes's load points, one on the eastern wall at the bathroom, the
other on the south-western wall
of the laundry. These were 67 kPa and 50 kPa
respectively. He said this was not significant load on the laundry wall. His
that the southern end is not overloaded, but that is where the worst of
the damage is. In my view, that has to be put in the context
uncontentious fact that although there are seasonal variations, the soil
conditions are less than ideal at that end. That
the soils are generally much
weaker at the southern end was accepted by Kingston: "
The soft soils are at
the south end of the house
." Additionally, there are the dimensions of the
footings as established by Dr Griffioen. As Mr Holmes pointed out, if they are
representative
of the strip footings throughout the building, or I would
interpolate, a substantial part of it, they would be too small to carry
of a modern two storey building.
Hr Holmes gave evidence that in 2014 of seeing the large crack in the kitchen
referred to earlier. He said it was not in a join
that has given way but was a
jagged crack that crossed the kitchen, and which has "
literally torn the
plaster sheet apart.
" In cross-examination, Mr Holmes agreed that it can be
confidently said that the house has been moving since 2014, particularly to
south. As to the crack in the kitchen and whether it could simply be the product
of a structure which has suffered distress for
several years, he said it is
cumulative stress. It was not there in 2022 when there was no evidence of major
distress across the
kitchen. But there has obviously been movement since so that
by 2024 it "
has torn the ceiling in the kitchen apart
Holmes agreed the distress to the south has repercussions throughout the
structure. Whether the tear in the kitchen could be a
reflection not of
subsidence but just of the structure suffering from almost a decade of distress
to the south, he said the distress
in the building is due to subsidence, not
some other cause. There has been movement within the kitchen area but there has
been ongoing
movement throughout the house. That total movement, whether it is
purely within the kitchen, or whether it is because the whole southern
the house is sinking and tearing away from the northern end, the net result is
the same; in 2022 there was no evidence of
that level of distress and in the
period of two years, there have been no extreme climatic conditions. As to why
the southern end
was failing at a faster rate than the northern end, Mr Holmes
said that there was no clear answer, but more recently significant
northern end
distress is evident. This represents a significant change since his first
inspection in 2017.
turn, it was put to Mr Kingston in cross-examination that there was movement
across the entirety of the old footings from the
eastern side of the building to
the west, including an existing footing under the new kitchen floor at the
northern end. (The scope
of that included a fracture to the external brick
wall– not just mortar cracking – outside the sunroom door next to
kitchen extension on the north-western corner, something which Mr Kingston
acknowledged he had seen, and which I saw on the view.
He asked counsel how he
knew it was moving, the answer to which was the tear in the kitchen ceiling
along with cracking above the
south wall of the sunroom. Mr Kingston said he
believed the kitchen ceiling crack was most likely settlement at the northern
of the kitchen, but he did not know what was causing that settlement.
Kingston later agreed that there was movement not only in the footings on the
south end of the building but "pretty much all around
the building", although
qualifying his answer by adding that the south end has so much more movement. He
then confirmed movement
to the footings across the whole structure. He also
agreed that in his investigations he had focused almost entirely on the southern
end and did so because that was the worst extent of the distress. When asked
he wanted to confine the
discussion to the upper level. In any event, as to the crack or tear across the
kitchen ceiling, he said
it is a fracture resulting from ceiling deflection
consistent with his assessment of movement of floor levels, but said he could
"offer much else
". He agreed the fracture could well be caused by
increasing settlement towards the north-west of the building.
Kingston was asked to confirm that it was his view the renovations had no role
to play in the subsidence. He said that was correct,
but that this related to
the southern end. He was pressed about whether the proposition applied to the
whole building. After some
difficulty getting him to address the point, he said
he believed that if the renovations were ignored completely, the level of
at the southern end, and movement at the northern end, would have
occurred in any event.
Accordingly, the defendant's position on this, as it was clarified in closing,
is that the damage at the northern end relates to
footings issues unconnected
with the renovations.
Turning then to Mr Kingston's stated causes of subsidence at the southern end,
first, there is the tree previously in the south-western
corner. This was
recommended to be cut down in 2015, and it was. To digress slightly, there is no
dispute that with reactive clay
soils, dryness can cause desiccation with result
and loss of bearing capacity. Excessive moisture can change the consistency of
soil so in addition to 'heave' or 'swell' it also gets to a point where it
loses bearing capacity.
Mr Kingston's evidence was that the diameter of the stump of the tree was 450
mm, and although not round in shape, he measured it
across its widest point.
That in itself would cause drying of the clays and result in settlement. In his
opinion, the former presence
of the tree would "probably" have caused relative
settlement at the south end of the house. (I note that there appears to be a
qualification
in his written report, in that the tree would have caused soil
drying affects up until it was removed). After some debate by Mr Kingston
cross-examination, he seems to have accepted that the tree had been there for
anything up to 18 years.
I acknowledge that his evidence added the leaking storm water pipe to the cause
of excessive moisture but before I move to that,
I will deal with the tree. Mr
Holmes did not disagree that soil moisture has some impact but it was, he
repeated, the additional
load that had a far greater impact, to the extent that
the house has been subsiding at various rates across the building. As to the
tree, he noted that the removal and the fact that the base of the tree and the
root structure was still in place. The reality was,
he said, that the building
had commenced to move before the tree was removed and had not stopped moving
since. (That damage of course
extends to the length of the house although less
severe at that end and is worsening.) Mr Holmes says that once the tree was cut
down and the moisture goes back with things being resolved, there should be a
cessation of movement, but the trend was for it to
In relation to the leaking pipe, photographs in Mr Kingston's report show a
downpipe at the south-western end of the building adjacent
to the portico over
the rear entrance. A pipe on the ground heading in a north westerly direction is
suggested as the leaking pipe.
His understanding was that minor cracks within
this pipe were fixed in 2017, water having been escaping into the vicinity. He
that because it was a charged system a minor crack would result in a
continuous leak.
After some prevarication, Mr Kingston seemed to have agreed that he might have
been speaking about the wrong pipe. Mr McDougall's
evidence established that the
relevant pipe was a short section of pipe leading from a down pipe on a
south-western corner of the
bedroom with the bay window on that side. However,
nothing turns on this, as it was a cracked pipe nonetheless. It is the
consequences
that are important. In evidence is an account from a plumbing
business dated 7 June 2017. It shows investigations of various drainage
were carried out, including by the use of CCTV. The relevant entry
"A down pipe on the SW side displayed indications of an issue so
we performed exploratory which [sic] discovered some minor cracks
pipe. Water had been escaping that at this point with
no signs of nuisance.
Repairs have been made as well as replacement of the entire down pipe and
connection". [My emphasis]
In evidence I accept, Mr McDougall says that there were no other cracked pipes
that he was aware of. But there were some other issues
said to have result in
excessive and problematic moisture near the foundations. Mr. Kingston points to
source in the form of a water
tank that previously discharged onto the ground
with the water likely having flowed "downhill "towards the south end of the
In evidence is a plumbing invoice dated 24 April 2018 which included work
for the agricultural drain mentioned above. There is an
entry relating to a "new
water tank overflow". The plaintiff's said this related to a second tank
installed in 2012 which did not
initially have an overflow, but which was
remedied in 2018. This second tank was to act as a subsidiary to the first to
storage capacity. There is no evidence of the frequency or extent of
any overflow in the intervening period. Mr Kingston also suggests
that runoff
from rainfall reaches the house and saturates the soil.
do not overlook the possible cumulative effect, but I do not regard these
sources as having any great significance. The house is
slightly downhill from a
point on the southern side. Using levels of the area that Mr Kingston took, Mr
Holmes demonstrated to my
satisfaction, with the benefit on my view, that the
fall was such that runoff would mostly bypass the south-western corner. Mr
reported that shortly before the trial started, there had been very
heavy rain for two days – a Sunday and a Monday –
to an extent of 56
ml measured on his property. Photographs taken on the Monday show ponding, while
some taken on the Tuesday do
not. Mr Holmes says that this indicates the water
has soaked into the ground rather than flowed in the direction of the house. He
also noted that one of the Griffioen pits, still uncovered, were not full of
There was also disagreement about the significance of evidence of moisture in
the subfloor of an area at the south-western side
of the laundry wall –
the laundry being on the southern end. Mr Holmes said that the foundations at
that point were obviously
saturated as would be expected when there was a
build-up of (garden) soil against the outside walls. He thought the subfloor
looked "remarkably dry" with no evidence that water had been sitting
there in any volume. Mr Kingston disagreed, saying it was evidence
saturation. However, Mr O'Halloran, a structural engineer called by the
plaintiff to give evidence about rectification, (see the
footnote to par [126]),
also gave evidence about his inspection of this area. He said there were clear
legacy moisture
" in the soil, it was lower than the outside
floor levels so there was a natural tendency for the moisture to gravitate to
sit there, "
which is just a natural phenomenon and quite common,
actually, to houses
Leaving these matters for the moment, there is an observation from Mr Holmes
that I think is of significance. He pointed out, and
I saw this myself, that the
downstairs bedroom on the western side of which I have been speaking, has
suffered no damage at all,
either internally or to the external walls. It was
not the subject of any renovation processes. Mr Holmes says it provides a
against which the performance of the rest of the building can be
judged. It seems to me that if the entirety stems from soil issues
dryness, or as it is more robustly put soil saturation, then that room would
have also suffered. It seems to be more consistent
with varying load points
imposed by the addition.
In terms of a circumstantial case, I venture to set parts of what I said in
Langmaid v Dobsons Vegetable Machinery Pty Ltd
(above) at [119]-[124]
with which Pearce J agreed, and cited in in
Brocklands Pty Ltd v Tasmanian
Networks Pty Ltd
[2020] TASFC 4
per Blow CJ at [39], Estcourt J at
[166]-[167]:
"119 'Where circumstantial evidence is relied upon, it
is not in general necessary that all reasonable hypotheses consistent with
non-existence of a fact, or inconsistent with its existence, be excluded before
the fact can be found'. 'A rational choice between
competing hypotheses,
informed by a sense of actual persuasion in favour of the choice made, will
support a finding, on the balance
of probabilities, as to the existence of the
fact in issue.'
Cosmopolitan Homes (NSW) Pty Ltd
[2008] NSWCA 246
per McDougall J (with
whom McColl and Bell JJA agreed) at
120 'All that is necessary is that according to the course of common
experience the more probable inference from the circumstances
... should be that
the injury arose from the defendant's negligence. By more probable is
meant no more than upon a balance of probabilities
such an inference might
reasonably be considered to have some greater degree of likelihood.'
Bradshaw v McEwans Pty
(1951) 217 ALR 1
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
Dixon CJ at
said that an
inference must not be drawn where it is but 'a choice among rival conjectures'.
There must be '... evidence supporting
some positive inference ... and it must
be an inference which arises as an affirmative conclusion from the circumstances
evidence and one which they establish to the reasonable satisfaction
of a judicial mind ... It follows, of course, that 'a court
is not authorised to
choose between guesses, even on the ground that one guess seems more likely than
another or others':
ACCC v Metcash
Trading Ltd
(2011) 198 FCR 297 per Buchanan J at
. However, a court is
entitled to draw an inference from 'even slim circumstantial facts that exist so
long as that goes beyond speculation':
Progressive Recycling Pty Ltd v
[2003] NSWCA 268
CJ in Eq (Ipp JA and Davies AJA agreeing);
Condos v Clycut Pty Ltd
per McColl JA at
(Campbell and
Macfarlan JJA agreeing).
123 Evidence of possibility is capable of supporting a probative inference,
and expert evidence of possibility may, as circumstantial
evidence, alone or in
combination with other evidence, establish causation":
Seltsam Pty Ltd v
[2000] NSWCA 29
, 49 NSWLR 262 per Spigelman CJ at
McDonald v Girkaid Pty Ltd
, Aust Torts Reports 81-768, per McColl JA (with whom Beazley JA and
Young CJ in Eq agreed) at [104]"
As to the facts from which an inference of causation may be drawn, I prefer the
evidence of Mr Holmes to that of Mr Kingston. Mr
Holmes gave reasoned and
responsive answers to questions. To the extent that is necessary because of ss
60 and 79 of the
Evidence Act 2000
, and to the extent that his evidence
is based on things he was told, those things have otherwise been proved. I have
already expressed
my view about Mr Kingston's manner of giving evidence. His
prevarication and unwillingness or inability to answer reasonable questions
not inspire any confidence.
Despite that, his opinion and his stated reasons for the subsidence and damage
need to assessed on the whole of the evidence. In
that exercise, I observe that
a not insignificant factor in his explanation for his hypothesis fell by the
wayside. The conclusions
he drew from the state of the building before the
renovations started proved to be without any real basis. His evidence of
observations
is based on the one visit to the property in April 2024, albeit
over two days and involving a comprehensive inspection. But that
inspection was
at a single point in time, unlike Mr Holmes who has made several site visits
since 2017.
Mr O'Halloran also spoke about this general issue of factual causation. As I
have mentioned, he was not called to provide an opinion
on this point, but the
cross-examination about the need for, and efficacy, of his solution for
rectification led into that issue.
There is no principle that suggests I cannot
have regard to his evidence. He is a well qualified structural engineer having
specialised
in underpinning for 30 years. It was put to him that if Mr Holmes's
opinion about the cause of settlement was not accepted, but it
was accepted that
the house was moving due to soil subsidence to the south, then his less
extensive and less costly solution that
he proposed in August 2017 after his
first site visit would be adequate, (as distinct from the much more extensive
exercise now out
forward.) He replied:
Oh, it's – it's a
complicated one, because we don't know exactly what the footings are like under
the house – the internal
footings or any – under any load-bearing
walls. And we don't know what they originally were, and we don’t know
how much load's coming down from the extension and how much is to do
with – with when the house was a single storey. The footings
floor were only just capable of coping with the loads, and then the extension
was just the last straw.
Further questioning gave rise to these responses:
undertaken any analysis as to whether or not the footings before the 2013
extensions were adequate for the soil bearing
capacity, but he had come to the
conclusion he had because he was trying to understand why things had worsened,
involved in which
were many factors;
he thought that
both the imposition of loads and the weakness of soils particularly to the south
could both be involved;
if it was solely
subsidence from weak soils at the south, then the building would have moved soon
after it was built;
when being asked
to assume that the cause was soil subsidence to the south, he preferred not to
answer the question of whether his
initial proposal would resolve the problem,
and went on to say that he did not understand the question in the sense that he
was looking
at it more widely; there were two different aspects – the
"squeaky wheel" which was the south-western corner which had "gone
crazy", with
other areas not being as extreme but although of the same vein with the same
symptoms right through;
when it was
pointed out that he was not there to explain causation, he said that he was
trying to tread that fine line because it
was an area where arguably he had more
experience than any other engineer in the country because he understood these
issues more.
On the whole of the evidence, I am satisfied that the building is continuing to
subside. That subsidence is not uniform and occurs
at different rates across the
building. On any view the southern end is the most affected. That is capable of
explanation by the
fact that some footings at that end were found to be quite
shallow. This likely operates in conjunction with what seems to be ordinarily
lesser bearing capacity at the end. No doubt seasonal moisture variations have
an influence. As a starting point, I see this as a
broad issue in logic and
common sense. That the damage is caused by the overloading of footings not
suitable for the purpose presents
itself as a far more likely scenario than a
tree removed in 2015, a leaking pipe on the corner of the building fixed in 2017
suggestions of run-off from various sources at the south end. Damage first
manifested itself in early 2014 within a few months of
the renovations being
completed and has been worsening since that time. The building was performing
satisfactorily at the start of
2013; within a few months at the end of the
renovations, it was not
I am not persuaded by Mr Kingston's views. I have already mentioned the factual
bases for those views. I did not find his explanations
notwithstanding the rather detailed plans and analyses in his report. I am
persuaded by the evidence of Mr Holmes. There
is also Mr O'Halloran's evidence
which I accept. There is no rational basis for its rejection. These opinions
are, of course, part
of the circumstantial case. Being careful not to simply
make a guess that seems more likely than another, or not to merely make a
between rival conjectures, I am positively satisfied of the inference as to
causation suggested by the plaintiff. I find that
the cause of the subsidence
throughout the building is the additional load transferred to the existing
footings by the extension
and renovation of the upper level when those fittings
were not fit for purpose in all the circumstances. I find the defendant's
caused the damage to the building and loss to the plaintiff. There is
a remaining matter of causation that relates to the extent
of the loss, but I
will deal with that when dealing with the quantum of damages.
Rectification
The parties are agreed that the approach to the quantification for damages in a
negligence case is that which was outlined by the
High Court in
Bellgrove v
[1954] HCA 36
(1954) 90 CLR 613
, notwithstanding that was a breach of contract
case. The application of the
approach to the quantification of
damage for tortious damage to property was confirmed by the New South Wales
Court of Appeal in
Gagner Pty Ltd v Canturi Corporation Pty Ltd
262 ALR 691
- [107]. The parties are in tacit agreement that
in broad conceptual terms the costs of restoration is the appropriate measure of
damages, rather than the diminution in house value, although the cost issue is
contentious. The plaintiff does not claim, nor has
any suggestion been made,
that had the deficiencies of the footings been established and remedial action
advised at that stage, the
plaintiffs would have abandoned the project, in which
case damages would fall to be assessed on a completely different basis, that
wasted expenditure:
Bevan Investments Limited v Blackhall and Struthers (No
Brown Falconer Group Pty Ltd v South
Parklands Hockey and Tennis Centre Inc
91 SASR 152.
, a building case, the Court acknowledged that an owner was
entitled to have a building which complied with the anticipated outcome
contract, but the appropriate measure of damages could be the cost of
rectification if that was a reasonable course to adopt.
That is, the cost of
conformity may require works of a wider scope, but the course adopted must be a
reasonable one. As stated in
at [95] the application of
in negligence cases is a reflection of a very close similarity
between the way in which principles operate for a court to assess
damages for a
breach of contract consisting of or resulting in building work that is not in
accordance with the contract, and for
a court to assess damages for tortious
damage to property. In both situations, it must be reasonable to take remedial
the cost of that remedial action is allowable as damages. In line
, a particular application of the requirement that the
restoration be reasonable is that damages in tort, when measured by reference
cost of restoration, are subject to the
of restoration being one
that is reasonable to adopt to make good the consequences of the tort:
There are two proposals for rectification, one advanced by Mr O'Halloran for
the plaintiff, the other by Dennis Reid, a master builder
and architectural
designer for residences. Mr O'Halloran's plan is much more extensive with a cost
accordingly higher. Mr O'Halloran's
final and present proposal arose from an
inspection in May 2024. His intention would be to use a patent method of
underpinning called
"Deep Pinning" which provides a direct connection using
steel "micro piles " to bedrock for long term support. The work is guaranteed.
After consideration of other options arising from earlier visits, his present
opinion is there is no practical alternative to dealing
with the issues than
this present solution. The basics of it are that once access is gained to the
flooring, that is removed, the
pins are driven down to bedrock. They are cut
off, some framing is welded to the tops and a concrete slab poured. As I have
there are additional costs.
Florent has outlined what he described as a general description of what was
required; it was not intended to be complete. But
he refers to such things as
demolition work to remove decking floors and fixtures, demolition works
sufficient to enable Mr O'Halloran
to access the various parts of the property,
reconstruction of those demolished parts and repairing any obvious pre-existing
from the subsidence or new damage caused during the process.
Mr Reid thought that the substantial demolition and rebuilding exercise
proposed by Mr Florent and Mr O'Halloran were unreasonable
and unnecessary, if
not extreme. What Mr Reid proposes is a little unclear from his reports, but
some clarification was given in
his evidence. The essential features are to
demolish an area at the southern end of the house, install new footings with
some underpinning
of existing pad footings ("subject to engineer's advice") and
reconstruct the demolished area while providing for underfloor cross
ventilation. Repairs would be carried out to damaged areas in other parts of the
house, accepting that there would be some remaining
cracks to an extent that Mr
Reid seems to think will be within acceptable tolerances. Control joints would
exist but at the boundaries
between the reconstructed area and the next part of
area of the house the subject of Mr Reid's proposal can be described as follows.
I have spoken of the two downstairs bedrooms,
one on either side. On the eastern
side there is one, now remodelled with a box window instead of a bay window, and
the untouched
and unaffected one with the bay window on the western side. The
area concerned is all of that area to the south of an imaginary line
east to west across the house at the southern end of the bedrooms, and which
encompasses such things as a bathroom, laundry
and storeroom.
addition to what I have outlined, while Mr Reid proposes to underpin an existing
footing, he excludes jacking up to level floors
as this could result in cracking
of nearby remaining brickwork. This jacking up of the internal floor and wall
framing is likely
to include an area of the flooring north of the line I have
referred to. This is confined to the hallway running longitudinally from
entry door about midway along the western side of the building, to the relevant
area at the south. But how far that extends in
a northerly direction depends on
what is found. This jacking up exercise would require some access to the
sub-floor space.
The cost of underpinning in 2013
There is an issue raised by the defendant's submission that rests on the
proposition that the plaintiff is to be put in the same
position in which he
would have been but for the defendant's negligence. There is no doubt about the
Haines v Bendall
[1991] HCA 15
[2021] HCA 40
274 CLR 606
. The defendant argues the
application of the principle means that money that would have been spent in 2013
had the problem being
identified and advised to the plaintiff does not form part
of the plaintiff's loss. There is also the consequential point that he
the benefit of that money since that time.
This issue was briefly raised in opening remarks on behalf of the defendant,
and squarely dealt with in its closing submissions.
It was not the subject of
any direct evidence led or introduced by either party. The plaintiff argues that
general principle does
not support the defendant's claim. The plaintiff accepts
that he is to be compensated for his actual loss and no more, but argues
there is at least an evidentiary burden on a defendant who wishes to say that
part of a plaintiff's loss would have happened
in any event; in this case it was
for the defendant to disentangle from the total cost of rectification, the cost
of what would have
been required in 2013.
plaintiff also points to difficulties in the assessment process in that there
was no evidence on behalf of the defendant as to
what Mr Horsham would have
recommended to the plaintiffs, with such matters being peculiarly within his
knowledge. The plaintiff
also complains that as an affirmative defence raised by
the defendant going to causation, it is a matter that was not raised on the
pleadings as it ought to have been by virtue of
Supreme Court Rules 2000
r 251, and in short, as the issue was not pleaded it was not properly raised
and should be disregarded.
I am not able to accept the plaintiff's arguments as they are contrary to what
I see to be established principles. This issue has
not uncommonly arisen in
relation to similar actions for damages; that is, claims involving breach of
contract and/or negligence
of architects and structural engineers, which in the
main relate to inadequate foundations and footings. The defendant relies on
Auburn Municipal Council v ARC Engineering Pty Ltd
[1973] 1 NSWLR 513
footing construction was identified as failing to provide piles in the design. A
properly reconstructed building would require
piles which, if they had been
installed originally because a proper design had been provided, the initial cost
to the plaintiff would
have been higher.
the trial, the plaintiff conceded that the cost of now erecting the pile
footings within the reconstruction costs of the relevant
buildings, should not
be included in any awarded damages. On appeal, the plaintiff/respondent sought
leave to withdraw the concession
and have the costs of piling added to the
damages awarded. At 522, Moffitt AP said he thought the correct position was
that the cost
of erecting the piles was not recoverable and leave to withdraw
the concession was refused. Hardie JA agreed.
was considered by the New Zealand Court of Appeal in
Investments Limited v Blackhall and Struthers (No 2)
(above). It was also a
case against a structural engineer. At 108, Richmond P said that in the case of
the plaintiff suing an engineer,
the plaintiff must establish what their
position would have been if the engineer had, in fact, exercised proper care and
Where it is shown on the probabilities that the plaintiff would have
proceeded on the basis of a properly prepared design at a cost
which would have
been substantially higher than that for a building erected in accordance with a
defective design, the higher cost
factor would be automatically taken care of
when determining the amount of money required to put the plaintiff in the same
in which he would have been if he had let a contract on a design
prepared with proper skill and diligence by the engineer.
109-110, his Honour made it clear that the onus of proof was on the plaintiff to
"establish that if proper care and skill had
been exercised, it would have
proceeded with erection of a building in accordance with the appropriate plans,
and proof to that effect
would in turn involve a question as to the probable
price of a properly designed building, for that would be relevant to the
of whether [the plaintiff] would have gone ahead with the project,
and also to the
quantum of any damages
." See also Casey J at 129.
[Emphasis added]
The defendant also relies on
De Pasquale Bros Pty Ltd v Cavanagh Biggs &
Partners Pty Ltd
(above) which involved, at its heart, breach of contractual
duty and negligence on the part of a building designer for failing to
geotechnical investigations of soil conditions underlying the site of a building
it had designed, leading to inadequate
foundations in the soil conditions when
built in 1986. In an action by the owner of the affected building against the
the damage suffered was economic loss, as I noted earlier, and damages
for rectification were awarded. At [35] Chesterman J said
that had the defendant
properly performed its retainer, it would have known of the existence of the
conditions requiring additional
piles, which would have been installed as an
additional part of the construction at extra cost. That item of cost had not
been incurred
by reason of the defendant's negligence. His Honour
"It is an expenditure that would have occurred had the
geotechnical investigation been conducted earlier. There is no evidence of
1986 cost of the work, which was presumably less than present cost. However, as
[the plaintiff] has had the benefit of the money
not spent in 1986 there is
probably no reason to reduce the amount of the present cost which should be
deleted from the cost of rectification
for the purpose of assessing
It seems that his Honour's approach was taken without argument. The court had
the current cost of the construction of the piles
but not, as his Honour noted,
that for when the building was constructed in 1986.
I have already mentioned that in this case there is an implicit acceptance on
both sides, that the plaintiffs would not have abandoned
the project. If that
were the case, the proper measure of the damage suffered would have been the
wasted expenditure on getting
to the point at which the issue of the footings
would have been identified, along with the cost of remediation at that time. In
fact, counsel for the plaintiff conceded that the plaintiff would have incurred
the cost of any recommended underpinning in 2013.
It follows that as a matter of
principle, the plaintiff's loss is the present costs of rectification less what
the amount that would
have been spent on remedial works in 2013. The difficulty
is that given the way the case was conducted, there is no evidence of
at least in the sense of evidence being specifically directed to this issue.
The defendant's primary position is that the
De Pasquale
approach be
adopted. On this approach, although the defendant would suggest that there is
no, or no sufficient, evidence of the cost
of what would reasonably have been
recommended by way of underpinning and carried out in 2013, it would presumably
be less than the
present cost, and as the plaintiff have had their use of
whatever sum that was, the present cost of underpinning is not allowable.
alternative approach, the defendant submits the award of damages be confined to
the difference between the 2013 and the 2014
costs. Of course, the precise scope
of the work required in 2013 has not been identified nor costed.
To further both submissions, the present cost of underpinning has to be
established as far as possible. The immediate difficulty
is that Mr O'Halloran's
suggested method, although described as "underpinning", bears no relationship to
what the evidence suggests
would likely have been done in 2013. Nor does Mr
Reid's proposal assist in any direct comparable way because of the very limited
scope of underpinning of a strip footing in two specific locations on the
south-western corner, as previously discussed.
In any event, as to the primary submission Mr Groves submits the
underpinning/stabilisation costs of the plaintiff's proposal should
allowed if the plaintiff's proposed rectification scenario is permitted. He then
proceeded to "deconstruct" the O'Halloran
quotation and suggests the removal of
three items each which contain reference to underpinning, the total of which is
$490,050. Of
the O'Halloran quotation, that leaves $26,950 for "Jacking and
supporting of structure on underpins" which the defendant concedes
is allowable
on the basis it reflects the additional cost caused by the delay in now doing
the underpinning works, "and because the
building has in effect moved and that
requires correction."
The defendant's argument was said to need extending a little further. That is
to exclude from an award of damages any sum in respect
of external works needed
to facilitate the underpinning which would have not been necessary in 2013, but
which needed to be done
now. Reference was made to six items in Mr Hawkins'
assessment all of which appear under a heading describing detachment and
of external timber decks to enable the excavation, jacking and
underpinning. The total figure excluding GST is $33,154. Further,
disallowance exercise is said to include the removal and reinstatement of soft
land scaping and vegetation, and the excavation
of garden areas and landscaping
to expose external brick courses and sub-floor masonry. Further still, the
defendant says that if
consultants' fees claimed as part of the total are in
fact to be awarded, the percentage amount of the total claim needs to be
to reflect the removal of those items. There was some further argument
against the need for a head contractor with consequential
superimposed
percentages and the like, which I do not need to detail.
Having undertaken that exercise, the defendant's submission was that a
reasonable alternative to attempting to disentangle present
underpinning costs
may simply be to adopt Mr Reid's proposal for rectification. It was submitted
that as an alternative it simply
recognises the strategy as an appropriate award
as a way of addressing the question of how to deal with the 2013 underpinning
as against what is now required. As stated above, the defendant's
alternative to the
De Pasquale
approach is to confine the award of
damages to the difference in underpinning costs between those of 2013 and of the
present. That
of course requires some estimate to be made of the cost of what
reasonably would have been done in 2013 and the present costs; with
figure having the same problems I have identified.
As a matter of general principle, where loss of some sort has been established
the law does not permit difficulties of quantifying
the loss to defeat the
remedy it provides. A court must do the best it can in light of the evidence,
but that must be sufficient
to justify the approach taken; it cannot make
something out of nothing: see for instance
RSPCA (Victoria) v Holdsworth
[2015] VSCA 243
Fink v Fink
[1946] HCA 54
(1946) 74 CLR 127
to what may well have been involved in underpinning in 2013, Mr Holmes provided
an explanation of the mechanics. He said that
at least one remedy would be to
excavate next to the existing footings and "undermine" them in order to carry
out underpinning. That
would involve "
going in underneath the footing, down
until you reach a more suitable material to found the footing on
concrete then being poured underneath to bring it up to the underside of the
existing footing. An alternative is to "enlarge
the footprint" of the footings
by extending the sides of the footing, using additional concrete to achieve a
larger footprint, and
that may extend under the footing itself.
As noted by the plaintiff's counsel, the only evidence of any cost comes from
Mr Horsham. The relevant passage is set out in [68]
above. It will be recalled
that this was evidence from Mr Horsham as to what he said to the plaintiff in
October 2012, the essence
of which was that until he inspected the foundations,
it had to be assumed they may need some work. He said that he mentioned a
methods – which I note seem to be consistent with Mr Holmes' evidence
– and advised that it was difficult to predict
the cost of underpinning.
He then offered to the plaintiff a worst case scenario of an extra $100,000.
Of course, that is evidence of what Mr Horsham said he said. But it can be
taken as reflecting his view. I think it can reasonably
be inferred he was not
being flippant and that it was not an unrealistic figure. There was no reason
for him to give an inaccurate
estimate, and good reason to do otherwise.
For the plaintiff, Mr Vince suggested that some assistance could be provided by
looking at Mr Reid's estimate of the cost of an
underpinning in his scope of
works. Mr Reid's proposed method also seems to be in line with what Mr Holmes
described. An isolated
item in Mr Reid's estimate for "concrete peers and
footings including some underpinning" is $25,400. (There may be some additional
costs because the allowance for demolition of about $48,800 includes "foundation
brickwork and footings removal.") The problem is
to apply those figures to the
strip footings of the house as may have been done in 2013.
think it can reasonably be concluded that in his estimate Mr Horsham
contemplated all strip footings, and that is what probably
would have been done
given what is now known. A very rough estimate and a crude guide, based on
expanding the area and method of
Mr Reid''s proposed work to all strip footings
(excluding external decks etc and the sunroom) and using the plans as a guide,
a present cost of $200,000.
That would have to be discounted by CPI and additional building cost
Horsham's evidence is the only evidence that bears directly on the issue. The
plaintiff bears the onus of establish his true loss,
and despite the plaintiff's
general criticism of this evidence, I see no alternative but to adopt Mr
Horsham's figure. I think it
represents the best alternative in order to get
closest to the principle to be applied. The plaintiff's loss has to be reduced
the amount that would have paid for underpinning in 2013. The alternatives
suggest by the defendant do not involve true comparisons
to what work would
reasonably have been done in 2013 and are much more imprecise. It is really a
question of doing the best that
can be done on the evidence. On the evidence of
what was ultimately discovered, it is reasonable to adopt the "worst case
figure of $100,000.
The next question relates to the use of the money that would have been expended
in 2013. In
De Pasquale
, the current cost of the work which ought to
have taken place much earlier was a known amount – $23,000 –
although there
was no evidence of the 1986 cost, said to be "presumably less
than present cost." In taking the approach he did, it can be fairly
Chesterman J approached the issue using a fairly broad brush. The plaintiff in
that case was said to have had the benefit of
something less than $23,000 for a
14 year period, there then, his Honour found, probably being no reason not to
deduct the present
cost. In that case, the plaintiff was a company that owned a
commercial building being part of a retail/commercial complex. It might
assumed the amount that ought to have been expended was put to use in at least
managing the building for its business interests.
the present case, there are competing contingencies with no firm or clear basis
in the evidence. The plaintiffs were retired and
renovating the house to enjoy
that retirement. In evidence, the plaintiff said they had a "fairly loose"
budget for the renovations.
Arguably, those things
suggest there
was no need to borrow heavily or at all. The plaintiffs may have spent all, some
or none of the amount that would have
been paid out, and conversely, invested
all, some or none. There is a range of possibilities, but I think a reduction
greater that
the cost itself is warranted. The average RBA cash rate from March
2012 to the present– to which I have been effectively forced
is 1.935 per cent. Admittedly not the most accurate calculation but applying
that rate to the sum of $100,000 on a
compound basis from 12 March 2013 to the
present gives an amount of $27,065. Doing the best I can in this situation, I
a very broad brush and reduce the plaintiff damages by
The mode of rectification
defendant's criticisms of Mr O'Halloran's method are based on the general
proposition that it is an unreasonable approach. The
defendant points out that
Mr O'Halloran accepted that an option would be to underpin the areas of obvious
subsidence, (Mr Reid's
proposal). The defendant relied on the Tasmanian Guide to
Standard Tolerances (the Guide). That contemplates some floor differentials
across broad areas of a house. The witness conceded that a difference in level
of some within 40 mm across a 10 metre space was an
acceptable tolerance and
quite normal.
Further criticisms were that Mr O'Halloran said that normally underpinning of
the type he suggested would not immediately be adopted,
but there would be some
progressive activity, and that he was focused on achieving certainty without
previous attempts at remediation
and to stop all future movement even though it
ought to be expected from the footings of the existing house, and to achieve
that would be better than what would be accepted. As to the last
point, Mr O'Halloran's evidence was that that sometimes there were
differentials
in floor levels but that he often achieved better results than could be
expected. Notwithstanding that, in reliance
on Mr Florent's evidence, the
defendant submits that the 'O'Halloran' approach to stabilisation and
rectification has no regard to
the degree of tolerances recognised by the Guide,
or by the Standard.
Mr Florent actually said was that in his reports he had mentioned the categories
of cracking with reference to Table C1 in the
Standard. He agreed that the table
was a fair approach to whether or not something should be cracked and filled, as
against being
stripped out and redone. But, he said, one needs to take into
account the notes to the table. In that table there are Damage categories.
Relevantly, the lower range is Categories 0 and 1, respectively described as
"Negligible" and "Very slight" cracks of less than 1
mm and which need no
repair. Mr Florent said this is cracking that can be expected and monitored, but
(on his interpretation) minor
cracking can be upgraded to a greater level if
there is a lot of it in one area.
It is argued that Mr O'Halloran's method will result in rectification for which
the defendant is not responsible. They include remedying
inadequacy of the
original footings, the pour subfloor ventilation (noted by Mr O'Halloran) and
removing an inherent susceptibility
to differential footings movement. There is
also inclusion of two rooms but only so as to avoid a "moisture trap", those
rooms being
deficient only in the floor ventilation sense. Mr O'Halloran
originally said two rooms could be salvaged in a floor ventilation sense
they would retain timber floors but if the slabs were included elsewhere, those
rooms would be isolated and became a moisture
trap in themselves; he saw no real
benefit in leaving those rooms with timber flooring.
The defendant also says that Mr O'Halloran made his recommendations based on
the soil conditions identified by Mr Cromer in 2017,
and which no longer
represented the soil conditions as were identified by Dr Griffioen. As to that,
I have already set out the differences.
To the extent they are significant,
there is nothing at all to suggest that Dr Griffioen's findings represent the
permanent state
of the building site.
As to the "windfall" items, the plaintiff says the sub-floor ventilation did
not give rise to any issue before 2013 and but for
the defendant's negligence
that would still be the case. Rectification works must be compliant, and Mr
Florent says that if timber
floors were replaced, the floor would probably need
improved sub-floor ventilation to meet regulatory requirements. Further, in Mr
O'Halloran's view there is no general benefit in having timber flooring on floor
joists because the cost would be very similar if
not cheaper as far as his
proposal was concerned. The plaintiff submits that Mr O'Halloran's method may
get close to completely level
flooring but, as noted above, it may not. If the
floors were out of level before the renovations, about which there is no
it is less likely that Mr O'Halloran's work would remedy that.
The plaintiff's essential criticism of Mr Reid's alternative proposal is that
it is based on the proposition that the house is not
still moving and has not
done so since 2020. He did, however, acknowledge evidence of movement by way of
the ceiling crack in the
kitchen. When taken through comparative photographs
over the relevant period, he acknowledged some differences as shown from them,
but maintained his view he did not think there was any evidence of movement of
any significance. He agreed that any crack opening
up more recently would be a
symptom of movement in the house. A little later in his evidence, when talking
the southern end of the house, he repeated his view that
the remainder of the house was not moving, apart from the sign of movement
the crack in the kitchen.
The plaintiff makes the further point that as established in his evidence, Mr
Reid's proposal pre-supposes a firm base for his piers
at 2.5 m which should be
contrasted with Mr O'Halloran's uncontested findings on 15 October 2021 of very
soft soil through the first
four to five meters with a sufficient depth for his
purposes of 12 metres.
plaintiff argues that underpinning is to be employed as to the solution to fix
the defects, particularly given the evidence of
ongoing movement, it would be
inappropriate to underpin only part of the property. As to this, there is Mr
O'Halloran's evidence
who said that if unsecured parts of the property were
still moving, they would just keep on doing that. Indeed, Mr Horsham himself
said one needs to be careful not to underpin one section of the house, because
more damage could be caused than if you underpinned
the entirety. Mr Holmes's
evidence about the varying rates of movement throughout the house and uneven
subsidence is relevant to
this discussion.
his report Mr Florent confirmed this view of things by saying that underpinning
sections only of the entire structure can and
often does result in further
differential movement, as the new underpinned areas are then founded on and
supported by different bearing
capacity foundation material to non-underpinned
areas. He explained this in his evidence:
T]he problem with
underpinning one section of a building and not the other, what you’re
actually doing is providing support
to that section of the building which is
being underpinned, it’s now getting support on a different foundation with
different bearing capacities to the rest of the building. So you will now
get differential movement again, because the section that
you underpin may well
be stiffer than the section that you haven’t and then you will get new
cracking and movement in locations
that you probably didn’t have up until
this point in time.
As earlier established, the mode of rectification must be one that is
reasonable to adopt to make good the damage. What counts
as making good the
damage needs to be understood in the context of its purpose. "That purpose is
ascertaining what the work is that
is necessary to undo the consequences of the
tort having been committed. The only interest of the defendant that bears on the
of whether rectification is reasonable is a financial one... .":
In terms of the approach to the question of reasonableness, I need to look
An argument existed as to the reasonable
method of remediation, not dissimilar to the one in the present case.
concerned defectively built foundations because of significant
departure from the specifications, resulting in "grave instability"
building. The choices were between demolition and re-erection, or piecemeal
replacement of the foundations, with expert opinion
to the effect that if any
underpinning should be decided on, the whole of the foundation should be
replaced; any other form of under-pinning
was regarded as useless: see 619-620.
trial judge had allowed for the cost of demolition and re-erection. The Court
said not only did it think the trial judge's conclusion
was justified, but after
reading the evidence and considering the submissions, it was satisfied that
underpinning by the piecemeal
replacement of the foundations "would, at the very
best constitute but a doubtful remedy."
Court said, "To give to the respondent the cost of the doubtful remedy would by
no means adequately compensate her." Of significance
is the Court's observation
in response to the argument that if the owner retained the present judgment and
it was satisfied, she
may or may not demolish the existing house and rebuild, in
which case, it was said she would still have a house together with the
erecting another one. At 620, their Honours said that "this circumstance is
quite immaterial and is but one variation of
which so often
presents itself in the assessment of damages in cases where they must be
assessed once and for all
". [My emphasis]
was considered in
Tabcorp Holdings v Bowen Investments Pty
[2009] HCA 8
236 CLR 272.
, French CJ, Gummow, Heydon Crennan
and Kiefel JJ referred to an example given in
at 618, of what
might be said to be unreasonable. From that example the Court concluded that
"the test of 'unreasonableness' is only
to be satisfied by fairly exceptional
circumstances."
There are three cases from intermediate appellate courts not cited by counsel
and which provide authoritative guidance as to the
reasonableness test. The
Kirkby v Coote
[2006] QCA 61.
The appeal was brought in respect
of an action for damages in tort for loss caused by the collapse of some
inadequate footings of
a house. Other footings had not failed. The trial judge
found that the residual threat posed by the remaining adequate footings
real; that is, although there was no certainty as to its magnitude there was a
risk that movement of the remaining footings would
occur in the future in the
event of the clay soil becoming saturated. The trial judge concluded the only
reasonable way to rectify
the defects was to underpin the whole of the house,
and not just part of it as the defendant's had contended, or to demolish it and
rebuild. It was common ground that underpinning would be more expensive than
demolition and reconstruction. The trial judge assessed
damages on the latter
Keane JA, with whom Williams JA agreed, discussed
length. At [52], his Honour said that in speaking of the reluctance of the law
to confine a plaintiff to a doubtful remedy,
the High Court was contrasting the
case before it, with one where it is clear that expenditure imposed on the
defendant is disproportionate
to any benefit to the plaintiff in terms of the
vindication of the plaintiff's rights to recover its actual loss from the
Extracts from his Honour's reasons are as
"[52] ... In this case, the damage as recovered by the
respondents are not disproportionate to the benefit to the respondents in terms
of the respondents' entitlement to have a house structure which will be, as it
should have been, free from risk to its stability
as far as its foundations are
concerned. It is only by this level of expenditure that the respondents can now
achieve a structure
which is as stable as it would have been had it not been for
the negligence of the first appellant.
[53] It should be noted here that the researches of counsel for both sides
have been unable to identify any case in which it has been
unreasonable for a plaintiff to recover the costs of demolition and
reconstruction where the defendant's defective work
has affected the stability
of a house structure. This suggests that the courts will be slow to
characterise as unreasonable the
position of a plaintiff who is unwilling to
'live with' the risk of the serious consequences which may result from
sub-standard work
which affects the stability of a structure. ...
[58] In the present case, one is not concerned with the breach of duty which
results only in aesthetic disappointment. The service
negligently rendered by
the appellants to the respondents has not left the respondents with a 'perfectly
serviceable' house. [Such
a] house is one which is effectively free of risk of
slipping. The respondents' house is a house which is affected by a degree of
instability which would not have been present had the first appellant properly
discharged his duty.
[59] As the High Court emphasised in ...
the respondents' damages are assessed 'once and for all', the law must be astute
to ensure that the measure of damages accurately
reflects the restoration of the
respondents to the position they would have been in had the appellants not
failed in their duties.
The respondents should recover
the amount of damages
necessary to enable them to own a house free of risk so far as its stability was
" [Emphasis added]
The next case is
Metricon Homes Pty Ltd v Softle
[2016] VSCA 60
746. The principal issue in that case was the test on an application for leave
to appeal to the Court of Appeal from a decision
of the Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal. That Tribunal had dealt with a claim concerning a
defective footing system leading
to structural damage to a house. The issue of
rectification arose in the context of whether leave to appeal should be granted.
[239], Robson AJA, with whom Warren CJ and Tate JA agreed on the issue, noted
the Tribunal had adopted the reasons of Keane JA in
"risk of future damage need not be such that there is a likely or probable risk
of further damage to the structure, but
rather it is sufficient to compensate
the owner on the basis of demolition and reconstructions
where there is a
real risk of damage to the structure in the future
". [Emphasis added] At
[245], Robson AJA concluded that as the Tribunal found there was a real risk
that unacceptable damage would
happen again in the future, it can be reasonably
inferred that the Tribunal "applied the real risk of damage test adopted in
", which reasoning showed the Tribunal had applied the correct
third case is that of
Owners SP 92450 v JKN
Para 1 Pty Ltd
and can be briefly mentioned. This was a case about a
building but with non-compliant cladding. An issue was whether the cost of
replacement cladding was the appropriate measure of damages, subsumed within
which was a question of proof of the absence of alternative
solutions. At
[74]-[77], Gleeson JA, White and Basten JJA agreeing, referred with apparent
approval to those parts of the judgments
of Keane JA in
and of Robson JA in
which I have identified above. In my
view, these cases are significant for the crystallisation of the "real risk of
damage" test in
the context of the 'once and for all' rule, following on from
plaintiff's claim for rectification works is about approximately $1.31 million,
which includes Mr O'Halloran's quotation of $517,000.
The total cost includes Mr
Florent's scope of works. He described the list as "generic in nature" due to
the need for formal redesign
and approvals in line with statutory requirements.
In essence the scope encompasses all necessary demolition of external walls and
decks, and internal joinery and fixtures, some of which is to enable Mr
O'Halloran to gain access for his pinning and slab work.
There is also complete
restitution and repairs after that slab work is finished, including installation
of windows etc, and general
repairs and re–painting. There are some
additional items to be added, including a contingency for possible damage to the
driveway, and escalation costs before the project can continue. There
are further costs such as accommodation and storage which arise
proposal but are substantially greater in the case of the plaintiffs.
Mr Reid's proposal is costed by him at about $354,400 which includes a 15 per
cent "overhead and profit allowance." Of course, the
costings relate to two
completely different proposals. The plaintiff called Christopher Hawkins, a
quantity surveyor, to comment
on the various costings. Mr Hawkins is highly
qualified in his field, and I found him to be an impressive and knowledgeable
On his analysis, Mr Reid's proposal would more likely be in the order
of $487,000. A component of the difference is opposing views
architectural/designer input, as against proceeding on existing drawings. Mr
Hawkins says that in his experience,
it is unlikely that an architect or a
designer would be content simply to work off the earlier plans.
item is the cost of the head contractor as allowed for by Mr Hawkins, as against
"site supervision". Mr Hawkins' view is
that for works of this nature he would
typically expect to see a head contractor. That person would coordinate Mr
O'Halloran and
builders and associated trades, with an overview of the entire
process and management of issues arising. Having heard from both witnesses,
respect, I prefer the evidence of Mr Hawkins particularly given his high levels
of skill in this area.
The difference in costings is very substantial and it is on that basis that I
of the methodology.
Because of the cost difference I have given this question particularly close
consideration relying on the authorities
referred to above. I have found that
movement in the house is continuing, and I do not accept that movement caused by
the renovations
is confined to the southern end. Those findings are of weighty
import in the present debate. On the basis on the evidence of Mr
Florent and Mr O'Halloran, all of whose evidence I accept, I am satisfied that
Mr Reid's proposal does not represent a
satisfactory approach. I do not think
that demolition of the southern end, partial underpinning and restitution of
that area –
along with an uncertain extent of floor jacking to the north
of the relevant area – pose any form of reasonable solution.
do what Mr Reid suggests gives rise to a probability that further movement and
consequential damage will occur, or at the very
least there is a substantial
risk of that occurring. Underpinning in one area can, in fact, exacerbate the
problem in others. Mr
Reid's solution is, in my respectful view, clearly "a
doubtful remedy". I am satisfied that it would leave a real risk that the
would not be rectified and a real risk of further and continuing damage.
I am satisfied the plaintiff's proposal is a reasonable
one in all of the
circumstances.
Quantification
to the reduction for the 2013 underpinning costs, the plaintiff should be
awarded the sum of $1,402,800, which is made up
of Mr O'Halloran's quotation, Mr
Hawkins' estimate of the proposed scope of works and all incidental costs, the
contingency amount
of $10,000 in respect of potential driveway damage, and a six
per cent escalation in costs as outlined by Mr Hawkins. This is an
allowance for
increased costs in a period of 12 months before the project can be commenced.
Before work can commence the relevant
personnel have to be contracted and
availability issues would arise. Drawings would be required, and necessary
approvals would have
to be obtained. Mr Hawkins was not cross-examined about
this, and I am satisfied the escalation cost is reasonable. Building permit
of $212 are claimed in accordance with Mr Florent's evidence and I will allow
are additional costs totalling $35,136, the quantum of which is agreed. Those
costs are the costs of accommodation for the
plaintiff while the work is being
carried out, furniture removal and storage, and onsite storage. In round terms
the total to this
point is therefore $1,438,150.
are two additional damages claims. The first is for the costs of having the
cause of the cracking and subsidence investigated
before the action was
commenced and apparently not in anticipation of it. The investigations include
those done by Mr Holmes, the
surveyor, plumbers and Mr Cromer. The total is
$20,556.60. Mr McDougall gave evidence about incurring these expenses and was
cross-examined about them. They were not addressed by either party in
closing submissions. I would be inclined to allow the sum as
claimed as being
within the scope of foreseeable loss caused by the defendant's negligence, with
no countervailing disentitling considerations.
In round terms, the total figure
to this point is $1, 458,710.
second claim is for $150,000. This was advanced in the plaintiff's written
closing submissions as referable to "the potential
of the works taking 12
months." The claim was not addressed by the defendant in closing. The plaintiff
relies on Mr. Florent's evidence
what Mr Florent said but there is no evidence as to how the sum claim is arrived
I would not be inclined to include this sum for that reason. However, as to
both claims I will provide an opportunity for the parties
to be heard
there is a claim for pre-judgment interest pursuant to
Court Civil Procedure Act 1932
With the plaintiff's acquiescence, Mr Groves
asked that if the plaintiff succeeds, I reserve this for further submissions,
thus allowing
time for the reasons to be considered.
Section 35A
requires any
order for pre-judgment interest be made "when making a judgment requiring the
payment of an amount of money." (I assume
"when making a judgment" means
ordering the entry of judgment.) An order for interest cannot be made after
judgment although under
the section, interest that is allowed is distinct from
the judgment amount and requires a separate order:
v Port Sorell
Bowls Club Inc (No 2)
[2020] TASSC 53
will adopt the same course as did Wood J in similar circumstances in
Port Sorell Bowls Club Inc
[2020] TASSC 47
accommodate the parties' position, and also to permit the parties to be heard
paragraph if that is sought, I will
simply indicate that, as I am presently minded, the plaintiff is entitled to an
award of $1,338,710,
being $1,458,710 less the sum of $120,000.
The gallery is an upstairs
hallway which runs on the western side from about the centre of the residence
Exception: opinion based on specialised knowledge
(1) If a person has specialised knowledge based on the
person's training, study or experience, the opinion rule does not apply to
evidence of an opinion of that person that is wholly or substantially based on
that knowledge.
"Consultation on engineering
design during the development of the building application documentation".
"Design footings, timber
and steel framing, bracing, lintels and roof
modifications."
See the comprehensive
discussion by Shanahan CJ in
Valleve Holdings Pty Ltd v Shepperd
A phrase used by Stephen J in
Caltex Oil (Australia) Pty Ltd v The Dredge
Willemstad"
[1976] HCA 65
136 CLR 529
Transcript pp 680 line 12 to
682 line14.
Classification based on soil
reactivity appears in cl 2.1.2 and includes class 'A' which relates to such
things as rock sites with
little or no ground movement from moisture
This would be a reference to
the commentary on cl 3.1 of the Standard as referred to in [65] above.
This would be a reference to
the Standard, clause 2.4.5 set out in par [64] above.
All depictions of and
reference to existing footings on Mr Tilley's drawings are noted to be
"assumed". There are also notes on
his drawings that he had not been able to
get on site to take measurements. Those drawings are dated 4 February 2013.
That strip footing was
shown to be 350 mm below ground level. Another digging at the equivalent point
on the building but on the
south-eastern side, showed that the stripe footing
was 230 mm deep and 660 wide, with a depth below the ground level of 500 mm.
The house has no major
water supply but is dependent on tank water. That comes from storm water roof
catchments with two pipes feeding
the tank from the house. There was one tank in
place in 2010, but in 2012 the plaintiffs put in a second tank for the purpose
taking overflow from the first, and to increase storage capacity. The charged
system means that the water level in the pipes, including
the downpipes, is at
the same level as the water in the tanks to the southern end of the house.
There are also some
comments made in evidence made by Michael O'Halloran,
a structural engineer called by the plaintiff to
give evidence about his method of rectification and its cost, who strayed into
area of debate while dealing with his
methodology.
Transcript pp
572 line 8 to 573 line 34.
An assessment of
photographs against oral evidence suggests the real possibility of it being
there for up to 22 years before it
being cut down. He relied on his opinion
significant signs
of damage up to 2013. When pressed, he qualified this to the
extent that this was a "possibility" and added that he thought the southern
has subsided before then.
One particular example is
provided by his answers in cross-examination about differences in levels taken
at different times, first
by a surveyor in May 2017 and then by him in 2024. The
particular focus was the floor levels across the doorway on the eastern side
which had sliding doors fitted. The surveyor's level showed a fall away from the
northern end of 8 mm while Mr Kingston's showed
a fall in the opposite direction
of +16 mm. Despite extensive questioning an answer to the simple question of
whether the combined
figure of the two measurements represented the net movement
of the floor at that point was not forthcoming. See transcript pp 550-551,
That is reached by doubling
the cost of $25,000 for the designated area at the south to extend it to the
western side and multiplying
by four to reflect the greater house area as
derived from the plans.
Mr O'Halloran said, "...
if it's over a very short distance it is a severe outer level. And most
places I look at have got that, that’s why we are here.
So at the end of
the day, to be satisfied with something that's that far out as a solution is not
really acceptable, especially if
it could move more in the future, which it has
shown [it] has done now."
Mr O'Halloran's report
says, "It was determined that there was approved bearing strata at 14 metres.
This was a judgment call
made based upon what was found at 12 metres but in my
experience, the installation set witnessed at 12 metres would have been adequate
to support the underpins in any event."
Mr Reid disagreed with the
need for a permit but said he would defer to the opinion of a building
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (855 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter