URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMC/2024/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Orr v Geason [2024] TASMC 11 (16 October 2024)
[2024] TASMC 11
MAGISTRATES COURT OF TASMANIA
Orr v Geason
[2024] TASMC
Inspector B
Gregory Peter
: 11690/2023
DELIVERED ON:
16 October 2024
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE/S:
15 – 23 July 2024, 12 September 2024
DECISION OF:
Temporary Magistrate Susan Wakeling
CATCHWORDS:
Criminal Law – Assault – Emotional abuse or
intimidation, pursue a course of conduct - knows, or ought to know, is likely
have the effect of unreasonably controlling or intimidating, or causing mental
Family Violence Act 2024
Gunes v Pearson
A Crim R 297
Berlyn v Brouskos
[2002] VSC 377
REPRESENTATION:
Prosecution:
T Percy KC with F
Solicitors:
Prosecution
Office of the
Director of Public Prosecutions
Cangelosi Logan
Decision Number:
[2024] TASMC 11
Paragraphs:
File No: 11690/2023
Serial No.11/2024
INSPECTOR B ORR V GREGORY PETER GEASON
REASON FOR DECISION WAKELING, DCM
16 October 2024
Introduction
31 March 2023 at a lunch in Canberra, the accused was introduced to the
complainant by her friend and colleague, Gillian Fiddy,
the accused’s
former wife. There was an immediate connection, and within weeks the two were in
a committed relationship. With
shared care of her two teenage children in
Canberra, the complainant alternated her weeks between her home in Canberra and
the accused’s
July, returning as an engaged couple. Upon obtaining employment in Hobart
August, the complainant renegotiated her care arrangements for the children to
reside with the accused at his Hobart home. A plan
was made for the joint
purchase of a shared home for their future.
1 November 2023, the complainant telephoned Tasmania Police to report an
incident of domestic violence she said had occurred on
the previous night. She
reported fear for her life in consequence of disclosure and uncertainty about
how to safely remove herself
from the situation. On 2 November 2023, with the
assistance of Gillian Fiddy, the complainant packed her belongings and left the
accused’s home. She met with police. On 2 November at 11.22pm police
attended at the accused’s home and served a Police
Family Violence Order
upon him, explaining its purpose and effect. The order included a prohibition on
the accused stalking (as defined
Criminal Code Act 1924)
electronic or other communication).
1 December 2023, the accused was arrested and charged with the offences now
before this Court. He was released, and has remained,
The charges
alleges that, in breach of
Family Violence Act
, between 30 April 2023 and 29 November 2023 at Hobart in Tasmania, the
accused pursued a course of conduct, namely:
the complainant’s movements using technology;
the complainant into establishing a shared phone account to gain access to her
electronic records;
Interrogating
the complainant about her location, including details about her companions;
Scrutinising
the complainant’s electronic devices and reviewing her messages, including
deleted messages;
the complainant to verbal abuse, including remarks about her professional and
personal life. Persistent yelling and screaming
the complainant contribute $300,000 equity from her own home;
the complainant to sign the contract of sale on a home in West Hobart;
jealousy, rage, anger and aggression;
ongoing contact with the complainant on 13 separate occasions between 20
November 2023 and 29 November 2023, in contravention
of a Police Family Violence
that the accused knew or ought to have known was
likely to have the effect of unreasonably controlling or intimidating, or
mental harm, apprehension or fear, to his partner.
alleges that in breach of
Police Offences Act
on 31 October 2023 at Battery Point in Tasmania, the accused unlawfully
assaulted the complainant by grabbing her by her arms and
squeezing, shaking and
striking her to the chest with his hand whilst holding onto her arm and pushing
her to the chest.
Family Violence Act 2004
(1) A person must not pursue a course of conduct that he or she knows, or
ought to know, is likely to have the effect of unreasonably
controlling or
intimidating, or causing mental harm, apprehension or fear in, his or her spouse
or partner.
(2) In this section a course of conduct includes limiting the freedom of
movement of a person’s spouse or partner by means of
intimidation.
charge is a summary charge. The accused pleads not guilty to each charge. The
burden of proving each charge is upon the Prosecution.
The standard of proof,
applicable to each element of both offences is beyond reasonable doubt. This
burden of proof does not rest
upon the Prosecution with respect to every aspect
of the case as it is put. It applies to the proof of the elements of the
There are no alternative offences in regard to either charge. The
evidence with respect to each charge is to be considered separately
count decided solely on the evidence that is admissible in relation to that
charge. A determination that the accused is
guilty or not guilty of one charge
is irrelevant to the question of guilt of the other. It is necessary to ensure
that evidence is
used for an identified and permissible purpose.
the matters to be proven beyond reasonable doubt by
the Prosecution are:
between 30 April 2023 and 29 November 2023 the accused participated in a course
of conduct in Tasmania;
he knew or ought to have known was likely to have the effect of:
unreasonably
controlling or intimidating; or
mental harm, apprehension or fear in the complainant.
decision of Justice McDonald in
Gunes v Pearson
(1996) 89 A Crim R 297
Gunes v Pearson
’) is authority for the
proposition:
In order for conduct which is engaged in to be a
‘course of conduct’ the relevant conduct must be conduct which is
or which is engaged in on more than one separate
Berlyn v Brouskos
[2002] VSC 377
, considering a charge of stalking
pursuant to the
(Vic), Justice Nettle approved
Justice McDonalds’ decision with respect to that legislation in
, and observed at paragraph 22:
Section 21A
would prohibit a person engaging in a pattern of
conduct composed of a series of proscribed acts over a period of time, however
and whether constituted of one or more occasion, if the acts committed
evidenced a continuity of purpose and were committed with
at paragraph 24:
It is readily conceivable that conduct on two
separate occasions may not always constitute a pattern of conduct evidencing a
of purpose and it is unlikely that conduct on only one occasion could
constitute a pattern of conduct evidencing a continuity of
purpose, unless the
conduct were protracted. In order to constitute a pattern of conduct there must
be something more.
at paragraph 25:
Something additional about the conduct or the
surrounding circumstances will need to be shown before it can be said of the
that it amounts to a pattern of conduct evidencing a continuity of
acts comprising the ‘course of conduct’ pursued are not required to
be alike. It is the purpose with which the acts
are undertaken which must be
continuous. Unlike
Section 21A
Crimes Act 1958
Family Violence Act 2004
does not refer to or characterise the
particular acts which might contribute to a course of conduct. What is required
is that from
the proven series of events or protracted event, ‘a pattern
of conduct evidencing a continuity of purpose’ emerges.
determination of the mental element of the offence is to be made by reference to
all of the admissible evidence and requires that
the court is satisfied (beyond
reasonable doubt) that the accused, at the time of ‘pursuing’ the
course of conduct, either
in fact knew, or in all of the circumstances
(including those personal to him) ought to have known, the likely effect that it
have upon the complainant in all the circumstances of the complainant
(including those personal to her).
maximum penalty upon proof of the offence is a penalty not exceeding 40 penalty
units or imprisonment for a term not exceeding
is a charge pursuant to
section 35(1)
Police Offences Act
which provides:
A person shall not unlawfully assault
another person.
maximum penalty upon proof of the offence is a penalty not exceeding 20 penalty
units or imprisonment not exceeding 12 months.
Criminal Code Act 1924
defines an assault in the following
(1) An assault is the act of intentionally applying force to the person of
another, directly or indirectly, or attempting or threatening
by any gesture to
apply such force to the person of another if the person making the attempt or
threat has, or causes the other to
believe on reasonable grounds that he has,
present ability to effect his purpose; or the act of depriving another of his
(2) Words alone cannot constitute an assault.
(3) An act which is reasonably necessary for the common intercourse of life
if done only for the purpose of such intercourse, and
which is not
disproportionate to the occasion, does not constitute an assault.
(4) Except in cases in which it is specially provided that consent cannot be
given, or shall not be a defence, an assault is not unlawful
if committed with
the consent of the person assaulted unless the act is otherwise unlawful, and
the injury is of such a nature, or
is done under such circumstances, as to be
injurious to the public, as well as to the person assaulted, and to involve a
Prosecution allege an assault involving the application of force.
elements of the offence to be proven beyond reasonable doubt by the Prosecution
in the circumstances of this case are:
accused applied force to the complainant’s body directly or
indirectly;
application of force was intentional; and
application of force was not reasonably necessary for the common intercourse of
life, or was not done only for that purpose, or
was disproportionate to the
occasion in which that necessity arose.
application of force took place without the consent of the
complainant.
Evidence of admissions and incriminating
Prosecution seek to rely upon the following evidence as admissions of the
accused with respect to the alleged assault which is
the subject of
SMS message to the complainant on 2 November
“I’ m sorry for all the messages but
I love you and need you. I get that I fucked up and that is not me and it will
happen again. You have my word.”
SMS message to the complainant’s friend Camilla Savage on 15 November
You know I fucked up. Like I never fucked up before
because I panicked. I needed to pause but in a moment of madness I thought that
she was going and I panicked.”
implied admission arising from silence in response to Ms Savage
“But P never should have been injured like
Evidence Act 2001
provides that the evidence of an admission
and related representations is admissible as an exception to the hearsay rule.
Evidence Act 2001
purpose of determining whether evidence of an admission is admissible, the court
is to find that a particular person made
the admission if it is reasonably open
to find that the person made the admission.
admission is defined in
Evidence Act 2001
A previous representation that is –
(a) made by a person who is or becomes a party to a proceeding, including a
defendant in a criminal proceeding; and
(b) adverse to the person’s interest in the outcome of the
proceeding.
court may only use an alleged admission if satisfied:
made by the accused, and
substance is
evidence must establish that the admission related to the specific conduct
alleged in the proceeding. In order to be satisfied
that the statement
constitutes a truthful representation of the accused’s involvement in the
crime the evidence must establish
that the words used in the admission were
intended to be an admission of guilt of the offence
Where the evidence is
ambiguous, the court is required to determine whether the accused effectively
admitted his involvement in the
Prosecution seek to rely upon particular internet searches allegedly undertaken
by the accused on his iPhone and iPad in the days
following the departure of the
complainant and the service of the Police Family Violence Order as an implied
admission of guilt with
regard to the charge of assault. The law requires that
the evidence establish that this conduct occurred,
and that the only reasonable explanation of the
conduct is that the accused believed that he had assaulted the
complainant.
The admissibility of extra-jurisdictional evidence as
‘context’ for the purpose of proof of Charge 1
, the Prosecution have identified in written
submissions multiple incidents relied upon to found the alleged course of
conduct. (The
parties do not seek to distinguish a course of conduct which the
accused knew or ought to have known was likely to have the effect
unreasonably controlling or intimidating the complainant from that which the
accused knew or ought to have known was likely to
cause mental harm,
apprehension or fear in the complainant).
written submissions the Prosecution seek to rely upon alleged events which
occurred outside Tasmania, which is interstate or overseas,
as relevant in proof
of a course of conduct comprised by events occurring in Tasmania. The
Prosecution submit that these “extra-jurisdictional
events” are
admissible to “place all the events that occurred within Tasmania into a
proper context.”
is an issue which falls to be determined at a point in the proceedings at which
the evidence, which includes evidence of a number
of witnesses with respect to
events said to have taken place outside of Tasmania, is closed. No objection was
taken in the course
of the evidence as to the admissibility of evidence of
alleged extra-jurisdictional events, and Defence counsel led evidence from
accused and two witnesses with regard to alleged extra-jurisdictional events.
Prosecution do not rely upon events which took place outside Tasmania as part of
the course of conduct, and submit that if the
charge is proven, the accused can
only be sentenced for that conduct which occurred in Tasmania. The Prosecution
argue, however,
that the events can be used to assess events that occurred
within Tasmania in a proper context, that to restrict the evidence to
conduct of the accused when he was in Tasmania “would be artificial and
unrealistic.”
the submission in oral submissions, the Prosecution identified the relevant
purpose for which the extra-jurisdictional evidence
is sought to be relied upon
as the rebuttal of the suggestion that evidence of events alleged to have
occurred in Tasmania came “out
of the blue.”
Specifically,
the evidence sought to be relied upon as admissible for context is:
of the complainant of incidents occurring in Dubrovnik, Croatia in July 2023
(Event 1 by reference to Prosecution written
submissions), in Sydney, Australia
on 11 August 2023 (Event 3 by reference to Prosecution submissions), and in
Sydney on an unspecified
date (Event 13 by reference to Prosecution submissions)
as events in which the accused displayed anger in the context of alcohol
consumption. The evidence is relied upon to rebut any suggestion that the
complainant’s evidence of the conduct of the accused
(Event 2 by reference
to Prosecution submissions) to have occurred in Hobart came “out of the
of an incident (Event 22b by reference to Prosecution submissions) in which it
is alleged that the only inference available
is that the accused in Canberra on
23 November 2023 tracked the headphones of the complainant to their location and
came face to
face with her son, Will, who was in possession of them. The
Prosecution seek to rely upon this event to rebut the suggestion that
complainant’s evidence that she was monitored by the accused by use of the
‘Find My’ App came “out of
accepts the Prosecution position that events outside of Tasmania do not
themselves form part of the alleged course of conduct.
The Defence submit that
the extra-jurisdictional conduct is irrelevant to an assessment of whether the
charge in count 1 has been
proved. It cannot be used to prove a course of
conduct comprised of other events. Defence submit that to rely upon the
extra-jurisdictional
events in proof of the existence of facts constituting the
physical element of the charge (a course of conduct in Tasmania) invites
impermissible tendency reasoning, and not a contextual use. Defence argue that
the evidence sought to be relied upon does not rebut
the suggestion that alleged
events occurred “out of the blue” save by reference to a tendency of
the accused.
which provides essential background information that allows assessment and
evaluation of other evidence may be admissible
as ‘context
evidence.’ Such evidence may be relevant to the assessment and evaluation
of other evidence given in the
case in a complete and realistic context.
DWG v The State of Western Australia
[2022] WASCA 45
Western Australia
’) the Western Australian Court of Appeal
distinguished tendency evidence from context evidence. The court observed at
Although the evidence may not go to establishing
the accused’s guilt of the charged offence, it may be relevant to the
of other evidence on which the Prosecution relies.
court referred to the variety of different uses of evidence noted in
The State of Western Australia
[2021] WASCA 39
which (relevantly)
The evidence may enable a complainant to give a full
account so that their evidence of the accused’s conduct on the day of the
offence in a familial setting would not appear to be ‘out of the
blue’ and inexplicable on that
DWG v Western Australia,
the court cautioned of the risk that evidence
‘that is only capable of being used for propensity purposes is
mischaracterised
respect to both categories of evidence which the prosecution submit are
admissible for a context purpose, I accept the Defence
submission that to rely
upon the extra-jurisdictional events for the purposes identified by the
Prosecution invites impermissible
tendency reasoning. In each instance the
evidence references a tendency of the accused to act in a particular way.
a result of this ruling, only evidence of events which occurred in Tasmania is
admissible to prove Charge 1.
The evidence
considering and assessing the evidence of witnesses in the proceeding I direct
myself that I may accept or reject all, some or
none of a witnesses’
evidence. The fact that I do not accept one aspect of a witness’s evidence
does not prevent me from
accepting another aspect of the witness’s
primary evidence of the two charges is that of the complainant and the accused.
The Prosecution case is almost entirely dependent
upon the evidence of the
complainant. I am satisfied that in the circumstances of this proceeding it is
appropriate that I direct
myself in accordance with the decision in
(1987) 11 NSWLR 12:
Where there is only one witness
asserting the commission of the crime, the evidence of that witness must be
scrutinised with great
care before a conclusion is arrived at that a verdict of
guilty should be brought in.
The evidence of the complainant
The alleged course of conduct in Tasmania
refer, in summary, to the evidence of the complainant in relation to each event
relied upon by the Prosecution as contributing to
the alleged course of conduct.
For ease of reference, I adopt, as Defence did in their submissions, the number
ascribed to each event
by Counsel for the Prosecution. I refer to the events, to
the degree that it is possible, in a chronological sequence.
: It was the evidence of the complainant that in the early months of the
relationship, during a holiday with her children to Thailand,
the accused
: The accused and the complainant agree that in July 2023 they met Bevan
and Lindy Schwaiger for dinner in Hobart and all present
drank alcohol. The
complainant alleges that on the walk home the accused verbally abused the
complainant repeatedly calling her a
“slut,” “a no-good
slut,” and that she sat on a park bench and wept as the accused came and
went and continued
: The complainant said that when she commenced employment in Hobart on
approximately 20 August 2023 her workplace was within close
proximity to the
accused’s place of work. The accused expected that she would accompany him
He expressed disapproval in the event
that she made or proposed to make other plans for her lunch break. When she did,
the accused
messaged that he missed her, disparaged her alternative plan, and
enquired of her, “Who are you seeing, where are you going?”
: The complainant said that if she did not accept a lift with the accused
to or from her work on any occasion during the period of
her Hobart employment
the accused complained that he missed her.
: The complainant said that the accused made unsolicited purchases of
clothing, gifted them to her and continued to do so following
her remonstration
that she had not asked for them.
: The complainant said that the accused gave the complainant
access to his Uber account. The complainant said that she had expressed
dissatisfaction with using her own Uber account. It is the evidence of the
complainant that on an occasion when she was in Canberra
and the accused in
Hobart, she used the accused’s Uber account to travel home from a waxing
appointment. Upon her return to
Hobart the accused questioned her; “What
were you doing taking an early morning Uber coming back from the Novotel?”
showed her the record of the travel. She provided her explanation, he
responded, “I just thought that you’d spent the
night at the Novotel
with someone else.”
: In September, the accused gave the complainant an iPhone to be utilised
by her. He demonstrated the ‘Find My’ feature
of the phone and
explained that it enabled him to see her location on his iPhone and her to see
his. Headphones, Airpods and an Apple
watch were gifted to the complainant and
paired by the accused so that they also could be located. It was the evidence of
the complainant
that on three or four occasions when she turned the ‘Find
My’ feature off the accused made a series of escalating demands
communicate her whereabouts and reprimanded her. The complainant came to believe
that the accused monitored her whereabouts
through the ‘Find My’
: The complainant said that the accused pressured her to merge her Aldi
phone plan with his Vodaphone phone plan. The complainant
said that she had
expressed no dissatisfaction with her own phone and Aldi phone plan.
: The complainant said that the accused gave her an American Express card
linked to his account for her use. She had not requested
it, and rarely used
: The complainant said that on two occasions the accused used a
surveillance camera installed prior to the commencement of their cohabitation
monitor her. On the first occasion the accused returned from work and asked her
why she had gone into his office that day. The
accused said to her that he had
observed her to do so on the surveillance camera. On the second occasion, while
working at home in
the accused’s absence, the complainant turned the
surveillance camera to the wall. When the accused returned from work, he
demanded; “How dare you turn the camera around to the wall. I was so
concerned about you. I didn’t know what you were
doing. Don’t ever
do that again.”
: The complainant received a gift of books for her birthday on 15
September 2023. She said that the accused demanded to know who gave
became abusive and angry, throwing things around their bedroom when she told him
that they were from a male friend. He demanded
of the complainant; “How
would you feel if other people or another woman was sending me birthday
presents?” The accused
continued angrily to abuse and berate her.
: The complainant described an occasion on which she left her workplace to
share a beer with her colleague, Darien Williams, at a
bar. She did not take her
phone with her. She said the accused began to WhatsApp message and email
demanding to know where she was.
When he collected her from work that evening,
he expressed his anger and concern at being unable to contact her, demanding to
where she had been and with whom, criticising her conduct in leaving work
and going to a bar. At home he continued with the same
complaints for two hours
with increasing anger. He grabbed her by the upper arms and called her “a
disgrace.” She retreated
to the spare room.
: In the course of the relationship the accused told the complainant that
her curriculum vitae (CV) was “shit” and “embarrassing”.
: The complainant said that in the course of the relationship the accused
referred to significant people in her life by derogatory
terms. When the
complainant argued with him the accused deliberately referred to her as
“Sarah” (his former fiancé’s
name) because, he said,
they were both “sluts” and they both argued with him.
: The complainant said in evidence that in the course of the relationship
the accused displayed such jealousy when she spoke of highly
(particularly male) acquaintances that she took to ascribing to those people
whom she anticipated he might be threatened
by, professions such as
“plumber” and “drug dealer”.
: It was the complainant’s evidence that in the course of the
relationship the accused declined to walk up Mount Wellington
with her as she
had been on the walk with a former partner.
: In the course of the relationship, the complainant said, she had asked
for the accused’s assistance to write a letter to the
father of her
children, she said the accused prefaced the letter, “Dear Cunt”.
: It is the complainant’s evidence that having agreed to
jointly purchase a house with the accused, agreed on a property, negotiated
price, and signed the contract with a deposit of $50,000 contributed by the
accused, she became very concerned when the proposed
arrangement to finance the
purchase was put to her. The arrangement put to her was that the equity in her
Canberra home ($300,000)
be used as collateral and that the accused would
contribute the $50,000 cash deposit. The balance of the purchase price (which
was unable to recall) would be financed by a joint loan secured by a
mortgage on the purchased property. She said that she was concerned
because the
accused did not propose to make an equivalent financial contribution, and also
that the accused insisted that they be
registered on the title as tenants in
common. These were concerns, she said, that she expressed to the accused and
that led to arguments
between them. She told him that she was worried about his
spending and reluctance to provide full disclosure of his financial
circumstances
to her. She told him that she wanted safeguards including changes
to their life insurance and wills, and a binding financial agreement.
accused reacted with anger.
complainant obtained independent advice and in October 2023, during a lunch
break at home, told the accused that her advice was
not to proceed. The accused
became very angry, threw papers around, and yelled at her for the duration of
the lunch break. The accused
told the complainant; “Our relationship is
over; we’re not going ahead. You’ve ruined me.” The
complainant
packed her belongings in response to this reaction and said that she
intended to leave. The accused came home before she did leave
and saw the packed
bags. He became angry and said, “You are not going to leave me.” The
complainant did not leave.
a further occasion, the complainant said, she told the accused that she would
not agree to the terms of the finance for the house
purchase. The accused became
very angry. She told him, “You are going to kill me if I don’t sign
those papers, aren’t
you?” He became angrier, saying “You have
ruined me if we don’t get this house, it’s our dream, it’s
future together, you can’t back out now, it’s the end of the
relationship if you do.” When the accused went
to work the complainant
packed her bags again, turned off her phone and used her laptop to book a hotel.
She took a taxi with her
bags to the hotel, but the reservation had not gone
through. Exhausted and distressed, the complainant turned her phone on again
discover missed calls and messages from the accused. She called him and he
arrived to collect her and her luggage. Together they
returned to his home.
a weekend together in Canberra, the accused presented the loan application to
her and demanded that she “sign it now.”
She said that she was
exhausted by his persistence and complied.
: The complainant described an occasion on which she met Gillian Fiddy for
drinks to celebrate Gillian’s birthday (which was
on 19 October 2023).
While at the hotel she said that she received more than 20 messages from the
accused. He demanded that she come
him. He asked who she was with and, hearing a male voice in the background, who
talking to. He arrived at the hotel (despite the fact that she had not
informed him where she was) and escorted her home, berating
her all the while.
: The complainant said that on 27 November 2023 she noticed that
the accused had posted twice on her Facebook account. On 29 November
accidentally dialled the accused on WhatsApp. In response she received a phone
call from the accused (which she did not answer)
and then two text messages.
The alleged assault
is the evidence of the complainant that on 31 October 2023 she was unable to
work and remained at the Mona Street property. Toward
the end of the day, in a
period of one and a half to two hours before the accused returned home, she had
drunk about three glasses
of pinot grigio. When the accused came home, he opened
a bottle of wine and began to drink a glass. She may have had another glass
wine. The complainant engaged in an exchange of messages with her work
colleague, Darien Williams. She was deleting the messages
apprehension that the accused would be angry if he discovered them. Unaware of
being observed by the accused, she opened
a photograph sent by Darien Williams
which depicted him pulling a face.
complainant said that the accused responded immediately, swore, and demanded to
know who was sending the messages. He grabbed
the phone and began to look
through the messages. He knew her passcode because of helping her previously
with the phone settings.
When the photo was not there, he was able to retrieve
her deleted messages and was becoming more and more angry. He screamed at her,
“Who is this person? Who do you think you are? You’re disgusting,
you’re a slut.” He handed her his phone
and said she could go
through it. He sat in his usual brown leather chair.
an attempt to de-escalate the situation, the complainant walked toward the
accused and said, “Look there is nothing to be
worried about, there is
absolutely nothing going on between Darien and I, will you please calm
down”. The accused stood up
and grabbed the complainant by the arms very
tightly, she was incredibly scared, and it was very painful. He screamed at her
she was disgusting and how dare she do this to him. The complainant tried
to get away and the accused started punching her in the
chest and breasts and
then he pushed her so that she flew back with force and hit her head on the
mantelpiece. The complainant said
she recalls a loud crack in her head and
blacking out for a while. When she came to, she was standing and had
on the back of her head and her head was “screaming in
pain.” She cried out to the accused in outrage and told him she
the evidence of the complainant that she had
poor recall of events which
followed on that night.
complainant’s next clear memory was of events on the following day when
she woke in bed with the accused, and he asked if
she would come to the gym. The
complainant said that her memory was poor regarding the events of the day which
followed, but she
recalls asking the accused that morning for an explanation for
the extensive bruising that she, and he, had seen as she showered.
The accused
told the complainant that the bruises on her thighs and buttocks had occurred
when she had thrown herself against the
table. He told her that she bruised
easily and told her to put a jacket on. The accused went to work.
complainant saw (but did not recall) that at 8.02pm on 31 October 2023 she had
sent Darien Williams an email to his work email
account which said;
“He’s found our deleted text, I’ve had my head bashed, not
good”. The email was not successfully
delivered to Mr Williams due, she
surmised, to security associated with the account. On the morning of 1 November
2023, she sent
photographs of some of her bruising to Mr Williams. She called
Tasmania Police, reported the incident, and requested assistance.
During the day
she contacted the finance company to whom the loan application was made and
requested that the application be cancelled
due to domestic violence. The
complainant said she contacted and arranged to meet Darien Williams to ask his
advice. She met him
at a hotel and told him that she had been assaulted. She
said that throughout the day of 1 November she had a terrible headache,
very dazed, confused, scared and unsure about how to proceed safely. She had
made appointments for waxing and hairdressing and
told the accused that she
would go to them. This was partly an excuse for her leaving the house. She was
unable to navigate the city
and did not make it to the appointments. She kept up
a text conversation throughout the day with the accused in an attempt to
normality while she worked out what to do.
the morning of 2 November 2023, the complainant said that the accused woke and
prepared to go the gym. When he returned, he told
the complainant that he had
counted the cars in the street and noted their registration plates so that he
knew that no one had visited
her. She denied that she and the accused had sex
that morning. The accused went to work. The complainant rang her employer to
for domestic violence leave. When Gillian Fiddy made contact to suggest
they meet for a walk, the complainant asked her to come to
meet her at the Mona
Street home. She showed Ms Fiddy the bruising and told her that the accused had
caused it. Ms Fiddy assisted
her to pack her belongings and took her to the home
of a friend. The complainant replied to attempted contacts from Tasmania Police
and agreed to meet with them later that day. The complainant left Tasmania on
the following day.
Evidence of the accused
The alleged course of conduct in Tasmania
refer, in summary, to the evidence of the accused in relation to each event
relied upon by the Prosecution as contributing to the
alleged course of conduct.
I refer to the events in a sequence corresponding to the sequence I adopted in
relation to the complainant’s
: The accused denied that his communications with the complainant during
the holiday, which he recalled being in Vietnam, were excessive
inappropriate. They reflected his enthusiasm for their new relationship.
: The accused recalled the dinner with his friends, Bevan and Lindy
Schwaiger. He denied the occurrence of the events which are alleged
followed the dinner. He denied calling the complainant a slut on any
: It was the evidence of the accused that, though he and the complainant
often lunched together, the complainant was under no pressure
to do so. He said
that in any event he lunched with his parents each week. He understood at the
time, from the complainant’s
sexual and other behaviour, that she
willingly shared her lunch break with him.
: The accused agreed that he routinely drove the complainant to and from
work. He did so because their workplaces were conveniently
proximate, and it
would assist the complainant. He said he was motivated only by these
considerations and his pleasure in being able
to do so. He said that the
complainant was not put under any pressure to accept his offer.
: The accused said that he gifted clothing to the complainant out of
affection and care. He had no other purpose.
: The accused said that he shared his Uber account with the complainant
for her benefit and convenience. He denied that there was
an occasion on which
he demanded that the complainant explain her use of an Uber from the Novotel
Canberra to her home and denied
using the Uber account to monitor her.
: The accused agreed that he gifted the complainant an iPhone and denied
that it was his intention to, or that he did, use it to monitor
her. He agreed
that the pre-installed ‘Find My’ function when activated allowed him
to see the location of the complainant’s
iPhone. He said that this was
known and agreed by the complainant, and she was free to turn the function off
at any time.
: The accused said that his only intention in joining the complainant to
his Vodaphone plan was to provide an improved phone service
and a financial
benefit to her. He did not dispute that on 9 November 2023 he accessed and took
a screen shot of the complainant’s
mobile phone records, or that the phone
records were used between 6 and 22 November to undertake internet searches for
the purpose
of ascertaining the identity of the persons the records showed were
called by the complainant. The accused said that he did not recall
undertaking
those searches. The accused denied that he had accessed the records for the
purpose of monitoring the complainant’s
phone calls prior to that
: The accused said that a surveillance camera had been installed in his
him to monitor his dog (and the dog’s carers) in his absence from the
camera to monitor the complainant.
He denied that the conversations described by the complainant took place.
: The accused denied that he confronted the complainant with regard to a
gift of books she received for her birthday. The accused
denied that on any
occasion in the relationship he behaved toward the complainant in the aggressive
manner she described.
: The accused denied that he was aware that the complainant left her
workplace to have a beer with Darien Williams. He denied that
an argument
occurred about such an event.
: The accused denied that he disparaged the complainant’s CV. To the
contrary, the accused said, he told her that she should
be proud of the CV and
of her professional qualifications.
: It was the accused’s evidence that the nicknames which are the
subject of this evidence were used both by himself and the
complainant, that
this was mutual and humorous and in no way intended to denigrate the complainant
or her relationships.
: The accused denied that he was jealous of the complainant’s male
associates or belittling of them. His evidence was that both
complainant could become sensitive.
: The accused denied that he declined to walk up Mount Wellington with the
complainant because she had previously done so with a former
: The accused said that the offensive address he used to refer to the
complainant’s former husband was intended to be
“light-hearted”
and otherwise he contributed constructive advice
regarding the letter.
: The accused gave a detailed account of the progress of the joint
decision to purchase and fund a shared home. He and the complainant
house that they agreed upon and made an offer, then jointly negotiated, and
agreed the price. When they signed the contract
to purchase the property they
bought and shared a bottle of champagne in celebration. The settlement was to
take place in January.
They were “ad idem” with respect to the
financial arrangements necessary to make the purchase work. At the outset, he
said, he disclosed to the complainant that he was “relatively cash
poor...and therefore not in a position to pay the sort of
deposit that would be
necessary.” He told her, “I have the income, and you have the
asset.” He proposed that he
contribute his $50,000 to the deposit and she
the equity in her Canberra property. This would get them “under the 80
loan to value ratio thing,” and, as he had a substantial and
secure income, he would refinance through his broker and service
mortgage on her Canberra home (and in addition two of the complainant’s
personal loans secured against her home) and
on the jointly purchased property.
He said, “I think she considered (that) to be a good couple’s
arrangement.”
The accused proposed to retain an additional $40,000 in
savings he had for incidental costs such as the building inspection and removal
accused said that he was not aware that the complainant had misgivings about the
financing until she told him on the drive home
for lunch one day that she had
had advice from someone she trusted that she should not proceed. The accused
conceded that they argued.
The complainant had been provided by the broker with
details of the financing structure which would enable her to understand the
relative advantage she would gain by the “rolled up arrangement.”
The complainant’s resistance to the financing
arrangement hardened through
October, “as evidenced by her packing her things and going to a
hotel.” The accused said
that he then, by agreement with the complainant,
executed a binding death benefit nomination through his superannuation fund. She
had agreed to do the same. In addition, he formalised a structure which directed
his salary directly to mortgage payments save with
joint signatures. The accused
sent a copy of the executed binding death benefit nomination to the complainant
on 25 October 2023.
In response the accused received a message from the
complainant; “Awesome, I’ll do mine too” The accused said that
he understood that these concessions addressed the complainant’s concerns;
her exposure to debt in the event of his death and
his “spending
propensity”. Thereafter the accused believed that the complainant’s
reservations with regard to the
financing had been resolved. The accused denied
that threats were made by him to the complainant in relation to the arrangements
for the financing of the property.
: Defence submissions accept that the accused sent repeated messages to
the complainant as alleged. The accused gave an account of
collecting the
complainant from the hotel. He said on this occasion that she was alcohol
impaired and required physical assistance
to the car from Ms Fiddy. He denied
any verbal aggression toward the complainant.
24: The accused did not dispute that on 27 November 2023 he posted a heart emoji
and a ‘like’ on the complainant’s
Facebook account.
: The accused did not dispute the evidence that on 29 November 2023 at
3.36pm there was a call from the complainant’s phone
to his and that he
called her back. He admitted that he sent two messages: at 5.31pm;
“I’ll assume you called in error
that’s ok be good to yourself
and yes. I love you unconditionally one day X,” and then: “I’m
into therapy
next week I need to go and improve build positivity on what I think
is my very good heart. My only worry though is your welfare.
reply I know but always know I’m thinking about you and hope you are ok
: The accused did not dispute that on or about 8 November 2023 (after he
had been served with the Police Family Violence Order) he
wrote and sent a
letter to the complainant’s parents in which he expressed his continuing
love for their daughter. It was put
to the accused that he knew that the
complainant’s mother was certain to tell her about the letter. The accused
denied that
he did. He said that his request within the letter that the
communication not be disclosed to the complainant reflects his intention
the letter was a private communication.
: The accused did not dispute that on 15 November 2023 he searched the
name of the complainant’s friend, Camilla Savage, on
the internet and
located her telephone number on her Facebook page. He sent a series of text
messages to her in which he expressed
his continuing love for the complainant.
The accused said that it was his intention, as he expressly requested in a
message, that
his communication with Ms Savage would remain
The alleged assault
is the evidence of the accused that when he returned from work on the evening of
31 October 2023 with two bottles of wine, it was
apparent to him that the
complainant had been drinking. She complained that she had lost her sunglasses
and told him that she had
been at the Prince of Wales Hotel that afternoon. He
rang the hotel to ask if they had been located there. The response he received
was that they had already had a call about that, and that the speaker was
informed “when she left, they were on her head.”
He located the
sunglasses in the bedroom. While in the kitchen having a few wines and preparing
dinner, he glanced out to see the
complainant with her phone in her hand
pressing on the screen of her phone as one might in order to add an emoji, or to
delete. When
the complainant eventually came inside, he asked her; “What
was that photo that you were pressing on your phone?” When
the complainant
responded vaguely, he said, “it just looked like a close-up photo of a
man’s head.” The complainant
told him who sent the photo. It struck
the accused as “an odd thing to send a girl a photo of yourself,”
and he was concerned
a look?” The complainant gave him the phone and her passcode, but
photo was not there.
two had by now walked to the bedroom and they sat on the bed. The accused was
more concerned now because “the idea of deleting
something connotes hiding
something.” He opened the complainant’s recently deleted messages,
read them, and asked the
complainant why she had deleted them. “I deleted
them because I knew they would upset you,” she said. The accused was
enraged at this stage, he said, but very upset. The complainant reassured him
that there was nothing to worry about. “Have
you seen his wife,
she’s gorgeous, she looks like a model,” the complainant said. The
accused said his concerns were
increased by the fact that the complainant had
apparently searched for this information about her colleague’s personal
When the two returned to the living room he told the complainant;
“Attention from a female is so easily construed as flirtatious
something intended to encourage, I’ll call it romantic engagement, and
it’s not so much what you think, it’s
what he makes of it”.
The accused conceded that he raised his voice and said to the complainant,
“Look if there’s
something going on, then really you should just go
to go back to Canberra because I love you”. He was sitting in his brown
leather chair. The complainant walked towards him.
accused said he stood and, taking her by the arms he held her and pleaded;
“Please tell me there is nothing going on.”
He was pleading for
reassurance. There was no violence in the gesture, no shaking.
said that the complainant bent down toward him in the chair, as she did he
raised his open hand, fingers spread, to indicate ‘stop’
“just leave me I just need some space”. In consequence of him
raising his hand as the complainant leaned down
to him, his hand connected with
her chest. The complainant stood up and, in doing so, brushed her cheek against
the mantelpiece.
The accused had observed the complainant to be unsteady on her
feet that evening due, he surmised, to consumption of alcohol. The
complainant
turned and walked the length of the table and fell hard onto her bottom and her
head went back and connected with the
side of the table.
accused denied that at any time he shook the complainant, punched her, or pushed
her. To assist the complainant on to her feet
after her fall, the accused
straddled the complainant, grabbed both her upper arms and exerted most of his
strength to bring her
(almost dead weight) to her feet. The complainant walked
toward the bathroom rubbing her head, the accused followed and asked if
all right. Forming the impression that she was, the accused left her in the
bathroom and went to bed and started to cry.
The accused said he was upset about
the way that things had gone and upset at the way he had handled the situation,
that he had allowed
things to progress the way they had, “to the point
that she had fallen on her bottom and hurt her head”. He agreed that
had consumed about six glasses of wine after his return from work. He had had a
difficult day. He felt that his response to the
messages was
“immature,” and he was upset.
the morning, the complainant was in bed with him. When the complainant rose from
bed, he said to her, “oh dear P how do we
come back from this?” The
complainant showed him bruising to her arms and “fingerprint marks”
on her breasts as
she was showering. He went to work. He messaged the
complainant throughout the day, and she responded normally. He did not apprehend
a change of attitude in her. That evening they ate together and watched
television. They slept in the same bed although a spare bedroom
was readily
available. The accused said that on the morning of 2 November the complainant
rose naked and initiated sexual contact.
When he returned from the gym, he and
the complainant had sex. He went to work as was usual.
evidence of other prosecution and defence witnesses
Kathryn Wells
Wells said she and the complainant had been friends since kindergarten. She
received a message from the complainant on 5 November
2023 and invited the
complainant to her home. The complainant replied that she was in hospital, that
the accused had beaten her.
In a follow up call the complainant said she had
sustained concussion. The complainant sent photos of bruising to her. Later the
complainant came to Ms Wells’ home and stayed the night. Ms Wells saw the
bruising covering the complainant’s chest,
and also on her arms and legs
and her upper thighs. She observed that the complainant was in shock and in
significant pain. Later,
when Ms Wells went to the complainant’s
parents’ home, the complainant showed her a series of texts sent by the
to Camilla Savage, a mutual acquaintance. Ms Wells said that the
complainant told her that she could not remember the particulars
happened, but that she had been assaulted by the accused after he drank wine on
an empty stomach. Ms Wells said that she
was told by the complainant that the
relationship had been a controlling one. When asked in re-examination Ms Wells
said she recalled
that the complainant had given examples of the accused’s
controlling conduct; he had bought her a phone, had added her to his
phone plan,
had bought her clothes and picked her up for lunch. I accept Ms Wells’
Michelle Grose
Grose is Ms Wells’ twin sister, also a kindergarten friend of the
complainant. It was her evidence that she saw the complainant
at Ms Wells’
shaking and upset, and had very
significant bruising. The following day the
complainant came to her home and Camilla Savage also visited with her daughter.
The complainant
had come to her home from the police station and had her
statement with her. Ms Grose did not read the statement, but Camilla and
Camilla’s daughter did. Later, Ms Grose said, the complainant’s
mother Hennie told her that the accused was messaging
the complainant but had
then deleted some of the messages. They decided to take screenshots to preserve
a record of the messages
still on the complainant’s phone. Ms Grose
responded to cross-examination as she had done in her evidence, with clear,
answers. She did not read the complainant’s statement. She said
that when the complainant gave the statement to Camilla to
read, she was seeking
reassurance that its contents were “rational and straightforward.”
Ms Grose had cautioned against
Camilla’s suggestion that she could access
the complainant’s hospital records. She disapproved of Camilla sharing the
statement with her daughter. She presented as a caring friend with good counsel,
and a reliable witness.
Dr Sinead Taylor
Taylor was the emergency physician who examined the complainant upon her
admission to Bendigo Hospital on 5 November 2023. Her
qualifications were not
challenged. Dr Taylor identified her clinical notes among those produced by
Bendigo Hospital, and eighteen
photographs she had taken of the
complainant’s injuries as she made her clinical assessment. She said that
her notes were made
when the complainant was taken to emergency short stay for
scans and observation.
witness confirmed that she had noted that the complainant had reported being
assaulted by her partner; that she had been “picked
up and thrown against
a heavy object”, that she was hit “multiple times to the head,
torso, limbs”, and that she
had been beaten by her partner on other
occasions”. The complainant described pain on breathing, abdominal and
chest pain,
nausea, and headaches. The witness examined the complainant and
could feel swelling, a palpable haematoma, on the complainant’s
behind the right ear which she was unable to photograph. She photographed and
noted other injuries. She described them as “extensive.”
noted that the complainant was at times slow in her responses, seemed tremulous
and unsteady on her feet. She considered
the symptoms of headache and nausea
indicative of concussion and diagnosed the complainant accordingly. She ordered
a CT scan to
check for any significant injury and referred the complainant to
“emergency short stay.”
witness was cross-examined with respect to any explanation provided to her by
the complainant for specific bruising. She said
that it was not her practice to
ask. She conceded that she was not forensically trained to comment upon
causation of bruising, and
that it was beyond her expertise (not being a
haematologist) to comment upon propensity to bruising. She said she was
confident to
express an opinion regarding the presentation of the complainant
based on her training and experience as an emergency physician.
The witness
patiently assisted Counsel with more general questions to assist in navigation
of the general hospital notes. She agreed
that she had noted, “P had
limited recall of all the specifics in the context of head injury.” She
said, as to whether
the complainant said exactly what she noted, that she could
not remember. The witness said that from her examination and the history
available there was no indication that the complainant was alcoholic. In
re-examination she said that there was no evidence that
the complainant had a
predisposition to bruising.
witness was considered in her answers, cooperative and professional. She
identified the parameters of her expertise but expressed
her clinical opinion
with clarity and confidence. I accept her evidence.
Parekh’s qualifications and expertise in forensic medicine were not
challenged. Her statement of qualifications and experience
was provided to the
parties and to the court.
Parekh did not personally examine the complainant. She relied upon the clinical
notes and photographs of the complainant taken
by Dr Sinead Taylor and expressed
confidence in her capacity to assess the injuries depicted in photographs in the
context of a clinical
examination by an emergency physician. She said that she
examined three or four hundred people per year “in this category of
complaint.”
Parekh observed “at least eighteen individually identifiable areas of
bruising over multiple anatomical planes” depicted
in the photographs
produced to her. She expressed her opinion that the bruising indicated multiple
applications of blunt force. It
was her opinion that it was significant that
“the majority of the bruising appears on protected areas of the
said, “the number and location of bruises on her body
were very likely to be the result of an assaultive event because of the
positioning of those bruises”. Due to the positioning of the bruises on
protected areas of the body, she said, they are “very
unlikely to be
accidental,” and “extremely unlikely to have been
self-inflicted.”
Parekh was requested to make observations regarding each of the images available
and did so. She said that the injuries depicted
in images 4, 5, 6 and 15
occurred to protected areas of the body. With regard to images 4 and 5, she said
that as fingertip bruising
from individual applications of force heal, they can
become confluent and merge together. She observed that fingertip bruising is
present on both the upper right and left arms of the complainant in images 4 and
5; “You can see the overall impression of
multiple applications of
separate force which have become confluent”. She expressed the opinion
that they are likely to be
grab marks. As to the bruising depicted in image
fifteen, bruising to the chest of the complainant, the witness observed that
are a series of different bruises from more than one application of force.
Dr Parekh said that in her experience these are definitely
not accidental
bruises “because of the way the breasts sit”. In reference to image
sixteen, the bruising to the right
rib area, Dr Parekh observed that it would be
unusual if this were accidental, but that she cannot exclude the possibility. In
opinion, the bruises in image 17 to the hands and wrists may be partially
defensive but there may be other possible mechanisms as
witness maintained these opinions when cross-examined. She was asked if bruising
in the individual images could be explained by
accidental injury, such as a
collision or fall, and said that she could not exclude the possibility of
accidental causation of the
majority of individual bruises depicted in the
images. She said that she had a significant degree of confidence that the
depicted in images 4, 5, 6 and 15 was not accidental.
responsive to questioning regarding her opinion with respect to the causation of
the individual images, Dr Parekh insisted,
“It is the constellation of
injuries that we need to look at.” She agreed that the injury to the
complainant’s
cheek might result from walking into an object, that the
bruising to the complainant’s hip area might be explained by running
a table and those in image 11 might result from a heavy fall to a solid floor
and could conceivably all have occurred as a result
of that one fall. She agreed
that the yellow bruising to the complainant’s upper chest might result
from pressure applied by
a hand. The witness said that it was her duty to the
court, as an expert witness, to make it clear that a consideration of the
individually would be misleading. She cautioned, “It is
misleading to consider these images individually. Look at the totality.
much more likely to have been inflicted deliberately, not
accidentally.”
witness said that she did not consider that either Factor V Lieden or medication
taken by the complainant (of which she was aware)
might have contributed to the
degree of bruising. She disagreed that there was any evidence which she had seen
to support the proposition
that chronic alcohol abuse by the complainant
contributed to the degree of bruising. She conceded that she could not
clinically exclude
that the complainant had a propensity to bruise easily.
Parekh was an impressive witness, cooperative, measured, and aware of her
obligations as an impartial expert. I accept her evidence.
complainant’s mother
was clear that the complainant’s mother was stressed by the requirement to
attend as a witness. She was, however, a competent
and cooperative witness. She
had met the accused on only two occasions and gave an account of those. She said
that she spoke to her
daughter weekly when she was with the accused in Hobart
and complained that the calls were often put on speaker by the complainant
said that the accused liked to be able to listen.
evidence was that on 3 November 2023 she received a call from her daughter who
told her that she had been badly beaten by the
accused and was making
arrangements to return to her parents’ home. When she and her husband
collected their daughter on 4
November 2023 in Melbourne, she said that she was
shocked by the complainant’s appearance and observed that she was
dishevelled,
shaking, crying, and had vomit around her mouth. She complained of
a splitting headache. When the complainant reluctantly removed
her coat, she
revealed bruising which she said was caused by the assault. At 8am the next day,
the complainant’s mother took
her to hospital. The witness’s
evidence was not challenged in cross-examination. I accept her evidence.
Darien Williams
Williams gave direct answers to questions. He rejected some propositions put by
the Prosecution. He conceded that his memory was
not complete with respect to
some detail of the events he was taken to. He made an effort at recall when
requested by both Counsel.
Mr Williams is a lawyer. He said that he had become
friendly with the complainant when they were colleagues in Hobart, and that he
had no continuing connection with her. She had asked that he not contact her
after she left Hobart, and she had initiated no contact
save by sending him a
card on one occasion, which was after he had made his statement to police. I
regard him as a reliable and impartial
Williams said that before 31 October 2023 the complainant had told him she had
allowed the accused location sharing on her phone,
and that she was concerned
that the accused could see where she was. He said that the complainant told him
that if she were not in
certain locations the accused would question her in the
evenings. She said that she and the accused would fight about this and that
accused is a jealous person. The complainant told Mr Williams that she was very
worried about providing equity in her home as
security for the joint purchase of
a house. She said there were problems in the relationship and that she was very
worried. He said
that the complainant told him that she had independent legal
advice not to proceed and she had told the accused, and he got very
the day following this conversation, the complainant told him by text that she
was leaving the accused, and she packed
her bags and went to a hotel. Mr
Williams said that it is his belief that she returned to the accused the same
was the evidence of Mr Williams that on the morning of 1 November 2023, the
complainant sent him photographs of bruising on both
arms. In the exchange which
followed he told her, “If he caused those you should leave and go to
police.” Later he met
her at a hotel, she was there when he got there. Mr
Williams said that the complainant requested that he help her to turn off
sharing on her phone. He was able to do that. It was on and he turned
it off. Mr Williams said that the complainant told him on that
occasion that the
accused had beaten her for one hour and then thrown her toward the mantelpiece
and that she had hit her head on
the mantelpiece. She said that he was now being
very apologetic and loving. When he asked what caused the argument, the
complainant
said “jealousy.” He asked, “of who?” she
answered, “you or anyone”. He saw bruising on her arms
“not drawn to” any others. He could not recall what the complainant
was wearing at the time, his best recollection
was shorts and a top.
Williams said he was at the hotel with the complainant for about 1 hour and he
had at least three drinks but could not say how
many the complainant had. He
said that the complainant paid because he was unable to use his card. Mr
Williams said that the complainant
told him that she was worried for her life if
she went home, and he told her that she should not. She said she had already
police, and she would be seeing them the following day.
Williams said that he had never seen the complainant drink alcohol during the
day, but when prompted about a particular occasion
said that he could recall one
occasion that he and the complainant left work and went for a drink at about
am satisfied that Mr Williams gave impartial evidence. I accept that he is a
witness of truth.
Gillian Fiddy
Fiddy was married for 20 years to the accused, and they have two adult children.
They divorced in 2013, and she described their
separation as amicable,
“textbook”. She is a lawyer. Ms Fiddy invited the accused to lunch
in Canberra on 31 March 2023,
he had been “sad and lonely” in
Canberra, and she thought he would get along well with her friend and colleague,
complainant. He travelled from Hobart.
Fiddy was asked questions about her observation of the complainant’s
alcohol use. In effect she described it as problematic;
when they were working
together in Canberra she said the complainant was keen to leave work to drink
and that her use of alcohol
was in a 3:1 ratio to her own, she sometimes smelt
alcohol on the complainant early in the morning and was told by the complainant
that she brought alcohol to work in a metal flask, she supported the
complainant’s attempt to give up alcohol when she had
a health scare and
knew that she attended AA (Alcoholics Anonymous) in that period. She said that
when drunk the complainant became
unsteady on her feet and would tend to trip
a period of two and a half months Ms Fiddy was living in the accused’s
Mona Street home and this coincided with the complainant
also staying there. She
said that she observed both the accused and the complainant to be happy in the
relationship, the accused
thought the complainant was “the bees’
knees,” the complainant was less demonstrative but enjoyed the things the
accused gave her and appeared to be managing her separation from her children
well. Ms Fiddy said that she did not observe that the
accused used controlling
behaviour toward the complainant, rather the accused was supportive of her and
“gave her options,”
he did not exhibit jealousy or possessiveness.
Fiddy gave an account of an incident in which she said that the complainant
disguised a glass of wine in a teacup, winding the
tag around the handle and
pouring some tea on top. She later told the accused of the incident and warned
him that it was a “red
flag” for her problematic alcohol use. Ms
Fiddy agreed that the accused approached her around August of 2023 and told her
she had upset the complainant. Ms Fiddy and the accused had an argument,
there were no raised voices, there was no anger. She laughed
at the suggestion
that the accused then, or on any other occasion, threw things around. But it was
this incident which caused Ms
Fiddy to immediately leave the accused’s
it some days later) as her car was inaccessible. On or about 19
October, she met the complainant for a drink for her birthday and
together they
drank three bottles of wine. When the accused arrived, the complainant stood and
was so unsteady she walked into something
and required Ms Fiddy’s physical
support to get to the accused’s car. In response to a question in
cross-examination
Ms Fiddy said that the accused knew where to collect the
complainant because the complainant had told the accused where she was when
rang her at the hotel.
Fiddy had a text exchange with the complainant on the morning of 2 November 2023
and went to the Mona Street house at the complainant’s
request at around
9am, she noted that the complainant had been drinking. She saw the bruising to
the complainant’s arms and
was told by her that the accused had done it.
The complainant appeared confused and sad. Ms Fiddy made arrangements to take
a friend’s home and assisted her to pack and remove her belongings.
Ms Fiddy remained with the complainant through the day
and was present when
police attended at about 10.30pm and took a statement and photographs of
bruising. Ms Fiddy did not recall the
complainant’s explanation to the
police for the bruising on her arms but did recall her tell police that the
accused banged
her head into the mantelpiece. Ms Fiddy said that the complainant
told the police she had a poor recollection of the incident. Ms
Fiddy said that
the complainant had continued to drink alcohol through the day of 2 November and
needed assistance to take the stairs
to bed that night as she was quite
Fiddy was aware that a Police Family Violence Order was served on the accused on
2 November 2023. She said that at one point, when
the complainant was
contemplating asking police to lift the order, she had been asked to be an
intermediary, then the complainant
changed her mind.
Fiddy said that when police approached her to make a statement, the officer
asked her to do so to support the complainant. She
was concerned that the police
were not asking for an objective statement and chose not to make a statement at
all. When questioned
by Prosecution Counsel on this issue Ms Fiddy became
combative. She denied that she had set out to exaggerate the complainant’s
drinking and denied that she had joined the complainant in the wine in a teacup
incident as a shared joke.
Fiddy is the former wife of the accused and mother of his children. She has been
a loyal friend to the accused, attentive to his
happiness (as is evident in her
account of circumstances of his introduction to the complainant). She declined,
she said, to provide
a statement to police out of concern to retain her
impartiality but elected to give evidence for the Defence. Her argument with the
accused in his Mona Street home was on her evidence calm, but it was the very
reason she left his home immediately and in haste (she
took the accused car as
she would have required assistance to move another vehicle to access her own).
In evidence she laughed at
the suggestion that the accused threw items around in
anger, but responded immediately and admirably when the complainant told her
that she had been assaulted by him. It is apparent from Ms Fiddy’s
evidence that as a witness, she had divided loyalties. I
have reservations about
the impartiality of her evidence. I cannot conclude that her evidence is
Bevan Schwaiger
Schwaiger had been a close friend to the accused since childhood. He was able to
describe two occasions on which he met the complainant
with the accused in
Tasmania. On 25 August 2023, at a reception following a memorial service in
Hobart, he observed that the complainant’s
alcohol consumption was
excessive. At dinner when they met again on 29 August 2023, he observed again
that the complainant drank
to excess. Mr Schwaiger said that he and his wife
invited the accused to stay with them shortly after the complainant left him. He
observed that the accused was “a broken man,” very distraught and
confused. To the extent that evidence of Mr Schwaiger
is relevant, I accept it.
His evidence does not undermine the credibility of the
complainant.
Assessing the complainant as a witness
complainant gave evidence in a contained and responsive manner over more than
two days. Her account of the progress of the relationship
with the accused and
the incidents within it was substantially consistent with the accounts she gave
to witnesses and police. At
times she was unable to recall detail. The matters
with respect to which she expressed confident recall remained consistent.
Hospital notes of 5 November 2023 purport to record the history given by the
complainant to triage, and to Dr Taylor at the
time of her admission and
examination. The notes record some matters which are inconsistent with the
complainant’s evidence.
The records note that the complainant was
“picked up and thrown against a heavy object,” on 31 October, that
been two other occasions on which the complainant was
“beaten” (once in Sydney and after she had received books from
male colleague). These inconsistencies were put to the complainant and to Dr
Taylor. The complainant said that those records which
were not consistent with
her evidence and recall were incorrect. In cross-examination she conceded in one
instance “I have
to accept I said this, I must have......but I can’t
recall saying that.”
complainant agreed that the Bendigo Hospital notes of 5 November 2023 record;
“P had limited recall of all of the specifics
in the context of head
injury”. She agreed to the proposition that this was what she told the
doctors and that at the time
she could not recall “all the exact details
of the assault.” The complainant expanded; “As I said, my mental
at that time was such that I was – I couldn’t recollect much
at all. I mean I was concussed. I was traumatised. I don’t
remember saying
those things.” The complainant said that during the period of her
concussion (three weeks severe and limited
difficult to recall. Memories have come back over that time. It’s taken a
while for my
brain to heal.” The complainant said that she was diagnosed
with concussion as a result of striking her head on 31 October
2023 and said
that she had significantly impaired memory and organisational capacity in the
aftermath of that incident. She said
that as time passed, her recall improved.
The witness said that at the time of her admission to hospital in Bendigo (5 to
7 November),
she was “heavily concussed and traumatised”. She said
she remained impaired for weeks following and was admitted to another
for treatment for “trauma” later in November.
submit that the complainant’s claim that she suffered concussion when she
struck her head on 31 October 2023 is inconsistent
with her capacity to organise
herself to effectively make reports to Darien Williams and to police, seek the
cancellation of the
joint loan application on the ground of domestic violence,
apply for domestic violence leave, and maintain a fictional normality
communication with the accused that the relationship continued. Defence submit
that the inconsistencies in accounts given by the
complainant to the hospital
and to police are attributable not to an error in note taking or the effects of
concussion on the complainant
but are a reflection upon her credibility and on
her reliability. Defence submit that the court can reject the
complainant’s
account of memory lost at the onset of the concussion and
recovered as the concussion resolved as inconsistent with judicial
experience.
5 November 2023 Dr Taylor diagnosed concussion and considered the
complainant’s symptoms consistent with the diagnosis. Witnesses
her in the week after she left Hobart describe her as “shocked,”
“distressed,” “confused,”
“traumatised.”
There is no evidence which contradicts her assertion that she was significantly
impacted by concussion
and by trauma as she described. I have no evidentiary
basis to reject her evidence that her recall of events improved as her
resolved. Dr Taylor made the observation that records made in the
hospital triage were not exact and that she was unable to recall
complainant said, only what she noted. Inconsistencies which appear in the
hospital notes are not repeated in contemporaneous
accounts given by the
complainant to witnesses. Ms Fiddy for one, heard the complainant tell police in
Tasmania; “he banged
her head into the mantelpiece.” It is my
assessment that the inconsistencies recorded in the notes are likely the result
confusion or miscommunication rather than misinformation.
complainant was challenged repeatedly with respect to her use of alcohol on
specific occasions and generally. The complainant
denied that she had a problem
with alcohol. She said that she drank “as much as any professional woman
of (her) age.”
The complainant also described occasions on which the
accused engaged in problematic drinking. She conceded that when she and the
accused were introduced over dinner, they drank wine and that they drank alcohol
together again at breakfast, at lunch and at dinner.
She conceded that she
attended Alcoholics Anonymous early in 2023 and said she was then attempting to
abstain from alcohol use. The
complainant said that her resolution to abstain
was motivated by a health issue (a tumour requiring surgery and found to be
and she was supporting a friend who had a cancer diagnosis. The
complainant denied that she took a flask of alcohol to work and took
opportunities to leave work to drink. She denied that concealing wine in a
teacup was a sign of her problematic alcohol use and said
that this was simply a
joke shared with Ms Fiddy. Ms Fiddy denied that she shared in this joke and said
that she described it to
the accused as a “red flag.” Her evidence
described the complainant’s use of alcohol as excessive and at times
impairing (at the Den hotel on 19 October 2023, on the evening of 2 November
2023, on occasions in Canberra). Mr Schwaiger’s
evidence was that the
complainant drank excessively on each and every occasion that he interacted with
her. Mr Williams was a colleague
of the complainant. He did not observe her to
drink during the workday (save for one 4pm occasion). Dr Taylor did not observe
evidence to warrant more than routine enquiry into the complainant’s
alcohol use during her examination on 5 November. The
accused said he was
concerned about the complainant’s use of alcohol and spoke to her about it
conclusion in the light of all the evidence and my assessment of witnesses is
that it is likely that the complainant did use alcohol
often and at times, to
excess. My impression on the evidence is that her use of alcohol exceeded that
of many professional women
of her age. I think that it is unlikely that she
attended Alcoholics Anonymous unless at the time she acknowledged that her
use was problematic. It is not a matter which impacts to any significant
degree my assessment of her credibility. The complainant’s
unwillingness
to make this concession in evidence might well reflect a complex relationship
with alcohol. The fact that the complainant’s
self-assessment of her
alcohol use differs to mine or the assessment made by Ms Fiddy, Mr Schwaiger, or
the accused, does not impact
in a general sense on my assessment of her
reliability. Evidence that the complainant was affected by alcohol on any
particular occasion
warrants consideration as to whether, in the particular
circumstances, the effect of alcohol impacts the reliability of the
complainant’s
complainant called Tasmania Police on the morning of 1 November 2023, reported
an incident of domestic violence on the previous
night and sought assistance.
She named the accused with considerable reluctance and expressed fear for her
life. The recording of
the report evidences the account she gave.
this first contact with police the complainant raised a complaint that the
accused had gained access to her texts and email and
a belief that he tracks her
phone, and if she turns it off it is worse for her. The complainant told Mr
Williams before 31 October
that the accused was jealous and always wanted to
know where she was and that caused arguments between them. She told Dr Taylor
her friends, Kathryn Wells and Michelle Grose, that the accused used
controlling behaviours.
SMS message on the morning and later in person on 1 November 2023, the
complainant told Darien Williams that she had been assaulted
by the accused and
showed him bruising to her arms which she said the accused had caused.
complainant provided an account of the incident to Senior Constable Rachel
Coomber and Sergeant Marco Consentino and in the presence
of the witness,
Gillian Fiddy, on 2 November 2023. The complainant gave substantially consistent
accounts of the cause of her injuries
to her mother on 3 November, to Dr Sinead
Taylor at the Bendigo Hospital on 5 November and separately to her friends,
Michelle Grose
and Kathryn Wells on 7 and 8 November.
injuries recorded by Dr Taylor when she examined the complainant are more
extensive than those which are explained by the account
given by the complainant
to Dr Taylor or her evidence to this court. The complainant conceded that her
recollection of the assault
she described was limited, and that after she struck
her head on the mantelpiece and recovered to stand and feel “eggs”
forming on her head, she was unable to clearly recall anything until she woke in
bed with the accused the following day. When challenged
bruising to her cheek the complainant conceded that she did not know how it was
caused. She said, “but
there was only Greg and I in the house that night
and the next morning. I was covered in bruises so it would have to be related to
him.” The complainant conceded an inability to explain the bruises to her
body save those on her arms and chest (and the pre-existing
burns visible on her
hands) rather than enter into supposition. Although she is unable to provide a
full account, the one given is
convincing.
complainant conceded that, even after the events described by her on 31 October
2023, her love for the accused did not just end.
She said that she remained
uncertain about her future with the accused for some time and, in that period,
discussed the prospect
of reconciliation with Gillian Fiddy.
the whole of the evidence into consideration it is my assessment that the
complainant made a genuine and sustained effort to
provide truthful evidence. I
accept her as a witness of the truth. I accept that there are instances in which
her evidence on a particular
matter, possibly due to the effects of trauma or
concussion, while truthful, may not be reliable. I refer in my findings which
to such instances.
Prosecution submit that communications and conduct of the accused are admissible
as admissions made by the accused and corroborate
the evidence of the
complainant. I will deal with the issue of admissions in due
Assessing the accused as a witness
accused was an expansive witness, forthcoming with regard to the history of his
relationship with the complainant. His account
is of immediate connection with
and attraction to the complainant, and the flourishing of a loving relationship.
accused gave a detailed account of events in the relationship to which he was
directed. He was well prepared with photographs
and records produced to support
or clarify his evidence, particularly with respect to the events of 31 October
is in the context of his commitment to the relationship and his acknowledgment
that the complainant was leaving her life in Canberra,
he said, that he
encouraged the complainant to accept such financial assistance as he could
offer; use of his associated American
Express card, coverage by his health
insurance and gym membership, access to his Uber account and Vodaphone mobile
service. It was
because they were so happy in each other’s company that he
was confident that the complainant shared his preference to spend
time together
when they could; travelling to and from work together, lunching together,
visiting the complainant’s children
together. He said that he had no sense
at all that the complainant regarded such shared time and shared resources as
anything but
a choice. The complainant had freely agreed to location sharing on
their phones and understood the utility of the function. The accused
acknowledged that he maintained a frequency of communication with the
complainant that might be regarded as intense, but he said,
it was a reflection
of their mutual attachment.
accused denied that he was jealous in the relationship. He said that both he and
the complainant could be “insecure”
but that it was the nature of
their relationship that they acknowledged and supported each other to overcome
those insecurities.
accused denied each instance of aggressive behaviour or anger toward the
complainant which was put to him. He did not acknowledge
the existence of any
argument with the complainant prior to the occasion on which she told him that
her advice was not to proceed
with the joint purchase of a home with the finance
as proposed and as tenants in common. It was the accused’s evidence,
the unique occurrence of this argument and the one which followed (both
of which led to the complainant packing her belongings in
preparation for
leaving him), that the complainant actively agreed to the formalisation of the
financial arrangements having been
appeased by the promise of a binding
financial agreement and other safeguards.
the accused’s account of the state of the relationship, I am unable to
reconcile the accused’s belief that his
relationship was untroubled with
other evidence in the proceeding which is either not disputed or
corroborated.
accused said that he and the complainant were “ad idem” with regard
to the choice of, price of and financial arrangements
for, the purchase of a
joint home, and that the first time that he knew of her dissatisfaction was when
she told him of her independent
advice and they argued. The accused denied that
the argument escalated in the manner descried by the complainant. He did not
that when he returned from work later in the day he saw that the
complainant had packed her bags to leave him. His evidence fails
to account for
the apparently rapid and drastic deterioration in the complainant’s
satisfaction with the relationship on that
day. Within a short period, there was
a second occasion on which the complainant packed her bags and removed herself
with them to
a hotel. The accused came to her assistance by collecting her and
her possessions and returning them to his home. The accused described
evidence, accommodations made in order to address the complainant’s
exposure to financial risk associated with the purchase
of a home. The accused
conceded that he came to appreciate that the complainant was worried about the
use of her Canberra home as
collateral and about his spending. He did not
address the unresolved objections of the complainant (for example, being
as tenants in common) or the dynamics which brought the relationship
to such a crisis.
accused gave a detailed description of the events of 31 October 2023. His
account cannot be reconciled with that of the complainant.
His account in
evidence before the court is consistent with that volunteered by him to police
when they attended to serve the Police
Family Violence Order on 2 November 2023.
I note, as the accused did, that there are matters included by the accused in
his evidence
to the court that are not referred to in the recorded conversation
of 2 November.
accused said that he drank two or three wines before the incident which is the
subject of Charge 2 occurred, and he said that
he could not dispute that he
drank six to eight glasses of wine over the evening.
accused’s evidence is that when he saw an image of a man on the
complainant’s phone, he became concerned. When the
complainant let him see
the phone and he discovered that the image had been deleted his concern
increased. That when he had accessed
and read the text exchange and the
complainant told him that he had nothing to be concerned about, that he became
very upset. He
denied that he was jealous. He agreed that he was afraid that
something was going on, afraid that he might lose her. The accused
his “immature” response in demanding the complainant’s
reassurance to this fear. I am unable to reconcile
the accused’s response
to this slight provocation with his denial that he was either jealous or
inclined to engage in controlling
accused described in detail and consistently the sequence of the events of the
evening and the physical contact which he made
with the complainant. He
described her fall to the ground and how she sustained a blow to the head. He
referred to photographs of
his living room to aid an understanding of his
account. The accused’s evidence addressed quite explicitly the mechanisms
which the bruising to the complainant’s upper arms, to her chest and
breasts and to her bottom, and back of thighs might be
explained. The
accused’s evidence did not address the substantial bruising (which Dr
Taylor photographed and documented in
her examination of the complainant on 5
November 2023) to the complainant’s hip, to her hands or wrists. As to
bruising to
her ribs, thighs, and shins he said only “I don’t
believe I caused that”. He denied causing bruising to her shins,
and knees. His evidence did not address the reality of the injuries.
accused’s account that on the morning of 1 November 2023 he saw the
complainant naked in the shower but resumed a normal
routine, is discordant. He
was asked, “Were you aware of the extent of her bruising at that stage. He
responded, “I’d
seen the – what I call the fingerprint marks
and I’d seen some bruising on her arms”. When asked to expand he
“ she showed me .... I think when I was shaving she was showering
and so we were in the bathroom together, so she was undressed”.
reference to observing the other very significant bruises later documented, or
the totality of the bruising which Dr Taylor
described as
“extensive”. It is unavoidable that the accused saw the extent of
the complainant’s injury. He was
aware that she had struck her head. By
his own account he did nothing, and in his evidence he said nothing, which
acknowledged it.
absence of evidence from the accused with regard to these critical matters is a
sharp contrast to his otherwise expansive approach
to his evidence.
accused said that the complainant bruised easily. There is no evidence that the
complainant bruised easily. The accused was asked
in relation to his evidence of
the inadvertent contact to the complainant’s chest; “In the course
of your relationship
you would have connected with her in such a manner with
that degree of force on many occasions, in various interactions?” The
accused agreed to the general proposition. He was asked, “and on none of
those occasions did you cause such bruising did you?”
The accused
responded, “on no occasion did I witness bruising like you can see on her
evidence of the accused is unconvincing as an explanation for the totality of
the extensive bruising sustained by the complainant.
Dr Parekh cautioned with
respect to her agreement that all of the bruising save for that sustained to the
upper arms and chest of
the complainant were conceivably consistent with an
accidental cause; “It is misleading to consider these images individually.
Look at the totality. They are much more likely to have been inflicted
deliberately, not accidentally.”
completeness I refer to the Prosecution’s objection to breaches of the
Browne v Dunn
[1893] 6 R 67. After discussion, the Prosecution
conceded they had not sought to have the complainant re-called or otherwise to
the issue. Counsel referred to the issue as “of minor
importance.” Defence submitted with regard to such failures as
that they pertained to “matters which are not significant.” I have
not acted on the basis that breaches of
the rule affect the weight of, or the
credibility of, the accused’s evidence.
Considering
the entirety of the evidence it is my conclusion that the accused cannot be
relied upon to give an honest and reliable
account of events which are relevant
to the proof of the charges before the court.
the evidence of the accused is not consistent with evidence of witnesses I have
found to be honest and reliable, including that
of the complainant, I will
prefer the evidence of those witnesses.
am satisfied that the complainant is a witness of truth and that her evidence is
reliable. I reject the evidence of the accused
to contradict her evidence.
Having put his evidence to one side as I am required to do, I give consideration
to all of the evidence
which I do accept. Except when there is other evidence
which causes me to have a doubt as to the reliability of the complainant’s
evidence in a certain particular, I rely upon the evidence of the complainant to
make the following findings.
Events relied upon to found a course
accept the complainant’s evidence that the accused contacted her
repeatedly while she was on holiday in Thailand and asked
what she was doing and who she was with (
). I am not satisfied,
that this conduct can be characterised as an event which contributed to a course
of conduct.
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that when the complainant and accused lived
together in Hobart, the accused expressed displeasure
if the complainant
declined to travel to and from work with him or to join him for lunch at home,
and that if the complainant told
the accused that she had another plan, he would
disparage her alternative plan or the people she was proposing to spend time
I accept that the complainant generally came to comply with the
accused’s expectations because he made things so unpleasant
resisted him (
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was disparaging of
significant people in the complainant’s life, referring
nicknames as alleged. I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused
displayed jealousy in response to positive
things said by the complainant about
male acquaintances. I accept the complainant’s brief account of
as consistent with such expressions of jealousy or insecurity.
accept beyond reasonable doubt, in the context of this jealousy or insecurity,
that the accused became enraged when the complainant
received a gift of books
from a former male colleague, and that he reacted in the way described by the
complainant, verbally abusing
and denigrating her (
am not satisfied to the requisite standard that the offensive form of address
complained of in
(the substance of which is admitted by the
accused) is consistent with such acts of denigration or jealousy. It is open on
the evidence
to accept that it was intended as a joke by the accused as he
accept beyond reasonable doubt the evidence of the complainant that on an
occasion in Hobart following dinner with Bevan and Lindy
Schwaiger, the accused
verbally abused her, repeatedly calling her a “slut” and that the
complainant sat on a park bench
and cried, and that the accused kept returning
to her, continuing his abuse (
). The accused denied that this
incident occurred, and Bevan Schwaiger did not observe it. I do not accept the
denial of the accused.
It was not the evidence of the complainant that Bevan or
Lindy Schwaiger were present.
also accept beyond reasonable doubt the complainant’s evidence that on
occasions that she argued with the accused he would
call her “Sarah”
(the name of his former fiancé) and that he told her that this was
because Sarah also argued
with him, and they were both sluts (
am satisfied that the accused told the complainant that he was proud of her
professional achievements. The complainant agreed that
he encouraged her in that
regard. I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused also told her on
occasions that her “CV”
was “shit” and
“embarrassing” (
accept beyond reasonable doubt the complainant’s evidence that the accused
demanded explanations from her with regard to her
entry into his study, and her
re-orientation of the surveillance camera as she described (
find that the only inference open on the evidence is that the accused had
observed this behaviour when monitoring the surveillance
camera. The evidence
does not permit me to exclude the possibility that the accused made these
observations in the course of monitoring
the surveillance camera to check on his
dog. The conduct which is capable of contributing to the course of conduct
alleged, is the
demand that the complainant provide an explanation for her
behaviour, and the accused’s expectation that he was entitled to
explanation.
is not in dispute that the accused gifted the complainant an iPhone or that he
assisted her to activate the ‘Find My’
feature of the phone. I
accept that the complainant did not express a desire for an iPhone, and that she
felt overborne when the
accused insisted that she merge her phone service with
). I am not satisfied to the requisite standard that the
merging of mobile telephone accounts is an event which contributes to a course
of conduct. I accept that the accused gave the complainant access to his gym
(where they then shared a personal trainer), to his
Uber account and to an
American Express card on his account. He joined the complainant to his private
health insurance. I accept
that it pleased the accused to be able to provide the
complainant with these financial benefits.
accept the complainant’s evidence regarding the activation of the
‘Find My’ account on the iPhone gifted to her,
and of the pairing of
the accessories including headphones by the accused with her knowledge and
acquiescence. These matters are
not disputed. The complainant did not claim to
understand the technical operation of the location sharing capacity enabled by
‘Find My’ function. She understood that she could see where her
phone and Apple accessories were, and so could the accused.
complainant’s evidence that on 1 November she asked Mr Williams to assist
her to turn off location sharing because she
believed that the accused could use
it to locate her was corroborated by Mr Williams.
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that when the complainant left her
workplace without her iPhone in the company of Darien Williams
to go to a bar
and drink a beer (
), the accused reacted with escalating anger,
ultimately grabbing her arms and calling her a disgrace. Mr Williams confirmed
evidence that there was an occasion when he and the complainant had left
work (at about 4pm) and drank a beer. Mr Williams also recalled
complainant had told him that she was concerned that the accused could see where
she was, that he would question her, and
that this led to fights. Mr Williams
said that the complainant told her that the accused was jealous.
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the complainant turned the ‘Find
My’ function off on three or four occasions
and that when she did, she was
subjected by the accused to demands that she communicate her whereabouts. I am
satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that the accused used location sharing data to
hold the complainant accountable for her movements (
). I accept
that the complainant did not persist with disabling location sharing because of
the inevitability of the accused’s
displeasure.
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that accused demanded that the complainant
explain her early morning presence at the Novotel
in Canberra to him when he
observed an Uber ride from there to the complainant’s home because he
suspected or feared that she
had been unfaithful to him at the hotel (
am not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused monitored the
complainant’s location in order to locate her with
Ms Fiddy at the Den
hotel on or around 19 October 2023 (
). In response to a question
from Prosecution Counsel, Ms Fiddy said that she overheard the complainant tell
the accused where she
was when he called her at the Den. Ms Fiddy’s
evidence corroborates the accused’s with respect to the
complainant’s
inebriation on that night. Although I have reservations with
respect to the impartiality of Ms Fiddy, and I have generally preferred
complainant’s evidence when it is contradicted by the accused’s, I
cannot be satisfied to the requisite standard
that the complainant’s
evidence is reliable in relation to the events of 19 October 2023.
accept the complainant’s evidence that having agreed to jointly purchase a
house with the accused, she became worried about
the proposal for financing the
purchase. I accept beyond reasonable doubt that she told the accused that she
was very concerned by
the inequity in their contribution to the financing, to
holding the property as tenants in common, and to the accused’s failure
disclose the details of his financial position. I accept the complainant’s
evidence that she and the accused had a lot of
arguments about the financing
over an approximately four-week period. The complainant acknowledged that the
accused eventually agreed
to accommodate some of these concerns but articulated
her unresolved reservations. I accept beyond reasonable doubt the
complainant’s
evidence with regard to her communication to the accused of
her ongoing dissatisfaction with the proposed financing of the purchase.
accept beyond reasonable doubt that on (at least) two occasions the accused
became verbally aggressive in response to her resistance.
the first of those occasions during a lunch break at home, the complainant told
the accused that she had independent advice against
proceeding and that the
accused became “very, very angry” and refused to compromise. When
the accused dropped her back
at work she walked home and packed her bags,
intending to leave. The accused returned home early and saw the bags, he
demanded; “You’re
not going to leave me!” She did not leave.
The evidence of the complainant that at this time she told her colleague Darien
Williams that she did not want to sign the documents was corroborated by Mr
the second occasion, the complainant told the accused that she would not proceed
with the purchase and the accused became verbally
abusive. The complainant
offered to compensate him for half of the $50,000 deposit if they were to lose
it. In response to the accused’s
reaction to her decision, the complainant
turned off her phone, packed her bags again, and booked a hotel. The complainant
was confused
and distressed, and when the hotel had not received her booking and
the accused made contact and offered to collect her, she accepted,
returning to
accept beyond reasonable doubt this account and that shortly following these
events, exhausted by the demands of the accused, the
complainant signed the loan
application documentation (
Events 14 and 15
). I satisfied that she did so
despite her continuing belief that it exposed her to financial risk.
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that these events form a pattern of
conduct, coercive of the complainant’s will and controlling.
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that this pattern of conduct evidences a
continuity of purpose on the part of the accused
which was to secure control
over the complainant.
am not satisfied that events which occurred after 31 October 2023, and upon
which the Prosecution seek to rely as evidence of a
single course of conduct,
fall within the pattern of conduct to which I have referred. It is conceded by
the Defence that the evidence
establishes to the requisite standard that on
dates between 1 November 2023 and 29 November 2023 the accused:
and sent a letter to the complainant’s parents in which he expressed his
continuing love for their daughter, and in which
he asked that the fact of the
communication not be disclosed to the complainant.
the name of the complainant’s friend, Camilla Savage, on the internet,
located her telephone number on her Facebook
page, then sent a series of message
to her in which he expressed his continuing love for the complainant, and asked
that the fact
of the communication not be disclosed to her.
a heart emoji and a ‘like’ on the complainant’s Facebook
and messaged the complainant after she inadvertently called his phone.
poetry written by the complainant and gifted to him on his Facebook
events occur in a very different context to those which predate 31 October 2023.
I am not satisfied that they evidence a continuity
of purpose on the part of the
accused as required pursuant to
Family Violence Act
clarity, based on these findings of fact, I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
that the following ‘events’ relied
upon by the Prosecution comprise
the course of conduct pursued by the accused in Tasmania; Events 4, 5, 11, 2,
29, 30, 28, 10, 12,
26, 7, 14 and 15. I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
that particulars (c), (e), (f), (g) and (h) as alleged in Charge 1 are
The mental element
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused observed the impact of his
conduct upon the complainant. I am satisfied that
the complainant voiced her
resistance to the demands of the accused. I am satisfied that he saw her in
tears on the park bench when
he castigated her following dinner with the
Schwaigers, he saw her retreat in the face of his anger when he confronted her
leaving her workplace to drink a beer with her colleague, he saw her
pack her bags to leave him on two occasions following his verbal
abuse over the
financing of the house and return to him defeated.
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused knew or ought to have
known that the pursuit of the course of conduct which
I have found proven was
likely to have the effect of unreasonably controlling or intimidating the
complainant.
I am wrong in that regard, I am satisfied that when pursuing the course of
conduct which I have found proven, the accused knew
or ought to have known that
the likely effect of his conduct upon the complainant would include causing her
mental harm, apprehension,
made these findings with regard to the elements of the offence, I am satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that the charge pursuant
Violence Act 2004
Evidence of admissions and incriminating conduct
was the evidence of the accused that the statement made by him to the
complainant in a SMS message on 2 November 2023 was intended
to communicate to
the complainant that he accepted responsibility for his immature reaction to her
communication with Darien Williams
on 31 October and the escalation of events
which followed. It was not, he said, an admission of an assault. It was the
evidence of
the accused that his statement to Camilla Savage in an SMS message
on 15 November that he “fucked up like I never fucked up
was a concession that he took responsibility for precipitating the events of 31
October as he described them in his
evidence, with disastrous consequences for
the relationship. The accused said that he chose not to respond to Ms
Savage’s reference
to injury suffered by the complainant. He was aware
that he and the complainant had different versions of what had occurred on the
night, and he did not intend to engage with Ms Savage about that.
have made a finding that the accused cannot be relied upon to give an honest and
reliable account of events which are relevant to
the proof of the charges before
the court. Putting his evidence to one side and taking all of the evidence which
I do accept into
account, I am not satisfied that either of the two statements
or the silence of the accused amount to an unambiguous admission of
involvement in the offence charged.
accused admitted that in the aftermath of the events of 31 October he undertook
internet searches in the nature of those relied
upon as incriminating conduct by
the Prosecution. The accused explained the searches in this way; “I
to what I was accused of. I allowed myself to let it
become an immature engagement.” The accused was aware that the complainant
had told police that he was abusive and controlling, and that he had assaulted
her. He said, in effect, that he was willing to do
what it took to show a
commitment to the relationship. Setting the accused’s evidence aside, and
considering the whole of the
evidence, I cannot be satisfied that the only
reasonable explanation for the conduct is that the accused believed that he had
the complainant.
made these findings, the evidence is not available in proof of the elements of
am satisfied that the complainant is a witness of truth and that her evidence is
reliable. I reject the evidence of the accused
to the extent that it contradicts
her evidence. I do not accept the accused’s account of the incidents which
followed his observation
of the image of Darien Williams on the
complainant’s phone. I consider his account to be contrived and
implausible. It does
not accord with the evidence of
First element: The accused applied force to the
complainant’s body directly or indirectly
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that in the living room of the
accused’s home on the evening of 31 October 2023, the
accused applied
direct force to the complainant’s body in the manner described by her. I
am satisfied that the accused became
enraged and grabbed the complainant by the
arms very tightly and shook her repeatedly. I am satisfied that the complainant
and the accused released one arm and struck her repeatedly to the
chest area. I am satisfied that the accused pushed the complainant
unintended consequence that her head struck the mantelpiece. I am satisfied that
the complainant was unable to clearly recall
further detail of the incident save
that she stood and felt swelling and severe pain to her head. I am satisfied
that the complainant
made every effort to recall and recount the incident. I am
satisfied that the account given by the complainant is consistent with
injuries documented by Dr Taylor, and with the opinions expressed by Dr Parekh
as to their causation. The extent of injury to
the complainant which is
documented by Dr Taylor on 5 November 2023 is unexplained on the evidence.
Second Element: The application of force was intentional
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the complainant’s evidence
establishes that the application of force to the complainant’s
body by the
accused was intentional. The shaking of the complainant, the blows struck to her
chest area, and the push were intentional
Third Element: The application of force was not reasonably necessary for
the common intercourse of life
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt on the evidence of the complainant that the
circumstance in which force was intentionally applied
to her body by the accused
were in no way necessary for the common intercourse of life. They were acts done
Fourth Element; The application of force took place
without the consent of the complainant
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the complainant did not consent to the
application of force to her body by the accused.
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the charge of assault pursuant to
Police Offences Act 1935
Gunes v Pearson
89 A Crim R 297
v The Queen
(1975) 132 CLR
The Queen v Buckley
[2004] VSCA 185
[2004] 10 VR 215.
[2013] VSCA 259
[2013] 42 VR 616.
R v Baden-Clay
LNN v The State of
Western Australia
[2021] WASCA 39
DWG v Western
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (764 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter