URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCCA/2025/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lockwood v Tasmania [2025] TASCCA 6 (17 June 2025)
[2025] TASCCA 6
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (COURT OF CRIMINAL
Lockwood v Tasmania
[2025] TASCCA
: LOCKWOOD, Corey Adam
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Estcourt J, Jago J, Porter AJ
Criminal law – Appeal and new trial – Appeal against sentence
– Grounds for interference – Sentence manifestly
excessive or
inadequate – Plea of guilty to one count of persistent family violence
– Nineteen occasions of violence
including nine involving rapes –
Sentence of 17 years' imprisonment with a non-parole period of 10 years –
without substantial prior convictions – Disputed facts hearing
required – Some evidence of reform after offending –
Lengthy period
between charge and resolution not attributable to appellant but no undue delay
given complexity of facts and procedure
– Little to mitigate the criminal
conduct – Greater than minimum non-parole period a proper exercise of
discretion given
the gravity and duration of offending – Sentence imposed
not manifestly excessive – Appeal dismissed.
Aust Dig Criminal Law [3521]
Palmer v State of Tasmania
[2024] TASCCA 6
JWM v Tasmania
[2017] TASCCA 22
[2019] TASCCA 9
Groenewege v Tasmania
[2013] TASCCA
Connelly v Tasmania
[2015] TASCCA 15
REPRESENTATION
: L Mason SC, E
Solicitors:
The Cangelosi
Respondent:
Director of Public Prosecutions
[2025] TASCCA 6
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 6/2025
File No CCA 1095/2023
COREY ADAM LOCKWOOD v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
Appeal dismissed
File No CCA 1095/2023
COREY ADAM LOCKWOOD v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
17 June 2025
I have read the reasons for judgment of Jago J with which I agree. They
represent the reasons why I joined in the making of the
order on 11 October
File No CCA 1095/2023
COREY ADAM LOCKWOOD v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
17 June 2025
Introduction
This is an appeal against sentence. Following the hearing of oral submissions
on behalf of the appellant (the respondent was not
called upon), the Court
dismissed the appeal. These are my reasons for joining in that order.
The appellant pleaded guilty to the crime of persistent family violence. The
crimes related to the appellant's then wife. After
a disputed facts hearing,
Blow CJ made findings that the appellant had committed crimes that constituted
unlawful family violence
acts on a total of 19 occasions. On four of those
occasions, Blow CJ found the appellant committed two such crimes and therefore
sentenced him in respect to 23 crimes. Blow CJ found there were nine occasions
when the appellant raped his wife, one occasion when
he assaulted her and
attempted to rape her, three occasions when he assaulted her and unlawfully
injured property of hers, three
further occasions where he assaulted her and
three occasions when he unlawfully injured property belonging to her. On 26
April 2023,
the appellant was convicted and sentenced on the indictment to 17
years' imprisonment, backdated to 16 March 2023 to take into account
the appellant has spent in custody. A non-parole period of ten years was
The appellant contends that both the head sentence, and the non-parole period,
is manifestly excessive.
The sentencing judge also ordered that the appellant's name be placed on the
Community Protection (Offender Reporting) Act
register for a period
of 15 years and made a family violence order to operate until revocation. No
challenge is made as to the appropriateness
of either of those
The facts of the offending
The sentencing judge made findings of fact following a disputed facts hearing
and published his reasons on 5 April 2023. See
Tasmania v Lockwood
[2023] TASSC 5.
The following summary was outlined by the sentencing judge in his Comments on
Passing Sentence. There is no suggestion his summary
is not a fair and accurate
reflection of his findings. It is convenient and desirable that the summary be
set out in its entirety:
"The couple lived together from 2004 until
March 2017. There were some temporary separations during that period. They
were married
in 2006. The crimes in question were committed from about October
2004 onwards.
The rapes involved a variety of aggravating circumstances. Brief details of
them are as follows:
When the complainant was about seven months pregnant with her first child,
she was vomiting into a bucket beside the couple's bed
one night. Whilst she
was trying to vomit Mr Lockwood raped her vaginally from behind.
On another occasion, the couple were on holiday at a hotel. The complainant
was menstruating. Mr Lockwood raped her vaginally on
their bed at the hotel,
even though she was crying the whole time.
On another occasion one night at the couple's home, the complainant resisted
Mr Lockwood advances, but he ripped her clothes off and
raped her vaginally.
On an occasion shortly after the complainant had given birth, he raped her on
a mattress on their lounge room floor, even though the
complainant made it clear
that she was not consenting, telling him that she had just had a baby, that she
had stitches, and that
she was bleeding.
There was another occasion when Mr Lockwood raped his wife anally with the
result that she was in a lot of pain and could not sit
down for a week or
During a temporary separation in 2013 the complainant returned to the
matrimonial home to get some things. On that occasion Mr Lockwood
held her over
the side of a bed with her back bent and her head near the floor and raped her
On another occasion, the complainant had been to visit a sick friend who had
died in front of her. When she returned home, Mr Lockwood
pulled down her pants
and raped her on their bed.
In April 2017, a few weeks after the couple's final separation, Mr Lockwood
drove to the complainant's workplace, waited for her in
the car park there, and
raped her in his vehicle after she finished her shift.
Several months later, when the couple's children were spending a weekend with
Mr Lockwood, he went to the complainant's home, barged
in, and raped her.
As I have said, there was an occasion when Mr Lockwood assaulted his wife and
attempted to rape her. That was shortly before their
final separation. The
complainant was planning to sleep in their lounge room, but Mr Lockwood picked
her up, dropped her onto the
floor from a height, and then dragged her to his
bedroom where he tried to rape her. She resisted, struggling with him for about
half an hour. He was so drunk that he eventually passed out. On this occasion
one of the couple's children saw her father manhandling
her mother, and then
heard her mother in the bedroom calling out to her father to stop.
The crimes committed by Mr Lockwood on the remaining occasions can be
summarised as follows:
In about 2005 he smashed a window at the couple's home.
In 2007 when the complainant was pregnant, he assaulted her by throwing paint
at her, pushing her up against a wall, throwing her
onto a bed, sitting on her,
and holding her hands down.
On an occasion in 2008 Mr Lockwood committed the crime of unlawfully injuring
property by throwing a beer bottle through a window
at the couple's home,
smashing the window. The throwing of the bottle also constituted an assault
since he threw it towards his
wife in a threatening gesture.
There was another occasion when Mr Lockwood unlawfully injured property
jointly owned by him and the complainant by throwing a beer
bottle against a
There was another occasion when Mr Lockwood assaulted his wife by means of a
threatening gesture by throwing her mobile phone towards
her. That act also
constituted the crime of unlawfully injuring property as the phone smashed when
it landed on some concrete.
There was another occasion when Mr Lockwood assaulted the complainant by
grabbing another mobile phone from her hand and unlawfully
injuring property by
throwing the phone at a television set and punching the set a number of
There was another occasion when Mr Lockwood unlawfully injured a mobile phone
belonging to his wife by throwing it against a wall
in the presence of at least
one of their children.
There was another occasion when Mr Lockwood assaulted his wife by punching
the driver's side window of her vehicle when she was sitting
in the driver's
seat, in the presence of at least three of their children.
There was another occasion, apparently late in the couple's relationship,
when Mr Lockwood assaulted his wife by grabbing her by the
hair and dragging her
out of a doorway by her hair. The complainant's mother was within earshot and
heard a commotion on this occasion,
but did not see what happened.
The complainant gave evidence, which I accept, to the effect that these were
not isolated crimes. I am satisfied that Mr Lockwood
was in the habit of raping
his wife from late 2004 until the end of their relationship, that he raped her
anally on several occasions,
and that he smashed things and manhandled her on
other occasions. His uncharged unlawful acts do not weigh in favour of a
sentence. Uncharged criminal acts weigh against the imposition of a
lenient sentence, but there is not much scope for lenient treatment
is to be sentenced for nine rapes."
The appellant's personal circumstances
The appellant was aged 21 to 34 at the time of the offending. He was 40 years
of age at the time of sentencing. He had no substantial
prior convictions.
There were some dated driving offences and breaches of the
Road Safety
(Alcohol and Drugs) Act
, and a matter of burglary and stealing from
2001. As the learned sentencing judge correctly noted, however, "the
significance of
his lack of serious prior convictions is substantially negated
as a result of his persistent criminal conduct towards the complainant
years". The appellant's criminal conduct commenced when he was aged 21 and
continued until he was approximately 34. The
duration of the conduct which
continued persistently and largely unabated during this time, extinguished any
entitlement to leniency
that might otherwise be given to an offender who commits
isolated crime for the first time. The length over which the criminal conduct
endured, deprived the appellant of the opportunity to say the offending was an
aberration. A similar comment can be made in respect
to the appellant's age.
Whilst he may have been only 21 when the offending commenced, he was 32 by the
time the offending ceased.
At no point within that time frame, did the appellant
mature sufficiently or develop sufficient insight or understanding into the
wrongfulness of his conduct, to cease offending. The sentencing judge noted:
"Remorse is not a mitigating factor in this case. Mr
Lockwood's counsel told me
that he acknowledges that there were significant problems relating to
communication in the course of the
relationship. However, he does not accept
that anything he did amounted to rape". Moreover, the vast majority of the
appellant's
offending did not occur when he was a younger person. It is well
recognised that in cases of serious criminal conduct, as this was,
mitigation that arises from youth gives way to the need for general and specific
deterrence.
It was appropriate that the absence of relevant prior convictions, and the
appellant's age when the offending commenced, be given
minimal weight in the
sentencing exercise, given the persistent, extremely serious and escalating
conduct towards the complainant
over a period of some 14
Further matters in mitigation
Court was also told the following in mitigation:
The appellant
had a dysfunctional upbringing. His father maintained a relationship with two
different women, resulting in the appellant
having 11 siblings.
The appellant
had significant trauma in his life with three of his siblings having committed
suicide. His father died when he was
eight years of age.
excessive alcohol consumption attributed to difficulties in managing and
processing grief.
There were good
supports in his life from his mother, his new partner (against whom there was no
allegation of any acts of violence),
his sister and his employer.
At the time of
sentence, the appellant's sister had an inoperable brain tumour, and his mother
was suffering from breast cancer.
Imprisonment was, therefore, going to be
onerous for the appellant because he would be unable to provide support for his
they underwent treatment.
The relationship
with the complainant had been terminated and the appellant had consented to the
making of an indefinite family violence
order, thereby giving the complainant
long-term protection and comfort.
The appellant
had embarked upon a rehabilitative course. In particular, he had recognised
that previously he had experienced "issues
in communication" and was actively
addressing this in his new relationship. The new relationship was loving and
supportive. He
had addressed his alcohol consumption, which had been a
difficulty in his relationship with the complainant, and was now only consuming
alcohol occasionally and moderately. He had good employment. He was seen as
hard working and well regarded by his employer, as
evidenced by a letter of
support written by the employer. There had been no further offending since the
commission of the last act
of violence relevant to the persistent family
violence charge.
Sentencing principles relevant to
family violence
Family violence has long been recognised as a grave, insidious and all too
prevalent problem within the community. In sentencing
any such crime, general
deterrence, denunciation and the protection of the community are prominent
sentencing considerations. It
is also important that the sentence "vindicate
the dignity of each victim of violence, express the community's disapproval of
offending and afford such protection as can be afforded by the State to the
vulnerable against repetition of violence" (
Munda v Western Australia
[2013] HCA 38
(2013) 249 CLR 600).
Palmer v State of Tasmania
[2024] TASCCA 6
, Porter AJ said at
"39 This Court and other courts in Australia have made
clear statements about the general approach to physical violence in the domestic
context. In
Director of Public Prosecutions v Karklins
[2018] TASCCA 6
29 Tas R 373
at 92, Geason J (with whom Blow CJ and I agreed) said:
'Domestic violence is properly regarded as a most serious form of offending,
frequently hidden from view, and thus difficult to detect.
The court has a
symbolic function. Censure for domestic violence should be communicated through
the sentences which are imposed.
Community attitudes to it are changing...Strong
denunciation is called for, and general deterrence is a primary consideration.
crimes which are difficult to detect, the consequences of discovery must be
severe enough to counter the perception that their commission
is a risk worth
short time later, in
Gregson v Tasmania
[2018] TASCCA 14
[37], Martin AJ (Blow CJ and Geason J agreeing) said:
'Men like the
appellant who are minded to use physical violence against their female partners
must understand that the community is
greatly disturbed by this type of
unacceptable conduct. Such violence is prevalent and will be met with
significant terms of imprisonment.
General deterrence was also an important
factor in sentencing."
... Women in domestic circumstances are particularly vulnerable to the abuse
of power and breach of trust by violent male partners
... Women who become
victims in these circumstances, and other potential victims throughout the
community, are entitled to such protection
as the law is able to provide through
the imposition of sentences that will act as both a personal and a general
deterrent.'"
Similar sentiments were expressed in
Gregson v Tasmania
[2018] TASCCA 14
at par 30 and par 37 when Martin AJ noted:
"30 Men like the
appellant who are minded to use physical violence against their female partners
must understand that the community
is greatly disturbed by this type of
unacceptable conduct. Such violence is prevalent and will be met with
significant terms of
imprisonment. General deterrence was also an important
factor in sentencing.
appellant is not to be punished again for his prior criminal conduct, but he is
not entitled to any leniency. He has a history
of violence towards women and,
as I have said, the community is greatly disturbed by the prevalence of this
in domestic circumstances are particularly vulnerable to
the abuse of power and breach of trust by violent male partners: Director
Public Prosecutions v Karklins
[2018] TASCCA 6
per Geason J, at [54]–[60].
Women who become victims in these circumstances, and other potential victims
throughout the community,
are entitled to such protection as the law is able to
provide through the imposition of sentences that will act as both a personal
a general deterrent."
Such remarks are consistent with the approach being taken to sentencing family
violence matters across the country. Nationwide,
courts are recognising the
very strong need to condemn family violence and to sentence in a manner that
ensures violence within domestic
settings is adequately punished, and that the
sentences which are delivered have a strong element of both personal and general
deterrence.
Community expectation is that the Court will do what it can in
sentencing, to provide protection to vulnerable complainants. It is
for the sentences imposed to make it very clear that courts, and the community
at large, are exasperated by the continuing
endemic of family violence, and
those who perpetrate it will be met with a strong sentencing response.
In determining a sentence for the crime of persistent family violence, it is,
of course, necessary to consider, amongst other relevant
matters, the number and
nature of each unlawful family violence act, the duration of the course of
unlawful conduct and the nature
of the relationship generally, including the
extent to which there was coercive control, the extent to which there was
humiliating
and degrading behaviour, and the extent to which there was exposure
of children of the relationship to the violence or a real risk
exposure might occur. It is well recognised that the exposure of children to
family violence can have significant, often
life-long, deleterious effects.
Bearing these factors in mind, I note the sentencing judge was satisfied as to
the following after the disputed facts hearing:
"80 The police
interview and the evidence presented at the trial included a lot of evidence
and the accused. That evidence is
relevant and important because it places the evidence as to disputed allegations
in context. There
is a substantial body of evidence from the complainant to the
effect that the accused routinely and repeatedly raped her from 2004
end of their relationship, sometimes every day or every second day, and
sometimes more than once in a day. The complainant
gave accounts of manipulative
and controlling behaviour on the part of the accused. She described him
requiring her to wear sexy
clothes, inappropriately touching her in public and
in front of their children, ignoring her complaints about sexual demands or
violence, criticising her clothing, hiding underwear, and taking naked
photos of her without her permission. She said she would lock
herself in the
bathroom, but that he would unlock the bathroom door with a knife. She said that
he would become violent and angry
if she refused his sexual advances.
was nothing about the complainant's demeanour or the way she answered questions
during the police interview or the disputed
facts hearing to suggest that any of
her assertions were dishonest, inaccurate or unreliable. I am satisfied that for
some 14 years
the complainant was in a relationship with the accused that was
characterised by intimidation, controlling behaviour, and persistent
sexual advances. Having regard to the length of the relationship and the delay
before reporting matters to the police,
I do not think that the complainant's
accounts of specific incidents were lacking in detail to such an extent as to
suggest unreliability.
Indeed, her accounts in relation to the rape when she was
seven months pregnant and vomiting, and the rape when she had just come
from hospital after giving birth to her second child, for example, were very
detailed. Having regard to the evidence of intimidation
and controlling
behaviour, I do not accept that the complainant's delays in reporting matters
are indicative of unreliability."
The appellant's conduct then extended to humiliating, degrading and
manipulative acts. It was persistent and extended over many
years. The behaviour
had a grave impact on the complainant. The sentencing judge noted: "...she still
suffers continually from disturbing
psychological symptoms, including
nightmares, panic attacks, intrusive recollections, social withdrawal, feelings
of vulnerability,
hypervigilance and anxiety". The appellant's criminality
involved a significant breach of trust. That, by itself, was a matter which
called for significant weight to be placed upon general deterrence. There was
little to mitigate such a protracted and damaging course
of criminal conduct.
It is also noteworthy that during the disputed facts hearing, the statutory
declarations of three of the appellant and complainant's
children were tendered
by consent. Those statutory declarations established that the children
witnessed the appellant being violent,
controlling and degrading towards the
complainant on several occasions.
The considerations observed when sentencing for the crime of persistent sexual
abuse of a child, contrary to s 125A of the
Criminal Code
apposite when sentencing for a crime contrary to s 170A of the
JWM v Tasmania
[2017] TASCCA 22
, Pearce J said at
"5 It is not necessary that the prosecution proves the
dates on which any of the unlawful sexual acts were committed, or the exact
circumstances in which any of the unlawful sexual acts were committed: s
125A(4). It is often the case that, for this crime, it is
difficult to give
particulars of each and every sexual act during a period of prolonged offending.
The Crown refers to the specific
sexual acts it is able to identify, but an
offender may be sentenced on the basis that each specific act is part of a
course of conduct
involving other, sometimes many other, unspecified acts.
an offender is sentenced for the crime, he or she should suffer the same penalty
as would have been imposed if the individual
sexual acts constituting the crime
had been charged as separate crimes:
[2005] TASSC 14
per Evans J at [38];
Director of Public Prosecutions v B
19 Tas R 14
per Crawford CJ at [23]-[24];
[2012] TASCCA
21 Tas R 442
Director of Public Prosecutions v STU
21 Tas R 322.
When sentencing for multiple crimes, totality requires
that a single or aggregate sentence be a just and appropriate measure of the
total criminality involved:
Postiglione v The Queen
[1997] HCA 26
(1997) 189 CLR 295
at 307–308;
Director of Public Prosecutions v Farmer
13 Tas R 418
Rae v State of Tasmania
[2010] TASCCA 8
Hall v Tasmania
[2015] TASCCA 6."
Here, the appellant was being sentenced for 23 unlawful family violence acts,
including nine rapes, one attempted rape, seven assaults
and six occasions of
injuring property. Moreover, the learned sentencing judge accepted that these
were not isolated crimes. He
commented: "I am satisfied that Mr Lockwood was in
the habit of raping his wife from late 2004 until the end of their relationship.
That he raped her anally on several occasions and that he smashed things and
manhandled her on other occasions. His uncharged unlawful
acts do not weigh in
favour of a heavier sentence. Uncharged criminal acts weigh against the
imposition of a lenient sentence, but
there is not much scope for lenient
treatment when a man is to be sentenced for nine rapes."
It is trite to say that rape is an inherently serious crime. It involves not
only the infliction of physical violence but necessitates
the emotional and
psychological degradation of victims.
The appellant's commission of the rapes alone, without consideration of the
additional acts of family violence, necessitated a substantial
imprisonment. When placed into the context of the other unlawful family violence
acts, and the persistent nature of the
sexual, physical and emotional abuse
generally, it is patently clear that a weighty sentence was required.
The appellant's submissions
The primary submissions made on the appellant's behalf was that the Court
failed to give adequate weight to delay and failed to
give adequate weight to
the appellant's reform in the time between the offending ceasing and sentencing.
In an appeal against sentence
asserting manifest excess, it cannot be said that
a sentencing court failed to give sufficient weight to any relevant factor or
unless the sentence is manifestly excessive taking into account all
matters relevant to sentence:
Mulholland v Tasmania
[2017] TASCCA 2
. The appellant's grounds of appeal contended that the sentence was
manifestly excessive, both as to the head sentence and the non-parole
but during oral submissions, counsel for the appellant largely confined her
submissions to the length of the non-parole period,
and all but conceded an
argument that the head sentence was manifestly excessive was not sustainable.
The following exchange occurred:
"PORTER, AJ Well, if you start to
do the simple mathematics on the identified occasions, take into account
background of offending
which extends beyond the type of conduct particularised
in the occasions and extends to emotional intimidation which is also a family
violence matter...the arithmetic ends up being quite large, even taking into
account proportionality, totality, crushing sentence,
and just do the simple
maths, it puts the 17 years into perspective, doesn't it?
MS BAUMELER: Well, it does, and that's why I'm saying
that in terms of the
actual head sentence, it is difficult to argue that that is manifestly
but in terms of the other factors that need to be considered, the
non-parole period, in my submission, half non-parole period in
circumstances where there's been rehabilitation isn't unrealistic." (emphasis
In my view, in terms of both the head sentence and the non-parole period, the
factors identified in the appellant's submissions
were not of a nature that they
ought to have attracted any significant weight in the sentencing exercise.
Delay between the commission of an offence and final disposition of a case is
not mitigating, per se, but it may work in favour
of an accused if certain
factors are at play. Delay as a mitigating factor focuses on two significant
contentions. The first relates
to the anxiety and stress of the offender who
waits for a considerable period of time before the determination of the charges,
the second relates to circumstances where the offender has demonstrated
rehabilitation during the period of delay, or at least what
has occurred during
that period suggests favourable prospects of rehabilitation.
It is important to remember, however, that the delay must be unnecessary. That
is to say unnecessary in the sense that the resolution
of the matter has taken
more time than would usually be the situation given the nature of the matter.
Davidson v Tasmania
[2019] TASCCA 9
, Wood J at par 4 noted:
"4 It is clear that it may be appropriate, depending on the
circumstances, for undue or lengthy delay to be taken into account as
mitigating factor:
[2003] TASSC 55
[1982] 2 NSWLR 517
at 519-520;
R v Schwabegger
[1998] 4 VR 649
Williams v Tasmania
[2014] TASCCA 2
Director of
Public Prosecutions v Allen
[2017] TASCCA 24
27 Tas R 260
However, a delay of three years and three months is not unusual for this type of
case. The time taken is explicable given the
nature of the crimes and the
investigation, voluminous material, and listing considerations such as the
expected duration of the
trial and priority given to the appellant's other case.
In comparing the appellant's experience with the experience of other people
have had their cases heard in the Supreme Court, there may be various
differentiating factors influencing the listing of trials.
For example,
priority is generally given to the trials of accused who are not on bail but
held in custody on remand."
The appellant complains that it is the period from being charged to being
sentenced that constitutes the unreasonable delay which
was relevant to
sentencing. The starting point is a consideration of whether there was, in
fact, a delay in this matter. In my
view, there was not. The persistent family
violence was committed between 2004 and 2018. The appellant and complainant
on 11 March 2017. The complainant spoke to police about the
appellant's conduct in March 2014 and made a statutory declaration,
but did not,
at that point, raise any allegations of sexual violence. She spoke to police
again some three years after the final
separation. Throughout 2020, an
investigation occurred which involved speaking to a number of witnesses,
including the appellant
and complainant's children. The appellant was charged
on complaint on 26 June 2020. He pleaded not guilty to the complaint and was
committed to the Supreme Court on 3 September 2020. An indictment was filed on
6 December 2021. The appellant entered a plea of
guilty to the crime of
persistent family violence on 27 April 2022, but indicated there was a dispute
as to the facts. The disputed
facts hearing commenced on 15 December 2022 and
continued on 27 and 28 February 2023. The sentencing judge published findings
5 April 2023. The appellant was sentenced on 26 April 2023. Given the
nature of this matter, which necessitated complex facts being
drafted, including
the particularisation of the specific unlawful family violence acts relied upon
and the fact it required a disputed
facts hearing which took three days to hear,
and involved a considerable body of evidence to be analysed, in my assessment,
not be said that there was undue delay associated with the prosecution
of the matter, or the matter proceeding through Court.
In any event, the appellant was, quite generously in my assessment, given the
sentencing judge's findings as to the extent of the
appellant's intimidation and
violence, and his absence of insight and lack of remorse, given the benefit of
the asserted rehabilitation
that occurred between the cessation of the offending
and the date of sentencing. The learned sentencing judge
"There are some positive things that can be said about Mr
Lockwood. He is now 40 years old. He does not have any serious prior
convictions...
His counsel told me that he no longer drinks to excess, and now drinks only
socially and occasionally.
He has good employment record. Until I remanded him in custody, he was
employed as a machinery operator. He had held that job for
over two years and
was highly regarded by his employer.
He has a new partner. They have been together for four and a half years. It
is very clear that he does not treat her in the way
that he treated the
complainant. His new partner has a child who is part of their household."
The sentencing judge took into account, in the appellant's favour, the positive
changes he had made in the preceding four years,
including curbing his alcohol
consumption, which had been a difficulty in his relationship with the
complainant, improving his communication
skills which meant his new relationship
was not characterised by violence, and his employment. There was no other aspect
of the issue
of delay that had any relevance to the sentencing exercise.
Overall, there was very little that mitigated the appellant's criminal conduct.
Some benefit could be given for the plea of guilty,
although any discount for
the plea of guilty was substantially ameliorated by the need for the disputed
facts hearing. The learned
sentencing judge took this into account when he
"It was necessary for the complainant to give evidence because
Mr Lockwood disputed most of the allegations against him, including
allegations of rape and attempted rape. That is not a factor that weighs in
favour of a heavier sentence, but it reduces
the weight to be given to his plea
of guilty. However, it does count in his favour that his plea of guilty avoided
the cost and
inconvenience of a jury trial. It also counts in his favour that
the admitted several allegations relating to conduct witnessed
by some of his
children, thereby making it unnecessary for any of them to give evidence. But
for his concessions, three of them
probably would have had to give
I detect no error in the approach the sentencing judge took to either the issue
of delay or the rehabilitative endeavours the appellant
had undertaken since the
offending ceased.
Was the sentence manifestly excessive
The principles applicable to sentencing appeals, where the sole ground is an
allegation that the sentence was manifestly excessive
in all the circumstances,
are well settled. In
Director of Public Prosecutions (Acting) v Pearce
[2015] TASCCA 1
, Pearce J, with whom Blow CJ and Porter AJ agreed,
summarised the principles relevant to appeals such as this at [8]-[9] as
"[8] As in all such appeals as this, it is necessary to
refer to the principles which limit the circumstances in which intervention
an appellate court is justified. The court sits to correct material error:
Dinsdale v The Queen
[2000] HCA 54
(2000) 202 CLR 321
per Kirby J at
[57]-[60]. Where no specific error is alleged, this Court must be persuaded of
error of the second type referred to
House v The King
[1936] JCA 40;
(1936) 55 CLR 499
at 505, that is, that the sentence imposed by the sentencing
judge is 'unreasonable or plainly unjust'. It is not to the point that
sentence may be regarded by some as too lenient or too harsh. It must be
established that the sentencing order is so manifestly
wrong that it could only
be the result of some undefinable error in the exercise of the judicial
discretion:
Bresnehan v The Queen
[1992] TASSC 55
(1992) 1 Tas R 234
242. A court of criminal appeal may not substitute its own opinion for that of
the sentencing judge merely because the appellate
court would have exercised its
discretion in a manner different from the manner in which the sentencing judge
exercised his or her
discretion: see
Lowndes v The Queen
[1999] HCA 29
(1999) 195 CLR 665
, and the other cases referred to by this Court
Director of Public Prosecutions v CSS
[2013] TASCCA 10
judges should be 'accorded a wide measure of latitude':
Postiglione v The
[1997] HCA 26
(1997) 189 CLR 295
per Kirby J at 336. Excess or
inadequacy is either apparent or it is not:
Dinsdale v The Queen
at [6]. In considering that question regard is to be given to all the matters
that are relevant to determining the sentence:
Hili v The Queen
(2010) 242 CLR 520
[9] It is opportune to refer again to the oft quoted passage from the joint
decision of Mason CJ, Brennan, Dawson and Toohey JJ in
Veen v The Queen
[1998] HCA 14
; (1988) 164 CLR 465 at 476:
'However, sentencing is not a purely logical exercise, and the troublesome
nature of the sentencing discretion arises in large measure
from unavoidable
difficulty in giving weight to each of the purposes of punishment. The purposes
of criminal punishment are various:
protection of society, deterrence of the
offender and of others who might be tempted to offend, retribution and reform.
The purposes
overlap and none of them can be considered in isolation from the
others when determining what an appropriate sentence is in a particular
They are guideposts to the appropriate sentence but sometimes they point in
different directions.'"
For the appellant to succeed it has to be shown that the sentencing discretion
miscarried. It must be remembered that the sentencing
judge's discretion is to
be exercised within wide parameters taking into account the gravity of the
criminal conduct, the circumstances
of the offending and the circumstances of
the individual offender (see
Brennan v Tasmania
[2022] TASCCA 7).
As has been noted in sentencing a crime of this nature, it is apparent that the
appellant should be subject to the same penalty
as would have been imposed if
the individual acts of family violence constituting the crime had been charged
as separate crimes,
with the sentence appropriately moderated to accommodate
principles of totality and proportionality. If one was to embark upon a
mathematical exercise, it is trite to say that each individual occasion of rape
would have attracted a significant term of
imprisonment, as and by itself. When
one "adds in" the additional unlawful family violence acts, and places all the
unlawful acts
into the context of them not being isolated, but rather part of a
continuing course of conduct, which extended to not only many acts
of physical
violence, but also emotional intimidation and manipulation, it is blatantly
obvious, in my view, that the sentence imposed
was not manifestly excessive.
The sentencing judge was correct to describe the matter as:
case is an extremely bad example of family violence. Although the physical
injuries were minimal, the impact on the complainant
has been devastating. The
impact on the couples' children must not be overlooked. Their father was a
terrible role model for them,
and now they will have to come to terms with his
imprisonment. There is every indication that Mr Lockwood is not the person that
he was when he sexually and emotionally abused his wife over many years, but I
need to impose a sentence that should deter others
from the sort of conduct that
he engaged in, and one that reflects the extreme seriousness of his crimes".
In my assessment, the head sentence was a just and proportionate response to
the seriousness of the conduct and the level of criminality
The non-parole period
The appellant also submits that the non-parole period of ten years is excessive
and renders the sentence manifestly excessive.
In a case where the head
sentence is not manifestly excessive, and the non-parole period is under
scrutiny, the correct approach
is as set out in
Groenewege v Tasmania
[2013] TASCCA 7
"56 I turn to the order in
relation to parole eligibility. The question is whether the period for which an
appellant is not eligible
for parole makes the sentence manifestly excessive;
"sentence" in this context, being used in a broader sense. Under the
Sentencing Act
, there is no parole eligibility unless it ordered
that the offender is not eligible for parole before the expiration of a
period. That period must be not less than one half of the head
sentence. A non-parole period should be the minimum period that
the sentencing
judge determines that justice requires the prisoner must serve in prison, having
regard to all the circumstances.
The fixing of a parole eligibility period
gives a sentencing judge the opportunity, when appropriate, to mitigate a
penalty of imprisonment
in favour of the rehabilitation of a prisoner through
conditional freedom once the prisoner has served the minimum period the judge
determines:
[1974] HCA 26
(1974) 131 CLR 623
[2002] TASSC 60
11 Tas R 362
Richman v Tasmania
[2011] TASCCA 18
whether a non-parole period is appropriate has to be assessed not only on the
basis of the whole of the circumstances of
the case, but in the light of the
length of the head sentence. There are several recent instances in which this
Court has taken
the view that although the particular head sentence was not
shown to be manifestly excessive, the non-parole period made the sentence
manifestly excessive one. In
Johnstone v Tasmania
[2011] TASCCA 9
non-parole period was set at 2½ years (a little over 70%) of a 3½ year
term. The court concluded that having regard
to mitigating circumstances,
particularly the appellant's age, his general good character and lack of prior
convictions, and attitude
to offending after it was detected, the minimum period
required to be served was out of proportion to moral culpability. The sentence
was varied by a reduction of the non-parole period to 21 months."
Therefore, to demonstrate undefinable error of this kind, the appellant must
show that the sentence, as a whole, was unreasonable
or plainly unjust by
reference to all matters that were relevant to fixing the sentence and fixing
the non-parole period. Whether
the non-parole period is appropriate, must be
assessed not only on the basis of the whole of the circumstances of the case,
the light of the head sentence.
It must be remembered that in setting the non-parole period, the sentencing
judge's discretion is not fettered. In
Connelly v Tasmania
[2015] TASCCA
, Wood J at [14] said:
"14 It can be seen that the court's
discretion is not fettered. The factors set out in the sub-paragraphs may be
taken into account,
but the section allows the court to have regard to other
'such matters as it considers necessary or appropriate'. The section is
non-prescriptive in allowing the sentencing court to allocate its own weighting
to the matters in (a), (b) or (c), or indeed,
any other matters. In any
particular case there may be factors that weigh for or against parole, and the
court is entrusted with
a wide discretion in balancing these considerations and
determining the appropriate outcome. The role of sentencing aims such as
rehabilitation and deterrence also bear on the exercise of discretion. Again,
such matters are left to the court's discretion.
The provision allows for cases
where the court may, because of the particular circumstances, not allow any
opportunity to apply for
Whilst a consideration relevant to the setting of a non-parole period is the
offender's prospects of rehabilitation, circumstances
of significant gravity
justify the imposition of lengthier non-parole periods. This is particularly so
when the crime justifies
the giving of prominence to denunciation and
retribution, in that it re-asserts societal values and gives proper weight to
done to victims (
Director of Public Prosecutions v NOP
per Evans J at [41], cited in
Connelly v Tasmania
(above), Wood
J at [23]-[24]).
In sentencing this crime and setting the non-parole period, the sentencing
judge was entitled to, and given the gravity of the criminal
conduct, was
required to, in my view, give prominence to the need for general deterrence and
denunciation, and acknowledgment of
the grave harm caused from the appalling
acts of family violence.
The overarching guiding principle in exercising the discretion to fix a
non-parole period, is that the non-parole period should
be "the minimum time
that a judge determines justice requires that he must serve having regard to all
the circumstances of his offence"
Power v The Queen
(1974) HCA 26
The non-parole period ought to reflect the minimum period required to
achieve the sentencing goals of prevention, punishment and
deterrence.
In setting the non-parole period in this matter, the sentencing judge was
clearly minded to those considerations. He said:
"Because Mr
Lockwood has not been to prison before, and because of the positive factors that
I have mentioned, I will make provision
for parole, but I will fix a non-parole
period that is longer than the shortest possible period. It will be the period
that, because
of the seriousness of his crimes, I consider to be the minimum
period that he should spend in custody."
It is evident from those comments that it was the gravity of the crimes which,
in the view of the sentencing judge, warranted the
outcome that the appellant
should serve a period of no less than ten years in prison. It was within the
proper exercise of the sentencing
discretion to set a non-parole period in
excess of the minimum, given the gravity and duration of the offending. In my
learned sentencing judge did not err in fixing the non-parole period
at ten years. The non-parole period did not render the sentence
excessive having regard to the whole of the circumstances.
For these reasons, I was not satisfied that the sentence of imprisonment
imposed was manifestly excessive, and I therefore joined
in on the order,
dismissing the appeal.
File No CCA 1095/2023
COREY ADAM LOCKWOOD v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
16 June 2025
I agree with the reasons for judgment of Jago J. They embody the reasons why I
joined in making the order dismissing the appeal.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (188 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter