URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASWRCT/2021/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:23:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
E. v Qube Ports No 1 [2021] TASWRCT 27 (23 July 2021)
[2021] TASWRCT 27
WORKERS REHABILITATION AND COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
E. v Qube Ports No 1
[2021] TASWRCT 27
QUBE PORTS NO. 1
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
20 July 2021
DELIVERED ON:
23 July 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Chief Commissioner Clues
CATCHWORDS:
Proceedings to obtain compensation – application for
an order to make discovery – relevance – extent of order.
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Regulations (Tas)
Glenorchy District Football Club Inc. v C.
[2019] TASWRCT 29
DETERMINATION:
That within 14 days the employer is to:
(a) make discovery under r6(1)(a) of:
(i) any first aid and incident reports made by the worker in
the course of his employment at the employer since 1 January 2011;
first aid records and incident reports made by workers employed by the employer
as stevedores for: neck, mid and lower back
and hand injuries, since 1 January
(b) disclose the location of those documents to the
worker’s solicitors under r6(1)(c).
REPRESENTATION:
M. Valentine
Solicitors:
McLean McKenzie &
Wallace Wilkinson & Webster
[2021] TASWRCT 27
Chief Commissioner Clues
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. On 29 May 2020, the worker filed with the Tribunal a s42
referral (W/2020/583) seeking workers compensation benefits for injuries
described in the referral as follows:
injury in 2007 and gradual spinal injuries evident from about 2014 and resulting
in cessation of duties in August
2018 and termination of employment on or about
14 April 2020, further particulars to be provided following
discovery.”
2. As part of the s42 referral the worker made an application
to the Tribunal for orders in the following terms:
“That the employer,
pursuant to the Regulations, make discovery of:
first aid and incident reports made by
[the worker]
in the course of his
employment at
[the employer]
since 1 January 2011.
first aid records and incident reports made by workers employed by
as stevedores for: neck, mid and lower back and hand injuries,
since 1 January 2011.”
3. The employer consents to the first order being made but
opposes the second order. This decision concerns whether the Tribunal
make the second order.
4. At all material times the worker was employed by the
employer as a stevedore. That employment was terminated on or about 14 April
2020 apparently because the employer had no suitable duties for the worker to
5. Attached to the worker’s s42 referral are three claims for
workers compensation made by the worker. The first claim is dated
27 November
2015. In that claim, the worker states “Approximately March 2014 I
experienced some back discomfort. As the discomfort
did not dissipate I sort
[sic] medical assistance from Dr J Lavers.” The worker claims he suffered
“severe pain cervical
and lumbar spine and feet weakness and tremour [sic]
both arms”.
6. The initial workers compensation medical certificate for
the first claim dated 26 November 2015 provides a diagnosis of:
and degeneration cervical spine lumbar spine confirmed on MRI and CT
7. Dr Lavers records that the worker’s disease, symptoms
of which became evident on 1 June 2014 was consistent with the workers
cause of “heavy lifting 44 gallon drums using vibrating
machinery”.
8. The second claim is dated 1 March 2016. In that claim
the worker states that he suffered “symptoms of pain in arms and hands,
increased over period time during this period I sort [sic] medical assistance
from Dr Lavers”. The worker describes his injuries
as “Tendonitis
of wrist. Mild carpal tunnel syndrome”.
9. The initial workers
compensation medical certificate for the second claim dated 22 February 2016
provides a diagnosis of “bilateral
tendonitis wrist and forearm flexor
muscles and carpal tunnel syndrome”. Dr Lavers records that the
worker’s disease
is consistent with the worker’s stated cause of
“chronic heavy lifting and repetitive movement arms, climbing in and
of holds”. Dr Lavers further states in that certificate:
has bilateral mild carpal tunnel syndrome diagnosed on nerev
conduction studies few months ago. He saw specialists Mr Thomson who has stated
injuries both arms due to his wprk
as a stevedor
10. The third claim is dated 24 September 2018. In that claim
the worker states that on 15 August 2018 “near completion of
shift I lost
partial use of my left hand, wrist and arm”.
11. The medical
certificate provided in support of the third claim is a “continuing”
certificate dated 21 September 2018.
Dr Lavers provides a diagnosis of
“tendonitis both arms”.
12. Liability for all three claims for
workers compensation was disputed by the employer pursuant to s81A of the
Workers Rehabilitation
and Compensation Act 1988 (the Act) and with respect to
each claim, the Tribunal determined that a reasonably arguable case existed
ordered that no workers compensation benefits be paid pursuant to s81A(3)(c) and
(d) of the Act.
13. By filing the s42 referral, the worker seeks a
determination from the Tribunal as to whether his alleged incapacity for work
from any of the alleged injuries to his cervical/lumbar spine, arms and
hands that his claims he suffered as a result of his employment
employer and which are the subject of his three claims for workers compensation
referred to above.
The Worker’s Submissions
14. With respect to the application for discovery counsel for
the worker referred to the following three medical reports:
(a) report of Dr Ernst dated 21 September
(b) report of Dr Ernst dated 9 June 2021;
(c) report of Dr Tschirn
dated 10 March 2021.
15. Dr Ernst is an occupational and musculoskeletal medicine
physician. Dr Tschirn is a consultant occupational physician.
16. Dr Ernst
assessed the worker at the request of his solicitors on 1 and 16 September 2020
via telehealth.
17. In relation to the worker’s claims for workers
compensation that are the subject of this s42 referral, Dr Ernst took a history
that the worker “noticed gradual onset of low back pain, neck pain, loss
of bilateral grip strength, and numbness and tingling
over the tips of his
Ernst noted
worker continued to suffer with the following ongoing symptoms and
complaints:
• neck aches and stiffness;
• bilateral hand
• mid and lower back pain;
• inability to open his
• spasm in his left hand.
19. The worker has been off work from 15 August 2018 due to
these ongoing symptoms.
20. Dr Ernst records that the worker has undergone
four multilevel cervical spine fusions and suffers ongoing neuropathic
His prognosis for the worker is that he will not recover and will have long term
restrictions due to permanent impairment, disability
and fluctuating
21. According to Dr Ernst the
worker has “suffered from the effects of Type A, Type B and Type C
damaging energy exchanges.
A Type A damaging energy exchange is of high
concentration, usually just one exposure. A Type B damaging energy exchange is
recommended exposure levels but generally not enough to cause instant
injury effects. A Type C damaging energy exchange is the result
of cumulative
low dose exposures over many
Ernst postulates that the worker “has suffered from many jolts to his neck
with or without symptoms” further “that
the condition is the result
of multiple repetitive and cumulative exposures for many
Ernst concludes that “on balance, [the worker’s] neck condition is
the result of occupational exposures, particularly
driving mobile plant under
circumstances as described by
Ernst accepts that he has not conducted an ergonomic assessment of the
worker’s workplace and he that he has relied upon
the descriptions
provided to him by the worker.
25. The worker’s request for discovery
that is the subject of this application has its genesis in the following
passages from
“I specifically asked
[the worker]
whether he could recall neck or spinal injuries of other employees. He
provided multiple examples in the above email to me. These
examples are purely
by recollection and would reflect only serious injury outcomes. Based on common
logic, common sense and my own
experience as an accident epidemiologist, it
would be highly likely that there would be many more accident and incident
reports where
people experienced pain from a jolt, which did not lead to any
long term symptoms but recovery, consistent with the above mentioned
and C damaging energy exchange concepts.
If the crunch came up with regards to defining the truth in
case, a genuine record of the organisation’s reported
accidents and incidents including first aid records since the year 2000
provide the ultimate insight, provided there was no prevailing
‘non-reporting culture’ due to coercive lost time
injury frequency
based incentive schemes.”
26. Counsel for the worker also referred to Dr Tschirn’s
report dated 10 March 2021.
27. The worker was reassessed on 19 February 2021
by Dr Tschirn at the request of the solicitors for the employer.
report, Dr Tschirn refers to Dr Ernst’s suggestion that a genuine record
of the employer’s reported accidents
and injuries including first aid
reports since the year 2000 would provide the ‘ultimate insight’
with respect to causation.
In relation to this suggestion Dr Tschirn
point about being able to assess the various potential workplace exposures is
well made but probably
impractical.”
29. Dr Tschirn agrees that external trauma may hasten the onset
or progression of degenerative changes in the spine. He accepts that
in this case is whether the worker’s employment as a stevedore at the
employer in 2014 has either caused or affected
the course of the disease. Dr
Tschirn rejects the worker’s employment as being causative because
“there is no evidence
for it causing the disease to
Tschirn refers to the “exposure information provided in a submission by
[the worker] provided to Dr Ernst”. He
notes that it “contrasts
with that provided by Mr Aitchison in his signed submission dated 20 May
assume Mr Aitchison is a representative from the employer).
31. Dr Tschirn
correctly asserts that:
“At issue in this case
is whether some aspect of employment has brought
the conditions
subsequently discovered or whether tolerance for activities has gradually
reduced because of the presence of those
conditions and in this case,
particularly the multilevel advanced cervical spine disease. In the absence of
clear injurious mechanism
as discussed above, I have favoured the latter as the
explanation for the onset of difficulties at work reported by
32. Dr Ernst disagrees with Dr Tschirn’s opinion that the
worker’s condition was not caused by his employment. He confirms
history of cervicogenic injury exposures at work is a significant factor in
establishing causation in this case. He says
that the worker “provided an
exposure history to me which revealed definite cervical spine injury
potential”.
33. Counsel for the worker referred to the decision of Glenorchy District
Football Club Inc. v C.
[2019] TASWRCT 29.
Chief Commissioner Webster
(as he then was) noted:
“Regulation 6(1)(a)
permits a party to request discovery of documents relevant to the issues in
dispute in any application or
referral. To be relevant the document must relate
in some way to the matter in dispute and it has been held in Donaldson v Harris
(1973) 4 SASR 299
at 304 that relevance will be established if the document
sheds any light on the case or if it would lead to a train of enquiry which
would either advance a party’s own case or damage that of his adversary:
Mulley v Manifold
[1959] HCA 23
(1959) 103 CLR 341
34. Counsel for the worker submitted that based on the above
there is no doubt about the relevance of the documents referred to in
order sought by the worker. He noted that the employer has sent those documents
to the solicitors acting for the worker
and no explanation has been given as to
why the request to provide those documents to the worker’s solicitor would
be oppressive.
The Employer’s Submissions
35. The employer submitted that the first aid records and
incident reports requested by the worker were not required for the benefit
Ernst and Dr Tschirn. It was clear that Dr Ernst had already formed the view
that the worker’s employment was causative
of his current condition and
incapacity for work. Therefore, Dr Ernst does not require additional documents
to assist him in the
formation of that view.
36. Counsel for the employer
submits that proceedings in the Tribunal shall be conducted with as little
formality and technicality
and with as much expedition, as the requirements of
the Act and a proper consideration of the matters to be resolved permit (see
s49(1)(b)). He noted that the employer employs hundreds of workers across
different parts of the State and there are a volume of
first aid records and
incident reports that fall within the second order sought by the
37. The employer’s counsel acknowledged that the employer had
provided him with the documents requested by the worker. He said
a number of
them related to “frank injuries” that are not relevant to the
worker’s claim as his injuries all relate
to a disease process.
employer accepts that the tests set out in Glenorchy District Football Club Inc.
v C. (supra) in relation to relevance of
documents is correct but submits that
to make an order in the broad terms sought by the worker would lead to an
“evidentiary
slippery slope”.
39. Counsel for the employer
submitted that the records sought include the names of many individuals and
further that the documents
were of little probative value. It was further
submitted that privacy issues could be avoided if the employer provided the
with a statistical analysis of the first aid records and incident reports
made by stevedores in relation to neck, back and hand injuries
occurring at the
workplace rather than providing the source documents. Alternatively, if the
discovery order was made, the names
of the workers referred to in the records
and reports should be redacted.
40. Finally, counsel for the employer
submitted that if the Tribunal was minded to make an order in the terms sought
by the worker
it should exclude any reference to hand injuries because in his
report Dr Ernst states he does not believe the worker’s hand
symptoms fit
the label of “carpal tunnel syndrome” and suspects they relate to
his neck injuries and surgeries.
Consideration
41. The issue of causation is in dispute in the worker’s
s42 referral. The worker bears the onus of proof in establishing causation.
Therefore, the worker should be afforded the opportunity to obtain relevant
documents that may or may not support his case or may
or may not adversely
affect the employer’s case.
42. I find that the documents are relevant
because they relate in some way to the matter in dispute and may shed light on
or alternatively lead to a train of enquiry which would either advance
a party’s own case or damage that of his adversary (See
Glenorchy District
Football Club Inc. v C. (supra)).
43. Both Dr Ernst and Dr Tschirn accept
that the documents are relevant.
44. In relation to causation, Dr Ernst says
that a genuine record of the employer’s reported accidents and incidents
first aid records) would provide the “ultimate
Dr Tschirn agrees with Dr Ernst but says that the obtaining of those documents
is “probably
impractical”
45. There is no
evidence from the employer that it would be impractical or oppressive to produce
the documents requested. In fact,
counsel for the employer indicated that the
employer had provided the documents requested. The only point counsel for the
made in relation to this is that there was a volume of documents and
that they contained personal and a lot of irrelevant information.
noted Dr Tschirn admits at page 7 that external trauma may hasten the
onset/progression of the worker’s underlying degenerative
changes in his
spine. Dr Tschirn correctly notes that the issue in this case is whether the
worker’s employment with the employer
has either caused or affected the
cause of the worker’s disease. He then states there is no evidence that
the worker’s
employment caused the disease to
respect to the evidence, Dr Tschirn notes that the worker provided Dr Ernst with
information about work exposures that may
have brought on the condition/s that
the worker has suffered. He says that this information “contrasts with
that provided
by Mr Aitchison in his signed submission dated 20 May
explanation was provided to the Tribunal as to who Mr Aitchison is and his
submission was not provided to the Tribunal. I have
assumed Mr Aitchison is a
representative from the employer who has provided a submission in relation to
“exposure information”.
Dr Tschirn provides no analysis of the
contrasting evidence or why he prefers the evidence of Mr Aitchison over that of
the worker.
48. The fact that there is contrasting evidence between the
worker and Mr Aitchison provides support to the worker’s submission
there should be discovery of the independent first aid records and incident
reports relating to the impact of various workplace
exposures upon stevedores
employed by the employer.
49. The Tribunal’s primary obligation is to
determine the facts. In this case there appears to be two versions of facts;
provided by the worker and the other provided by Mr Aitchison. Additional
independent evidence may assist the Tribunal determine
Tribunal can be assisted by expert medical evidence but it must weigh and
determine the probabilities as to the cause of an
injury or disease having
regard to the whole of the evidence. The documents the worker seeks to be
produced may assist the medical
experts and the Tribunal determine the issue of
51. The main thrust of the employer’s submissions are that
the documents relating to injuries suffered by other workers of the
have little or no probative value to the worker’s claim.
52. A document
will have probative value if it could rationally affect the assessment of the
probability of the existence of a fact
in issue. In my view, the documents the
worker seeks to have produced could have probative value, the extent of that
probative value
cannot be assessed unless and until they are produced.
relation to the employer’s submission that the documents relating to hand
injuries should be excluded from the documents
to be produced I note that the
injuries to the worker’s hands have been variously diagnosed as carpal
tunnel syndrome, bilateral
tendonitis and a neurological disorder resulting from
the worker’s neck injuries and surgeries.
54. Dr Ernst does say with
respect to the worker’s ongoing hand symptoms that he does not believe
they fit the label of carpal
tunnel syndrome and suspects the worker’s
ongoing symptoms are of neurological causation in relation to his neck injuries
surgeries. He says he would have to physically examine the worker to
establish a better understanding and differentiate between
Dr Ernst also notes that the worker had a left carpal tunnel release in 2019
which improved his symptoms
on this evidence, I am of the view that all references to “hand
injuries” cannot be ruled out of the request
for the employer to produce
56. With respect to the submission that at least “frank
injuries” to the hands should be ruled out of the order, I am
of the view
that this makes the task of discovery unnecessarily technical as it requires a
careful assessment of whether a record
or report relates to a frank injury or a
gradual onset injury. The weight and probative value to be given to each record
is ultimately the task of the Tribunal. Accordingly, I determine that
all injuries to the hands should be included in the discovery
57. Finally, I accept that the documents contain the names of workers
which the employer may not wish to reveal on the basis of a
potential breach of
reveal the identity of that worker
could be redacted to ensure there is no
breach of privacy.
58. For the reasons outlined, I make the following orders
pursuant to r6(3);
That within 14 days the employer is to:
(a) make discovery under r6(1)(a) of:
(i) any first aid and incident reports made by the worker in
the course of his employment at the employer since 1 January 2011;
first aid records and incident reports made by workers employed by the employer
as stevedores for: neck, mid and lower back
and hand injuries, since 1 January
(b) disclose the location of those documents to the
worker’s solicitors under r6(1)(c).
A. M. CLUES
CHIEF COMMISSIONER
See page 3 of Dr Ernst’s
report dated 21 September 2020.
See page 2 of Dr Ernst’s report dated 21 September
See page 9 of Dr
Ernst’s report dated 21 September
See page 10 of Dr
Ernst’s report dated 21 September
See page 10 of Dr
Ernst’s report dated 21 September
See page 17 of Dr
Ernst’s report dated 21 September
See page 13 of Dr
Ernst’s report dated 21 September
See page 14 of Dr
Ernst’s report dated 21 September
See page 6 of Dr
Tschirn’s report dated 10 March
See page 7 of Dr
Tschirn’s report dated 10 March
See page 8 of Dr
Tschirn’s report dated 10 March
See page 10 of Dr
Tschirn’s report dated 10 March
See page 3 of Dr
Ernst’s report dated 9 June
See page 14 of Dr
Ernst’s report dated 21 September
See page 6 of Dr
Tschirn’s report dated 10 March
See page 7 of Dr
Tschirn’s report dated 10 March
See page 8 of Dr
Tschirn’s report dated 10 March
See page 16 of Dr
Ernst’s report dated 21 September
See page 4 of Dr
Ernst’s report dated 21 September 2020.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (179 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter