URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCCA/2025/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Director of Public Prosecutions v Francis [2025] TASCCA 2 (13 May 2025)
[2025] TASCCA 2
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (COURT OF CRIMINAL
Director of Public Prosecutions v Francis
[2025] TASCCA 2
: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
PROSECUTIONS
FRANCIS, Oneck Walter
DELIVERED ON:
13 May 2025
HEARING DATE:
8 April 2025
Shanahan CJ, Estcourt J, Marshall AJ
Criminal Law – Appeal and new trial – Appeal against sentence
– Grounds for interference – Sentence manifestly
excessive or
inadequate – Crown appeal against sentence of two years and three months'
imprisonment with a one year and six
month non parole period imposed for a
single count of trafficking in a controlled substance – Single appeal
ground of manifest
inadequacy – Respondent's role in trafficking was low
level and motivated by dire financial position – No error by sentencing
judge identified – Appeal dismissed.
Aust Dig Criminal Law
Cases cited:
Bresnehan v The Queen
[1992] TASSC
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v De La Rosa
[2010] NSWCCA
Director of Public Prosecutions (Acting) v Pearce
[2015] TASCCA
Director of Public Prosecutions v Swan
[2016] TASCCA 1
[2010] HCA 45
242 CLR 520
R v Olbrich
(1999) 199 CLR
Upston v Tasmania
[2018] TASCCA
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Director of Public
Prosecutions
Respondent:
Cangelosi Logan
[2025] TASCCA
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 2/2025
File No CCA 3154/2024
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS v ONECK WALTER
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
SHANAHAN CJ
13 May 2025
of the Court (8 April 2025):
Serial No 2/2025
File No CCA 3154/2024
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS v ONECK WALTER
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
SHANAHAN CJ
13 May 2025
Introduction
On 28 November 2024 the respondent pleaded guilty to an indictment alleging one
count of trafficking in a controlled substance contrary
Misuse of Drugs Act
("MD Act").
The respondent was convicted and sentenced to two years and three months
imprisonment to commence on 3 November 2023. The respondent
was made eligible
for parole but the learned sentencing judge ordered that he was not to be
released on parole until he had served
one year and six months of the sentence
of imprisonment (refer to
Sentencing Act
forfeiture order was made under
for various property
identified in the miscellaneous property sheet dated 3 November 2023, and a
victims of crime levy of $50 was
imposed pursuant to the
Victims of Crime
Compensation Act
The appellant, the Director of Public Prosecutions, now appeals that sentence
on the ground that it was manifestly inadequate in
all the circumstances of the
case. The respondent has been in custody on this matter since his arrest on 3
November 2023. He is
shortly to attend a parole hearing scheduled for Friday,
11 April 2025 and his counsel submitted during the hearing of the appeal
successful at that hearing he could be released within 21 days thereafter. It
was for that reason that the Court pronounced
its judgment immediately following
the hearing with its reasons to be published. These are my reasons for joining
in that decision.
The offending
On Friday 3 November 2023, Tasmania Police were conducting screening of
passengers and vehicles disembarking the Spirit of Tasmania
in East Devonport
when the respondent, the sole occupant of a white MG registered in Victoria,
drove through a police inspection
point and was spoken to by police, cautioned,
and his vehicle was screened by a drug detection dog with the subsequent police
locating two sports bags in the boot, one a black bag and the other a
grey "Culture Kings" bag containing cryovacced packages.
Altogether there were six cryovacced packages, four were black and two were
black and white. In the four black cryovacced packages
was a total of 4,044.78
grams of methylamphetamine and in the two black and white cryovacced packages
was 2,039.58 grams of cocaine.
In total there was 6,084.36 grams of
methylamphetamine and cocaine respectively. More than two hundred and forty
three times the
trafficable quantity.
The respondent was arrested and participated in a record of interview with
police. He initially denied knowing anything about what
was in the sports bags
and how they came to be in the vehicle he was driving. Later in the interview
the respondent made the following
admissions:
(a) He was approached by someone to do a job and was told that the job was risky
but he would make "quick money" and be able to have
(b) He was $20,000 in debt at the time and was also financially supporting his
family in Africa;
(c) He flew from Hobart to Melbourne and then collected a hire car from the
airport which he paid for;
(d) He was then instructed to download the encrypted app "Threema" on to his
phone so that he could communicate with the people he
was working for;
(e) He then drove to Sydney and collected the two sports bags;
(f) He looked inside both bags and saw the packages and thought it was drugs and
panicked. He could not do anything about it as
it was too close to the
departing time of the boat;
(g) After that he just wanted to focus on delivering the bags; and
(h) He was to be paid $5000 for the job but never received any money as it was
cash on delivery.
The respondent was charged and detained.
On 4 November 2023 the respondent was brought before a Justice of the Peace in
the Devonport Magistrates Court and was refused bail.
As noted above the
respondent has been in custody since that date.
On 28 November 2024 the respondent was convicted upon his guilty plea for one
count of drug trafficking contrary to
Depending on how the drugs were sold, the potential combined value of the drugs
was $2,634,264 and $5,064,570.
The respondent was 26 years of age at the time of the offending. When
sentenced he was 27 years of age, had no prior convictions
for drug related
offending and had only very minor convictions for driving offences.
The respondent entered Australia as a teenager and was granted refugee status,
he is now an Australian citizen. Prior to being
sentenced, and since 2008, the
respondent had predominantly spent his time in Tasmania. He was educated in
Tasmania and attended
Guilford Young High School. Between 2021 and 2023 the
respondent spent time in Queensland visiting his sister who had also moved
South Sudan to Australia. One of the main reasons for visiting his sister was
because the respondent was experiencing mental
health issues, which were
aggravated by his financial position and being rejected from numerous jobs. His
counsel submitted that
if paroled the respondent would live in Victoria with his
partner who is a resident of that State.
respondent returned to Tasmania around April 2023 and moved in with a friend
from high school which allowed him to live rent
free and alleviate his financial
respondent stated, in mitigation, that he was approached by a friend who said he
needed him to do him a favour, as he was travelling
interstate, and he would get
paid money for it. He said that he had no idea of what the job was going to be
at the time he accepted
Further, the respondent said that he had no knowledge of who was offering him
the job, all he knew was that the housemate or the
friend was going to give his
name to a third party and a third party would be in contact with the respondent
once the job was lined
up and instructed the respondent to download the app
The respondent said he subsequently flew to Melbourne on an airline ticket
provided by his housemate, picked up a hire car and drove
to Sydney where he
picked up the sports bags before driving to Melbourne and crossing to Tasmania
on the Spirit of Tasmania. He
stated that he only looked inside the bags when
on the ferry after clearing a security screening area in Melbourne.
sentencing judge did not accept the respondent's account on two matters. First,
that the respondent did not know that the job
would involve anything illegal,
and second, that he did not look inside the bags until he was cleared from
Melbourne and on the ferry.
There was no finding as to exactly when the
respondent discovered that he was carrying drugs.
was accepted at sentencing that the respondent's plea of guilty had some
utilitarian benefit.
was put in mitigation that a lengthy term of imprisonment would be onerous for
the respondent as it would be served in Tasmania
and the respondent had no
family in the State, and that his friends or acquaintances had cut connections
with him. The sentencing
judge was urged, if he was to impose a lengthy term of
imprisonment, to make the non-parole period as "short as it can
The sentencing
sentencing judge having recited the facts, and rejected the respondent's account
that he did not know the job was to involve
anything illegal and having observed
that he could not know when the respondent looked in the two sports bags,
described the amount
of the drugs and acknowledged their potential street
sentencing judge identified a number of propositions in aggravation, including
that such drugs cause enormous harm throughout
our community, and the reliance
placed on people like the respondent being prepared to take a risk and become
involved in the transporting
sentencing judge also acknowledged that the respondent suffered over the years
from depression and had mental health issues,
that he had accepted
responsibility through his plea of guilty, albeit that he faced an exceptionally
strong prosecution case, and
that he had been in custody since his arrest. The
respondent was not a drug user and had no relevant prior convictions.
sentence imposed is set out above at [2]. This Court needs to consider the
whole of the sentencing disposition when asked to
consider the adequacy of the
sentencing judge's disposition, it would be artificial to focus
individual aspects of that disposition, such as the head term of
imprisonment.
is noted that the statutory provisions dealing with parole provide for a minimum
statutory non-parole period of "a period equal
to one half of the period of the
operative sentence":
Corrections Act
instance the head term of imprisonment was two years and three months
imprisonment to commence on 3 November 2023. However,
the sentencing judge did
not apply the minimum statutory parole period but rather made an order under
Sentencing Act
setting a longer non-parole period of one
year and six months of the sentence of imprisonment. The respondent argues that
non-parole period effectively increases the severity of the sentence
in that it equates to a period of imprisonment of three years
were the minimum
statutory non-parole period applied. Counsel for the appellant noted that
parole is not guaranteed and a longer
head term put the respondent at risk of a
longer term of imprisonment.
Crown appeals – identifying
legal principles in respect of appeals against sentence are well settled.
primary purpose of a Crown appeal against sentence is to identify principles for
the governance and guiding of sentencing courts
and to maintain public
confidence in the administration of justice by intervening in the case of a
manifestly inadequate sentence:
Director of Public Prosecutions v Swan
[2016] TASCCA 9
per Pearce J at [30]).
Pearce (Blow CJ and Porter J agreeing) observed (
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Acting) v Pearce
[2015] TASCCA 1
) that an appellant
must demonstrate that the sentence imposed "is unreasonable or plainly unjust".
It is not to the point that some
may regard the sentence as too lenient or too
harsh. Ultimately, it must be established that "the sentence is so manifestly
that it could only be the result of some undefinable error in the exercise
of the judicial discretion":
(Bresnehan v The Queen
[1992] TASSC 55
sentencing judge and, by extrapolation, an appellate court, have to take care in
the use of comparative sentences drawn from other
cases in the process of, or
for evaluating, sentencing. French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell
Hili v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
242 CLR 520
, acknowledged
that a sentencing judge "must have regard to what has been done in other cases".
However, the Court then went on (at
[54]) to cite Simpson J's decision in
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v De La Rosa
[2010] NSWCCA 194
as an accurate account of "the proper use of information about
sentences that have been passed in other cases":
"As her Honour
pointed out, a history of sentencing can establish a range of sentences that
have in fact been imposed. That history
does not establish that the range is the
correct range, or that the upper or lower limits to the range are the correct
lower limits. As her Honour said: 'Sentencing patterns are, of course,
of considerable significance in that they result from the
application of the
accumulated experience and wisdom of first instance judges and of appellate
courts.' But the range of sentences
that have been imposed in the past does not
fix 'the boundaries within which future judges must, or even ought, to
sentence'. Past
sentences 'are no more than historical statements of what has
happened in the past. They can, and should, provide guidance to sentencing
judges, and to appellate courts, and stand as a yardstick against which to
examine a proposed sentence' (emphasis added). When considering
past sentences,
'it is only by examination of the whole of the circumstances that have given
rise to the sentence that 'unifying
principles' may be discerned'." (Footnotes
omitted. Emphasis added.)
yardstick is a standard used for comparison. As Simpson J points out,
comparative sentences are constantly changing and evolving,
necessarily
identify appropriate sentencing outcomes they are not "outer
markers". The gravamen of these observations is that comparative sentences
not dictate the outcome in a particular sentencing by requiring that particular
set of circumstances be "shoe horned" into a range
of past sentences revealed by
comparative analysis, but rather that the sentencing judge use that information
as a yardstick against
which to consider an appropriate sentence.
important consideration for this Court is to ensure the consistency of
sentencing for like offences. However, the particular
circumstances of each
case need to be considered. In doing so, the role of an appellate court in
considering appeals on sentence
is not to sentence anew but to remedy
first task for any appellant is to identify error. When dealing with an appeal
of the type described in
Bresnehan v The Queen,
as in this appeal,
where an appellant
asserts that a sentence is "manifestly wrong"
because of an "undefinable error in the exercise of the judicial discretion" the
identification
of error is necessarily diffuse and the process unwieldy.
such a case the use of comparative sentences can be useful but rarely
determinative because whilst sentencing is concerned with,
inter alia, public
confidence, the administration of justice and the need for consistency, it
addresses an offender's conduct and
personal circumstances with particularity.
That requires deeper consideration than the metrics proffered by a comparative
adequacy of sentencing requires consideration of, inter alia, the objective
circumstances of the offences, the requirement of
general deterrence and
denunciation, the subjective circumstances of the respondent, and the proper
application of principles concerning
accumulation, concurrency and totality,
these are all factors that need to be considered in the context of the
sentencing disposition
as a whole.
this Court if an appellant identifies error, the appellant must then negate any
reason why the residual discretion of the Court
not to interfere in the
respondent's sentencing should be exercised: (
Director of Public Prosecutions
[2020] TASCCA 3
per Wood J at [19]). Such factors include, but are
not limited to, delay in the appeal process, fault on the part of the Crown,
imminent or past release on parole of the respondent, and the effect of
re-sentencing on progress towards the respondent's rehabilitation.
Court's determination this issue does not arise in this
Did the sentencing judge fall into error?
sole ground of appeal is that the respondent's sentence was "manifestly
inadequate in all the circumstances of the case".
is to be readily accepted that the crime of trafficking in a controlled
substance, in breach of the
, is one that would ordinarily attract severe,
or harsh, punishment, and that conclusion is driven by the need for "general
and denunciation". Further, that such matters become more acute when
the substance involved is methylamphetamine because of its
"pernicious nature,
the prevalence of its use and the great harm it causes the community":
Upston v Tasmania
[2018] TASCCA 4
per Porter AJ at [15]).
was placed by the appellant on par [21] of Pearce J's judgment in
[2016] TASCCA 9
for the proposition that, "although the circumstances
of the offender and the prospect of rehabilitation remain relevant sentencing
considerations, they are of lesser importance in drug trafficking matters"
(Appellant's Written Submissions [13]).
passage at [21] in
addresses the principles engaged in
sentencing for trafficking offences, they are to be considered in context and in
their entirety:
"Sentences for trafficking have been the subject of
two relatively recent appeals to this Court:
Director of Public Prosecutions
v Williamson
[2013] TASCCA 6
Stebbins v Tasmania
[2016] TASCCA
. In the latter appeal I stated some matters of principle which, in my
view, should be applied to consideration of the sentence in
Because there
are so many ways in which a person may be guilty of trafficking there is a great
diversity of circumstances in which
the crime is committed, and it is difficult
to identify a sentencing range or tariff.
The criminal
culpability of a person guilty of trafficking is to be assessed by focussing on
the nature and level of the offender's
involvement in the commercial
distribution.
Traffickers
encourage and foster the abuse of illicit drugs, which cause misery to
individuals and the people around them, and immeasurable
harm to the community.
The great social evil which results from trafficking points to stern punishment
in almost every case.
Persons who may
be inclined to engage in trafficking illicit drugs for profit, must balance the
chance of high returns with knowledge
that apprehension and conviction will
result in a harsh sentence.
Trafficking
motivated by commercial gain involves greater criminality.
deterrence and punishment are the predominant sentencing considerations.
Although the
circumstances of the offender and the prospect of rehabilitation remain relevant
sentencing considerations, they are
of lesser importance."
The observations in the first dot point above identify the difficulties
emerging in sentencing for trafficking where there are
so many ways in which
a person may be guilty of that offence
, and the great diversity of
circumstances in which the crime is committed. In seeking to identify the tools
of comparative analysis
it is said that it is "difficult to identify a
sentencing range or tariff". These are matters that an appellate court needs to
consider when being asked to intervene on the basis that a sentence
for trafficking is manifestly inadequate.
These observations highlight the importance of determining as a matter of fact
the way in which a person convicted of trafficking
has participated in that
conduct, by focussing on the "nature and level of the offender's involvement in
the commercial distribution".
In this instance the appellant accepted that the
respondent was a "courier" and "was not involved in the higher chain of
distribution
of the drugs" (Appellant's Written Submissions [18]).
The respondent participated in the commercial distribution of drugs for the
promised payment of $5000, albeit he had no previous
convictions and was not a
drug user. His motivation was not addiction but his "dire" financial position.
He suffered from depression
and mental health issues attributed to by his
financial position. Whilst it appears clear that the respondent's motivation
was financial,
the payment of $5000 that he expected bore no obvious
relationship to the street value of the drugs he was asked to transport.
appellant accepts that the respondent's conduct was limited to a single day
(Appellant's Written Submissions [20]), albeit his
conduct on that day was a
course of conduct rather than a single occurrence.
In the course of submissions the appellant sought to develop a point that
revolved around the circumstances of the offending by
characterising the
trafficking to Tasmania as special, in the sense that it is an island and such
drugs, as were transported, were
likely to be consumed here.
Whilst there may be circumstances thrown up by such offending that are
particular to Tasmania, there is nothing about the conduct
in this matter that
suggests an extra circumstance of aggravation because the drugs were trafficked
across the Bass Strait.
observations at dot points three to six set out above identify the public's
interest in deterring trafficking, and the social
evil that trafficking causes,
which point "to stern punishment in almost every case", and that those convicted
of trafficking for
profit must "balance the chance of high returns with
knowledge that apprehension and conviction will result in a harsh sentence".
is because trafficking motivated by "commercial gain" involves greater
criminality that, in such cases, "general deterrence and
punishment are the
predominant sentencing considerations" and "although the circumstances of the
offender and the prospect of rehabilitation
remain relevant sentencing
considerations, they are of lesser importance".
appellant accepts that the respondent's motivation "arose due to the dire
financial position in which he found himself" (Appellant's
Written Submissions
respondent's motivation was financial, but can it be said it was for "commercial
Commercial gain implies a business. There was no evidence, and no finding,
that the respondent had participated in the criminal
activity for more than a
day, and whilst there were clearly commercial aspects evident in the planning of
the transportation of the
drugs, and the amounts and packaging of the drugs, the
sentencing judge was unable to make a finding as to precisely when the
became aware of the drugs in his car, ie the amounts and packaging of
the drugs, but it could only be after the respondent collected
the sports bags
respondent was sentenced on the basis that the sentencing judge could not make
any specific findings as to his knowledge, and
that it was unclear who was
responsible for choosing the drugs for transport, packaging them or placing them
in the two bags found
in the respondent's car.
respondent was sentenced on the basis that at some point in his journey, he
discovered and looked inside the bags and located
the drugs but continued the
journey despite that discovery. If that conduct is examined through the prism
of operating a business
then, on any account, the respondent's role was at a low
oral submissions the Court was taken to the decision in
R v Olbrich
(1999) 199 CLR 270
at [19]-[23] which considers the utility of describing
offenders in terms of roles such as "principal" or "courier". The majority
the High Court (Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, Hayne and Callinan JJ) considered that in
some cases, levels of culpability may be identified
by adopting those terms, but
not in that case (at [19]). Their Honours stressed that the significant matter
is to focus on what
the offender had done and who the offender was, not what
others may have hoped to have gained from the offender's activity.
the principles associated with deterrence and denunciation, these were all
matters that the sentencing judge took into account.
sentence has to be understood in its entirety.
sentencing judge specifically eschewed the minimum statutory non-parole period
and set it at one year and six months. If the
respondent was paroled after that
period, then that would be analogous (in terms of time served) to the time
served by an offender
sentenced to a head term of three years who obtained
parole at the earliest opportunity.
appellant's submissions focussed on the deterrent and denunciatory effect of a
head sentence.
it may readily be accepted that some might focus more upon the head sentence
when a term of imprisonment is imposed, this
Court is obliged to consider the
sentencing disposition as a whole. When one does that, the sentence does not
reveal error.
to the comparative table helpfully provided by the appellant (Appellant's
Written Submissions at Annexure A), the disposition
of the sentencing Judge does
not sit outside the parameters of similar offending. Whilst there are
differences in age, amounts of
drugs trafficked and the personal antecedents and
circumstances of offenders in the comparators provided, the effective term of
imprisonment
does not sit outside the comparable
Disposition
The single ground of appeal having failed, the appeal is
File No CCA 3154/2024
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS v ONECK WALTER
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
MARSHALL AJ
We agree with the reasons for judgment of the Chief Justice. It was for those
reasons that we joined in the order dismissing the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (273 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter