URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASGAB/2021/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
EEC (Review of Enduring Power of Attorney) [2021] TASGAB 18 (25 May 2021)
EEC (Review of Enduring Power of Attorney)
[2021] TASGAB 18
HEARING DATE(S):
21 January 2021, 26 February 2021, 26 March 2021
DATE OF ORDERS:
26 March 2021
DATE OF STATEMENT OF REASONS:
25 May 2021
Ms R Holder, President
Dr M Fasnacht, Member
Mr M Rapley, Member
APPLICATION
Application to Review an Enduring Power of Attorney
CATCHWORDS:
the application a ‘matter’ between residents
of different States;
judicial or administrative power; Board’s exercise of administrative
donor’s capacity at the time of executing the Power; donor’s
understanding of nature and effect of the Power; formal requirements
of creating
a Power; invalidity of Power; whether two witnesses present together at the time
of the execution of the power by the
donor; disability; capability to make
reasonable judgments; best interests; wishes of the proposed represented person;
suitability
for appointment; administration order
LEGISLATION CITED:
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
CASES CITED:
Burns v Corbett
(2018) 265 CLR 304
State of Tasmania (Department of Health and Human Services) v M, M v the
State of Tasmania (Department of Health & Human Services)
[2018] TASWRCT
Precision Data Holdings Ltd v Wills
[1991] HCA 58
(1991) 173 CLR
The Queen v Trade Practices Tribunal; ex parte Tasmanian Breweries Pty
[1970] HCA 8
(1970) 123 CLR 361
Brandy v Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
[1995] HCA 10
(1995) 183 CLR 245
Rizeq v Western Australia
[2017] HCA 23
TCL Air Conditioner (Zhongshan) Co Ltd v Judges of the Federal Court of
[2013] HCA 5
; (2013) 251 CLR 533.
K-Generation Pty Ltd v Liquor Licensing Court
[2009] HCA 4
(2009) 237 CLR 501
Huddart, Parker & Co Pty Ltd v Moorehead
[1909] HCA 36
(1909) 8 CLR 330
Raschke v Firinauskas
[2018] SACAT 10
Re Ranger Uranium Mines
(1987)163 CLR 656
[2019] WASC 255
Szozda v Szozda
[2010] NSWSC 804
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication
STATEMENT OF REASONS
Application
1. By an Application dated 22 December 2020, Ms
Natasha Veenstra, social worker at the Royal Hobart Hospital applied for the
of an Enduring Power of Attorney (‘EPA’) executed by Mr EEC
(‘the Application’). The EPA was created under
Attorney Act 2000
(Tas) (‘the POA Act’). It was made on 29
August 2020 and registered on 28 September 2020 with number PA XXXXXX. The
Application
raised the validity of the EPA.
2. The Board has published this Statement of Reasons on its own motion.
3. The Application was heard by the Board on 21
January 2021, 26 February 2021 and 26 March 2021.
4. The following persons appeared at the hearing:
EEC (the donor of the EPA);
Natasha Veenstra, Social Worker, Royal Hobart Hospital (the
Applicant);
BP, daughter of the donor and attorney;
BEC, son of the donor and attorney;
Len Ierino, solicitor attending 26 February 2021;
Janina Skelton, Staff Specialist – Geriatric Medicine, Royal Hobart
Claire Corbett, Clinical Psychologist, Royal Hobart Hospital;
Louella Tria, Social Worker, Royal Hobart Hospital;
Rosemary Jurs, Public Trustee attending on 26 February 2020;
Jessica Watson, Public Trustee attending on 26 March 2021;
Jane Tolman, Geriatrician.
5. At the hearing the Board considered the following documents:
Application;
Care Professional Report by Ms Claire Corbett dated 15 December
Letter by Dr Janina Skelton dated 20 December 2020;
Power of Attorney by EEC dated 29 August, 2020;
by Ms BP dated 13 January 2021;
Report from The List dated 4 January 2021;
by Ms BP dated 17 February 2021;
by Mr Charles Giugni dated 17 February 2021;
by Mr Charles Guigni dated 17 February 2021;
by Ms Amanda Lott dated 16 February 2021;
by Ms Amanda Lott dated 16 February 2021;
(Transfer) from Ms BP dated 22 May 2013;
from Ms BP dated 9 January 2021;
by Ms BP undated;
by Ms BP undated;
Nominee from BP dated 11 December 2020;
received after hearing on 26 February 2021;
notes by Mr Len Ierino undated;
report by Dr Jane Tolman dated 9 March 2021;
submission by Centrelink dated 12 February 2021;
by Ms Louella Tria dated 16 March, 2021;
and Attachment by Dr Greg Pitt dated 17 March, 2021.
Legislation
6. The Board’s jurisdiction in relation to the review of enduring
powers of attorney is set out in set out in Part 4, section
33 of the POA Act.
7. Section 33(1)(d) of the POA Act provides that on Application by a person
the Board believes has a proper interest in the matter,
the Board may hold a
hearing in accordance with Division 1 of Part 10 of the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
(‘the GAA’) to review an EPA.
8. Section 30 of the POA Act provides for the creation and effect of enduring
powers of attorney. Section 30(2) states: ‘A deed
or instrument is not
effective to create an enduring power of attorney
(a) the donor understands the
nature and effect of the deed or instrument; and...’
9. Section 9 of the POA Act sets out the formal requirements of creating a
power of attorney under section 30 of the POA Act.
10. Section 33(2) of the POA Act provides that on review the Board may make
certain Orders following a review including to:
(a) vary a term of, or a power conferred by, the
enduring power of attorney; or
(b) appoint a substitute attorney; or
(c) appoint an administrator of the estate of the
donor if he or she is over the age of 18 years; or
[Section 33 Subsection (2) amended by No. 39 of 2013, s. 17,
Applied:01 Feb 2014]
declare that the donor did or did not have mental
capacity to make a valid enduring power of attorney or to revoke an enduring
of attorney; or
[Section 33 Subsection (2) amended by No. 39 of 2013, s. 17,
Applied:01 Feb 2014]
declare that the enduring power of attorney or the
revocation of it by the donor is invalid if the Board is satisfied
[Section 33 Subsection (2) amended by No. 39 of 2013, s. 17,
Applied:01 Feb 2014]
the donor did not have the mental capacity to make the
power or the revocation, respectively; or
[Section 33 Subsection (2) amended by No. 39 of 2013, s. 17,
Applied:01 Feb 2014]
the power or the revocation, respectively, does not
comply with the other requirements of this Act; or
[Section 33 Subsection (2) amended by No. 39 of 2013, s. 17,
Applied:01 Feb 2014]
the power or the revocation, respectively, is invalid
because the donor was induced to make it by dishonesty or undue influence or
invalid for any other reason; or
(f) revoke the enduring power of attorney and, if
the donor is over the age of 18 years and the Board thinks fit, appoint an
administrator
of his or her estate; or
(g) make such other order as to the exercise of
the power, or the construction of its terms, as the Board thinks
11. Section 33(3) of the POA Act provides that the appointment of a person as
an Administrator under section 33(2)(f) has the same
effect as if the
appointment had been made under Part 7 of the GAA.
12. In Part 7, section 51(1) of the GAA the Board may make an Order
appointing an Administrator in respect to a person’s estate
satisfied that:
person is a person with a disability; and
person is unable by reason of that disability to make reasonable judgments in
respect of matters relating to all or any part
of his or her estate;
person is in the need of an administrator of his or her estate.
13. In determining whether or not an Order should be made section 51(2), (3)
and (4) of the GAA require that:
Board must consider whether the needs of that person could be met by other means
less restrictive of his freedom of decision and
action; and
Board must not make an order unless it is satisfied that the order would be in
the best interests of that person; and
an order is made it must be the least restrictive of that person’s freedom
of decision and action as possible in the circumstance.
14. The Board must also when performing a function or power conferred on it
have regard to the general principles in section 6 of
the GAA which
means which is the least restrictive of a person’s freedom of decision and
action as is possible in the circumstances is
best interests of a person with a disability be promoted; and
wishes of the person with a disability are, if possible, carried into effect.
Does the Board have jurisdiction to determine the Application:
15. At the commencement of the hearing on the 26 February, the Board raised
with the parties a potential jurisdictional issue with
respect to the
Application as a consequence of the determination of the High Court in
v Corbett, Burns v Gaynor, AG for NSW v Burns, NSW v Burns
The High Court
Burns v Corbett
that where a ‘matter’ involves a
dispute between residents of different States, the matter is one in which
is conferred on the High Court under section 75(iv) of the
Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution
Act 1900 (Cth)
Constitution
’). The High Court held that the
Constitution
precludes a
State Parliament from conferring on a Tribunal that is not a Court of the State,
section 75(iv)
Constitution
in respect of ‘a
matter between residents of different States.’ Chapter III of the
Constitution
is contained, is concerned with judicial
power. Consequently, the ‘matters’ referred to within
section 75(iv)
Constitution
are matters requiring the exercise of judicial power.
16. Therefore, the issue that arises is whether the Application is a matter
between residents of different States or between a State
and resident of another
State; and that issue first requires consideration of whether the Board, in
exercising the powers contained
in Part 4 of the POA Act, is exercising judicial
power. If the Board is exercising administrative power rather than judicial
then the residential status of the parties is not relevant, as the
Constitutional limitation set out above is not engaged.
17. The Board raised these issues with parties, at the commencement of the
hearing on 26 February 2021. Mr EEC is a resident of Tasmania.
resident of Victoria, and Mr BEC is a resident of Queensland. The Applicant is
an employee of the Royal Hobart Hospital,
which is part of the Tasmanian Health
Service, owned and operated by the State of Tasmania. The Board invited
submissions from parties
as to whether it had jurisdiction to hear and determine
the Application. No party sought to make any submission on this issue. The
Board gave its preliminary view at hearing that it did have jurisdiction to hear
the Application, and again invited parties to comment.
Mr Ierino, who attended
this hearing to give evidence and also stated he acted for Mr EEC, did not wish
to make any submission. No
party commented on the issue or opposed the
Board’s jurisdiction to determine the Application. Nevertheless, before
determining
the Application the Board must be satisfied that it has the
hearing, and the Board expressed a preliminary view about the matter, it is
appropriate to address it in these Reasons.
18. The primary question is: does Part 4 of the POA Act, and in particular
the power to declare an enduring power of attorney invalid,
require the Board to
exercise judicial power? This requires consideration of what judicial power is.
19. Over time, case law has outlined features or indicia of what may
constitute the exercise of judicial power.
State of Tasmania (Department of Health and Human Services) v
M, M v the State of Tasmania (Department of Health & Human Services)
[2018] TASWRCT 24
, Chief Commissioner Webster outlines the accepted criteria for
the characterisation of a power as a judicial power, which the Board
Chief Commissioner Webster said at paragraph [35] – [36]:
35. There is no exhaustive list of features or
definition of judicial power and how such power is to be distinguished from
administrative
Precision Data Holdings Ltd v Wills
[1991] HCA 58
(1991) 173 CLR 167
(“Precision Data”).
36. Despite this principles have been established in the authorities which can
be applied to the circumstances of particular cases:
The Queen v Trade
Practices Tribunal; ex parte Tasmanian Breweries Pty Ltd
[1970] HCA 8
(1970) 123 CLR 361
at 373. Although I acknowledge the statement of principle in
paragraph 35 the accepted criteria for the characterisation of a power
judicial power include the following:
(a) the power to deliver a binding and authoritative decision in determining a
dispute between parties;
Brandy v Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
[1995] HCA 10
(1995) 183 CLR 245
(“Brandy”). That
is “quelling controversies about legal rights and legal obligations
through ascertainment of
facts, application of law and exercise, where
appropriate, of judicial discretion”:
Rizeq v Western Australia
[2017] HCA 23
(footnotes omitted).
(b) The capacity to enforce those decisions although that is not necessarily an
attribute of judicial power. However the inability
to enforce judgments is a
factor weighing against the characterisation of the power as judicial:
(c) The ascertainment of existing rights and liabilities by the determination of
issues of fact and law, as opposed to a determination
of what legal rights and
liabilities should be created: Brandy and Precision Data.
(d) The observance of open justice principles and the rules of procedural
TCL Air Conditioner (Zhongshan) Co Ltd v Judges of the Federal
Court of Australia
[2013] HCA 5
; (2013) 251 CLR 533. Where a tribunal is not bound
by the rules of evidence, this may indicate that the exercise of the power is
administrative:
K-Generation Pty Ltd v Liquor Licensing Court
[2009] HCA 4
(2009) 237 CLR 501.
Huddart, Parker & Co Pty Ltd v Moorehead
[1909] HCA 36
(1909) 8 CLR 330
at 357 described the end result
after the exercise of judicial power as “a binding and authoritative
decision. In fact the
enforceability of decisions given in the exercise of
judicial power may characterise a function as judicial when it is otherwise
equivocal: Brandy at 268. In addition, “where a tribunal is able to give a
binding and authoritative decision and is able to
take action to enforce that
decision, ‘all the attributes of judicial power are plainly
present’.” (Brandy at 268-9).
Despite this it is not essential to
the exercise of judicial power that a tribunal should be called upon to execute
its own decision:
Brandy at 269...’
21. Therefore, when applying those features or indicia, the Board is
delivering a binding and authoritative order as to whether the
EPA is valid or
determining to exercise its other powers under section 33(2) of the POA Act.
22. The Board does not have the ability to enforce its own Orders. A decision
of the Board may be appealed to the Supreme Court pursuant
to section 76 of the
GAA on a question of law or on any other question, with leave of the Court.
23. The Board, pursuant to section 11 of the GAA, must observe the rules of
natural justice and is not bound by the rules of evidence.
The jurisdiction of
the Board is often referred to as ‘inquisitorial’. When the Board is
‘acting in a manner that
has an inquisitorial flavour and will actively
utilise its ability to inform itself, the Tribunal’s power is more
characterised as an exercise of administrative
24. The Application to review an EPA and the power under section 33(2)(ii) of
the POA Act is concerned with settling a question as
to the existence of the
donor’s right. This involves the finding of facts, and the application of
the law and the exercise
of the Board’s discretion. On hearing the
Application the Board may determine what legal rights should be created, given
powers set out in s33(2) of the POA Act. For example the Board could
determine to revoke the EPA and appoint an administrator or
substitute attorney,
rather than make a finding to declare the EPA invalid. The majority of the
powers set out in section 33(2) of
the POA Act are concerned with ‘what
rights should exist’, being a distinctive feature of administrative power,
than ‘ascertainment of existing rights and liabilities’.
Ranger Uranium
the High Court said:
the power of inquiry and determination is a power which
properly takes its legal character from the purpose for which it is undertaken.
Thus enquiry into and determination of matters in issue is a judicial function
if its object is the ascertainment of legal rights
and obligations. But if its
object is to ascertain what rights and obligations should exist, it is properly
characterised as an
arbitral function when performed by a body charged with the
resolution of disputes by arbitration.
26. The High Court observed in
Precision Data
... although the finding of facts and the making of
value judgements, even the formation of an opinion as to the legal rights and
obligations of parties, are common ingredients in the exercise of judicial
power, they may also be elements in the exercise of administrative
legislative power.
27. Further, in
Chief Justice Quinlan in the Supreme Court of Western Australia stated:
there is, therefore, no ‘bright-line’ test
to be applied in the determination of whether a particular power is property
be characterised as judicial power. Indeed, for this reason, some functions (so
called chameleon functions) may properly be characterised
as administrative or
judicial according to whether they are conferred upon an authority acting
administratively or upon a court.
... Certain functions and powers, in the penumbra of the notion of judicial
power, may, depending upon the particular circumstances
(including the body to
which they are entrusted), be properly characterised as
administrative.
28. It is also notable that section 33(1) of the POA Act empowers the Board
on its own motion to hold a hearing to review an EPA to
consider what the
person’s rights should be. This is not an uncommon feature of protective
29. Further, the primary focus of the powers of the Board under the POA Act
by virtue of the application of the
is the rights of the donor and
making decisions focused on his or her ‘future rights.’
30. Therefore, when considering the above mentioned factors, the Board finds
its power to declare an EPA invalid or not is a ‘chameleon
that, when it is reposed in a specialist administrative tribunal rather that a
court, points to the administrative
character of the power. When considering the
other orders the Board can make under section 33(2) of the POA Act, the Board
they are predominantly of an administrative character.
31. For these reasons, the Board is satisfied that the power it is exercising
is administrative power. Because the Board is not exercising
judicial power
section 75(iv)
Constitution
does not apply to the exercise of the
Board’s powers under section 32(2) of the POA Act, and it has jurisdiction
to determine
the Application regardless of the residence or status of parties.
32. The Board, however, makes the following observations and finding as to
whether the Application is ‘a matter between the
parties or a party and a
33. On the Application, a dispute arises between the THS and Mr EEC, as to
whether he validly made an EPA. While the THS is a party
to the hearing, it does
not have any vested interests and its rights are not affected in any way by the
outcome. Similarly, while
the Attorneys may have a view on the Application or
argue they are parties to a dispute, their right to be Attorney derives only
from the EPA created by Mr EEC, and they do not have any legal right to
appointment. The substance of the matter for determination
impacts legally on Mr
34. The nature of the Board’s jurisdiction is inquisitorial and
protective, and the section 6 principles of the GAA focus entirely
on the person
who is the subject of the Application. The Board is not hearing
inter partes
litigation, that is, a dispute between parties because of the operation of
the principles in section 6 of the GAA.
35. Mr EEC was born on 31 January 1935 and at the date of the second and
third hearing was 86 years old. Mr EEC is divorced. He has
three children, Mr
BEC, Ms BP, and another daughter N who did not participate in the
proceedings.
36. On 30 July 2020 Mr EEC met with his solicitor to give instructions for an
enduring power of attorney.
37. On 28 August 2020 Mr EEC was admitted to the RHH with full thickness
burns to his buttocks, and sepsis. He was transferred to
the Intensive Care Unit
of the RHH (ICU) and subsequently had a number of surgeries in relation to his
perineal burn management.
38. On 29 August 2020, while in ICU, Mr EEC appointed Mr BEC and Ms BP as his
joint attorneys under an enduring power of attorney.
39. After approximately one week in ICU, Mr EEC was moved to a general
medical ward at the RHH. On 2 October 2020 Mr EEC was transferred
Rehabilitation Centre, Peacock 1.
40. On discharge from the RHH on 30 December 2020, Mr EEC moved into a
residential aged care facility. He had previously been living
property he owned.
41. Mr Ierino, solicitor, gave evidence at the hearing on 26 March 2021 that
he had known Mr EEC for approximately 20 years and had
acted for him in respect
of some legal matters. He stated Mr EEC had been a businessman for many years
and knew what an EPA was.
Mr Ierino indicated that Mr EEC was a party to Supreme
Court proceedings last year and understood the proceedings, however chose
represent himself against Mr Ierino’s advice that it would be ‘to
his own detriment.’ The outcome of the proceedings
resulted in a costs
order being made against Mr EEC. Mr Ierino stated Mr EEC had had two strokes but
he was fine and there was no
reason to doubt his mental capacity.
42. Mr Ierino stated he met with Mr EEC on 30 July 2020 at his office for the
purpose of obtaining instructions from him for the preparation
of an enduring
power of attorney.
43. Mr Ierino stated that Mr EEC attended his office again on 27 August 2020
when he noticed Mr EEC exhibited pain and discomfort
and he relayed to him he
had suffered burns to his buttocks. Mr Ierino advised Mr EEC to see his GP or
attend the hospital.
44. Mr Ierino stated that on 29 August 2020 he received a phone call from Ms
BP advising Mr EEC was at the RHH and she requested he
attend there urgently,
prior to scheduled surgery the following day. Mr Ierino states he attended the
ICU RHH between 4.30 and 5pm
on 29 August 2020 and provided Mr EEC with the EPA
to execute. He gave evidence that he said to Mr EEC that if he had any
difficulties
with the document to let him know. He asked him if he understood
it. He gave evidence that Mr EEC read it carefully and confirmed
he understood
it and confirmed the appointment of the two joint attorneys was correct.
‘Nothing exhibited to me other than
he was in discomfort about surgery. He
knew why he signed it. No one could say they were there on the day.’ Mr
Ierino gave
evidence that there was ‘no doubt’ as to Mr EEC’s
capacity, that ‘I assessed he was capable’. Mr Ierino
produced and
tendered a file note of his attendance upon Mr EEC at the RHH on 29 August
45. At the end of his evidence Mr Ierino attempted to make submissions about
the evidence he had just provided and noted he had not
received a copy of the
medical reports, or indeed any of the hearing papers. The Board indicated this
was because he appeared before
the Board as a witness. Mr Ierino then stated he
acted for Mr EEC. Notice of this had not been given to the Board prior to
or at the commencement of the hearing on 26 February 2021, and no
request had been made to the Board Registry by Mr Ierino for hearing
papers. The
Board asked Mr Ierino several times during the course of the hearing whether he
wanted an adjournment to obtain a copy
of the hearing papers and to get his
client’s instructions. Mr Ierino advised he did not seek an adjournment
and wanted to
proceed. He was asked on two occasions whether he believed he had
a conflict of interest in acting for Mr EEC given he was a witness
proceedings. On the second occasion, Mr Ierino responded that ‘of course
he had a conflict’ but his client was
happy for him to proceed. Mr Ierino
then requested an adjournment, which was opposed by Ms BP. Mr Ierino then
withdrew his request.
After urging from the Board to get his client’s
instructions, he spoke with his client and then requested an adjournment. An
adjournment was granted. Mr Ierino was asked to put in writing his request for
hearing papers to the Board Registry confirming he
acted for Mr EEC. Mr Ierino
subsequently emailed the Registry stating he no longer acted for Mr EEC.
Registry, at the direction of
the Board, by numerous phone calls to his legal
office, requested Mr Ierino to attend the next hearing date in the capacity as a
witness. Mr Ierino did not attend the hearing on 26 March 2021 or respond to the
numerous phone calls from the Registry.
46. The Applicant gave evidence that Mr EEC was admitted to the RHH on 29
August 2020 with full thickness burns to his buttocks that
he had suffered on or
was transferred to ICU for hypotension,
poor urine output and drowsiness. The
Admission Summary in ICU indicted that on admission to ICU Mr EEC’s
neurological status
was ‘orientated to name and DOB, poor concentration
and intermittently slow in responding to questions.’ The medical
listed include ‘delirium versus mild cognitive impairment.’
47. During Mr EEC’s admission to ICU a Medical Registrar from the Unit
called Ms BP to update her on her father’s condition.
During this
telephone conversation the Medical Registrar documented in Mr EEC’s
medical record that ‘Daughter would also
like a solicitor to present to
hospital for signage of property transfer documents’ and ‘advised B
to contact Home Team
post-surgery tomorrow to discuss timing of that.’
Further there is a nurse’s entry note on 29 August 2020 at 19.25 that
states: ‘agitated at times. BP’s 75-90mmHg...Visited by family
48. The Applicant gave evidence that on 2 October 2020 Mr EEC was transferred
to Peacock 1 for discharge planning. A full allied
health assessment was
conducted. There was evidence of Mr EEC hoarding at home, and accounts he had
not paid for up to nine months.
The Applicant stated Mr EEC was agreeable to
moving into residential aged care. A copy of the EPA was obtained from Ms BP by
RHH, which then resulted in the treating team questioning its validity and
the Application being lodged with the Board.
49. Dr Skelton, Geriatrician gave evidence that she took over Mr EEC’s
care when he transferred to Peacock 1 on 2 October 2020.
Dr Skelton states Mr
EEC has a diagnosis of dementia (mixed Alzheimer’s and vascular type). She
indicated the CT scan on 16
September 2020 shows small vessel ischemia and
atrophy. Mini cognitive testing by Dr Blair Adamczewski indicated impairment
recall 0/3. On a Rowland Universal Dementia Assessment Scale
(‘RUDAS’) assessment on 18 September 2020 Mr EEC scored
50. At hearing Dr Skelton agreed with the evidence from Dr Jane Tolman
setting out the cognitive decline of Mr EEC over the last two
to five years. She
indicated this was consistent with the history provided to her and stated the
cognitive decline impacted on Mr
EEC’s functioning, which was evidenced by
poor nutrition, difficulties with meal preparation and cooking, unpaid bills
at least nine months before admission, poor ability to maintain property,
and giving up driving.
51. Dr Skelton stated she believed it is likely that Mr EEC had delirium
during his acute episode of illness in ICU. Dr Skelton opined
it was unlikely
that Mr EEC had capacity to understand the nature and effect of the EPA on 29
August 2020. She indicated she had
taken into account evidence from Dr Matthew
Spotswood, Intensive Care Consultant and Dr Dong, Plastics Registrar at the RHH
who indicated
their surprise that an EPA could be completed based on Mr
EEC’s confusion and drowsiness at the time. Dr Skelton was unable
indicate how frequently Dr Spotswood was able to observe Mr EEC but noted he was
the consultant in charge so would have been involved
with the transfer from
emergency to ICU and been the consultant looking after him and his overall care
over those four or five days
of intensive care treatment, and had an awareness
of Mr EEC’s delirium during that admission.
52. Dr Skelton reported she had emailed Dr Spotswood and Dr Dong seeking
their comment on Mr EEC’s capacity to execute an EPA.
Dr Spotswood reply
was ‘Mr EEC had sustained burns in circumstances that led us to wonder
know he had signed an EPA on our unit. I am
surprised. My initial impression would be that he would need assistance with
such a document.’
Dr Dong replied ‘I recall he was septic and
confused on the 28 August, he showed some signs of improvement on 29 August but
I noted he was delirious and was having visual hallucinations on occasions
through that day.’ Dr Skelton commented that with
a delirium there can be
fluctuations and a person can go from being very confused to more lucid. Dr
Skelton stated she believed it
unlikely that Mr EEC had the cognitive capacity
on the day to understand and complete an EPA, given the context of dementia and
decline that had likely been present for the last 2 or more years, a
likely delirium, and the evidence from Dr Dong and Dr Spotswood.
53. Dr Skelton stated from Mr EEC’s admission to Peacock 1 in October
2020 and after assessment of his capacity, she did not
believe Mr EEC had the
capacity to manage his financial estate. Dr Skelton noted that Mr EEC had relied
on his daughter Ms BP, in
particular, to help manage his finances.
54. Dr Skelton stated that since Mr EEC’s discharge from hospital she
has not seen him or assessed his capacity to understand
the nature and effect of
an EPA. Dr Skelton was questioned by the Board as to whether she believed Mr
EEC’s cognition would
be any different now, and whether he had capacity to
understand an EPA now, being the time of the hearing.
55. Dr Skelton stated it was possible that there could have been some
improvement in Mr EEC’s cognition from the time when he
left hospital to
the time when he has been in the residential aged care facility. She indicated
she would not ‘expect a great
improvement but people do sometimes improve
as it can take 6 months in some cases for people to fully recover from episodes
of delirium
and with additional care and nutrition and a stable environment,
that can all help with someone’s cognition, so it is possible
that Mr EEC
had some improvement since being in Barossa.’ When asked how likely it
would be that he has regained his capacity
to understand the nature and effect
of an EPA now, Dr Skelton responded ‘I know that he did not have that
capacity in October,
I would imagine that he has not had enough cognitive
recovery to understand such a complex legal document but to give a definitive
answer, I would want to re-examine him.’
56. In a HCPR Ms Corbett, Clinical Psychologist at the RHH stated Mr EEC had
a diagnosis of dementia with mixed Alzheimer’s
and vascular type changes.
Ms Corbett conducted an assessment of Mr EEC’s capacity on 26 October
2020. She stated she believed
his planning and reasoning skills and impulse
control were impaired by virtue of his dementia. Ms Corbett stated that on
of financial decision making capacity Mr EEC was unable to provide
the facts of his financial situation. Her evidence was that Mr
EEC reported his
income from the pension incorrectly and frequently forgot to pay bills.
‘He was unable to provide details
regarding budgeting, banking or how he
managed his day to day expenses.’ Ms Corbett opined that Mr EEC ‘did
the basic facts of his financial situation and due to short term memory
deficits is unable to retain information presented to him.
These issues impact
his ability to manage legal matters regarding his finances.’
57. In oral evidence Ms Corbett stated she did not know Mr EEC when he was in
ICU but if asked to assess his capacity in ICU ‘my
concerns would be that
the Mr EEC had been admitted three days following the burns which raise concerns
and his cognition prior to his admission. With the
delirium at the time, I would be concerned about the validity of a capacity
at that time.’ On questioning from the Board Ms Corbett opined
‘I think it would be unlikely that Mr EEC would have had
capacity to
appoint an EPA at that time.’
58. Ms Corbett reported that at the time of her assessment on the 26 October
2020 she had asked Mr EEC about the nature and effect
of an EPA, and he
indicated: ‘that it’s like a next of kin’ reporting roles
including ‘If I need money to
pay bills, they come.’
‘It’s a bit of their money and it’s a bit of my money.’
He also reported EPA
roles to include funeral arrangements and food delivery and
supply. Ms Corbett also reported Mr EEC stated: ‘it’s about
rules and legal and everything else, blah blah blah, power of attorney.’
In the HCPR Ms Corbett states Mr EEC reported
the EPA had been signed ‘a
few months ago’, stating the location as ‘on the table’ and
‘in Hobart.’
Ms Corbett stated ‘He was consistent in saying it
was his daughter and then his son that he wanted appointed, so there is no
change in who he wants appointed but I felt that he did not understand the
nature or effect of the document.’
59. When asked about the likelihood of Mr EEC having regained capacity to
make an EPA now, Ms Corbett stated ‘I think it would
be unlikely that
given his cognitive impairment and dementia, that there would be substantial
change in his understanding of the
nature and effect of the document.’
60. The Board had before it a copy of a medical report letter from Dr Jane
Tolman, Geriatrician, addressed to Dr Gregg Pitt, General
Practitioner dated 9
March 2021. Dr Tolman also gave oral evidence at the hearing on 26 March 2021.
The Board also had a HCPR from
Dr Pitt that post-dated Dr Tolman’s report
and appears to solely rely on Dr Tolman’s report to inform his opinion. Dr
Tolman confirmed at hearing she had met with Mr EEC once, being 9 March 2021,
and conducted a ‘comprehensive assessment.’
Dr Tolman provided some
detail of Mr EEC’s personal history, function and detail about his
capacity. Dr Tolman noted, in 2015
on a holiday in Italy, family members
observed episodes of disorientation and confusion in Mr EEC. At that time a
niece of Mr EEC’s
observed his condition resembled that of one of her
parents who had dementia. Dr Tolman noted that family also observed in the last
2 years ‘He became very repetitive; short term memory was impaired; he
needed significant assistance in selling a block of
land and this was not in
keeping with his previous abilities or personality, he became suspicious of
others...’ Dr Tolman stated
in her oral evidence he began to exhibit
paranoia. It was reported there were issues with legal matters including
approvals expiring,
invalid contracts, and unpaid accounts. His driver’s
licence was revoked. In 2020 Dr Tolman reports there was evidence of Mr
becoming malnourished; of him flooding his home; not paying bills; and of giving
of intermittent authority to his son and daughter
to manage his personal and
business finances. Dr Tolman indicated she had obtained most of the background
information about Mr EEC
from Ms BP.
61. In her oral evidence, Dr Tolman opined that Mr EEC has a diagnosis of
dementia and that cognitive decline dated back to 2015.
She questioned whether
he had capacity to participate in various legal and financial arrangements in
2018 and 2019:
It looked to me that he had had dementia for possibly up
to five years, certainly it was becoming more obvious and in 2019, when somebody
or other said he should not be driving, that is getting pretty definitive, that
is often the last thing that happens. The fact that
he wasn’t eating well,
flooded the house, I mean any one could do any of that, but all together, these
things are adding up
to a picture. I was told by B that she and her brother had
been given the authority by Mr EEC to manage finances because he was finding
hard to do that, he has acknowledged that.
62. In oral evidence, Dr Tolman stated ‘the sudden cognitive
decline...at the time of his hospital presentation at the end of
August 2020 was
the result of a delirium which was secondary to the perineal burn, sepsis,
environmental changes, various medications
and other factors.’ She stated
delirium can be fluctuating. She agreed it can cause disengagement from reality,
which can be
fluctuating. She indicated she had no view or evidence about Mr
EEC’s capacity to understand an EPA on 29 August 2020. She
then opined
that it is quite likely, and maybe very likely, he had capacity to execute an
EPA at some stage on 29 August 2020, noting
dementia and delirium ‘are
diseases that have wild swings and very significant variations, not just from
person to person,
but from moment to moment within a person.’ She agreed
with questioning that a person during a delirium in the best moments
fluctuations, wouldn’t be any better than their baseline.
63. Dr Tolman gave evidence that Mr EEC does not have capacity to manage his
financial estate or legal matters.
64. Dr Tolman gave evidence that at the time of her assessment Mr EEC had
capacity to appoint an enduring power of attorney. She formed
this view on the
basis Mr EEC understood the concept that he can’t manage his finances and
was very clear about who he wants
to do that and why. Dr Tolman opined that Mr
EEC gave very plausible reasons why he wanted Ms BP to continue as his attorney,
others. Dr Tolman confirmed she did not discuss the possibility of
variation, termination or changing the future of the EPA with
Mr EEC, and when
exploring the extent of any powers conferred by an EPA she advised ‘I told
him that the person who makes the
financial decisions has got total control over
his money and can do anything that they think is right and that you have got to
someone who would do what you would have wanted them to do.’
65. After hearing the medical evidence the Board gave leave to the doctors
and Ms Corbett. The Board then adjourned briefly and on
its return Dr Tolman and
Ms Corbett had left the hearing room and Dr Skelton had disconnected from
Microsoft Teams. Ms Watson and
then Ms Tria expressed immediate concern to the
Board that Dr Tolman had been questioning Mr EEC further during the adjournment
which in their opinion was an attempt to assess his capacity about the
EPA. Ms BP stated Dr Tolman was trying to initiate discussion
with him about the
66. Ms BP was invited to give evidence. Ms BP made the point that only she,
her brother, Dr Pitt and Mr Ierino knew Mr EEC for some
time, all the medical
practitioners only knew him ‘for a snippet.’ She indicated that she
witnessed a decline in Mr EEC’s
cognitive ability in the last few years.
In mid-2020 she was managing his finances but she believed he still understood
going on, and making decisions.
67. Ms BP reported she received a phone call from the RHH on the evening of
the 28 August 2021 advising her father was in hospital
with a delirium and
burns. She was able to speak to Mr EEC that night, who she confirmed was
delirious, was talking in Italian and
was able to have a joke. The next day she
spoke with him again and felt he had improved. He indicated he understood he was
a serious operation and could die. He asked her to have his solicitor
‘come in.’ Ms BP stated she believed her father
had capacity to
understand and execute an EPA on 29 August 2020. She confirmed she was managing
Mr EEC’s finances during the
period of his hospital admission and had
continued since then. She stated ‘he left a right royal mess.’
68. Ms BP stated she has been self-employed for the last 20 years and has
done all her own accounting work and made investment decisions
relating to her
own estate. She is a licenced real estate agent. She gave an overview of Mr
EEC’s estate, the value of his
assets and liabilities, and what financial
decisions she had made over the last few months. She indicated she was his
correspondence
nominee with Centrelink. Documentation submitted by Ms BP
indicated that she and her brother, as joint attorneys, had engaged a tax
advisory company as accountant and tax agent for their father. The Board was
advised a company in which Mr EEC was a shareholder
was in voluntary
administration and documentation to this effect formed part of the hearing
69. Ms BP gave evidence that did not believe she was in a position where her
interests would conflict with her father’s. She
said she would treat the
management of her father’s estate as if her father was her client. Ms BP
said she communicated frequently
with her father and was able to communicate
with her brother and sister, providing transparency. She indicated her ongoing
willingness
to manage her father’s estate.
70. Mr BEC supported Ms BP’s ongoing management of his father’s
estate. He acknowledged that being joint attorney with
Ms BP did cause conflict
and differences of opinion. He stated he had been in Tasmania for a couple of
months assisting his father
with his properties and paying bills for him.
71. At the end of the hearing on the 26 March 2020, Ms Tria informed the
Board that on 29 August 2020 the RHH had a COVID-19 Visitor
Policy in place.
This policy provided strict restrictions on who could visit and when, and
requiring all visitors to complete a COVID-19
visitor screening tool
electronically or by paper, before entering the hospital. Ms Tria stated at
every entrance of the hospital
was a security guard ensuring compliance with the
visitor and check-in policy. She indicated if the proper screening was not done
then there was no entry to the hospital. Ms Tria stated on a check of the
Visitors Log at the RHH there was no record of Mr Ierino
attending the RHH on
the 29 August 2020. Further Ms Tria stated that the ICU was a locked unit and
any visitor entering the unit
was required to sign in. There was no record of Mr
Ierino attending the ICU on 29 August 2020, only a female person identified as
Ms Xue Mei Ma. She indicated that Ms Ma had been identified as working for Mr
Ierino, as his office manager.
72. Mr EEC gave evidence that he ‘thinks he saw Mr Ierino’ in the
ICU and is unable to recall anyone else being with him.
He was not able to
recall any other visitors when he was in ICU.
73. Mr EEC stated at hearing, he did not have dementia but just forgets
things. He gave evidence his children are doing his finances
can’t attend to it but thought he was capable. He indicated he sometimes
needs help. Mr EEC advised that Ms BP is
for one person continuing as attorney, that being Ms BP, rather than two or
three family members.
When asked what an enduring power of attorney is, he
replied ‘I want honest. Now it’s BP and my son. I want to remove
son. There are conflict.’ When asked what Ms BP could do as his attorney
he indicated that was up to her, ‘she has
a lot of power and can pay
bills.’ He said ‘if she does good things, good and if not I kick her
Findings and Determination
74. The medical evidence from Dr Tolman, Dr Skelton
and Ms Corbett is that Mr EEC has dementia. A CT scan on 16 September 2020 shows
small vessel ischemia and atrophy of Mr EEC’s brain, cognitive testing
supported a finding of cognitive decline and impairments
and personal and
functional history provided by family over the last 5 years indicated increasing
cognitive decline, all of which
led to the diagnosis of dementia. The Board
finds on all the medical evidence before it, Mr EEC has a diagnosis of dementia
Alzheimer’s and vascular type), with cognitive decline being
evident over the previous 2-5 years. The Board did not have any
medical evidence
before it which disputes this diagnosis.
75. The Board needs to consider whether Mr EEC had capacity to understand the
nature and effect of the EPA on 29 August 2020. The
evidence of Mr Ierino is
that he attended ICU and provided Mr EEC with the EPA and ‘to let him know
if he had any difficulties
with the document.’ Mr Ierino stated that Mr
EEC read the document carefully and confirmed he understood it and confirmed who
he wanted to appoint as his attorneys. It is Mr Ierino’s opinion that Mr
EEC understood the nature and effect of the enduring
power of attorney or his
words ‘I assessed he was capable.’ From his evidence it was clear,
Mr Ierino did not test Mr
EEC’s understanding of the document. There was
no discussion or explanation about the effect of the enduring power of attorney
as an instrument that went beyond appointing his son and daughter as attorneys.
In particular there was no evidence before the Board
that on 29 August 2020 Mr
Ierino satisfied himself that Mr EEC understood the matters set out in section
30(3) of the POA Act. Mr
Ierino’s evidence focused on Mr EEC’s
ability to express a preference for whom he wanted appointed as his attorney as
opposed to the broader understanding of the nature and effect of the document.
Further, while Mr EEC indicated that he wanted his
son and daughter to be his
joint attorneys it is unlikely he could have formed the view that he wanted them
to have all of the powers
vested in an attorney under an enduring power of
attorney, because there was no evidence to indicate he knew what those powers
or that Mr Ierino had gone through that with him on 29 August 2020 and
tested his understanding of that.
76. Further Mr Ierino did not state or explain how he ‘assessed’
Mr EEC’s capacity, except the fact that he had
known him for many years.
The evidence indicates that he did not speak with a medical practitioner in ICU
on 29 August 2020 or any
other medical practitioner on or before that date to
ascertain Mr EEC’s capacity. This would have been a prudent action and
indeed reasonable and appropriate action for a legal practitioner, particularly
given the setting Mr EEC was in when Mr EEC executed
the EPA, and the ability
and opportunity to get medical advice at that time.
77. The Board accepts Dr Skelton and Dr Tolman’s opinion that it is
more likely than not that Mr EEC had delirium during his
acute episode of
illness in ICU. The Board accepts the medical evidence that a person
experiencing delirium can have fluctuating
capacity within the course of a day.
The Board accepts the evidence from Dr Dong that Mr EEC was delirious and was
having visual
hallucinations on occasions through 29 August 2020. There was also
confusion and drowsiness noted by Dr Dong and Dr Spotswood, and
both doctors
were surprised the EPA was executed.
78. Dr Skelton and Ms Corbett opined it was unlikely that Mr EEC had the
cognitive capacity on 29 August 2020 to understand and complete
an EPA, given
the context of dementia which had been likely to be present for the last 2 or
more years, probable delirium and the
evidence from Dr Dong and Dr Spotswood.
79. Dr Tolman opined it was very likely Mr EEC had capacity to execute an EPA
at some stage on 29 August 2020. This is quite different
to stating at the time
of signing the EPA Mr EEC had capacity, that is, that he understood the nature
and effect of the document,
which is the crux of the matter. Dr Tolman had noted
doubts about Mr EEC’s capacity to participate in various legal and
arrangements in 2018 and 2019 and court proceedings, and his apparent
cognitive decline over the preceding 2 years, and incapacity
now to manage his
estate. She did not appear to appreciate the complexity of an EPA and the test
contained in section 30(3) of the
80. Ms BP also gave evidence that she believed Mr EEC had capacity to execute
the EPA on 29 August 2020. The Board notes that Ms BP
did not see Mr EEC in ICU,
given she lived in Victoria. Ms BP accepted that Mr EEC was delirious on 28
August 2020 but believed he
had improved on 29 August 2020 and following surgery
she commented ‘he was not in a good way.’ She indicated that her
father was in the middle of a property transaction and her father felt there was
some urgency to sign the documentation as there
were ‘consequences if the
paperwork was not done.’ She gave evidence that before her father was
‘admitted to hospital
she did not really know what dementia was except the
public view where your brain goes a bit funny.’ Her view was that her
father was showing signs of cognitive decline but could still make his own
81. While there is no direct formal medical assessment of Mr EEC’s
capacity on 29 August 2020, the Board does note that approximately
7 weeks later
when Mr EEC’s capacity was formally assessed it was found his planning and
reasoning skills were impaired and
he had difficulty recollecting the details of
the EPA, including when and where it was signed, and demonstrated very limited
understanding
as to the nature and effect of it, and limited understanding about
his financial estate.
82. The Board is persuaded by Mr EEC’s history of cognitive decline
outlined in Dr Tolman’s report and to a large extent
observations and evidence of Ms BP, the evidence of Dr Skelton, Ms Corbett and
the observations of the specialist doctors
in ICU, and finds the weight of the
evidence supports a finding that Mr EEC did not have mental capacity to
understand the nature
and effect of the enduring power of attorney he executed
on the 29 August 2020. The Board therefore declares the EPA invalid.
83. The Board also makes the following observations about the validity of the
EPA pursuant to section 33(2)(e) of the POA Act, which
On the review, the Board may, by order –
(e) declare that the enduing power of attorney...by the donor is invalid if the
Board is satisfied that
(ii) the power...does not comply with the other requirements of this Act.
Section 9 of the POA Act states:
A power of attorney made or created under...section 30
(b) must be signed by the donor with the that signature attested by the
signature of –
[Section 9 Subsection (1) amended by No. 39 of 2013, s. 5,
Applied:01 Feb 2014]
in the case of an enduring power of attorney, two
witnesses neither of whom is a party to it nor a close relative of a party to it
and each of whom has witnessed it in the presence of the donor and each
84. Mr Ierino gave oral evidence he attended ICU on the afternoon of 29
August 2020. In the course of the hearing he tendered a File
Note of his
attendance on Mr EEC on 29 August 2020. On examination of the EPA it appears Mr
Ierino has certified and signed as a
witness to the EPA executed by Mr EEC. The
other witness is Ms Xue Mei Ma, Office Manager of 418 Elizabeth Street North
which is the address of Mr Ierino’s legal practice.
85. The Board notes that at no time during his oral evidence does Mr Ierino
refer to attending the ICU with Ms Ma. Mr Ierino’s
File Note makes no
reference to Ms Ma being present. Yet, both witnesses have certified that the
donor has ‘signed the Instrument
and form of acceptance freely and
voluntarily in
(emphasis added).
EEC’s evidence is that ‘he thinks he saw Mr Ierino in the ICU’
and is unable to recall anyone else being with
him. The COVID-19 check-in at the
entrances of the RHH and the Visitor Log at the ICU do not confirm that Mr
Ierino attended the
ICU on Saturday 29 August 2020. The Visitors Log provided to
the Board only indicate Ms Xue Mei Ma attended the RHH and the ICU on
29 August 2020. There is no evidence before the Board which indicates that Ms Ma
and Mr Ierino were in the presence of each
other and Mr EEC when they signed and
certified the EPA, as witnesses. If that is the case, it would mean the EPA did
with the requirements of the POA Act, in particular with section 9 of
the POA Act, and on this basis the EPA would be invalid. Further,
the evidence
from the RHH points to a finding that Mr Ierino was not at the ICU on 29 August
2020. The Board did give consideration
to whether it should adjourn the hearing
to summons Mr Ierino and Ms Ma to hearing to question them. It was noted that
had ignored all contact made by the Board Registry requesting he make
the Board had
found Mr EEC lacked capacity to understand the nature and effect of the EPA, and
on that basis found the EPA was invalid,
it determined it was not in Mr
EEC’s best interests to prolong the determination of the Application by
adjourning the hearing,
and sit through hearing further evidence.
86. Before considering whether there was a need to appoint an administrator
for Mr EEC, the Board considered whether he had capacity
to understand the
nature and effect of an EPA now. If it was found Mr EEC did have capacity to
make an EPA and wanted to proceed
to make an EPA, then there would be no need
for the appointment of an administrator.
87. Dr Tolman’s evidence was that Mr EEC did have capacity at the time
she assessed him on 9 March 2021 to make an EPA and she
confirmed that at
hearing. Dr Tolman’s assessment was based on her understanding that Mr EEC
understands he is unable to manage
his finances and understands he wants someone
to manage his finances, and gave plausible reasons why he wants Ms BP to be sole
Dr Tolman explained to Mr EEC this ‘meant giving someone total
control of his finances’ and indicated that this should
be someone close
to him and someone he trusts. It does not appear from Dr Tolman’s own
evidence that she questioned or assessed
Mr EEC’s understanding of her
brief explanation about giving total control of his finances to an attorney.
88. In her evidence, Dr Tolman acknowledged that she did not question or
assess Mr EEC’s understanding about the possibility
of variation of the
EPA or revoking the EPA, and there was no evidence of the other matters in
section 30(3) of the POA Act being
discussed and assessed. In this respect Dr
Tolman’s assessment was flawed. Dr Tolman may have attempted to correct
the Board had given her leave on the basis she had finished giving
evidence and had adjourned as there was evidence from Mr Tria,
Ms Watson and Ms
BP that she had conversation with Mr EEC about his further understanding of the
EPA. The Board does not consider
that it is appropriate in the circumstances to
put the subject person through any questioning or assessment of capacity when
as an expert witness and having finished giving evidence at a hearing.
It is unclear what purpose this serves and it is difficult
to see how this could
be in the subject person’s best interests.
89. Dr Skelton opined that, as Mr EEC did not have capacity in October 2020
to understand the nature and effect of an EPA, she did
not believe he would have
had enough cognitive recovery to understand an EPA in March 2021. Ms Corbett
found Mr EEC’s planning
and reasoning skills were impaired and he was
unable to respond to her questioning or demonstrate an understanding of the
and effect of the EPA at the time of her assessment. Ms Corbett opined it
was unlikely that given Mr EEC’s cognitive impairment
there would be
substantial change in his understanding of the nature and effect of the
document, from when she assessed him. Both
Dr Skelton and Ms Corbett did state
they had not had opportunity to reassess Mr EEC since his discharge from the RHH
and therefore
could not give a definitive response.
90. Dr Tolman’s assessment of Mr EEC’s capacity to understand the
nature and effect of an EPA was the most recent. Dr
Tolman and Ms Corbett
however only met Mr EEC once for the purpose of the assessment and report, while
Dr Skelton’s contact
was more frequent given her evidence that she was in
charge of Mr EEC’s care while he was on Peacock 1. Dr Skelton had
opportunity
to make observation and informal assessment of Mr EEC over a longer
period of time, (approximately 3 months) and with the opportunity
to account for
fluctuations in capacity over time.
91. Dr Tolman’s evidence did not indicate that Mr EEC was able to
demonstrate or relay his understanding about the effect of
the enduring power of
attorney, other than it being an appointment which would allow the attorney to
to be appointed as his attorney and why. At
hearing, Mr EEC demonstrated limited understanding about the effect of an EPA.
For example
Mr EEC’s comment ‘if she does good things, good and if
not I kick her out’ does not indicate an understanding of
an enduring POA.
His evidence however was clear who he wanted to manage his finances and why.
This falls well short of an understanding
of the effects of an enduring power of
attorney, including that an attorney could do things that Mr EEC would not
decide or choose
92. Further, given the evidence from Dr Tolman, the Board finds Mr EEC could
not have formed the view that he wanted his attorney
to have all of the powers
vested in an attorney under an enduring power of attorney, because he did not
know what those powers were
and there is no evidence that this was ever
explained to him by his solicitor or any other person.
93. Accordingly, the Board is persuaded by the opinions of Dr Skelton and Ms
Corbett and also for the reasons set out in paragraphs
89-91 above, and finds Mr
EEC does not have capacity to understand the nature and effect of a power of
94. Given that the Board finds that Mr EEC lacks the requisite capacity to
execute a new EPA, the Board considered the criteria set
out in section 51 of
the GAA, as to whether it makes an administration order for Mr EEC.
95. The findings of dementia made in paragraph 68 above are repeated and
relied on by the Board to make a finding that Mr EEC has
a disability, as
defined in section 3 of the GAA.
96. The medical evidence from Dr Skelton, Ms Corbett and Dr Tolman is that Mr
EEC is not capable of managing his financial estate.
The Board is persuaded on
the medical evidence that Mr EEC is unable to make reasonable judgments as to
his estate.
97. In considering whether there is a need for an administrator to be
appointed to manage Mr EEC’s estate the Board gives weight
BP’s evidence. The Board is persuaded there are financial decisions to be
made concerning his property, shareholdings,
and investments, as well as day to
day management of Mr EEC’s finances including payment of his bills and
residential aged
98. The Board finds it is in Mr EEC’s best interests that his estate be
administered by an administrator.
99. At this point in time, the Board finds there is no less restrictive way
of managing Mr EEC’s estate other than by the appointment
administrator. Such an order should be plenary, that is, to allow unrestricted
authority to an administrator to manage his
estate and day to day finances.
100. The Board considered whether to appoint the Public Trustee or Ms BP as
administrator for Mr EEC. The Board considered the eligibility
criteria in
section 54 of the GAA, in respect to persons eligible as administrators. The
Board is satisfied on the evidence before
it, that Ms BP will act in her
father’s best interests, does not appear to be at this time in a position
where her interests
may conflict with Mr EEC’s and appears suitable to act
as administrator given her close relationship with her father. The Board
considered whether Ms BP has sufficient expertise to deal with Mr EEC’s
estate, which is a sizeable and a complex estate, and
considered she did given
her demonstrated willingness to obtain accounting and tax advice and all
necessary assistance as required.
101. Mr EEC made it clear to the Board that he wanted his daughter Ms BP to
manage his estate. This is consistent with his wishes
expressed to Mr Ierino, to
Dr Tolman, and to Ms Corbett. Mr BEC also endorsed Ms BP’s appointment.
The Board was satisfied
that the criteria in section 54 were met by the
appointment of Ms BP.
102. The Board also heard evidence that Mr EEC gave gifts to family members
throughout the year on special occasion days such as birthdays
and Christmas.
The Board obtained details as to who Mr EEC gifts to and an estimate of the
amounts. The Board finds it appropriate
to make a gifting order to a maximum of
$2000 per year, subject to the administrator’s discretion.
In respect to the Application for Review of the Enduring Power of Attorney
the Board orders:
1. Enduring Power of Attorney PA XXXXXX dated 29 August 2020 made by the
Donor EEC is invalid as the Donor did not have the mental
capacity to make the
2. BP is appointed as Administrator of the estate of EEC.
3. The Administrator is authorised to distribute gifts from EEC’s
estate to a maximum of $2000.00 per year. Such gifts are subject
Administrator’s discretion.
4. The Administrator is to lodge with the Board a Financial Summary relating
to the estate of EEC no later than 6 weeks from the date
5. The Order remains in effect to 25 March 2024.
Burns v Corbett
265 CLR 304
Firinauskas
[2018] SACAT
Re Ranger Uranium Mines
(1987)163 CLR 656, p666.
Precision Data Holdings
[1991] HCA 58
(1992) 173 CLR 167.
[2019] WASC 255
point was made by Justice Kitto in
Tasmanian Breweries
in relation to the
‘borderland’ in which judicial and administrative functions
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
[2010] NSWSC 804
per Barrett J at [34, 36].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (444 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter