URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASRPDComm/2009/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:20:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sorell Planning Scheme 1993 Amendment 2/2008 [2009] TASRPDComm 21 (6 May 2009)
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act
Resource Planning and Development Commission Act 1997
Decision and Reasons for Decision
PLANNING SCHEME
Draft Amendment
A draft Amendment to change the provisions and standards for the residential
use classes and the zones within which residential uses
Date and Place of Hearing
2.15 PM Tuesday, 31 March 2009
at the Sorell Council, 12 Somerville Street, Sorell
16 February 2009
and pursuant to Section 8 of the
Resource Planning and Development
Commission Act 1997
, the Commission delegated to
Mr Robin Nolan
powers and functions under
sections 40
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
in relation to draft amendment
Planning Scheme
connection with the exercise of those powers in performance of those functions,
its powers under Part 3 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Representation
One representation was received from Mr Stuart Clues, on behalf of the Tasmanian
Housing Industry Association (HIA).
Council also received a letter from Mr Denis Pigden that was outside the public
exhibition period and, while noting its contents,
chose not to treat this as a
formal representation.
Issues raised in the representation
The representation:
− Supported changing the status of Multiple Dwelling within the
Residential Serviced zone to permitted; but
− Objected to a proposed dwelling site area of
. The representation states that
is sufficient and argues for consistency with the
proposed minimum area for the Business zone and corresponding provisions in the
Brighton Planning Scheme 2000.
Mr Pigden similarly objected to the proposed dwelling site area of
and at the hearing sought to have the proposed
maximum floor area for the use class dependent persons unit lifted from
as is the case
for the current house and ancillary apartment.
Council’s response to the representations
Council’s s.39(2) of LUPAA report considered the representation and the
draft amendment. Council resolved that issues raised
in the representation did
not warrant modification to the draft amendment.
However, Council resolved to recommend to the Commission that several changes be
made to the draft amendment as contained in Appendix
A and B of their planners
report. The provisions of the certified draft amendment and Council’s
recommended changes are considered
Appearances at the hearing
: Mr J Molnar represented the Sorell Council
Materially interested person:
Mr D Pigden
Commission’s assessment of the draft amendment
The draft amendment:
− Introduces definitions for Site Coverage and for the use class Multiple
− Amends the existing use class definitions for Apartment and House and
Ancillary Apartment’.
− Amends Schedule 2 – Table of Uses.
− Introduces provisions for Multiple Dwellings within Schedule 7 –
Dwelling Units.
− Makes various amendments consequential to the above including
consequential amendments to Schedule 12.
The parts of the draft amendment
The certified draft amendment specified:
‘Clause 1.5.4 - After the definition description for ‘Sign’
insert the following term and definition:
Site Coverage – means the proportion of a site covered by
buildings.’
The draft amendment proposes limits on the proportion of a site to be developed
for residential use. The definition accords with
the Common Key Elements
Template established by Planning Directive No. 1 (the Template). The proposed
definition is appropriate.
This part of the draft amendment should be
2 Consequential amendment
The certified draft amendment specified:
‘At clause 4.2.11
delete reference to House and Ancillary Apartment and replace with House and
Dependant Persons Unit.’
As this change in name of the use class is not accepted this part of the
draft amendment is rejected.
3 To make multiple dwellings in the Business zone subject to Schedule
The certified draft amendment specified:
‘Insert a new Clause (e) in. 6.7.2 as follows:
(e) Development for the purposes of Multiple Dwellings must accord with the
provisions of Schedule 7.’
To make the use class house in the Village zone subject to Schedule
The certified draft amendment specified:
‘Insert a new Clause (d) in 6.8.2 as follows:
(d) Development for the purposes of a House must accord with the provisions of
Schedule 7.’
To make the use class house in the Tourist zone subject to Schedule
The certified draft amendment specified:
‘Insert a new Clause (d) at the end of 6.11.2 as follows:
(d) Development for the purposes of a House must accord with the provisions of
Schedule 7.’
The above parts of the draft amendment at points 3,4 and 5 are appropriate and
should be approved.
of Apartment
The current use definition of Apartment is:
means any land used
for one or more dwelling units not elsewhere defined in the Schedule.
The certified draft amendment specified:
‘Amend Clause S1.2.1 to delete the definition for
‘Apartment(s)’ and replace with:
means any land used for the purpose of dwelling units located on a site within
commercial areas whereby the dwelling unit does not
have ground floor road
frontage (i.e. is located on the first floor or to the rear of the commercial
premise) and is not elsewhere
defined in the Planning
Council subsequently recommended a revised definition for apartment to that
certified so that the use is not confined to commercial
areas with the
definition for apartment to then read:
‘means any land used
for a dwelling unit that does not have direct access from ground level and not
elsewhere defined in the
Planning Scheme. Examples are a walk-up flat or a
dwelling unit attached to another use’
Within the suite of residential definitions the use class multiple dwelling has
the character of each unit having separate ground
level access and private open
space at ground level. An apartment does not necessarily have these characters
and is therefore the
preferred default use as in the current definition. In
addition as certified, an apartment should not be confined to commercial
and there would be few occasions in Sorell when an apartment would not have a
direct ground floor access.
In consideration of the range of residential use definitions under review, the
amended definition for apartment is not required.
This part of the draft
amendment should be rejected.
7. House and Dependant Persons Unit
The certified draft amendment specified:
‘Delete the use
category House and ancillary apartment and replace with the term House and
Dependant Persons Unit and insert
the definition:
‘means any land used for a house, as defined above, and an additional
dwelling unit where:
(a) water, electricity and sewerage services to the House and
Dependant Persons Unit are commonly metered; and
(b) the Dependant Persons Unit:
i) is connected to that House
ii) has a Floor Area not exceeding 60m
iii) is occupied by a person that is a dependent of, or
related to the occupants of the House.
iv) is designed to be relocatable or demountable, or is able to be incorporated
as part of the existing House’
The current equivalent definition that is to be replaced is as follows:
‘House and Ancillary Apartment
means any land used for a House, as defined above, and an additional dwelling
unit that is appurtenant to that House, provided that
the floor area of the
additional dwelling unit is not greater than 80m
50% of the floor area of the dwelling unit of the House, whichever is the
Council’s view on the definition is that the change of name is more
descriptive of the purpose of the use class and there is
validity in a separate
use classification discrete from a house extension yet without being classified
as a multiple dwelling or
stand alone apartment.
Mr Pigden advocated the retention of the current minimum floor area of
. Mr Pigden submitted that the reduced maximum
floor area of 60m
is too small to permit a 2 bedroom
dwelling unit or make allowance for access by disabled persons.
There are matters of principle that apply to both the current definition and the
proposed replacement. First, a planning scheme
should not seek to specify the
occupants of a dwelling as this could be seen as discriminatory and cannot be
enforced in practice.
Second, the definition should stand without standards to
define it and third, is there any effective difference between a house
ancillary apartment and simply an extension to a dwelling?
For the purpose of the current scheme the concept of house and ancillary
apartment should be retained and the current definition
name merged with the
provisions of the certified alternative definition. Although the principle of
not having standards in a definition
holds, again within the context of the
current scheme the current approach should be retained. Also to the floor area,
position of a maximum floor area of
is preferred. A purported house and ancillary
apartment with a floor area greater than 60m
classified as either an apartment or multiple dwelling.
The modified definition is to read as follows:
House and Ancillary Apartment
‘means any land used for a House, as defined above, and an additional
dwelling unit where.’
(a) the House and additional dwelling unit are serviced from a common water,
sewerage, gas, electricity and telecommunications connection
and commonly
metered, where applicable; and
(b) the additional dwelling unit:
i) is connected to the House;
ii) has a Floor Area not exceeding 60m2;
designed to be relocatable or demountable, or is able to be incorporated as part
of the House'.
8. Multiple dwelling
The certified draft amendment specified:
‘Insert a new term and definition after the definition description for
Multiple Dwelling
Means any land used for two or more dwelling units on a single lot not
elsewhere defined in this Schedule.’
Council subsequently recommended the definition be modified to:
‘Multiple Dwelling
Means any land used for two or more dwelling units on a single lot where each
dwelling unit has its own defined site, individual access
and ground level
private open space.’
The proposed modified definition introduces a
concept of defined site without defining what this might be. In principle the
of defined site sets the area that is allocated for the exclusive use of
a dwelling where there is more than one dwelling on a site.
The concept can
also effectively set the density of dwellings where standards for the area of a
defined site are included.
At this stage, the recommended revised definition should be approved with a
further modification to incorporate a definition for
defined site. Should
Council decide that standards for the area of defined sites should be included
in the scheme, this can be by
future amendment. At this stage the definition
should be modified to:
‘Multiple dwelling
means any land used for two or more dwelling units on a single lot where each
dwelling unit has a defined site that is set aside for
the exclusive use of the
occupants of the dwelling unit and individual access and ground level private
open space for each dwelling
This part of the draft amendment should be approved with
modifications.
9. Consequential amendments
The certified draft amendment specified:
‘In the definition
for ‘Residential Building’, add the term ‘multiple
dwelling’ following ‘guest
‘In the definition for ‘Welfare Building’, add the term
‘multiple dwelling’ following ‘house’.
The above parts of the draft amendment should be approved.
10. Classification of apartments in zones.
The certified draft amendment proposed to prohibit apartments in all zones
except to be discretionary in the Business and Village
zones. Following
recommendations for a revised definition for apartments, Council proposed
retention of the current classification
of apartments in zones. The existing
classifications are appropriate. This part of the draft amendment should be
11. Classification of multiple dwellings in zones
The certified draft amendment classified multiple dwelling as a permitted use in
the Residential zone, discretionary in the Business
zone and prohibited in all
other zones. Council subsequently recommended the use class be also classified
in the Residential Unserviced
zone as discretionary. In consideration of the
range of zones and their intents this part of the draft amendment should be
with the modification recommended by Council.
Consequential
amendments relating to the definition of
House and Dependant Persons
The certified draft amendment specified:
‘In Schedule 2
Table of Uses delete the title ‘House and Ancillary Apartment’ at
row 4 and replace with ‘House
and Dependant Persons Unit’
‘Amend row 1 of Table 1 to Schedule 5 by omitting the term ‘House
& Ancillary Apartment’ and ‘ancillary
apartment’ and
substituting with ‘House and Dependant Persons Unit’ and
‘dependant persons unit’.
As the definition ‘House and Dependant Persons Unit’ is not
accepted, the above modifications do not need to be made.
This part of the
draft amendment is rejected.
13. Amendments to Schedule 5 Car parking
This part of the certified draft amendment set out to provide identical
carparking standards for apartments and multiple dwellings.
subsequently sought to clarify the provisions relating to the various
residential classifications as follows:
DEVELOPMENT
MIN. NO. OF CAR PARK SPACES
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS NOTES
House and Dependent Persons Unit
Not applicable
1 space for dependent persons unit
Dwelling unit
May be ‘jockey’ parking
Multiple Dwelling
Dwelling Unit
0.5 spaces + 0.5 spaces/bedroom per dwelling unit
1 additional common visitor space per 2 dwelling units.
Although Council’s recommended changes did not include parking
standards for apartments this use class was included in the certified
as having the same standards as multiple dwellings.
Council’s recommended changes help to clarify the position on parking
standards beyond that in the certified draft. Further
modifications are
required as follows:
− Omit house and dependent persons unit and substitute house and ancillary
− Relocate the note for multiple dwellings in the
column to the 3
− Alter the heading of the 4
‘NOTES’ to remove the prospect of standards being included in that
− Add under Notes a requirement for visitor spaces to be signed.
This part of the draft amendment, with the modifications, should
be approved as follows.
DEVELOP-MENT
MIN. NO. OF CAR PARK SPACES
Not applicable
May be ‘jockey’ parking
House and Ancillary Apartment
Not applicable
1 space for dependent persons unit
Dwelling Unit
0.5 spaces + 0.5 spaces per bedroom per dwelling unit
1 additional common visitor space per 2 dwelling units.
Visitor spaces to be signed
Multiple Dwelling
Dwelling Unit
0.5 spaces + 0.5 spaces per bedroom per dwelling unit
1 additional common visitor space per 2 dwelling units.
Visitor spaces to be signed
14. Amendments to Schedule 7-Dwelling Units
Schedule 7 applies to dwelling units generally, aspects of subdivision in terms
of streetscape and landscaping and specific provision
for apartments. The draft
amendment expands the scope to include multiple dwellings and to make other
consequential changes.
14.1 Application of Schedule &
Council recommended
additional clauses as follows:
‘Introduce the following new heading S7.1 and associated two new
clauses S7.1.1 and S7.1.2 and renumber subsequent clauses accordingly;
S7.1 Application of Schedule
S7.1.1 This Schedule applies to development of a new dwelling unit or
alteration or addition of an existing dwelling unit.
S7.1.2 Proposals for development to which this Schedule applies must
demonstrate compliance with the standards set out in clauses
S7.2.1 to S7.3.3
This additional directive clause clarifies the application of the Schedule to
all dwelling units in all applicable zones and should
be approved with the
reference numbers to clauses in the schedule amended as
14.2 Standards for apartments and multiple dwellings
Schedule 7 currently makes specific provision for apartments. The certified
draft amendment aimed to remove the apartment standards
and to substitute
standards for multiple dwellings. Council’s recommended changes clarify
this issue to some degree but the
standards for both types of dwellings need to
be defined.
The representation objected to the setting of a minimum multiple dwelling site
area of 400m
with the preference for
. Mr Pigden raised the same issue. The argument
for the higher density was based on the density adopted in planning schemes for
other Municipalities and that the requirements of a minimum density of
meant few lots would be available for multiple
dwellings where most lots subdivided were at a minimum lot size less than
. Mr Molnar agreed that most recently subdivided
lots were less than 800m2, but the older areas of Midway Point was exampled as
area of larger lots where unit developments could potentially dominate the
streetscape.
A further consideration is that Schedule 7 allows for the conditional approval
of lots on a plan of subdivision less than 450m
area and less than 300m
in area where part of an
approved development plan. It could therefore be the case that subdivided lots
for houses could be at a
greater density than that allowed for multiple
dwellings. Whilst noting this fact it is not considered as creating an inherent
inconsistency
in the planning scheme, as national and state residential codes
(eg TASCORD) mostly promote small lot housing.
In terms of the ability for a planning scheme to set standards for development
relevant to local requirements, the view of Council
on minimum dwelling density
is preferred. The standards set are for permitted development, and clause
s.7.2.3 of the planning scheme
allows for a variation to the standards if a
higher density of multiple dwellings is required.
The next issue is private open space. The certified draft amendment sets open
space standards for multiple dwellings at 40m
for balconies or rooftops. However at S7.1.19 the
private open space standard is 80m
. Clause S7.1.19
applies to all dwellings.
Mr Pigden submitted that the current standard of 80m
for each dwelling should be maintained. On the material available, there is
scope to specify the minimum private open space standards
specific to the type
of dwelling. The private open space requirements are expressed as minimum and
larger areas can be provided.
Therefore with a basic requirement of
for dwellings generally,
for ground level open space for multiple dwellings
for above ground open space for apartments
clause 7.1.19 should be modified to include Council’s recommended changes
for apartments
and multiple dwellings as follows:
Private Open Space
S7.1.19 Private open space for each dwelling unit is to be provided as
(a) For multiple dwellings, an area directly accessible from the dwelling unit
having a minimum area of 40 square metres or 20% of
the building footprint,
whichever is the greater, a minimum dimension of 4 metres and a maximum slope of
1 in 4 (25 per cent).
(b) For apartments that do not have direct ground level access, a balcony or
level rooftop area directly connected to the dwelling
unit having a minimum area
and a minimum dimension of 2
(c) For all other dwelling units, a minimum total area of 80 square metres
consisting of:
(i) one part directly accessible from the dwelling having a minimum area of 25
square metres, a minimum dimension of 4 metres and
a maximum slope of 1 in 4 (25
per cent); and
(ii) any other part having a minimum dimension of 2.5 metres.
(Note: no modifications to clauses S7.1.22 – S7.1.27 ‘Streetscape
and Landscaping’)
APARTMENTS AND MULTIPLE DWELLINGS
S7.2.1 A development for Apartments shall be in accordance with the development
standards specified in Table 3 to this Schedule.
T A B L E 3 T O S C H E D U L E 7
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS - DIMENSIONS AND CONDITIONS
(a) Minimum lot area per Apartment:
(i) Studio 120m2
(ii) One Bedroom 150m2
(iii) Two Bedroom 180m2
(iv) Three Bedroom 210m2
(b) Minimum separation of dwelling units opposite or across a court or driveway,
6 metres for a single storey development plus 3
metres for each additional
dwelling storey.
(c) Private open space in accordance with clause S7.1.19(b).
S7.2.2 A development for Multiple Dwellings shall be in accordance with the
following development standards:
Dwelling Site Area
(a) A minimum site area per dwelling unit of not less than
in the Residential Serviced Zone and
in the Business Zone.
Site Coverage
(b) A maximum site coverage of 40%.
Private Open Space
(c) Private open space for each dwelling unit in accordance with clause
S7.1.19(a).
(d) Buildings must be sited so that sunlight to at least 50% of the principal
area of ground level living rooms and private open
space of adjacent
properties:
(i) is not reduced to less than five hours between 9.00am and 5.00pm on June 21;
(ii) is not further reduced where existing overshadowing by buildings is greater
than the above.
S7.2.3 A development for Apartments or Multiple Dwellings shall be in
accordance with the following development standards:
(a) The design of buildings, footpaths, parking spaces, driveways and areas of
common and private open space shall be such that the
from both noise and overlooking is ensured.
(b) No pedestrian path or vehicle driveway giving access to a dwelling unit
shall be closer than 1 metre from the wall of another
dwelling unit, or 2
metres, if such wall contains a window with a sill height less than 2 metres
above the level of the path or driveway.
Landscaping
(c) In the preparation of the land for building construction purposes or when
landscaping the land, every effort shall be made to
retain existing trees and
(d) Any common areas of open space shall be suitably landscaped, or developed in
other appropriate ways for the enjoyment of residents.
(e) Suitably designed and screened areas shall be provided for the storage of
waste materials and garbage materials free from foraging
(f) Satisfactory provision shall be made for clothes drying facilities and
(g) In buildings of more than one storey, all pipes, ducts and vents servicing
the building shall be concealed from public view.
(h) Where practicable, a common TV antenna shall be provided in lieu of
individual antennae for each dwelling unit.
S7.2.4 Council may grant a planning approval for a development for Apartments or
Multiple Dwellings which is not in conformity with
the requirements of S7.2.1,
S7.2.2 and S7.2.3, subject to the provisions of Clause 2.5.
This part of the draft amendment concerning Schedule 7 as modified above should
be approved.
15. Amendments to Schedule 12 Criteria for on-site wastewater management
The certified draft amendment for Schedule 12 was to reflect the changed
residential use classes.
‘Omit S12.7 and substitute with
S12.7 APARTMENTS, MULTIPLE DWELLINGS, DEPENDENT PERSONS UNIT, BUILDING
EXTENSIONS AND OUTBUILDINGS
Omit title S12.7.1 and substitute with– ‘Apartments and Multiple
Omit title S12.7.2 Building Extensions, Ancillary Apartments and
Outbuilding’ and substitute with ‘Building Extensions,
Persons Unit and Outbuilding’.
Omit, in third dot point of S12.7.2, ‘ancillary apartments’ and
substitute with ‘Dependant Persons Unit’
Consistent with earlier decisions, the relevant use class is house and ancillary
apartment where appearing except in respect to the
third dot point of S12.7.2
where no modification is required. Clause s12.7.1 should have an additional
modification to omit ‘land
area per apartment’ and to substitute
‘site area’.
This part of the draft amendment should be approved as
Application of State Policies
State Policies are not applicable to the draft
Schedule 1 Objectives
Part 1 objectives
to promote the sustainable development of natural and physical resources and the
maintenance of ecological processes and genetic
The draft amendment furthers the objective for sustainable development of
physical resources through residential standards allowing
for an increase in
dwelling density consistent with the retention of residential amenity. The
maintenance of ecological processes
and genetic diversity are not directly
relevant to the draft amendment.
(b) to provide for the fair, orderly and sustainable use and development of
air, land and water;
The draft amendment furthers the objective for fair and orderly use and
development through the residential standards that recognise
different forms of
residential development and standards that should protect residential
(c) to encourage public involvement in resource management and
The draft amendment has included public processes.
(d) to facilitate economic development in accordance with the objectives set
out in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c);
The draft amendment furthers this objective consistent with the above
objectives.
(e) to promote the sharing of responsibility for resource management and
between the different spheres of Government, the community and
industry in the State.
The draft amendment involves the sharing of responsibility for appropriate
residential development in the Residential Serviced and
Residential Unserviced
zones of the Sorell Planning Scheme.
Part 2 objectives
The part 2 objectives are furthered principally in terms of establishing a
system of planning instruments to be the principal way
of setting objectives,
policies and controls for the use, development and protection of land.
In accordance with Section 40(1) of LUPAA, the draft amendment, representations
and Council’s report have been considered.
The draft amendment expands
the provisions and standards for residential use or development appropriate to
the planning scheme objectives
and the intents of the relevant zones. The draft
amendment should be approved with modifications.
Pursuant to
Section 41(ab)
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
the Commission modifies the draft amendment as set out in Annexure A and
gives its approval to the draft amendment as modified pursuant
to Section 42 of
Robin Nolan
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Attachment: Annexure A
Sorell Planning Scheme 1993
The Planning Scheme is amended as follows:
Part 1 Preliminary
1.5.4 - After the definition description for ‘Sign’ insert the
following term and definition
‘Site coverage – means the proportion of a site covered by
6.7.2 -Insert a new clause (e) as follows:
‘(e) Development for the purposes of Multiple Dwellings must accord with
the provisions of Schedule 7.’
6.8.2 - insert a new clause (d) in as follows:
‘(d) Development for the purposes of a House must accord with the
provisions of Schedule 7.’
a new Clause (d) at the end of 6.11.2 as follows:
‘(d) Development for the purposes of a House must accord with the
provisions of Schedule 7.’
S1.2.1 - Amend the definition of use category House and ancillary apartment
House and Ancillary Apartment
‘means any land used for a House, as defined above, and an additional
dwelling unit where.’
(a) the House and additional dwelling unit are serviced from a common water,
sewerage, gas, electricity and telecommunications connection
and commonly
metered, where applicable; and
(b) the additional dwelling unit:
i) is connected to the House;
ii) has a Floor Area not exceeding 60m2;
designed to be relocatable or demountable, or is able to be incorporated as part
of the House’.
S1.2.1 - Insert a new term and definition after the definition description for
‘Multiple dwelling
means any land used for two or more dwelling units on a single lot where each
dwelling unit has a defined site that is set aside for
the exclusive use of the
occupants of the dwelling unit and individual access and ground level private
open space for each dwelling
the definition for ‘Residential Building’, add the term
‘multiple dwelling’ following ‘guest house’.
the definition for ‘Welfare Building’, add the term ‘multiple
dwelling’ following ‘house’.
Schedule 2 insert a new row after row 4 of the Residential Uses Table as
Multiple Dwelling
rows 2 and 3 of Table 1 to Schedule 5 and replace with the following:
DEVELOP-MENT
MIN. NO. OF CAR PARK SPACES
Not applicable
May be ‘jockey’ parking
House and Ancillary Apartment
Not applicable
1 space for dependent persons unit
Dwelling Unit
0.5 spaces + 0.5 spaces per bedroom per dwelling unit
1 additional common visitor space per 2 dwelling units.
Visitor spaces to be signed
Multiple Dwelling
Dwelling Unit
0.5 spaces + 0.5 spaces per bedroom per dwelling unit
1 additional common visitor space per 2 dwelling units.
Visitor spaces to be signed
schedule 7 insert the following new heading S7.1 and associated two new clauses
S7.1.1 and S7.1.2 and renumber subsequent clauses
accordingly;
‘S7.1 Application of Schedule
S7.1.1 This schedule applies to development of a new dwelling unit or
alteration or addition of an existing dwelling unit.
S7.1.2 Proposals for development to which this schedule applies must
demonstrate compliance with the standards set out in clauses
applicable clauses as required to fit the schedule) below.’
schedule 7 omit clauses s7.1.19 and S7.2. and substitute the following:
Private Open Space
S7.1.19 Private open space for each dwelling unit is to be provided as
(a) For Multiple Dwellings, an area directly accessible from the dwelling unit
having a minimum area of 40 square metres or 20% of
the building footprint,
whichever is the greater, a minimum dimension of 4 metres and a maximum slope of
1 in 4 (25 per cent).
(b) for Apartments that do not have direct ground level access, a balcony or
level rooftop area directly connected to the dwelling
unit having a minimum area
and a minimum dimension of 2
(c) For all other dwelling units, a minimum total area of 80 square metres
consisting of:
(i) one part directly accessible from the dwelling having a minimum area of 25
square metres, a minimum dimension of 4 metres and
a maximum slope of 1 in 4 (25
per cent); and
(ii) any other part having a minimum dimension of 2.5 metres.
(Note: no modifications to clauses S7.1.22 – S7.1.27 ‘Streetscape
and Landscaping’).
APARTMENTS AND MULTIPLE DWELLINGS
S7.2.1 A development for Apartments shall be in accordance with the development
standards specified in Table 3 to this Schedule.
T A B L E 3 T O S C H E D U L E 7
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS - DIMENSIONS AND CONDITIONS
(a) Minimum lot area per Apartment:
(i) Studio 120m2
(Ii) One Bedroom 150m2
(Iii) Two Bedroom 180m2
(Iv) Three Bedroom 210m2
(b) Minimum separation of dwelling units opposite or across a court or driveway,
6 metres for a single storey development plus 3
metres for each additional
dwelling storey.
(c) Private open space in accordance with clause S7.1.19(b).
S7.2.2 A development for Multiple Dwellings shall be in accordance with the
following development standards:
Dwelling Site Area
(a) A minimum site area per dwelling unit of not less than
in the Residential Serviced Zone and
in the Business Zone.
Site Coverage
(b) A maximum site coverage of 40%.
Private Open Space
(c) Private open space for each dwelling unit in accordance with clause
S7.1.19(a).
(d) Buildings must be sited so that sunlight to at least 50% of the principal
area of ground level living rooms and private open
space of adjacent
properties:
(i) is not reduced to less than five hours between 9.00am and 5.00pm on June 21;
(ii) is not further reduced where existing overshadowing by buildings is greater
than the above.
S7.2.3 A development for Apartments or Multiple Dwellings shall be in
accordance with the following development standards:
(a) The design of buildings, footpaths, parking spaces, driveways and areas of
common and private open space shall be such that the
from both noise and overlooking is ensured.
(b) No pedestrian path or vehicle driveway giving access to a dwelling unit
shall be closer than 1 metre from the wall of another
dwelling unit, or 2
metres, if such wall contains a window with a sill height less than 2 metres
above the level of the path or driveway.
Landscaping
(c) In the preparation of the land for building construction purposes or when
landscaping the land, every effort shall be made to
retain existing trees and
(d) Any common areas of open space shall be suitably landscaped, or developed in
other appropriate ways for the enjoyment of residents.
(e) Suitably designed and screened areas shall be provided for the storage of
waste materials and garbage materials free from foraging
(f) Satisfactory provision shall be made for clothes drying facilities and
(g) In buildings of more than one storey, all pipes, ducts and vents servicing
the building shall be concealed from public view.
(h) Where practicable, a common TV antenna shall be provided in lieu of
individual antennae for each dwelling unit.
S7.2.4 Council may grant a planning approval for a development for Apartments or
Multiple Dwellings which is not in conformity with
the requirements of S7.2.1,
S7.2.2 and S7.2.3, subject to the provisions of Clause 2.5.
schedule 12 omit S12.7 and substitute:
S12.7 APARTMENTS, MULTIPLE
DWELLINGS, HOUSE AND ANCILLARY APARTMENT, BUILDING EXTENSIONS AND
OUTBUILDINGS
clause S12.7 as follows:
title S12.7.1 and substitute with:
‘Apartments
and Multiple Dwellings’
− Delete ‘land area per apartment’ and to substitute
‘site area’.
title S12.7.2 Building Extensions, Ancillary Apartments and Outbuilding’
and substitute with:
‘Building Extensions, House and
Ancillary Apartment
and Outbuilding.’
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (433 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter