URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASHPT/2021/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:16:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Medical Board of Australia v Dr Paul David Thompson [2021] TASHPT 1 (5 March 2021)
[2021] TASHPT 1
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL
Medical Board of Australia v Dr Paul David Thompson
[2021] TASHPT 1
MEDICAL BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
THOMPSON, Paul David
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
18 February 2021
DELIVERED ON:
5 March 2021
DECISION OF:
Chairperson A. Clues
CATCHWORDS:
Medical practitioner – sexual intercourse with a
patient – professional misconduct – reprimand and suspension.
Health Practitioners Regulation National Law Act
Health Practitioners Tribunal Act
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (Tas) Act
Medical Board of Australia v McGrath (Review
and Regulation)
[2014] VCAT 641
Psychology Board of Australia v Malcolm
[2019] TASHPT 5
Re a Psychologist
[2009] TASSC 70
Board of Australia v Holten (Review and Regulation)
[2019] VCAT 837
Medical Board of Australia v Xie
(Review and Regulation)
[2019] VCAT
Honey v Medical Practitioners Board of Victoria (Occupational and
Business Regulation)
[2007] VCAT 562.
DETERMINATION:
The respondent’s conduct complained of amounts to
professional misconduct and the Tribunal orders that:
(a) The respondent be reprimanded.
(b) The respondent be
suspended for a period of four months, such suspension to commence on 6 April
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Australian Health
Practitioner Regulation Agency
Respondent:
Murdoch Clarke
[2021] TASHPT 1
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. Pursuant to s193 of the Health Practitioners Regulation
National Law Act 2009 (the National Law) and
Health Practitioners
Tribunal Act 2010
the applicant on 5 March 2020, referred to the Tribunal
conduct of the respondent which occurred whilst he was practising as a general
practitioner in Magnet Court, Sandy Bay in 1996 and 1997.
2. The National Law
set out in the Schedule to the Health Practitioner Regulation Law Act 2009 (QLD)
has been adopted by the Tasmanian
Parliament and applies as a law of this State.
case concerns the professional consequences for the respondent who commenced and
maintained an intimate personal and sexual
relationship with a patient he
treated on eleven occasions between 5 September 1996 and 6 January
respondent’s reply to the application it was contended that the Tribunal
did not have jurisdiction to hear the application
because the conduct occurred
before the National Law existed and the Health Practitioner Regulation National
Law (Tas) Act 2010,
could not be applied retrospectively.
5. The hearing in
relation to that preliminary jurisdictional issue took place on 13 May 2020. On
15 June 2020, the Tribunal determined
(a) The applicant did have the power to initiate an
investigation and to determine to refer the conduct of the respondent to the
for hearing.
(b) The Tribunal did have the power to hear and deal
with the conduct of the respondent under Part 8 of the National Law.
Tribunal did have the power to make findings and determinations available to it
under the National Law.
6. The parties prepared and filed a statement of agreed facts,
agreed documents as well as written submissions in relation to proposed
Those documents formed the court book that was filed and relied upon by both
parties at the hearing that took place on 18
February 2021.
7. The relevant
patient, who also notified the applicant of the conduct on 29 March 2019, was
present at the hearing and specifically
requested that she be identified in the
reasons for determination. This was not objected to by the respondent.
Agreed Facts
8. The following facts were agreed by the parties and I accept
them as the facts of this matter:
(a) The respondent commenced practising as a medical
practitioner in or about December 1981.
(b) Sara Marie had been introduced to
the respondent by mutual friends, with whom Sara Marie was living, and they had
socialised twice
prior to the commencement of a therapeutic relationship. The
last of those social engagements occurred in the days leading up to
5 September
(c) On or about 5 September 1996, whilst registered by the Medical
Council of Tasmania, the respondent commenced a therapeutic relationship
Sara Marie to discuss with her a proposed termination of pregnancy.
the time that Sara Marie consulted on the respondent she suffered from
longstanding depression and anxiety.
(e) The respondent was also experiencing
mental health difficulty and was dealing the breakdown of his
(f) On 27 September 1996 Sara Marie underwent a pregnancy
termination procedure in New South Wales. The respondent did not refer Sara
Marie for this procedure.
(g) Throughout September and October of 1996 the
respondent and Sara Marie continued regular social engagement through their
friends, including a barbecue on 25 October at the respondent's
(h) Between 5 September 1996 and 23 February 1997 Sara Marie consulted
the respondent on approximately 11 occasions at his practice
in Magnet Court,
Sandy Bay. The consultations did not involve physical examinations or
prescriptions of medication and some were
of administrative nature.
November 1996 Sara Marie consulted the respondent. Following that consultation
the Respondent and Sara Marie commenced a
relationship.
Particulars
The respondent invited Sara Marie to Seven Mile
Beach where the respondent and Sara Marie consumed alcohol and marijuana before
to the respondent's residence in Sandy Bay where the respondent and
Sara Marie had unprotected sexual intercourse.
(j) The respondent maintained
a sexual relationship with Sara Marie until March 1997.
(k) During the sexual
relationship Sara Marie became pregnant to the respondent.
(l) During the
sexual relationship and before the therapeutic relationship ended, the
respondent did not advise Sara Marie to seek
alternative medical care. He did
recommend that Sara Marie seek alternative medical care when the sexual
relationship ended.
(m) On 23 October 1997 Sara Marie gave birth to a son,
(n) The respondent provided financial support to Sara Marie throughout her
pregnancy with J.
(o) The respondent paid full child support for J as
determined and administered by the Child Support Agency, which payments have
substantial and never missed.
(p) The respondent has had no disciplinary
action taken with respect to his registration over a professional career of some
years. Until this year there had been no other complaints of any
description. There was a Notification made about the respondent
this year, which
was completely unrelated in character, which the respondent contested and which
has been dismissed with no further
action being taken by the
(q) The respondent has been fully cooperative with the
investigation by the applicant, participating fully in an interview and making
appropriate admissions at an early stage.
9. Based on these facts, the parties jointly invited the
Tribunal to make the following orders by way of determinations:
(a) That the respondent's conduct amounts to professional
misconduct; and
(b) That the respondent be reprimanded; and
(c) That the
respondent be suspended from practice for a period of time.
10. The respondent submits the appropriate length of suspension
is less than 3
applicant submits the period of suspension should be no less than 6
the agreement between the parties as to the appropriate orders is relevant, it
remains the Tribunal’s role to make
its own determination as to the level
of the conduct and the appropriate
The Respondent’s Conduct
13. The conduct of the respondent is summarised as
• On or about 5 September 1996, whilst registered by the
Medical Council of Tasmania, the respondent commenced a therapeutic
relationship
with Sara Marie to discuss with her a proposed termination of pregnancy. They
met through mutual friends and had socialised
twice prior to commencing the
therapeutic relationship.
• The respondent was aware that Sara Marie
suffered from longstanding depression and anxiety.
• The respondent was
aware that on 27 September 1996 Sara Marie underwent a pregnancy termination
procedure in New South Wales.
• On 7 November 1996 the respondent
commenced a sexual relationship with Sara Marie.
• That relationship
was commenced as a result of the respondent inviting Sara Marie to Seven Mile
Beach where they consumed
alcohol and marijuana before travelling to the
respondent’s residence in Sandy Bay where they had unprotected
• The respondent maintained a sexual relationship with Sara Marie
until March 1997 and a therapeutic relationship until 23 February
• During the sexual relationship and before the therapeutic
relationship ended the respondent did not advise Sara Marie to seek
alternative
medical care.
• Sara Marie became pregnant and on 23 October 1997 she
gave birth to a son, J. On J’s record of birth, the respondent
is named as
14. The respondent has admitted that the conduct described
above constitutes professional misconduct within the meaning of that term
National Law.
15. Insofar as the categorisation of the admitted conduct is
concerned, the Tribunal can determine in respect of all or some of those
that the respondent:
(a) behaved in a way that constitutes unsatisfactory
professional performance;
(b) behaved in a way that constitutes
unprofessional conduct; or
(c) behaved in a way that constitutes professional
misconduct.
16. Each of these terms is defined in s5 of the National Law.
In the case of Psychology Board of Australia v Malcolm Aslin
[2019] TASHPT 5
Chairperson Webster (as he then was) summarised the terms as
“(a) Unsatisfactory
professional performance means the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised by the practitioner
in the practice of the health profession in
which the practitioner is registered is below the standard reasonably expected
of a health
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience.
(b) Unprofessional conduct means professional conduct which is of a lesser
standard than might reasonably be expected of a health
practitioner by the
public or the practitioner’s professional peers.
(c) Professional misconduct includes unprofessional conduct of a practitioner
that amounts to conduct that is substantially below
the standard reasonably
expected of a registered health practitioner of an equivalent level of training
or experience. Additionally,
where more than one instance of unprofessional
conduct, when considered together, amounts to conduct substantially below the
reasonably expected of a registered health practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience then this amounts to professional
misconduct. It includes conduct whether that conduct occurs in connection with
the practice of the health practitioner’s profession
or not, which is
inconsistent with the practitioner being a fit and proper person to hold
registration in the profession.”
17. The definition of “professional misconduct” is
an inclusive one and it is not an exhaustive statement defining that
Conduct which falls outside the statutory definition may still be considered to
be “professional misconduct” as
established at common law. In the
case of Re a Psychologist
[2009] TASSC 70
Blow J (as he then was)
“At common law,
behaviour on the part of a member of a profession that would reasonably be
regarded as disgraceful or dishonourable
by members of that profession of good
repute and competency amounts to professional
misconduct.”
18. His Honour’s observations continue to be relevant and
consistent with decisions made since the National Law was introduced.
respondent was a registered medical practitioner at the time of the conduct in
question and the AMA Code of Ethics that was
in force at the time of the
respondent’s conduct formed part of the material that was jointly put to
20. Section
41 of the National Law provides that a code or guideline approved by a National
Board, is admissible in proceedings against
a health practitioner registered by
the Board as evidence of what constitutes appropriate professional conduct or
practice for the
health profession. Clearly the AMA Code of Conduct is relevant
to the question of whether the respondent’s conduct fell short
expected of a registered medical practitioner.
21. Relevantly, part 1.2 of
that Code provides:
for patients
(a) Ensure that your professional conduct is above reproach.
(b) Do not exploit your patient for sexual, emotional or financial
(c) Treat your patients with compassion and with respect for their human
22. The respondent has admitted that the conduct referred to
above constituted professional misconduct within the meaning of that
term in the
National Law. However, even if the respondent had not made that admission the
Tribunal is persuaded that the respondent’s
conduct constituted
professional misconduct as defined because his conduct was clearly substantially
below the standard reasonably
expected of a registered medical practitioner of
an equivalent level of training and experience. Further, medical practitioners
of good repute would regard the respondent’s boundary breaches as
disgraceful and dishonourable which constitutes professional
misconduct at
common law.
23. As stated in Medical Board of Australia v Holten (Review and
Regulation)
[2019] VCAT 837
doctor should be in any doubt that they must not have sexual intercourse with a
patient, whether or not the patient consents.
It is a simple, fundamental and
longstanding principle of medical ethics and
24. There can be no doubt that the respondent was aware that
Sara Marie was a vulnerable patient. He was aware that in September
underwent a termination of pregnancy in New South
In a letter
dated 26 February 1997 that the respondent wrote to Westpac General Insurance
with respect to Sara Marie he reported:
“Ms Marie states that she has been depressed
for a number of years i.e. since 1994. She has experienced chronic sleep
disturbance,
poor appetite, weight loss, lack of energy and motivation, social
withdrawal, poor self-esteem, inability to concentrate, inability
to work and a
number of anxiety related symptoms including some panic attacks. She has tried
to return to work on several occasions
since 1994 however she has been unable to
cope. She has had no delusional ideas nor suicidal thoughts. She had been
living in Sydney
up to July 96 then moved to Tasmania in an attempt to
“pull herself out of it”.
I have seen her on the following dates 5/9/96, 9/9/96, 13/9/96, 20/9/96,
22/10/96, 7/11/96, 2/12/96, 23/12/96 and the 6/1/97. All
consultations have
related to aspects of her depressive/anxiety condition. Treatment has consisted
of one to one counselling and
planning of lifestyle changes and strategies to
deal better with anxiety and depressive symptoms when they
25. Despite this knowledge, the respondent exploited the
doctor/patient relationship. He transgressed the professional boundaries
should exist between a doctor and a patient by engaging in a sexual relationship
with Sara Marie. The doctor/patient relationship
is inherently unequal. The
respondent abused this power imbalance to enter into a sexual relationship with
Sara Marie.
26. I find that the respondent engaged in professional misconduct
as a result of forming a sexual relationship with a current patient,
vulnerable and at risk of emotional and psychological harm. A child was born as
a result of the relationship.
Consequential Orders
27. What orders should
follow a finding of professional misconduct on the facts of this case?
the case of Craig v Medical Board of South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
Doyle CJ. stated at 553:
purpose of disciplinary proceedings is to protect the public, not to punish a
practitioner in the sense in which punishment
is administered pursuant to the
criminal law. A disciplinary tribunal protects the public by making orders
which will prevent persons
who are unfit to practice from practising, or by
making orders which will secure the maintenance of proper professional
A disciplinary tribunal will also consider the protection of the
public, and of the relevant profession, by making orders which
will assure the
public that appropriate standards are being maintained within the relevant
profession.”
29. Section 196(2) of the National Law provides the Tribunal
can decide to do one or more the following:
(a) caution or reprimand the practitioner;
(b) impose a
condition on the practitioner’s registration;
(c) require the
practitioner to pay a fine of not more than $30,000.00 to the National Board
that registers the practitioner;
(d) suspend the practitioner’s
registration for a specified period;
(e) cancel the practitioner’s
registration.
30. The parties have jointly submitted that the appropriate
determinations are that the respondent be reprimanded and his registration
suspended for a specified period. However, as stated, no agreement between the
parties can supplant my duty to determine the appropriate
sanctions to be
imposed in respect of the respondent’s professional
misconduct.
Appropriate Sanctions
31. Both parties prepared submissions
outlining the principles relating to the making of determinations. In the case
of Medical Board
of Australia v Holten (supra) the Tribunal usefully summarised
the range of factors to be considered in making determinations. Those
• The nature and seriousness of the conduct and the risk
of harm if it were engaged in by others.
• The need for specific and/or
general deterrence
• The degree of insight that the practitioner has
into his or her offending conduct.
• The degree of
• Evidence of character and contribution to the
• Any history of offending.
• Evidence of
rehabilitation.
• Whether there has been any delay between the start of
the investigation until the completion of the Tribunal hearing.
32. In Medical Board of Australia v Xie (Review and Regulation)
[2019] VCAT 1924
the Tribunal observed at [43]:
note also determinations in other cases of similar and analogous conduct will
provide useful guidance and that consistency
and proportionality are important.
However, what is necessary in any particular case to meet the objectives of
determinations will
depend on all the facts and
circumstances.”
Applying the Principles
• The nature and seriousness
of the conduct and the risk of harm if it were engaged in by others
33. With respect to this principle the respondent submitted
“The conduct itself occurred 25 years ago in
circumstances where the respondent was experiencing his own personal battles,
deterioration of his marriage of ten years and his mental
wellbeing.”
34. The applicant made the following
submissions
• Sara Marie was highly vulnerable given her depression
and anxiety, her recent termination at the time the relationship commenced
with her desire that she not fall pregnant again.
• The manner in which
the respondent instigated the commencement of the relationship is an aggravating
factor. By taking alcohol
and drugs on a picnic with a vulnerable patient, he
invited disinhibited conduct by Sara Marie. He instigated the personal
relationship.
• Sara Marie was deprived of independent medical advice
and treatment, in particular in connection with the use of contraception
the sexual relationship. Her pregnancy may have been avoided, but for such
• The sexual relationship commenced in the therapeutic
relationship, although there was a relatively pre-existing social
relationship.
• Whilst the respondent has provided financial assistance
to Sara Marie for the care of their child, he has not provided emotional
nor has he been involved in the child’s life. Whilst his parenting is not
on trial, the fact that a child was born
is relevant as it demonstrates the
consequences (the joint responsibility for the maintenance of a child) that may
follow from the
abuse of the power imbalance between a doctor and his or her
35. I accept that Sara Marie was highly vulnerable at the time
of the commencement of the sexual relationship. I further accept that
respondent was suffering depression as a result of his own marital difficulties
at the time.
36. I find that the way in which the respondent instigated the
sexual relationship was an aggravating factor as was the respondent’s
failure to refer Sara Marie to another practitioner for treatment at the time
the sexual relationship commenced. I find that the
respondent abused the power
imbalance between himself and Sara Marie and that this compromised her medical
care and exploited a vulnerable
• Specific/General Deterrence
37. With respect to specific deterrence the respondent submits
“In our submission, there is no need for the
determination of the Tribunal to factor in any requirement for specific
deterrence.
This is not a case where there is any risk of the respondent
repeating the conduct.
The Tribunal can be satisfied as to that by reason of the fact that this
conduct was an aberration on what is an otherwise unblemished
medical career of
some 40 years. Over that time the respondent has had no professional complaints
of the same character and only
one other complaint for which no action was
38. In relation to general deterrence I repeat what the
Tribunal said at [35] - [37] in the case of Medical Board v Holten
“In Wilks v The
Medical Practitioners Board of Victoria (Occupational Business Regulations)
[2007] VCAT 2439
– [157] VCAT discussed why doctors must not
engage in sexual relationships with patients:
‘Sexual relationships between patients and doctors are always
inappropriate. Medical practitioners are placed in a position
of trust in the
community and have available to them intimate knowledge of their patient’s
physical and psychological wellbeing.
This places the practitioner in a
position to exploit the trust that has been given to them.
The community expects that when they attend a medical practitioner, they will
not be regarded as potential sexual parties nor that
their relationship with the
doctor will be sexualised. Likewise, the profession expects its members to
refrain from using the consulting
room as a means of establishing sexual
relationships with patients. To do otherwise brings the profession into
disrepute by reducing
the trust that the community has in the
profession.
Doctors have a duty to make the care of patients their first concern. They
must be ethical and trustworthy. Having sexual intercourse
with a patient is a
fundamental breach of that trust, has the potential to do great harm, and brings
the profession into disrepute.
General deterrence is of the utmost importance here and requires a clear
message to be sent that serious consequences will follow
such conduct. To the
extent that there continue to be cases where medical practitioners fail to heed
the message, that message needs
to be continually
reinforced.”
39. I agree that in this case general deterrence is of the
utmost importance.
• The degree of insight that the practitioner has into
his offending conduct
40. On behalf of the respondent it was submitted “that
although he did not at the time consider the seriousness of his actions,
because the genesis of the relationship was personal before becoming clinical,
he subsequently came to appreciate that he
had breached the trust of his
patient, which trust is essential to the doctor/patient relationship. He is now
acutely aware of the
consequences of such
the respondent’s statement to AHPRA that was taken on 25 July 2019 the
respondent says:
“I let my emotions and my attraction to Sara Marie
influence my professional judgement, and allowed the relationship to be
established
in a situation that I now realise was not acceptable. It’s an
event which has had very, very major ramifications for me.
And I regret it very
• The degree of remorse
42. The respondent regrets the suffering which he has inflicted
upon Sara Marie and his son,
the respondent’s statement to AHPRA he
“I can, truly, say that this is probably one of
– the most significant event
in my life. It occurred at a
time when I was vulnerable, Sara Marie was vulnerable I – I admit. I
don’t think that my
judgement on a lot of matters around that time were
– were rational, because I – I’ve, I was significantly
And that depression increased, severely, over 1998 to 1999. And
I’d – I totally – I totally regret my actions.
And to have
put somebody, let alone, a patient in this circumstances, I have carried that
right through my years."
44. I accept that the respondent is remorseful and has insight
into his offending conduct.
• Evidence of character and contribution to the
45. The respondent provided the Tribunal with three character
references.
As in the case of Medical Board v Holten (supra) they are impressive because all
three of his referees are fully aware of the agreed
facts in this case. This
shows the respondent has been open and candid with the colleagues he has asked
to write references on his
46. Mr Andrew Hunn, MBBS, BMSC, FRACS
Neurosurgeon has known the respondent since the early 1980s and he has worked
closely with him
47. In his reference he says the
respondent:
by far the highest level of technical expertise, and the greatest level of
reliability, of any of the many surgical
assistants I have worked with.
He exhibits outstanding compassion for patients in difficulty, and I have
personally never seen him behave in other than a completely
appropriate
Should he have imposed an extended suspension from practice, there will be a
considerable impact on the functioning of the Tasmanian
Spine Service, with
potentially hundreds of patients being unable to be assessed in a timely fashion
and, as a result, being forced
to endure for much longer, pain and disability.
His current contribution to the caseload of the clinic is magnified by the
retirement of one of his peers, and the interstate transfer of
48. Dr Robert Walters, BMed.SC, MB, BS has known the respondent
for over 35 years. He has practised with him since 2000. He says:
“The nature of the
practice at both Bayside and Churchill Avenue Medical Centre is/was such that
the doctors often consult with
each other’s [sic] patients in the absence
of their usual doctor. We therefore necessarily gain a detailed insight into
fellow practitioners’ modi [sic] operandi and professional principles.
This is most certainly the case with Dr Thompson, as
he only works in the
practice one full day a week on average. His patients therefore are often seen
upon his behalf, on the days
he is absent from the surgery.
It is clear to me from these interactions that Dr Thompson is a skilled and
astute practitioner. His professional principles are
the highest standard and I
have never had a reason to be concerned about any aspects of his practice,
either medically or ethically.”
49. Dr P J Sayers, MB BS FANZCA, has known the respondent since
1982. He has worked closely with the respondent from mid-1990 when
working with Mr Andrew Hunn in private practice and Dr Thompson was his regular
surgical assistant. He says:
“I believe our
surgical patients’ experience received a positive benefit because of Dr
Thompson’s involvement in
their care, on a human level as well as
benefitting from his surgical expertise.
Throughout the time working with Paul on a weekly basis, I have had no reason
to call into question his ethics or change my belief
that the care of the
patient was his first priority.”
50. I accept that the respondent is a highly skilled
practitioner who provides a very important service to his patients and further
that this conduct was an aberration in his extensive medical career.
• History of offending
51. The respondent has no prior disciplinary history.
• Evidence of rehabilitation
52. I note there has been no previous transgressions and no
further transgressions of the respondent’s professional
obligations.
53. I accept the respondent’s statement that this is
probably the most significant event in his life. It occurred at a time
both Sara Marie and he were vulnerable. The respondent says it occurred at a
time when he was significantly depressed and that
depression increased severely
to the point where he was suicidal. Through the course of the early 2000s he
did see a psychologist
who was very helpful and he now tries to look after his
relevant matters
54. In the applicant’s submissions the further
following matters are raised with respect to the application of the principles
in this case:
• The respondent’s admissions and
cooperation.
• There have been disputed aggravating facts which have
been resolved in the respondent’s favour.
• The respondent has
endured some publicity with respect to this case and will no doubt endure more
when this determination
is published.
• There has not been any delay in
the proceedings. The proceedings would have been finalised long ago if the
respondent had
not challenged the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to determine the
55. It is conceded that the respondent is at low risk of
engaging in any sort of similar conduct again. He has no prior disciplinary
history and an impressive professional record.
56. Although the respondent
did not self-report his conduct to the applicant, once the notification was made
he gave full and timely
admissions and has cooperated with the applicant’s
investigation and these proceedings.
57. The respondent was entitled to
challenge the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to deal with this matter but he
cannot now say that
weight ought to be given to the fact that he has had the
“spectre of these proceedings hanging over his head for almost 2
respondent’s conduct was not spontaneous and the sexual relationship
continued between 7 November 1996 and March 1997.
59. The respondent has paid
a significant personal price for his professional misconduct.
Comparison with
other cases
60. Both the applicant and the respondent provided a summary of
cases where a doctor has engaged in sexual intercourse or other sexual
misconduct with a patient. The cases referred to were:
• Medical Board of Australia v Proctor (Review and
Regulation)
[2018] VCAT 576
• Medical Board of Australia v Topchian
(Occupational and Business Regulation)
[2013] VCAT 86
• The Medical
Board of Australia v GFO (Review and Regulation)
[2017] VCAT
• Medical Board of Australia v Holten (supra);
Board of Australia v Ainsworth
[2019] VCAT 734
• Medical Board of
Australia v Naidu (NT) 27 November 2015
• Medical Board of Australia v
(2017) VCAT 2065
• Tasmanian Board of the Medical Board of
Australia v Visagie
[2013] TASHPT 2.
61. The respondent referred to two cases which demonstrate the
level of conduct which has attracted suspensions of 3 and 4 months,
Medical Board of Australia v Holten (supra) and Medical Board of Australia v
Naidu (supra).
62. I also considered the decisions of Medical Board of
Australia v Erhadt (Occupational and Business Regulation)
[2011] VCAT 1702
Medical Board of Australia v Dr ZOF No 2 (Review and Regulation)
[2015] VCAT
63. Whilst being mindful of the need for consistency between Tribunal
decisions the facts of this case cannot be directly compared
to the facts of the
cases referred to above.
64. However, like all the above cases, this case
shares the common feature that a doctor engaged in sexual misconduct with a
which in itself is a serious matter and is always to be denounced (see
Medical Board of Australia v Holten (supra) at [78]).
stated in the case of Medical Board of Australia v Xie (supra) at [58] and
is well understood that a reprimand is not a trivial determination. A sanction
of this form does not trivialise a lapse
in professional standards. For a
professional person it has the potential for serious adverse implications. It
tells the public,
patients and other practitioners that the standards expected
of a practitioner have not been met and that the practitioner has been
66. The Tribunal accepts that a reprimand is appropriate in the
circumstances. His conduct requires more than a caution. His conduct
undermines professional confidence in the medical profession. The reprimand is a
signal to other health practitioners that
this behaviour will not be
Cancellation/Suspension?
67. In Honey v Medical Practitioners
Board of Victoria (Occupational and Business Regulation)
[2007] VCAT 562
major difference between a period of suspension and cancellation is that once
the doctor’s registration is cancelled,
he must reapply after the period
specified. He is not guaranteed that he will be so reregistered. He must still
satisfy the Board
that registration is appropriate and that he fulfils the
qualifications for general registration...
Cancellation of registration sends a clear message of unsuitability to
practice. Suspension may be thought to indicate confidence
doctor’s future ability to practice once the period of suspension is
There are some cases in which it is abundantly clear that deregistration is
the only option available to protect the public from a
miscreant doctor.
This is apparent in situations in which the practitioner does not accept the
inappropriateness of his conduct, or has been shown to
be a serial
68. In this case, I consider a period of suspension is
appropriate. I am confident in the respondent’s ability to practice at
appropriate level of professionalism and expertise once the period of suspension
Conditions/Fine?
69. I accept that after the period of
suspension the respondent will be fit to return to his normal practice without
any conditions
imposed. As stated general deterrence is of the utmost importance
in this case. As the respondent has already paid heavily for his
conduct a fine
is not warranted.
70. Taking into account the principles and
their application in this case, I have formed the view that a reprimand as well
as a period
of suspension are necessary.
71. I consider a suspension for a
period of four months to be necessary to address general
deterrence.
72. Specific deterrence is of low importance. I accept that the
respondent is at low or no risk of repeating the conduct. He has
safely since the transgression. He is otherwise of good character. His
admissions and cooperation are to his credit.
73. I have taken into account
the factors that are in the respondent’s favour which have reduced what
would otherwise have been
a longer period. I recognise that the respondent
provides an important service to his patients in the area he practises in and
those patients will be disadvantaged as a result of this period of
suspension. However, this period of suspension is necessary to
deter other
members of the medical profession from engaging in sexual intercourse with a
patient. A clear message must be sent that
serious consequences will follow a
breach of this simple and fundamental rule.
74. As requested by the
respondent I determine that the suspension will not commence for a period of 30
days to enable the respondent,
his colleagues and patients to make necessary
arrangements for his absence. Such an order is appropriate in circumstances
there is no suggestion of present risk to the public.
Determinations
75. In summary I determine that the respondent’s conduct
constitutes professional misconduct as defined by the National Law
and at common
76. In so far as penalty is concerned I order that:
(a) The respondent is reprimanded.
(b) The respondent is
suspended for a period of four months, such suspension to commence on 6 April
A. M. CLUES
CHAIRPERSON
Section 4, Health
Practitioners Regulation National Law (Tas) Act 2010.
See Medicare patient history
report, page 72 court book.
See paragraph 23 of the respondent’s submissions, page 94 of the court
See paragraph 17 of the
applicant’s submissions, page 88 of the court book.
Medical Board of
Australia v McGrath (Review and Regulation)
[2014] VCAT 641
See page 19 of the court book,
record of birth.
See pages 75-82 of the court
See letter from Australian
Birth Control Services dated 27 September 1996, page 16 of the court
See paragraph 12 of the
respondent’s submissions; page 92 of the court
See paragraphs 16(c),
(d), (f), (g) and (h) of the applicant’s submissions; page 87 of the court
See paragraphs 8 and 9 of
the respondent’s submissions; page 92 of the court
See paragraph 13 of
the respondent’s submissions, page 92 of the court
See page 7 of the
statement, page 40 of the court
See paragraph 15 of
the respondent’s submissions, page 93 of the court
See page 33 of the
statement, page 66 of the court
See pages 100 –
103 of the court book.
pages 33-34 of the respondent’s statement to AHPRA, pages 66-67 of the
court book.
See paragraph
16 of the respondent’s submissions, page 93 of the court book.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (229 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter