URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASSC/2025/58.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:21:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
JL v CLARK [2025] TASSC 58 (6 November 2025)
[2025] TASSC 58
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA
[2025] TASSC 58
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Traffic Law – Offences – Particular
offences – Reckless driving – Other matters
– Tasmania – Sentence
and penalty.
Aust Dig Traffic Law
Traffic Act
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Director of Public Prosecutions
[2025] TASSC 58
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 58/2025
File No 2739/2024
JL v NATALIE CLARK
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT PEARCE J
6 November 2025
is an appeal against a sentence imposed by a magistrate, Mr K Stanton. The
applicant pleaded guilty to two counts of reckless
driving contrary to the
Traffic Act
He was convicted on both counts, sentenced to
a period of detention of two months, wholly suspended for 12 months, and
disqualified
from driving for two years. The respondent is a police officer who
made the relevant complaint.
are two grounds of review. The first is that the sentence was manifestly
excessive. The second is that the magistrate erred
by imposing a suspended
detention order without first ordering and considering a pre-sentence report
directed to that question.
ground is made out. The motion will be dismissed.
applicant's written and oral submissions in support of both grounds of the
appeal are founded on the proposition that the learned
magistrate failed to
correctly apply the provisions of the
Youth Justice Act
offences were committed the applicant was aged 17 and was thus a youth as
defined by the
Youth Justice Act
That Act established a division of
the Magistrates Court to be known as the Magistrates Court (Youth Justice
Division) which is constituted
by a magistrate: ss 159 and 160. The Youth
Justice Division has jurisdiction to hear and determine a charge against a youth
offence: s 161(1)(a).
certain offences, called prescribed offences, are, depending on the age of the
offender, excluded from the jurisdiction
of the Youth Justice Division: see the
various definitions in the Act, s 3. In respect of a youth who was 17 years old,
Traffic Act
was a prescribed offence.
The charges against the applicant were initially listed in the Youth Justice
Division but his Honour, before
sentencing, correctly recognised that that court
did not have jurisdiction. His Honour removed the proceedings to the Court of
Sessions and continued to hear and determine the proceedings as a
magistrate sitting in that court:
Youth Justice Act
result, the magistrate, when imposing sentence, was sitting in the Court of
Petty Sessions, not in the Youth Justice Division.
Nevertheless, he was
empowered by the
Youth Justice Act
to exercise all the
sentencing powers of the Youth Justice Division under
of that Act, in
addition to, or instead of, his sentencing powers under the
The circumstances of the offences
around 6.38 am on 19 December 2023, four cyclists were riding south on the West
Tamar Highway at Riverside. The roadway was dual
lane and the cyclists were
riding in single file in the left lane, very close to the left side of the road.
The applicant was driving
a small sedan in the same direction at an estimated
speed of about 70 kilometres per hour. He was on his way to work and a work
was in the front passenger seat. As the applicant passed the cyclists
he drove extremely close to them, within about 30 centimetres,
and then swerved
across, close in front of the lead rider. The passenger had his arm out of the
window and yelled at the cyclists
to "get off the road." The cyclists were
frightened by what happened and complained to the police. One of the cyclists
captured the
last moment of the incident on a front mounted video camera.
almost identical incident occurred about a month later at around 6.30 am on 25
January 2024. Four different cyclists were riding
in single file on the same
stretch of road, on or very close to the continuous white line marking the left
edge of the road. The
applicant was driving the same vehicle in the same
direction, with the same passenger. Again, the applicant drove so close to the
cyclists that he almost struck all of them, forcing them on to the sealed verge,
and then swerved in front of them, crossing the
line marking the edge of the
road. Again, his passenger abused the cyclists as the car passed. The cyclists
were so concerned about
what had happened that they stopped riding and were very
shaken. Once again, the last moment of the incident was captured by one
cyclists on a video camera and the police were notified. On neither occasion was
there any other traffic on the dual carriageway
near the applicant's vehicle
which could possibly have affected the way in which he had driven past the
cyclists. His actions were
deliberate.
applicant was interviewed at his workplace by police officers later in the
morning of the second incident. He admitted that he
was the driver. He falsely
claimed that on the first occasion he did not have room to manoeuvre around the
cyclists, but ultimately
admitted that his driving was deliberate and reckless.
He told the police that he had a "problem with cyclists."
applicant's personal circumstances
applicant pleaded guilty and had no prior convictions. His counsel told the
magistrate that the applicant now realised the seriousness
of what he had done
and was sorry for it. He had been the holder of a P1 provisional licence. He had
a supportive family and a good
upbringing. He was employed full time as a
welder. He lived in a relatively remote rural area more than 30 kilometres from
Launceston,
so the loss of his driver licence was a significant punishment. He
was able to obtain lifts to work, and so would not lose his employment,
inability to drive had a real personal impact and greatly restricted his freedom
of movement.
The sentence was not manifestly excessive
recently restated the principles to be applied on an appeal against sentence on
this ground in
Watson v Woodgate
[2025] TASSC 26
and I state them
again now. To succeed on a ground that a sentence is manifestly excessive it is
not enough to establish that the
sentence may be regarded by some as too harsh.
An appeal court may not substitute its own opinion for that of the magistrate
because it may have exercised the sentencing discretion differently:
Lowndes v The Queen
[1999] HCA 29
195 CLR 665
. This Court must
be persuaded of error of the second type referred to in
House v The
(1936) 55 CLR 499
at 505, that is, that the sentence imposed
by the sentencing court is, on the facts, unreasonable or plainly unjust, such
appellate court may infer that in some way there has been a failure to
properly exercise the sentencing discretion. Manifest excess
or inadequacy
must be plainly apparent. An applicant must show that the sentence is
so obviously excessive that it is outside the
proper limits of the broad
sentencing discretion of a magistrate:
Allen v Kerr
19 Tas R 132
TGW v Tasmania
[2017] TASCCA 10
applicant's submission is that a wholly suspended detention order and
disqualification from driving for two years was so harsh
as to be outside the
proper limits of the learned magistrate's sentencing discretion. I do not agree.
If the principles just stated
are applied, this Court is unable to interfere
with the sentence imposed by the learned magistrate. The sentence was not
the last 25 years or so the Court of Criminal Appeal in this State has
recognised a general increase in the severity of sentences
for serious driving
offences: refer to the analysis by Porter AJ, with whom Brett and Geason JJ
Banks v Tasmania
[2019] TASCCA 1
31 Tas R 342.
Many of the cases concern dangerous driving causing death or serious injury, but
severe punishment for dangerous driving or reckless
driving does not necessarily
depend on the existence of actual consequences:
[1965] TASStRp 14
[1965] Tas SR 196
per Crisp J at 201, cited with approval in
at [37]. General deterrence, denunciation and protection of the
public are powerful sentencing factors. Driving unsafely is inherently
dangerous. Death and serious injury resulting from unsafe driving has terrible
physical and emotional effects on those directly involved,
and causes trauma to
family and friends, witnesses, emergency services personnel and hospital
the commencement of the
Criminal Code Amendment (Dangerous Driving) Act
2017 on 19 September 2017, dangerous driving was a summary offence, also
contained in the
Traffic Act
along with reckless driving.
The result of the amendment Act was that dangerous driving became an indictable
offence under the
Criminal Code,
to be dealt with in the Supreme Court.
Reckless driving remained in the
Traffic Act
, as a summary offence.
According to the Minister's second reading speech, the change was intended to
reflect the seriousness of dangerous
driving, and the risk that it presents to
the community, while at the same time preserving a summary offence.
the course of an exchange between the magistrate and counsel for the applicant
it was asserted that the applicant was charged
with reckless driving, not
dangerous driving. The suggested implication from that submission was that
reckless driving was a less
serious offence. In argument before me, counsel for
the respondent indicated that the policy of the prosecution authorities is to
charge more serious cases as dangerous driving rather than the summary offence.
However, it is a mistake to regard reckless driving
as necessarily less serious
than dangerous driving. If the facts are otherwise the same, reckless driving is
a more serious offence
than dangerous driving. That is so because reckless
driving, unlike dangerous driving which involves no mental element, imports a
reckless state of mind:
at 201. As to dangerous driving, see
v The Queen
[2012] HCA 24
(2012) 245 CLR 588
per French CJ, Crennan and Kiefel JJ at
[32]-[38]. Reckless driving involves a "wanton disregard of the safety of others
be characterised as reckless": per Crisp J in
at 201. Each
case depends very much on its own circumstances. As Crawford J pointed out in
, at 207, "there may be cases of driving recklessly where there has
been little danger and there may be cases of driving dangerously
where there has
been extreme danger".
sentence imposed by the learned magistrate may be assessed against the statutory
penalty provisions. The
Traffic Act
, provides that a person who
drives a motor vehicle on a public street recklessly, having regard to all the
circumstances of the case,
including the nature, condition, and use of the
public street and the amount of traffic that actually is at the time, or that
reasonably be expected to be on the public street, is guilty of reckless
driving. Even as a first offender for both offences, the
applicant was liable on
each count to a penalty not exceeding 20 penalty units, or to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding two years.
For a youth, the reference to imprisonment
is taken to be a reference to detention:
Youth Justice Act
court which convicts a person of that offence may also order that the offender
be disqualified from driving for a specified period
or until further order:
Sentencing Act
s 55(2)(a).
magistrate was correct to regard these as serious cases of reckless driving.
Both involved great potential danger to members
of the public. The risk of death
or serious injury to one or more of the eight cyclists involved was obvious.
Indeed, the applicant
drove intending to use his vehicle to frighten or
intimidate so as to give effect to his apparent displeasure that they were on
road. The applicant, having driven in such a manner once on 19 December
2023, and despite having more than a month to reflect on
whether it was
something he should do, drove in the same way again on 25 January 2024.
his sentencing remarks the magistrate, after describing the applicant's driving,
"That gave rise to a very serious risk. A slight deviation by
you from your intended path or a slight deviation by a rider from the
anticipated by you could have been disastrous. Cyclists are entitled to use
roads without being put at risk in the way that
you put them at risk on these
occasions. Cyclists are vulnerable road users. They do not have vehicle
structure to protect them.
There is a very large weight differential between
them and vehicles and a very large speed differential, which means that a risk
of collisions carried with it a risk of serious injury or death.
... Indeed the risk in this case, in my view, is so obvious that it must be
concluded you averted to the risk and decided to take
The degree of recklessness on your part is high. In these circumstances
general deterrence is important. Specific deterrence, that
is personal
deterrence for you, is also important."
respectfully agree with his Honour's remarks. His Honour then
"... Your youth, you're still 17 years old, your
otherwise good character including no prior convictions, your employment, your
circumstances generally, your plea of guilty which indicates remorse
and a willingness to cooperate with the administration of justice
mitigating.
But in my view, the law treats all of them as subordinate in these
circumstances, to the need to discourage other people from doing
this, and to
discourage you from doing it. In my view, a custodial sentence is the only
sentence that can adequately achieve the
required level of deterrence from such
of the submissions made by counsel for the applicant focussed on whether the
learned magistrate correctly applied the principles
to be applied when
sentencing youthful offenders. Detailed reference was made to the objectives of
Youth Justice Act
and the principles of youth justice
The submission goes so far as to assert that the magistrate
"determined that the law made all mitigating factors and all sentencing
objectives subordinate to general and personal deterrence" and that the
statement was "incorrect at law." It was also submitted that
because there are
restrictions on reporting proceedings under the
Youth Justice Act
that general
deterrence is "not a factor which is relevant". There was a further submission
that the magistrate failed to consider
all other available sentencing options
before imposing a sentence of detention.
of the claimed errors are reflected in a ground of appeal that the learned
magistrate made a specific error when sentencing.
A ground that a sentence is
manifestly excessive is an assertion that the result of the exercise of the
sentencing discretion is
so obviously excessive that error is implicit. The
focus is on the sentence, not the reasons for it. In
Dinsdale v The
[2000] HCA 54
202 CLR 321
, Gleeson CJ and Hayne J said
"Manifest inadequacy of sentence, like manifest
excess, is a conclusion. A sentence is, or is not, unreasonable or plainly
inadequacy or excess is, or is not, plainly apparent. It is a conclusion
which does not depend upon attribution of identified specific
error in the
reasoning of the sentencing judge and which frequently does not admit of
amplification except by stating the respect
in which the sentence is inadequate
or excessive. It may be inadequate or excessive because the wrong type of
sentence has been imposed
(for example, custodial rather than non-custodial) or
because the sentence imposed is manifestly too long or too short. But to
the type of error amounts to no more than a statement of the conclusion
that has been reached. It is not a statement of reasons for
arriving at the
conclusion. A Court of Criminal Appeal is not obliged to employ any particular
verbal formula so long as the substance
of its conclusions and its reasons is
made plain. The degree of elaboration that is appropriate or possible will vary
from case to
Hili v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
applicant is to be held to the grounds in the notice to review unless an
amendment is allowed:
Justices Act
No amendment was applied
for but counsel for the respondent made written and oral submissions in response
to the applicant's various
contentions. In fairness I will address the arguments
put by the applicant. In my respectful view, the magistrate did not make any
the errors claimed by the applicant.
magistrate was sitting in the Court of Petty Sessions, not in the Youth Justice
Division. Strictly speaking, the objectives of
Youth Justice Act
the principles of youth justice stated in that Act did not apply. However, there
is nothing to suggest that the magistrate did
not apply them. The objective and
principles are largely restatements of the long established common law to be
applied when sentencing
young offenders:
TAP v Tasmania
[2014] TASCCA 5
per Porter J, with whom Blow CJ and Wood J agreed, at [23]-[29]. Young
offenders, being immature, are more prone to ill-considered
R v McGaffin
[2010] SASCFC 22
206 A Crim R 188
They may lack the degree of insight, judgment and self-control that is possessed
by an adult and may not fully appreciate the nature,
seriousness and
consequences of their criminal conduct:
Director of Public Prosecutions v TY
[2007] VSC 489
, 18 VR 241 at 242,
. There is greater potential
for young offenders to be redeemed and rehabilitated, and so the rehabilitation
and reform of young offenders
is one of the principal objectives of the criminal
law. Protection of the community ultimately is best served by the rehabilitation
of an offender:
DPP v Milson
[2019] VSCA 55.
the seriousness of the offending increases, the significance of youth and the
potential rehabilitation of the offender may diminish:
[2002] VSCA 131
per Phillips, CJ, Chernov and Vincent,
JJA at [66]. Thus, where deterrence, denunciation, protection of the
community and appropriate
punishment require more prominence, the weight to be
attached to youth will correspondingly reduce:
Azzopardi v The
[2011] VSCA 372
; 35 VR 43 per Redlich JA at [44].
That is particularly so when the youth has behaved as an adult. Reckless
driving, as with all offences
Road Safety (Alcohol and Drugs)
Traffic Act
Vehicle and
Traffic Act
, is a prescribed offence, and thus removed from the
a young driver assumes the responsibility, like every other driver, of driving
safely. Moreover, to the extent that young persons
may be more prone to
ill-considered or rash decisions when driving, the need for general deterrence
directed at others in the same
cohort is emphasised rather than reduced. The
learned magistrate said nothing to indicate that he misunderstood or did not
these principles. He correctly recognised the strong need for general
deterrence and protection of the public. He indicated his view
sentencing factors were, for this offence and this offender, subordinate. He did
not say that other factors were irrelevant.
Youth Justice Act
, restricts publication of any information about
proceedings in the Court if the information identifies, or may lead to the
identification,
of a youth who is the subject of the proceedings. That
restriction also applies to other courts by operation of
The submission
that this restriction removes general deterrence as a sentencing factor is
misconceived. The only restriction is on
identification of the offender, not the
proceedings themselves. There is no restriction on publication of the
circumstances of the
offence, the age of the offender and the sentence which was
imposed. There are many ways for others to find out what may happen to
they offend in this way.
applicant complained that the magistrate did not comply with the
Justice Act
That section provides that "the Court" may only make a
detention order if it has considered all other available sentences and is
satisfied that no other sentence is appropriate in the circumstances. It should
again be pointed out that the reference to "the Court"
, and elsewhere in
Youth Justice Act
, means the Magistrates Court (Youth Justice
Division). His Honour was not sitting in that court. Again, however,
restatement of the law which should be applied when sentencing youthful
offenders. The applicant referred to my statements in
Garcie v Lusted
[2014] TASSC 27
that, for a young person, a sentence of actual
imprisonment should be a sentence of last resort and only be imposed where
alternative
punishment is inappropriate. The magistrate's sentencing comments
make clear that his Honour did consider alternative sentencing
options. He had a
report which indicated that the applicant was not suitable for community
service. His Honour concluded that "a
custodial sentence is the only sentence
that can adequately achieve the required level of deterrence for such conduct".
did not order actual detention. He allowed for the applicant's
rehabilitation by wholly suspending the term. As his Honour explained
sentencing, the order would be subject to all of the conditions imposed by the
Youth Justice Act
, including that while the order is in force
the applicant will be subject to the supervision of an assigned youth justice
who may direct attendance at educational, personal, health and other
was explained earlier, disqualification from driving for two years was, for the
applicant, a significant punishment because of
where he lived. It could not be
said, however, that it was beyond the proper exercise of the magistrate's
discretion.
first ground of the motion is not made out.
A pre-sentence
report was not required
second ground of appeal asserts that the magistrate erred by imposing a
suspended detention order without first ordering and
considering a pre-sentence
report directed to that question. The magistrate made no such error.
Youth Justice Act
, provides that "the Court" must not make a
probation order, order community service or make a detention order unless it has
obtained a pre-sentence report. Under
, the Court may order the
Secretary to provide to it a pre-sentence report concerning the youth, and may
request that the report contain
specified information, assessments and reports
relating to the youth or the youth's family or other matters. The Secretary
the Secretary of the Department of Justice.
fact that the magistrate was sitting as the Court of Petty Sessions and not the
Magistrates Court (Youth Justice Division) is
sufficient to dispose of this
ground. The "Court" referred to in
was the Youth Justice Division. His
Honour was not sitting as that court and was not bound by
In any event,
a failure to comply with a procedural requirement of the
Youth Justice Act
did not invalidate the
order or any sentence imposed:
s 108A(1)(b).
Moreover, his Honour could have, in
the exercise of discretion, imposed sentence under the
Sentencing Act
was within his Honour's power to impose a sentence of actual imprisonment
without the need for any report. Instead, his Honour
decided, as he was
empowered to do by the
Youth Justice Act
, to exercise a
sentencing power of the Youth Justice Division.
is no definition of pre-sentence report in the
Youth Justice Act
counsel recognised the distinction in practice between a full pre-sentence
report and what is known as an assessment report.
The latter is a shorter
report, usually focussed on the suitability of a person for community service or
supervision by a youth justice
worker or a probation officer. However, the
distinction is not one which is recognised in any legislation. The magistrate
fact order a pre-sentence report, but from Community Corrections and not
the Youth Justice Service. Both fall within the operation
of the Department of
Justice. The sentencing proceedings commenced on 27 June 2024. After hearing the
prosecution facts and a plea
in mitigation the magistrate indicated that he
wanted to take time for reflection, and that he was "going to have [the
assessed for a community correction order as well". A community
correction order was a sentencing option open to his Honour under
Sentencing Act
Youth Justice Act
. The report his Honour
received prior to sentence was not a full pre-sentence report, but a shorter
assessment report. It indicated
that the applicant was not suitable for
community service because where he lived and his employment obligations made the
performance
of community service too difficult. However, the report also made
clear that the applicant was not suitable for a "community based
supervision
condition" due to an "absence of criminogenic risks/needs able to be targeted by
Community Corrections". The applicant
now complains that the report was not
directed to the making of a suspended detention order. He submits that a more
detailed report
might have been helpful and provided more expansive information
have been any
information not otherwise available to the magistrate which was relevant to
sentence which might have been included
in such a report. The applicant was
represented by experienced counsel. His Honour knew, from the matters put in
mitigation and from
the assessment report, the applicant's age, that he had no
prior convictions, that he held stable employment and had good family
and was remorseful. Without wishing to understate the importance of
recommendations made by those authorities, particularly
for a youth, it was for
the magistrate, not Community Corrections or the Youth Justice Service, to
decide on the appropriate sentence.
ground of appeal is not made out.
Extension of time
sentence was imposed on 8 August 2024. The
Justices Act
that a notice to review must be filed and served within 21 days. This notice was
not filed until 25 September 2024, well
outside the time limit. I have no
evidence of when it was served but no issue is taken with that by the
respondent. The delay in
filing has been explained. It was not contributed to by
the applicant. It arose because the legal practitioner then advising the
applicant had a busy workload. There was no prejudice to the
respondent.
Result and orders
extension of time sought by the applicant should be allowed, but neither ground
of the notice to review has been made out. I
(a) the time limited for filing the notice to review is extended until 25
September 2024;
(b) the notice to review is dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (175 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter