URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASHPT/2019/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:16:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Psychology Board of Australia v Malcolm Aslin [2019] TASHPT 5 (23 July 2019)
[2019] TASHPT 5
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL
Psychology Board of Australia v Malcolm Aslin
PSYCHOLOGY BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
ASLIN, Malcolm
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
15 July 2019 and by joint written submissions dated 4
DELIVERED ON:
23 July 2019
DECISION OF:
Chairperson Webster
CATCHWORDS:
Psychologist – professional misconduct –
sexual relationship between psychologist and patient – provision of false
statement in the course of an investigation by AHPRA – appropriate
findings and determinations
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law Act
Health Practitioners Tribunal Act
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (Tasmania) Act
Re a Psychologist
[2009] TASSC 70
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Omant (Review and Regulation)
[2013] VCAT 1679
Craig v The Medical Board of South Australia
Psychology Board of Australia v Spring
[2015] QCAT 314
Psychology Board of Australia v IVX (Review and Regulation)
[2016] VCAT
Psychology Board of Australia v Bakjac
[2016] SAHPT 3
Board of Australia v Popovski (Review and Regulation)
[2019] VCAT 155
Secretary to the Department of Planning and Community Development v Muto
[2011] VCAT 328
Honey v Medical Practitioners Board of Victoria
[2007] VCAT 526
Psychology Board of Australia v Wakelin
[2014] QCAT
DETERMINATION:
The respondent is guilty of professional misconduct and
the appropriate sanctions are imposed.
REPRESENTATION:
S. Taglieri SC
Respondent:
[2019] TASHPT 5
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. On 5 March 2019 the applicant referred to the Tribunal
pursuant to s193 of the Schedule to the Health Practitioner Regulation National
Law Act 2009 (Qld) (“the National Law”) and
Practitioners Tribunal Act 2010
conduct of the respondent which it asserts
amounts to professional misconduct. The National Law set out in the Schedule to
Practitioner Regulation Law Act 2009 (Qld) has been adopted by the
Tasmanian Parliament and applies as a law of this
case concerns the professional consequences for a psychologist, Mr Aslin, who
maintained an intimate personal and sexual relationship
with a patient and then,
during an investigation of a notification with respect to that relationship,
deliberately and wilfully sought
to mislead the applicant with respect to the
nature of his relationship with the patient.
3. The first directions hearing
in this matter was conducted by me on 20 March 2019. An application to make
some minor amendments
to the application was made and that application was not
opposed by Mr Aslin. Mr Aslin indicated he did not have any real difficulties
with what the applicant was proposing but there were a number of matters he
wished to discuss with the applicant and therefore the
matter was adjourned to
permit those discussions to take place.
4. Not having heard from the parties
this matter was listed on 3 June 2019 for further directions on 24 June 2019. A
joint submission
was received from the parties on or about 4 June 2019.
24 June 2019 I discussed the joint submission with the parties and indicated
what further evidence was required. The matter
was then set down for hearing on
15 July 2019.
These Proceedings
6. The applicant’s referral alleges the respondent
conducted himself while practising as a psychologist at Deloraine in Tasmania
between 2017 and 2018 in the following manner:
approximately 28 February 2017, the Respondent commenced a therapeutic
relationship to treat a patient (JM) (“the
patient”) for anxiety and
Respondent treated the patient during appointments on at least two other
occasions, being the 8
March 2017.
approximately mid June 2017 and November 2017, the Respondent had frequent and
recurring communications by phone and in person
with the patient, culminating in
the development of a close personal friendship.
approximately November 2017 until March 2018, the Respondent entered into and
maintained an intimate personal and sexual relationship
with the patient,
the professional obligations imposed on psychologists by the Code of Ethics
published by the Australian Psychology Society
(particularly C.4.1 and
conduct substantially below the standard of conduct reasonably expected of a
registered psychologist of equivalent training and
experience.
conduct inconsistent with him being a fit and proper person to hold registration
in the profession of psychology.
The Applicant further refers to the Tribunal, the
Respondent’s conduct arising from the content of his statement made to the
Applicant, via AHPRA, on or about 31 October 2018 in which he deliberately and
wilfully sought to mislead the Applicant about the
nature of his relationship
with the patient. A copy of the said statement is attached and marked
‘A’. The Respondent
only sought to correct his original misleading
statement to the Applicant, when he provided a further statement to the
via AHPRA, on or about 16 December 2018. A copy of the second
statement is attached and marked
7. On 24 June 2019 and again on 15 July 2019 I confirmed with
the respondent he conceded the following conduct which was alleged
in the joint
submission:
(a) The application dated 4 March 2019 and filed in the
Tribunal related to the respondent’s conduct:
• with a client (JM) between February 2017 and March
2018, being set out in paragraphs 1 to 4 inclusive of the application filed
March 2019 (“the breach of professional boundaries”);
• in the respondent’s dealings with the Board after being
advised of the notification by JM pursuant to s144 of the National
(b) The breach of professional boundaries was brought to the
attention of the applicant by a notification made by JM to the applicant
October 2018.
(c) The respondent admits he formed an inappropriate intimate
and sexual relationship with the notifier (JM) as has been alleged in
1 to 4 of the particulars to the application. The intimate and then sexual
relationship continued for several months
whilst the notifier remained his
(d) The respondent admits he provided two statements and submissions
to the Board, being those annexed to the application and marked
and “B” respectively. He admits that the first statement given on
or about 31 October 2018 contained
a knowingly false statement, namely that the
nature of his relationship with JM was one of friendship.
(e) The second
statement and submission given on or about 16 December 2018, corrected his
previous false statement, by admitting he
had an intimate relationship with
(f) The respondent is 62 years old and was a self-employed psychologist
based at the Deloraine Medical Clinic during the relevant
period in 2017 and
2018. He was initially consulted by the notifier for anxiety. His registration
as a psychologist was suspended
following immediate action taken by the
applicant on 2 November 2018. The respondent is now based in Launceston and is
a driver in a casual capacity.
(g) JM had been referred to the
respondent by a general practitioner in February 2017 for treatment of symptoms
for depression and
anxiety arising from burglaries at her home and past issues
of abandonment and cruelty.
(h) Following the termination of the relationship
between the respondent and JM, she felt used by the respondent and told him he
behaved in a predatory way for his own needs.
8. Other information provided by the parties on 15 July 2019
which was agreed was as follows:
• The respondent has no prior disciplinary
• He attempted to surrender his registration on 4 December
• The Code of Ethics (the Code) which was published in 2007 by
the Australian Psychological Society (the Society) was adopted
by the Psychology
Board of Australia (the Board) in 2010. On the 27 September 2013 the Board
decided to continue to endorse the Code
of the Society although the Society are
currently undertaking a review of the
respondent provided the misleading statement because as he says in annexure B to
this referral he was very afraid about
the consequences of his conduct in so far
as his ongoing registration as a psychologist was concerned. In addition he had
just commenced
a new position as a psychologist on the day he was advised of the
notification and he says he was only given a limited time to respond.
received legal advice “to fight” the case against him however after
discussing the matter with the Society and
his insurer, which denied indemnity
due to the nature of the allegations, he provided the subsequent statement. He
recognises he
put his own needs above that of the integrity of his profession
which he says he holds dearly. He accepts this caused the investigation
delayed and it caused ongoing harm to JM. He recognises he has caused JM a
great deal of harm and he has failed in his duties
as a psychologist. His
behaviour towards his patient was misguided and he has particularly let her
down. He understands the boundaries
he has crossed and the fact he has brought
his profession into disrepute. He expressed regret and remorse for that. As a
of his actions he says he has lost his profession, his job, his partner
and friends. He indicates in annexure B he does not intend
to return to the
profession.
• The respondent advised he was aware he had breached the
Code of Ethics, that this conduct was isolated and that he clearly
the error of his ways.
• He lost his new job as a psychologist, which
was in a team environment, because of his behaviour which is the subject of this
referral. He was frank with his employer about these proceedings and the
employer allowed him to resign rather than be sacked.
• His CV, which
I was handed by agreement at the hearing, discloses the respondent obtained a
Bachelor of Behavioural Science
from Monash University in 1998 and a Post
Graduate Diploma in Psychology from Monash University in 2001. He held a number
of positions
as a psychologist between 2003 and 2018. From July 1976 to March
2003 he held a number of positions as an ambulance paramedic with
the Victorian
Ambulance Service.
• I was also provided with references, by
agreement, from practice managers of two medical practices which attest to the
respondent’s
reliable, organised and professional manner of practise as a
psychologist. A third reference from a psychologist indicates she has
respondent for approximately 3 years as a colleague with whom she built “a
solid professional relationship”.
She says she is aware of the allegations
against him but says she would willingly work professionally with him in the
she continues to regard him as a psychologist “with good
character”.
• The respondent said he had always been truthful
and open with colleagues but he accepted he would need to rebuild trust and
confidence and his reputation if he was ever to practise again.
the time of the conduct the subject of the referral the respondent was working
alone and was seeing 7 patients per day,
5 days per week. He said he became
overwhelmed with the emotion of the cases he was dealing with and it wore him
down. He did not
take the holidays he should have and because he was working in
isolated towns he knew things and heard things that tainted his views.
long hours and travelled long distances and this led to the deterioration in his
relationship with a person he had known
for in excess of 30 years.
• The respondent now finds himself in a position where he is
performing casual work that pays him only $22,000 per year. This
comparison to his work as a psychologist, is not fulfilling. He misses his work
as a psychologist as that gave meaning to
his life. He says not only has he lost
income he has also lost his identity. There has been a loss of self-esteem and
some depression
has been experienced although that condition is being managed.
He is now 62 years old. He is uncertain whether he would apply for
reregistration. If he did and his application was approved he would not work in
private practice . He would seek to work in a team
environment where there is
not as much intense client contact.
Findings of Fact
9. Given the admissions of the respondent I find as facts the
particulars set out in paragraph 6 and also the matters contained in
Does the Respondent’s Conduct Amount to Professional
Misconduct?
10. The respondent does not dispute that in the circumstances
of this case a finding of professional misconduct is appropriate.
11. Insofar
as the categorisation of the admitted conduct is concerned, the Tribunal can
determine in respect of all or some of those
matters set out in paragraphs 6 to
8 the respondent:
(a) behaved in a way that constitutes unsatisfactory
professional performance;
(b) behaved in a way that constitutes
unprofessional conduct; or
(c) behaved in a way that constitutes professional
12. Each of the terms in paragraph 11 is defined in the
National Law
summary they are:
(a) Unsatisfactory professional performance means the
knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised by the practitioner
the practice of the health profession in which the practitioner is registered is
below the standard reasonably expected of a health
practitioner of an equivalent
level of training or experience.
(b) Unprofessional conduct means
professional conduct which is of a lesser standard than might reasonably be
expected of a health
practitioner by the public or the practitioner’s
professional peers.
(c) Professional misconduct includes unprofessional
conduct of a practitioner that amounts to conduct that is substantially below
the standard reasonably expected of a registered health practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience. Additionally,
where more than one
instance of unprofessional conduct, when considered together, amounts to conduct
substantially below the standard
reasonably expected of a registered health
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience then this amounts
to professional
misconduct. It includes conduct whether that conduct occurs in
connection with the practice of the health practitioner’s profession
not, which is inconsistent with the practitioner being a fit and proper person
to hold registration in the profession.
13. I accept the definition of “professional
misconduct” in paragraph 12 is an inclusive one and is not an exhaustive
statement of that term. The definition therefore includes conduct that may not
fall within any of the matters contained within the
definition, for example
matters established at common law or under previous disciplinary
legislation.
14. Professional misconduct by reference to common law
principles is helpfully discussed in the reasoning of Blow J, as he then was,
Re a Psychologist
[2009] TASSC 70
where he said:
common law, behaviour on the part of a member of a profession that would
reasonably be regarded as disgraceful or dishonourable
by members of that
profession of good repute and competency amounts to professional misconduct: In
re a Solicitor
[1911] UKLawRpKQB 173
[1912] 1 KB 302
at 311 – 312; Grahame v
Attorney-General of Fiji
[1936] 2 All ER 992
at 1002; Myers v Elman
[1940] AC 282
at 288 – 289; Re Thom; ex
parte the Prothonotary
(1963) 80 WN(NSW) 968
at 969; Re Veron; ex parte
Law Society of New South Wales (1966) 84 WN(NSW) (Pt 1) 136 at 143; In re Three
[1949] VicLawRp 13
[1949] VLR 72
at 73; Re a Solicitor
[1960] VicRp 96
[1960] VR 617
at 620; Law Society of Tasmania v
[2001] TASSC 129
(2001) 11 Tas R 1
at 17; Adamson v Pharmacy Board
of Tasmania (No 2)
[2004] TASSC 82
at par10. The provisions of the Act as to
professional misconduct have not affected that common law rule in relation to
psychologists.
Counsel for the appellant did not make any suggestion that they
had. If the conduct of the appellant towards the complainant would
have been regarded as disgraceful or dishonourable by members of his profession
of good repute and competency, it amounted
to professional misconduct at common
law. The question is whether the rules of procedural fairness were observed in
the decision-making
15. The statements of Blow J, although they were made before
the introduction of the National Law, are consistent with the decisions
since the National Law was introduced. An example of this is the decision in
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Omant
(Review and Regulation)
where the Tribunal said:
“The meaning of
professional misconduct has been set out in various cases, most notably Campbell
v Dental Board of Victoria
[1999] VSC 113
where Mandie J considered
that the test was whether conduct:
violates or falls short of, to a substantial degree, the standard of
professional conduct observed or approved by members of the profession
repute and competency.”
16. As the respondent was a registered psychologist at the time
of the conduct the subject of this referral the Society’s Code
is relevant
to the characterisation of the respondent’s conduct.
17. The Code
reflects the standards expected of psychologists and it was adopted by the
applicant in 2010. Section 41 of the National
Law permits a code approved by a
National Board to be admissible in proceedings under the National Law as
evidence of what constitutes
appropriate professional conduct or practice. I
note the Psychology Board of Australia is a National Board established pursuant
to s31 of the National Law. Standard C.4.3 provides:
“Psychologists:
(a) do not engage in sexual activity with a client or anybody who is closely
related to one of their clients;
(b) do not engage in sexual activity with a former client, or anybody who is
closely related to one of their former clients, within
2 years after terminating
the professional relationship with the former client;
(c) who wish to engage in sexual activity with a former client after a period
of 2 years from the termination of the service, first
explore with a senior
psychologist the possibility that the former client may be vulnerable and at
risk of exploitation, and encourage
the former client to seek independent
counselling on the matter; and
(d) do not accept as a client a person with whom they have engaged in sexual
18. The respondent has acknowledged he deliberately misled the
applicant by initially denying the allegations contained in the referral.
concedes once a formal investigation commenced into the allegations of a sexual
relationship he changed his mind and acknowledged
the inappropriate nature of
the relationship. He acknowledges his conduct was a deliberate attempt to
mislead and he failed to be
frank and candid with the applicant in his initial
response. He acknowledges his wilful misleading of the applicant could be
characterised
as either unprofessional conduct or professional misconduct, as
defined in s5 of the National Law.
19. The respondent acknowledges his
inappropriate relationship with a vulnerable client who had consulted him
because of her anxiety
had the potential to cause harm. He further acknowledges
that by failing to be frank and candid with the applicant, the
respondent’s
conduct fell substantially below the standard reasonably
expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level of training and experience
the respondent.
20. Psychologists of good repute would regard the
respondent’s boundary breaches and misleading conduct towards the Board as
disgraceful and dishonourable, meaning that it constitutes professional
misconduct at common law.
21. As mentioned above the respondent has conceded
his relationship with JM was inappropriate and in breach of professional
boundaries.
His admission saved the applicant from having to prove the
allegation and spared JM from giving evidence to the Tribunal. The applicant
acknowledges the respondent has expressed his regret for his behaviour and his
poor judgement.
22. Having considered the findings of fact made in paragraph
9 and all of the matters raised in paragraphs 10 to 21 above I take the
respondent’s breach of professional boundaries and his false statement to
the Board individually demonstrate his conduct
fell substantially below the
standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level of
training and experience as
the respondent. When the conduct is taken together,
and it is appropriate to do so given the false statement arose out of the
notification
with respect to the breach of professional boundaries, the conduct
is all the more grave. When viewed in that light the respondent’s
constitutes two instances of unprofessional conduct, which together amount to
professional misconduct as defined in subsection
(c) of the definition of
professional misconduct under the National Law: see paragraph 12
23. As I have previously said many pieces of legislation which deal
with professional vocations require a member of that profession
to be a fit and
proper person or a person of good standing and repute. The question of whether
the respondent is a “fit and
proper person” to practise must be
considered in the context of the definition of what constitutes professional
for the purposes of the definition of that term in s5 of the National
24. Professional misconduct in terms of the definition in subsection (c)
of s5 of the National Law only requires a practitioner’s
conduct to be
“inconsistent with the practitioner being a fit and proper person to hold
registration in the profession”
(my emphasis). Clearly the breach of
professional boundaries and the provision of the false statement are each by
themselves examples
of conduct which is inconsistent with the respondent being a
fit and proper person to hold registration in his profession; that is
conduct is professional misconduct according to the National Law. That conduct
when viewed individually is also professional
misconduct at common law. This is
because the respondent’s relationship with the patient and his behaviour
whereby he mislead
the Board amount to a breach of the Code and an instance
where he lied to the Board. This is conduct which is disgraceful and
dishonourable
when considered by psychologists of good repute and competency.
What Consequential Orders are Appropriate?
25. The parties seek the following consequential
(a) the respondent be reprimanded;
respondent’s registration be cancelled; and
(c) the respondent be
disqualified from seeking to reapply to be registered as a psychologist for a
period of 24 months.
26. It was submitted the Tribunal has the power to make these
orders under s196(2) and (4) of the National Law and I agree with that
submission.
27. In making orders under the National Law it is important to
understand the Tribunal’s primary purpose is protection of the
the Tribunal makes orders with the purpose of maintaining standards of, and
public confidence in, the medical profession.
As the Court said in Craig v The
Medical Board of South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
purpose of disciplinary proceedings is to protect the public, not to punish a
practitioner in the sense in which punishment
is administered pursuant to the
criminal law. A disciplinary tribunal protects the public by making orders
which will prevent persons
who are unfit to practise from practising, or by
making orders which will secure the maintenance of proper professional
A disciplinary tribunal will also consider the protection of the
public, and of the relevant profession, by making orders which
will assure the
public that appropriate standards are being maintained within the relevant
profession.”
28. The dominant purpose of the disciplinary regulation of the
psychological profession is the protection of the public by the maintenance
proper standards within the profession. Therefore, the impact which an
appropriate penalty would have upon a practitioner who
is guilty of misconduct,
and any personal hardship imposed on such a practitioner, are secondary
considerations
appropriate sanction is to be considered at the time of imposing the sanction
and not by reference to the date of the
30. Suspension
is of course a less serious consequence for the respondent than cancellation of
his registration because suspension
is for a specified and limited period. The
proper use of a suspension is in cases where the practitioner has fallen below
standards to be expected of such a practitioner, but not in such a way
as to indicate that he or she lacks the qualities of character
necessary attributes of a person entrusted with the responsibilities of a
practitioner
is suspension is appropriate where the Tribunal is satisfied that, upon
completion of the period of suspension, the practitioner
will be fit to resume
31. In determining an appropriate sanction I have previously said a
number of matters require
consideration
matters which previous cases have considered are inter-related and are not
mutually exclusive. There may, of course, be other
relevant matters depending
upon the circumstances of each case. The matters are as follows:
(a) Any need to protect the public against further
misconduct by the
practitioner
need to protect the public from similar conduct, through general deterrence, of
practitioners
need to protect the public and maintain confidence in the profession by
reinforcing high professional standards, denouncing
transgressions and thereby
articulating the high standards expected of the
that even where there may be no need to deter a practitioner for repeating the
conduct, the conduct is of such a nature that
the Tribunal should give an
emphatic indication of its
disapproval
(d) In the case of conduct
involving misleading conduct, including dishonesty, whether the public and
fellow practitioners can place
reliance on the word of the
practitioner
(e) Whether
the practitioner has breached any Act, regulations, guidelines or code of
conduct issued by the relevant professional
body and whether the practitioner
has done so knowingly.
(f) Whether the practitioner’s conduct
demonstrates incompetence, and if so, to what level.
(g) Whether or not the
conduct was isolated such that the Tribunal can be satisfied of his or her
worthiness or reliability in the
practitioner’s disciplinary
(i) Whether
or not the practitioner understands the error of his or her ways, including an
assessment of any remorse and insight (or
lack thereof) shown by the
practitioner. It has been said a practitioner who fails to understand the
significance and consequences
of misconduct is a risk to the
desirability of making available to the public any special skills possessed by
the practitioner.
(k) The practitioner’s personal circumstances at the
time of the conduct and at the time of imposing the sanction. The weight
given to personal circumstances cannot, however, override the fundamental
obligation of this Tribunal to provide appropriate
protection of the public
interest in the honesty and integrity of practitioners and in the maintenance of
proper standards of such
Tribunal may consider any other matters relevant to the practitioner’s
fitness to practice and other matters which may
be regarded as aggravating or
which mitigate its
seriousness
Generally speaking, mitigating factors such as no previous misconduct or a
practitioner’s service to the profession are of
considerably less
significance in this jurisdiction than in the criminal process because this
32. I was referred by counsel for the applicant to the facts
and penalty in a number of cases by way of comparison to this case.
immediately recognise that every case is different and each case usually has its
own combination of relevant factors which leads
to the orders that might be
made. Some cases can, however, be helpful in illustrating the range of orders
that might be made in
particular cases and the types of conduct that have come
before Tribunals.
33. The first case was Psychology Board of Australia v
[2015] QCAT 314.
In that case the conduct referred to the Board
consisted of breaches of boundaries by Mr Spring with respect to two patients.
as the first patient was concerned he also consulted and treated that
patient’s defacto husband. They participated in separate
counselling sessions with Mr Spring. During the treatment of the patient, she
disclosed highly personal matters which
concerned her relationship with her
defacto husband. It was clear from Mr Spring’s clinical notes she was a
psychologically
vulnerable person. An intimate relationship developed between
Mr Spring and the first patient and it appears that relationship commenced
a short period after the disintegration of her relationship with her defacto
husband. The relationship commenced during the
period of the therapeutic
relationship and was a sexual one. The matters concerning the second patient
relate to a series of text
messages exchanged between Mr Spring and that patient
in which Mr Spring appeared to be seeking the assistance of the patient to
engage the services of somebody who might bring harm upon another. It appears
Mr Spring was seeking protection from the first patient’s
former defacto
34. Mr Spring was examined by Dr Varghese who said of Mr
Spring’s disclosures of personal information to his patients:
is a practice without boundaries. The practice is from his own home, and once
his wife has left he is alone in the home
without office help that would act as
a chaperone. His clients or some of his clients, are aware of the breakup of
the marriage,
and moreover they are aware of Mr Spring’s problems with Mr
S, including the alleged threats of violence. His excuse that
he had to tell
clients because there was the possibility that appointments would be cancelled
because of threats is most worrying.
One can only imagine what sort of turmoil
would be going on in a client who has depression or anxiety who has to turn up
for therapy
with the possibility that the therapy may have to be cancelled in an
emergency because of threats of violence from a third party.
It seems to me much more likely that Mr Spring was seeking support and
comfort from his clients in the absence of any other individuals
provide this. This is grossly inappropriate and potentially damaging for
35. The Tribunal said those observations indicated why it is
that the disclosure of personal information by a treating psychologist
innocuous social interaction; but a matter potentially severely damaging to the
already vulnerable who are consulting the
psychologist for professional
services. The Tribunal also said the following at [16] to [18]:
“[16] Because Mr
Spring has not participated in these proceedings, it is unknown as to why it is
that he ceased practice. It
is unknown as to whether that of itself reflects
some level of understanding or insight, or indeed remorse, which he now
experiences
in respect of these matters. Notwithstanding that, it is a fact that
he has not practised or sought to practise now for a period
of some two and
a-half years. In my view, an order which will see him effectively precluded from
practice for a period of five years
in total is appropriate. In those
circumstances, it is appropriate to order that he be precluded from applying for
registration as
a registered health practitioner for a period of two years and
six months from the date of this order. That will effectively result
having been precluded from practice, including his own voluntary preclusion, for
a period of five years.
[17] It is also appropriate that Mr Spring be reprimanded.
[18] It will, of course, be a matter for Mr Spring to establish to the
satisfaction of the Psychology Board of Australia, in the event
that he does
ever seek to be re-registered, that he possesses the requisite personal and
professional qualities and requirements
to satisfy the board that he is indeed a
fit and proper person to hold registration. That will, however, be a matter,
appropriately,
for the Board to determine, if those events ever
transpire.”
36. The next case was Psychology Board of Australia v IVX
(Review and Regulation)
[2016] VCAT 35.
In that case from mid-February 2012,
the respondent, while working as a psychologist engaged in professional
misconduct in that
he had an intimate personal relationship with a client whom
he had been treating since August 2011 and whose final consultation was
February 2012 and whom he knew to be vulnerable to emotional and physical
exploitation in circumstances where:
• at the time the relationship commenced, the client was
yet to be referred to an alternate psychologist;
• at the time the
relationship commenced, the client had not been formally discharged back to the
general practitioner who had
referred her to IVX;
• at the time the
relationship commenced, IVX had taken no or insufficient steps to ensure the
client had received independent
advice about entering into the intimate personal
relationship; and
• at the time the relationship commenced, IVX had not
sought supervision from a peer regarding his decision to enter the intimate
personal relationship.
37. The Tribunal reprimanded the practitioner and suspended his
registration for 9 months from 10 March 2016 and required him to undertake
mentoring and/or education during the period of his suspension, for IVX and the
mentor to provide reports to the Psychology Board
of Australia and following the
resumption of registration he was to undertake professional supervision for a
period of 12 months
at fortnightly intervals.
38. The third case was
Psychology Board of Australia v Bakjac
[2016] SAHPT 3.
In this case for a
period shortly after 1 July 2011 until 6 September 2011 the practitioner entered
into and fostered an inappropriate
personal relationship with a client and
thereby breached professional boundaries between herself and the client. This
was an improper
dual relationship as defined in the Code and it was common
ground in that case the Code was binding on the respondent. In carrying
inappropriate personal relationship the respondent was in breach of standard
C.3.1 of the Code and in particular C.3.1(a)
because she engaged in a multiple
dual relationship that may have:
(a) impaired her competence, effectiveness or objectivity to
render psychological services;
(b) led to the exploitation of the
39. It was the Board’s position this did lead to the
client’s exploitation. Second, the respondent breached the Code
shortly after 6 September 2011 she had a sexual relationship with the client
which continued until the date of the hearing.
They cohabited and intended to
marry. The respondent had only formally ceased her professional role as a
psychologist on 6 September
2011 and the Code forbids a sexual relationship
between a psychologist and his or her patient for 2 years after cessation of the
professional role. Third her lawyers, with her approval and authority, wrote a
letter to AHPRA dated 29 February 2012 which gave
a false and misleading
explanation about her relationship with the client as to when it commenced and
under what circumstances.
The letter was false and misleading because it
wrongly stated the details of all communications between the respondent and the
were recorded in the case notes, that there were no telephone calls with
the client other than those recorded in her notes and she
did not recall any
phone calls late in the evening, particularly when the client was seeking
personal assistance. Fourth, on 23
January 2013 when interviewed by AHPRA she
gave the investigators false and misleading explanations concerning her
relationship with
the client as to when it commenced and under what
circumstances. It was false and misleading because generally she reasserted the
letter from her lawyers correctly set out her position and she did not wish to
correct it other than she may have received a couple
of out of hours phone calls
from the client which were not recorded by the respondent. This was untrue
because she received 12 phone
calls and 84 messages from him between April and
July 2011 and 8,707 messages and calls occurred between them between July 2011
September 2011, none of which were recorded in her case notes. The Tribunal
determined that collectively these four matters constituted
professional
misconduct because it was conduct which fell substantially below the standard
expected of a registered health practitioner
of an equivalent level of training
and experience. The seriousness of the conduct in matters one and two and the
lack of insight
she demonstrated by her subsequent false and misleading conduct
in matters three and four was found to be inconsistent with the respondent
a fit and proper person to hold registration in the psychology profession. The
Tribunal reprimanded the respondent and suspended
her registration for 15
months. The Tribunal also imposed supervision on her for 12 months after she
returned to practice including
the requirement that she complete certain
education programs approved by the Board.
40. The final case is Psychology
Board of Australia v Popovski (Review and Regulation)
[2019] VCAT 155.
allegations in that case were the respondent had engaged in professional
misconduct in that she:
(a) between approximately March 2010 and 30 June 2010
engaged in professional misconduct in that she transgressed the boundary
delineating
the psychologist/patient relationship by engaging in appropriate
dual relationships including a social and/or close personal and/or
relationship with her patient and/or former patient;
(b) between 1 July 2010
and approximately February 2011 she engaged in professional misconduct in that
she transgressed the boundaries
delineating the psychologist/patient
relationship by engaging in inappropriate dual relationships including social
and/or close personal
and/or sexual relationship with the patient; and
or about 23 October 2015 and/or 9 November 2016 she engaged in professional
misconduct in that she attempted to deceive and/or
mislead the Board and/or
AHPRA regarding the nature of her previous relationship with the patient during
the course of the Board’
s investigation into her conduct with respect to
the patient.
41. The notification was made to AHPRA in August 2015 and it
was alleged the respondent commenced an intimate relationship with a
or around June 2010 before or just after his treatment ceased. It appears from
the written decision the respondent denied
the allegations on four separate
occasions between October 2015 and June 2017. The matter was referred to VCAT
in March 2018. It
appears the respondent had closed her practice in January
42. During the VACT proceedings a further written statement was
provided from the patient to the respondent which made clear the significant
detrimental impact the relationship had had on him which, on his account, had
flowed from the psychologist/patient relationship.
In July 2018 the respondent
recanted her previous denials and admitted she engaged in the alleged conduct.
It appears the change
in her position had come about after reading the
patient’s March 2018 statement and she realised she had to “confront
the truth”. The allegations were found to amount to professional
misconduct. The Tribunal said with respect to the respondent’s
that it was completely unacceptable. At paragraphs [40] and [41] the Tribunal
Popovski’s conduct was completely unacceptable. She entered into a sexual
relationship with a vulnerable person
who she had provided treatment as a
psychologist, clearly in breach of relevant ethical codes. She went on to
consistently and methodically
lie about her conduct until contrary evidence was
overwhelming. This included attacking the credibility of the Notifier, the
and her friends Mr X and Ms Y. We add here that Mr X and Ms Y were both
registered psychologists who she had studied with at University.
decisions do not turn on this, it is reprehensible to, during false denials,
challenge the credibility of fellow psychologists.
have no hesitation in finding that Ms Popovski is not of good character, is
otherwise not a fit and proper person to engage in
the practice of psychology
and her conduct is inconsistent with her being a fit and proper person to hold
registration as a psychologist.
Her conduct amounts to professional misconduct
as alleged.”
43. In that case the Tribunal reprimanded the respondent and
disqualified her from applying for reregistration for a period of 3
44. In relation to the matters set out in paragraph 31, subparagraphs
(f), (h) and (j) are not relevant to this matter.
45. In relation to
subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) of paragraph 31, when the facts of this case are
compared to those set out in paragraphs
32 to 43 I think the conduct in this
case is towards the severe end. It is more severe than in the case of IVX , but
not as severe
as the conduct in Spring, Bacjak and Popovski. While the
Tribunal’s role is to protect the public and not punish the practitioner,
its decisions sometimes involve a degree of punishment for the purpose of
specific deterrence; that is to deter practitioners from
repeating the
misconduct or general deterrence the purpose of which is to warn others in the
profession against such misconduct.
The Tribunal’s role is also to uphold
the reputation of the psychology profession. Clearly a determination in this
achieve both specific deterrence, general deterrence and to uphold the
profession’s reputation is required given the respondent’s
Insofar as his misleading and deceptive conduct is concerned, it is constructive
to consider the comments of the Tribunal
in Psychology Board of Australia v
[2014] QCAT 516
where, at [27], the Tribunal said:
importance for deterrence of practitioners from any form of deceit in their
dealings with their Professional Board deserves
emphasis. The Board has limited
resources and needs to be able to trust the response of practitioners who have a
duty to deal with
their professional association in good faith. The
practitioners must know that serious consequences will follow if they flout that
duty, and that sanctions for such conduct may well exceed that which will be
imposed in a particular case.”
46. In relation to paragraph 31(d) I only have the
practitioner’s word that the public and fellow practitioners could rely
his word in the future. On the one hand he has admitted to providing a
false statement with respect to the notifier’s allegations
recant from that position after approximately 6 weeks when he says he came to
the realisation that his deceit delayed
the investigation and caused ongoing
harm to his former patient.
47. In relation to paragraph 31(e) it is clear
from what the respondent told me, he knew he had breached the Code by behaving
manner alleged.
48. As to paragraph 31(g) it seems to me the conduct
complained of in this case is isolated. There is no evidence of any previous
behaviour of a similar nature.
49. I note the applicant’s concession
there is no prior disciplinary history.
50. As to paragraph 31(i) it is clear
from the statement made in annexure “B” to the application and what
the respondent
told me at the hearing he understands the error of his ways and
he is sorry for his conduct, not only because of the significant
harm he has
caused JM but also because his conduct has brought his profession into
disrepute. As a consequence he has paid a significant
penalty in that he has
lost his profession, his job, his partner and friends. His remorse is reflected
by the fact he recanted his
previous denials because of the realisation of the
damage he had not only caused JM but to his profession.
51. At the time of
the conduct the subject of the notification the respondent’s circumstances
were as set out in paragraph 8.
He has, as a result of that conduct, lost his
partner; a person he has known for almost half his life. He is no longer
as a psychologist but instead performs casual work as a driver. His
income is significantly less. He no longer has a wide circle
of friends. While
these matters can be taken into account they cannot override the fundamental
obligation of the Tribunal to protect
the public and uphold proper standards of
practice within the psychology profession.
52. In making determinations and
orders in this matter I am assisted and guided by statements of Ross J. in
Secretary to the Department
of Planning and Community Development v Muto
, where his Honour observed that:
proceedings in respect of civil penalties there is now a well-established line
of authority in support of the proposition
that where a regulatory body and a
respondent have reached a negotiated settlement and the penalty proposed is,
broadly speaking,
within the ‘permissible range’ having regard to
all the circumstances, the court (or in this case the Tribunal) should
depart from the agreed sanction. I propose to adopt the same approach to the
matter before me. The question then becomes whether
the sanction proposed is
within the permissible range.”
53. While the parties have jointly proposed a disqualification
period of 2 years, my responsibility is to reach an independent determination.
Whether the sanction proposed is within the permissible range is answered by
whether the protection of the public and maintenance
of professional standards
is achieved by imposition of the proposed penalties. Before determining this
question it is important
to look at the differences between a suspension and a
cancellation. In Honey v Medical Practitioners Board of Victoria
[2007] VCAT
the Tribunal said the following at [42] to [45]:
“42 The major
difference between a period of suspension and cancellation is that once the
doctor’s registration is cancelled,
he must reapply after the period
specified. He is not guaranteed that he will be so re-registered. He must still
satisfy the Board
that registration is appropriate and that he fulfils the
qualifications for general registration...
Cancellation
of registration sends a clear message of unsuitability to practice. Suspension
may be thought to indicate confidence
in the doctor’s future ability to
practice once the period of suspension is served.
are some cases in which it is abundantly clear that deregistration is the only
option available to protect the public from a
miscreant doctor.
is apparent in situations in which the practitioner does not accept the
inappropriateness of his conduct, or has been shown to
be a serial
offender...”
54. In determining what orders should be made the Tribunal must
have regard to the seriousness of the conduct and the potential to
psychology profession into disrepute. The orders should fulfil the objective of
maintaining the professional reputation
of psychologists and also act to deter
the type of conduct that occurred in this case which is clearly unbecoming of
the standards
and reputation of that profession. The respondent’s
admissions with respect to the notification and his cooperation thereafter
relevant to the making of consequential orders. While the orders imposed by
this Tribunal should not punish him, they do need
to deter him and other
psychologists, or indeed other practitioners, to ensure that conduct whereby
practitioners breach professional
boundaries and are not candid with their
professional bodies are not repeated.
55. The respondent sought to surrender
his registration on 4 December 2018 some 4½ weeks after immediate action
was taken by
the Board to suspend his registration. His attempt to surrender his
registration pursuant to s137 of the National Law is not effective
because s207
provides that during a period of suspension a health practitioner is taken not
to be registered. There is therefore
nothing to surrender. It therefore seems
cancellation of the respondent’s registration pursuant to s196(2)(e) is
appropriate.
56. Weighing the obligations set out in paragraphs 53 to 55
with the facts of this case I determine the totality of the respondent’s
conduct amounts to professional misconduct and that he be reprimanded and his
registration cancelled. In addition he is disqualified
from seeking to reapply
to be registered as a psychologist for a period of 24 months from today. I note
the respondent has been
unable to practice due to immediate action since 2
November 2018. The effect of the orders is that he will be prevented from
for a period of about 2 years and 9 months. It will be a matter for
the respondent to establish to the satisfaction of the Psychology
Australia, in the event he seeks to be registered, that he possesses the
requisite personal and professional qualities and
requirements to satisfy the
Board he is a fit and proper person to hold registration. That is not a matter
for this Tribunal to
determine. That is a matter for the Board should the
respondent apply for registration in the future.
Disposition
57. I have found the respondent’s conduct amounts to
professional misconduct so I formally determine the conduct summarised
paragraphs 6 to 7 constitutes professional misconduct pursuant to the National
Law. Insofar as penalty is concerned I order that:
(a) the respondent be reprimanded;
respondent’s registration is cancelled; and
(c) the respondent is
disqualified from seeking to reapply to be registered as a psychologist for a
period of 24 months from today.
R. B. WEBSTER
CHAIRPERSON
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (Tasmania) Act
evidence was provided in an affidavit affirmed by Mr Shears on 3 July 2019.
See s196(1)(b) of the
National Law.
See s5 of the
National Law.
Legal Profession Complaints
Committee v Detata
[2012] WASCA 214
Legal Profession Complaints
Committee v Masten
[2011] WASC 71
Legal Profession Complaints
Committee v Leask
[2010] WASAT 133
Medical Board of Australia
[2014] WASAT 137(S)
A Solicitor v Council of the Law
Society of NSW
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253.
Legal Profession Complaints
Committee v A Legal Practitioner
[2013] WASAT 37(S)
Practitioner
(1984) 36 SASR 590
at 593 per King
Nursing & Midwifery
Board of Australia v Gregory John Hogan
[2018] TASHPT 3.
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
at 440C and
NSW Bar Association v
(1999) NSWCA 404
Veterinary Practitioners
Board of NSW v Johnson
[2010] NSWADT 308
NSW Bar Association
(supra) at [77].
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman
(supra) at 444F and
NSW Bar Association v Hamman
(supra) at [77] and
Craig v The
Medical Board of South Australia
(supra) at [64].
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman
(supra) at 445B and 445G;
Veterinary Practitioners Board
of NSW v Johnson
(supra) at [109].
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman
(supra) at 442E and 442G;
New South Wales Bar Association
[1968] HCA 20
(1968) 117 CLR 177
Council of the Law
Society (NSW) v A Solicitor
[2002] NSWCA 62
Chamberlain v Law
Society of the Australian Capital Territory
[1993] FCA 527
(1993) 118 ALR
at 62 and 63.
Profession Complaints Committee v O’Halloran
[2013] WASC 430
New South Wales v Walsh
[1997] NSWCA 185
per Beazley JJA;
Profession Complaints Committee v Lashansky
[2007] WASC 2011
Law Society of New South Wales v Foreman
Settlement Agents Supervisory Board
[2007] WASCA 97
(2007) 33 WAR 361
Profession Complaints Committee v A Legal Practitioner
(supra) at [25].
Law Society of New South
Wales v Walsh
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (231 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter