URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASPComm/2025/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:19:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tasmanian Planning Scheme - Brighton amendment RZ-2024-04 [2025] TASPComm 7 (1 April 2025)
Tasmanian Planning Scheme - Brighton
RZ-2024-04 - Insert Site-Specific Qualification BRI-26.1 at
2 Strong Street, Bridgewater, folio of the register 164049/1, for an additional
Permitted Use Class for Food Services with the qualification ‘if for
mobile food vendor’.
Planning authority
Brighton Council
Date of decision
1 April 2025
The draft amendment is modified under
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
as set out in Annexure
A and is approved under
section 40Q.
John Ramsay
Executive Commissioner
REASONS FOR DECISION
draft amendment seeks to insert a site-specific qualification (SSQ) for an
additional Permitted Use of Food Services (if for mobile
food vendor) in the
Utilities Zone at Strong Street, Bridgewater folio of the Register
Site information
The subject property is a 2,645m
lot with frontages to Strong Street and Glenstone Road, Bridgewater. The site is
clear of vegetation and is used as a ‘truck
stop’. The site
currently has a small concrete area with a covered table and chairs but is
otherwise undeveloped.
The site is within the Brighton Transport Hub, adjoins a heavy vehicle
parking area, and is surrounded by land used for transport
and warehousing.
The land is zoned Utilities and is Crown-owned; managed by the Department of
State Growth. The surrounding land is zoned General Industrial.
The Electricity
Transmission Infrastructure Protection Area, Bushfire-Prone Hazard Area, and
Attenuation Area overlays apply to the
land. The site is also within the
Bridgewater Quarry Specific Area Plan.
Issues raised in representations
The draft amendment was referred to TasWater under
section 56S
Water and Sewerage Industry Act 2008
. In response,
TasWater made a representation that stated it had no objection to the draft
amendment and did not wish to attend a
public hearing if one were held.
The draft amendment also was referred to Tas Gas Networks (Tas Gas). In
response, Tas Gas made a representation that stated it had
no objection to the
draft amendment but noted a network valve was located near the property boundary
and always required unrestricted
access. Tas Gas therefore requested a 5m buffer
between food trucks and the valve to ensure safe and clear access.
Tas Gas advised in an email dated 31 March 2025 that it did not wish to
attend a hearing.
Planning authority’s response to the
representations
The planning authority considered the representations
and recommended there be no change to the draft amendment. In response to the
issue raised by Tas Gas, the planning authority stated the future location of
the food truck would be ‘located well away from
property boundaries’
and would be ‘determined through Council’s food truck policy
approval process’.
Commission consideration
The Commission notes no objection by either TasWater
or Tas Gas to the draft amendment.
According to theLIST, the relevant gas pipeline infrastructure is located
near the southeast boundary of the site. The Commission
expects the likely
location of a mobile food vendor to be in the area on the northwest side of the
site, adjacent to the truck stop
area along Glenstone Road. The Commission
therefore considers no modification to the draft amendment as proposed by Tas
Gas is required.
The Commission also notes a mobile food vendor would require a permit under
the Council’s Mobile Food Vendor Policy and that
the planning authority is
aware of the location of the gas pipeline infrastructure. The Commission is
satisfied the draft amendment
section 34(2)(g)
of the LPS criteria (see
below), which requires a draft amendment to have regard to the safety
requirements set out in the standards
prescribed under the
Gas Safety Act
Consideration of the draft amendment
section 40M of the
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
the Commission is required to consider the draft amendment to the Local
Provisions Schedule (LPS) and the representations,
statements and
recommendations contained in the planning authority’s section 40K report
and any information obtained at a hearing.
consultation with the representors under section 40L(2) of the Act, the
Commission dispensed with holding a hearing.
Commission must also consider whether the draft amendment meets the LPS criteria
as set out under section 34(2) of the Act:
(a) contains all the provisions that the SPPs specify must be contained in an
(b) is in accordance with section 32; and
(c) furthers the objectives set out in Schedule 1; and
(d) is consistent with each State policy; and
(da) satisfies the relevant criteria in relation to the TPPs; and
(e) as far as practicable, is consistent with the regional land use strategy, if
any, for the regional area in which is situated
the land to which the relevant
planning instrument relates; and
(f) has regard to the strategic plan, prepared under
Government Act 1993
, that applies in relation to the land to which the
relevant planning instrument relates; and
(g) as far as practicable, is consistent with and co-ordinated with any LPSs
that apply to municipal areas that are adjacent to the
municipal area to which
the relevant planning instrument relates; and
(h) has regard to the safety requirements set out in the standards prescribed
Gas Safety Act 2019
Site-specific Qualification
draft amendment seeks to insert an SSQ to provide for an additional Permitted
Use of Food Services with a qualification of ‘if
for a mobile food
vendor’. The planning authority’s report dated 21 January 2025, made
in support of the certified draft
amendment (supporting report), submitted that
the SSQ would assist to provide a rest area for users of the Brighton Transport
consistent with the Tasmanian Heavy Vehicle Driver Rest Area Strategy. This
Strategy recommends the site be upgraded with new public
Additionally,
the planning authority submitted that the draft SSQ would enable development
which would be consistent with the Brighton
Structure Plan. Specifically,
strategy 5 of the Structure Plan intends to ‘improve the function and
presentation of the Brighton
Transport Hub and Industrial Estate.’
section 32(4) of the Act, an LPS may only include an SSQ if:
(a) a use or development to which the provision
relates is of significant social, economic or environmental benefit to the
a region or a municipal area; or
(b) the area of land has particular environmental,
economic, social or spatial qualities that require provisions, that are unique
to the area of land, to apply to the land in substitution for, or in addition
to, or modification of, the provisions of the SPPs.
supporting report submitted that the proposed amendment meets section 32(4)(a)
(‘a use or development to which the provision
relates is of significant
social, economic or environmental benefit to the State, a region or a municipal
planning authority contended that ‘the proposed development is considered
to provide significant social and economic benefits
to the southern region
through improving the place making of a State-significant industrial estate and
providing a much needed heavy
vehicle rest area for truck drivers utilising the
Additionally
in the supporting report the planning authority submitted ‘future
investment in the estate will continue to provide
social and economic benefits
to the municipality given the high rates of the population being employed in
construction, manufacturing,
transport, postal services and warehousing, and the
fact that existing businesses draw a significant percentage of employees from
the local area’.
Commission consideration
Commission accepts the Brighton Transport Hub is of strategic importance to the
State freight transport network. The network is
of critical importance to the
State and connects intrastate, interstate and international freight routes. The
SSQ would provide for
additional use that would provide support to the network.
The Commission therefore accepts the planning authority’s view the
consistent with section 32(4)(a) of the Act.
Commission also considers the SSQ meets section 32(4)(b) of the Act:
‘the area of land has particular environmental, economic, social or
spatial qualities that require provisions, that are unique
to the area of land,
to apply to the land in substitution for, or in addition to, or modification of,
the provisions of the SPPs’
land adjoins an existing heavy vehicle parking area within the Brighton
Transport Hub and is suitable for driver rest stop facilities.
therefore has particular economic, social and spatial qualities that require
unique provisions to provide for use that complements
the Hub and the transport
network. The land is not of significant environmental value.
Regional land use strategy
relevant regional land use strategy is the Southern Tasmania Regional Land Use
Strategy 2010-2035 (regional strategy).
planning authority submitted that the draft amendment was consistent with
policies IA 1.1-1.6, IA 2, 2.1, 3 and 3.1.
policies are described below:
IA 1.1-1.6 identify, protect and manage the supply of well-sited industrial land
that will meet the regional need for 5, 15 and 30
IA 2 and 2.1 protect and manage existing strategically located export orientated
industries; and
IA 3 and 3.1 ensure industrial development occurs in a manner that minimises
regional environmental impacts and protects environmental
Commission consideration
Commission accepts the evidence submitted by the planning authority.
Commission finds that the draft amendment is, as far as is practicable,
consistent with the regional strategy.
Council Strategies
planning authority submitted in the supporting report that the draft amendment
would be consistent with the Brighton Council Strategic
2023-2033, in
particular clauses 1.3, 1.4 and 3.3.
Commission consideration
Commission accepts the evidence submitted by the planning authority and finds
that the draft amendment is consistent with Council’s
Strategic Plan.
State Policies
State Policy on Water Quality Management 1997
supporting report submitted the amendment would have no direct impact on water
State Coastal Policy 1996 and State Policy on the Protection of
Agricultural Land 2009
planning authority submitted the
State Coastal Policy 1996,
State Policy on the Protection of Agricultural Land 2009
relevant to the assessment of the draft amendment.
National Environmental Protection Measures (NEPMs)
supporting report submitted the NEPMs were not relevant to the assessment of the
draft amendment.
Commission consideration
Commission notes that the
State Policy on Water Quality Management 1997
applies to the land and that any future use and development of the site would be
subject to requirements under the
Urban Drainage Act 2013
which would
protect water quality. The site is also connected to reticulated services.
Commission finds that the draft amendment is consistent with requirements for
Commission finds that no other State policies are relevant to the draft
Schedule 1 Objectives of the Act
supporting report submitted the draft amendment would further the Objectives in
Part 1 (b) (c) (d) and (e) of Schedule 1 of the
Act as it would:
the success’ of the Brighton Industrial Estate, which would provide for
the fair, orderly and sustainable use
and development
provide for use
and development of the Hub, which was designed through stakeholder and community
involvement; and
economic development by improving the appearance and facilities at the Hub,
which would attract investment.
planning authority submitted the proposal was consistent with all of Part 2 of
the Objectives.
Commission consideration
Commission accepts the evidence provided by the planning authority and finds the
draft SSQ furthers the Objectives in Schedule
1 of the Act, particularly to
provide for fair, orderly and sustainable use and development and to facilitate
economic development.
Modifications required to draft amendment
section 40M of the Act the Commission must consider whether modifications to a
draft amendment of an LPS ought to be made.
certified draft amendment references the correct folio of the Register number
but an incorrect street number, which was allocated
after the draft amendment
was certified. A modification to update the SSQ with the new street number (2
Strong Street) is required.
further modification is required to change the wording of the SSQ for
consistency with drafting conventions as follows:
The certified
amendment currently reads:
additional Permitted Use Class for this site is: Food Services (if for mobile
food vendor)
A modification
is required to change the wording to:
additional Permitted Use Class for this site is: Food Services ‘if for
mobile food vendor’.
Decision on draft amendment
to the modifications described above, the Commission is satisfied that the draft
amendment meets the LPS criteria and gives
its approval.
Attachments
Annexure A - Modified amendment
Modified amendment RZ-2024-04 to the Tasmanian
Planning Scheme - Brighton
Site-Specific Qualification BRI-26.1 as
Reference Number
Site reference
Folio of the Register
Description (modification, substitution or addition)
Relevant Clause in State Planning Provisions
2 Strong Street, Bridgewater
An additional Permitted Use Class for this site is:
Food Services with the qualification ‘if for mobile food
Utilities Zone - clause 26.2 Use Table
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.22 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter