URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCCA/2024/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
PAC v State of Tasmania [2024] TASCCA 12 (15 October 2024)
[2024] TASCCA 12
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (COURT OF CRIMINAL
PAC v State of Tasmania
[2024] TASCCA
STATE OF TASMANIA
CCA 3501/2023
DELIVERED ON:
15 October 2024
HEARING DATE:
9 October 2024
Estcourt J, Jago J, Marshall AJ
Criminal Law – Appeal and new trial – Verdict unreasonable or
insupportable having regard to the evidence – Other
Appellant’s argument that jury should have entertained doubt about
complainant’s recollection of childhood
events contradicted by expert
evidence at trial – Evidence sufficient to eliminate any reasonable doubt
of appellant’s
guilt – Appeal against conviction wholly unarguable
and leave to appeal refused.
Dansie v The Queen
(2002) 27 CLR 65
, referred to.
AWK v Tasmania
[2024] TASCCA 5
Aust Dig Criminal Law [3477]
Criminal Law – Appeal and new trial – Miscarriage of justice
– Particular circumstances not amounting to miscarriage
Misdirection or non-direction – Appellant contended that forensic
disadvantage due to delay in prosecution required
a specific direction by trial
judge – Trial judge had no obligation under s 165B of
Evidence Act
to make direction as to forensic disadvantage because that was not
sought by appellant at trial – Appeal against conviction
wholly unarguable
and leave to appeal refused.
PT v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 43
, referred to.
Evidence Act 2001
Aust Dig Criminal Law [3470]
Criminal Law – Appeal and new trial – Appeal against sentence
– Sentence manifestly excessive or inadequate –
Appellant sentenced
to 9 years imprisonment with 4 years and 6 months non-parole for one count of
persistent sexual abuse of a child
– Severe sentence justified by factors
including egregious breach of trust, long-lasting harm to complainant, lack of
and no guilty plea – Appeal against sentence dismissed.
DPP v Harrington
[2017] TASSCA 4, applied.
Aust Dig Criminal Law
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Director of Public
Prosecutions
Judgment Number:
[2024] TASCCA 12
paragraphs:
Serial No 12/2024
File No CCA 3501/2023
PAC v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
MARSHALL AJ
15 October 2024
Orders of the
to appeal against conviction is refused.
2 The appeal against
sentence is dismissed.
Serial No 12/2024
File No CCA 3501/2023
PAC v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
15 October 2024
The appellant has appealed against his conviction on one count of persistent
sexual abuse of a child contrary to s 125A of the
Criminal Code
also appealed against the sentence imposed for that crime.
The acts constituting the crime were committed between 1980 and 1988 when the
complainant was aged approximately between 3 and 11,
and the appellant was aged
between 43 and 52 years. The complainant is the daughter of the appellant.
The jury was satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant committed an
unlawful sexual act on the complainant on at least
three occasions out of six
specific alleged occasions.
In her comments on passing sentence the trial judge said of the complainant's
evidence that she was "satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt of the truthfulness and
the reliability of her evidence with respect of all six occasions and that the
six occasions occurred
as she described them in her evidence."
The six occasions referred to were set out in a document provided to the jury
at the trial called "Particulars of unlawful sexual
acts". The document reads as
Indecent Assault – contrary to section 127 of the
At Bicheno in Tasmania, [the appellant] unlawfully and indecently assaulted
[the complainant] by rubbing a towel against her vagina,
when she was aged
around five, or six years old.
Indecent Assault – contrary to section 127 of the
At Bicheno in Tasmania, [the appellant] unlawfully and indecently assaulted
[the complainant] by rubbing her vagina against his penis,
when she was aged
around five, six or seven years old.
Indecent Assault – contrary to section 127 of the
At a location in the Central Highlands in Tasmania, [the appellant]
unlawfully and indecently assaulted [the complainant] by kissing
her with an
open mouth and licking her, when she was aged around three or fours years
Penetrative sexual abuse of a child – contrary to section 124 of the
Criminal Code
At a location in the Central Highlands in Tasmania, [the appellant]
penetrated [the complainant]'s mouth with his penis, when she
was aged around
three or four years old.
Indecent Assault – contrary to section 127 of the
At Woodbridge in Tasmania, [the appellant] unlawfully and indecently
assaulted [the complainant] by rubbing her vagina with his finger
or hand, when
she was aged around five, six or seven years old.
Indecent Assault – contrary to section 127 of the
At Woodbridge in Tasmania, [the appellant] unlawfully and indecently
assaulted [the complainant] by putting her hand on his penis
and moving it up
and down, when she was aged around four years old.
Indecent Assault – contrary to section 127 of the
At Kingston or Blackmans Bay in Tasmania, [the appellant] unlawfully and
indecently assaulted [the complainant] by putting his hand
inside her gym shorts
and rubbing her vagina, when she was six or seven years old in grade four or
The trial judge described the occasions as follows in her comments on passing
"Occasion one occurred when the family were on holiday at
Bicheno Holiday Village. The complainant was 5 or 6 years of age. She
kayaking in a shallow pond and fell into the water. Her mother was looking
after her and told her to go back to the cabin.
Her father was there and he
undressed her and put in the shower. Afterwards, he dried her off with a towel.
He rolled up the edge
of the towel and rubbed it on her vagina. He knelt down
in front of her while she was standing and put the rolled up towel on her
and moved it around. The incident ended when someone, most likely the
complainant's mother, returned to the cabin and the
defendant moved away from
the complainant.
Occasion two occurred on a family holiday in Bicheno, and may have been the
same holiday referred to in occasion one. The complainant
approximately 5 or 6, but she may have been 7. She was allowed to stay up late
and watch a movie which was a big treat
as the family did not have a television
at home. Her mother and younger sister had gone to bed. She recalls that she
was sitting
next to her father on the couch. There was a sex scene or kissing
during the movie and he put his hand over her eyes so she could
not see it. He
pulled her onto his lap so she was facing him, with her legs around his waist,
and he held her waist and moved her
back and forth on his lap.
She said it hurt while he moved her back and forth. Her vagina and pubic
bone were in contact with his penis, over their clothing.
She was wearing
pyjamas. She felt something hard and remembers thinking it was like a rock or a
bicycle seat. She described him
doing that for 'a while' and then it ended, and
he stopped and pushed her off onto the couch.
Occasion three occurred on a family holiday to the Central Highlands. The
complainant was aged 3 or 4, and it is likely that this
was the first of the
specific occasions in time.
The arrangements were that the family was sleeping in an open room, divided
by a curtain. Her mother, father, and baby sister were
sleeping on one side of
the curtain, and her bed was on the other side. She was displeased about
sleeping out there by herself.
She cried out in the night, and the defendant
went to her, which her mother described as unusual.
The complainant remembers waking up and her father being there. He told her
that she was really good because she was brave for sleeping
out there and he was
going to teach her some 'big girl things' and how to kiss. He began to kiss and
lick her face and she could
not breathe. Then he said to her, 'We're going to
do something different and it's going to be good and it's nothing to worry
He put his penis into her mouth while she was lying in bed on her side.
The complainant struggled to breathe. The defendant said:
'Just try it', 'It
will be okay', 'Just try to lick it like an ice-cream'.
The complainant recalled the defendant removing his penis and saying she
could get up after that and have a little packet of sugar
as a treat.
The complainant gave evidence of non-specific occasions that happened in the
family home when the defendant would come into her bedroom
and wake her and put
his hand down between her legs and touch her vagina, and put her own hand there
and get her to do it, as well.
Occasion four was a specific occasion when this happened. The defendant got
her to lie on her stomach and he put his hand under her
nightie and underpants.
He would rub around her vagina and, in her words, 'Put his finger at the top and
sort of move it around'.
He said to her, 'You need to learn how to do this,'
and that girls need to learn that, and showed her ways of touching her
He told her she was 'good', and that she could not tell anyone.
Occasion five occurred in the bathroom at the complainant's family home at
Woodbridge. She recalls being in the bathroom with the
defendant who had had a
shower and was naked. He took her hand and put it on his penis and got her to
move her hand up and down.
The act of abuse ended abruptly because someone came
down the hallway and 'he threw her hand away'. The complainant was
approximately
4 years of age. She was sure she was only very young because she
was at eye-level with the top of his thigh and penis.
Occasion six relates to an incident in the car when the defendant drove the
complainant and her school friend to Little Athletics
at Kingston or Blackmans
Bay. Her friend got out of the car and went to join the other children. The
complainant remembers her
father was very angry about something that had
happened and she was not allowed to join in and had to stay in the car. The
complainant
desperately wanted to be involved in Little Athletics and to race,
and she was ready, wearing her gym shorts. She was sitting in
the front seat of
the car. The defendant reached over and put his hands into her gym shorts and
told her to look out the window.
He rubbed her on the vagina under her
clothing. The abuse ended when the complainant's friend returned to the car.
She thought
she was aged 6 or 7, but she also said she was in grade four or
five, which would mean she would have been aged 9–11."
Unreasonable verdict?
One ground of appeal pursued by the appellant at the hearing of the appeal was
that the jury's verdict was unreasonable and incapable
of being supported by the
evidence. When such a ground is raised it is incumbent on the appeal court to
"determine for itself whether
the evidence was sufficient in nature and quality
to eliminate any reasonable doubt that the accused is guilty of offence"; see
Dansie v The Queen
[2022] HCA 25
274 CLR 651
. That requires an
appeal court to make its own independent assessment of the evidence; see
Counsel for the appellant submitted that the jury should have had concerns
events in question from
her childhood.
The evidence of the complainant about the "occasions" was given clearly and
appeared to be given confidently, on a reading of the
transcript. It was
unshaken by cross-examination. Further and importantly, the complainant's
psychologist gave uncontradicted expert
evidence (CB 120) "with traumatic
memory, just based on the way we neurologically process memory, traumatic
memories do tend to remain
more vivid in recollection, which is why they
continue to be distressing for people after the event." As counsel for the
submitted, the jury was entitled to conclude that even though the
appellant was very young when the incidents occurred, she had a
reliable memory
It should also be noted that simplistic assertions that victims of sexual
assault lack the capacity to remember the relevant events
because they occurred
in their childhood are fraught.
As Wood J said in
AWK v Tasmania
[2024] TASCCA 5
"278 At times, there was an invitation to the
jury to speculate about matters on which there is a body of knowledge and
I have already mentioned the matter of why the complainant did not
make a contemporaneous disclosure. Additionally, the contentions
notions about what the complainant would remember if she had been subject to the
incident of abuse alleged. There were
contentions propounded on behalf of the
appellant that if her account was true, then realistically the jury could expect
complainant would not forget or make a mistake about certain details,
often matters of context peripheral to the sexual conduct.
contentions were then pressed before this Court on appeal. This approach can be
seen in a number of the submissions
made, such as in relation to occasion one,
two and seven and how the complainant did not have a memory of putting on her
shoes before
going to the shed where the alleged abuse occurred, her failure to
mention the lock on the shed, and her lack of evidence about sensory
perceptions
such as pain and smell.
nature and operation of human memory is an area of extensive scientific
psychological research: Goodman-Delahunty, J, Nolan,
Gijn-Grosvenor, E L (2017). Empirical guidance on the effects of child sexual
abuse on memory and complainants' evidence.
Royal Commission into Institutional
Responses to Child Sexual Abuse. Furthermore, scientific findings do not align,
at least in some
key respects, with 'common sense' notions held within the
community about memory. Memory is not like a video tape which accurately
all details of a particular event in sequence and which can then be played back
years later.
defence counsel may be given considerable latitude by a trial judge in a closing
address, on appeal, counsel can expect the
Court to be cautious about such
contentions and to resist invitations to speculate and to fill gaps in the
evidence with counsel's
version of common sense or intuition. Counsel should
expect the Court to be conscious that memory is a field of expertise and
specialised
knowledge, to be alert to the risk or reality of counsel propounding
erroneous beliefs about memory, and to be aware that there was
no expert opinion
before the jury to support defence contentions made about memory. This
observation, of course, applies with equal
force to the State and contentions it
may make if it is suggested that matters of specialist knowledge are matters
upon which the
jury or the Court on appeal may speculate."
In that same case at [318]-[319] Martin AJ said:
"318 This appeal,
and many of the submissions advanced by the appellant, reflect and seek to
perpetuate outdated concepts and myths
surrounding the conduct to be 'expected'
of child complainants in sexual assault cases. Similarly, they seek to
perpetuate such
concepts and myths about the evidence of child complainants,
often given many years after the events. The submissions also overlook
risk-taking behaviour of sexual predators commonly the subject of evidence in
the criminal courts.
agree with the observations of Wood J concerning submissions amounting to
speculation as to memories and behaviours "expected" of
child complainants. As
her Honour has noted, there exists extensive research in this area. In addition
to research, there is a
wealth of experience in the criminal courts
demonstrating the fallacy underlying the outdated concepts to which I have
Counsel for the appellant submitted that the complainant may have
misinterpreted events as being sexual when they were innocent.
There was nothing
innocent about the way the appellant acted towards the complainant about the
matters in relation to which she gave
evidence concerning the six occasions. It
is suggested by counsel for the appellant that rubbing a towel against the
complainant's
vagina may have been an innocent action. However, the evidence of
the appellant was that the towel was put into her vagina and that
related comment was made by the appellant as this was occurring.
Counsel for the appellant referred to the evidence of Ms C (the mother of the
complainant) regarding occasion 3. This is the instance
where the complainant
referred to the appellant having forced her to suck his penis. Counsel complains
that Ms C would not have a
good memory of this occasion because around this time
she had shortly beforehand given birth to a child and would have been focused
that child.
Ms C gave evidence about a photograph taken at the relevant time when the
family was holidaying in the Central Highlands. She gave
evidence-in-chief related to occasion three. Under cross-examination, Ms C
referred to a curtain closing off a cooking area
at the shack where the incident
occurred. It was not put to her that her evidence about that was incorrect.
Nothing about Ms C's
evidence detracts from the firm and specific evidence of
the complainant about what occurred. There is no basis for the allegation
the division of the sleeping areas between the complainant in the kitchen and
others, with a curtain dividing, was improbable.
If anything the fact of the
division made it easier for the appellant to perform sexual acts on the
complainant without being observed
by the rest of the family. It is entirely
speculative and unsupported by evidence that the jury should have assumed that
affected by guilt in initially ignoring the complainant's allegations
and was seeking to make that matter up to her by giving evidence
in support of
her case. No such suggestion was ever made to Ms C in her cross-examination that
that was the position.
Counsel for the appellant also referred to the significant forensic
disadvantage suffered by her client giving the relevant events
occurred a long
time ago. The trial judge did give a direction highlighting the passage of time
since the events in question and
the possible impact of the passage of time on
the reliability of the evidence, however it was submitted that the trial judge
required to direct the jury specifically as to forensic disadvantage.
This submission is misconceived.
Section 165B of the
Evidence Act
165B Delay in prosecution
(1) This section applies in a criminal proceeding
in which there is a jury.
(2) If the court, on application by the
defendant, is satisfied that the defendant has suffered a significant forensic
disadvantage
because of the consequences of delay, the court must inform the
jury of the nature of that disadvantage and the need to take that
disadvantage
into account when considering the evidence.
(3) The judge need not comply with subsection (2)
if there are good reasons for not doing so.
(4) It is not necessary that a particular form of
words be used in informing the jury of the nature of the significant forensic
disadvantage
suffered and the need to take that disadvantage into account, but
the judge must not in any way suggest to the jury that it would
be dangerous or
unsafe to convict the defendant solely because of the delay or the forensic
disadvantage suffered because of the
consequences of the delay.
(5) The judge must not warn or inform the jury
in accordance with this section, but this section does not affect any
other power of the judge to give any warning to, or to inform,
(6) For the purposes of this section –
(a) delay includes delay between the alleged
offence and its being reported; and
(b) significant forensic disadvantage is not to
be regarded as being established by the mere existence of a delay."
There is no obligation on a trial judge to give a direction to the jury under
this section if it is not requested by the appellant
at his trial. No such
application was made by the appellant at his trial. There is no ground of appeal
which alleges trial counsel
was remiss in not seeking such a direction. Indeed,
for a direction to be given, it is necessary for the trial judge to be satisfied
that an accused has experienced a significant forensic disadvantage. No
submissions were advanced on the appellant's behalf at trial
to suggest the
existence of such a forensic disadvantage. Moreover, there was nothing on the
face of the evidence given at the trial
to suggest a forensic disadvantage,
particularly in light of the fact the appellant's defence was one of a complete
denial. This
was not a situation where, for example, the appellant was
suggesting relevant witnesses may have become unavailable as a consequence
the delay or evidence may have been lost given the passage of time. There was
nothing raised in the evidence on the trial that
ought to have prompted the
trial judge to enquire with counsel as to whether such a direction was sought
pursuant to s 165B of the
Evidence Act
. Even on appeal, the submission as
to alleged forensic disadvantage was limited to a broad assertion that the
passage of time simpliciter
created a forensic disadvantage, without any attempt
to identify the specific forensic disadvantage that was said to arise. In
v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 43
it was held that "the clear focus of the
provision is on identification of the particular consequences of the delay which
to significant disadvantage".
In short, there is no sensible basis upon which it can be submitted that the
trial judge erred by not giving a direction pursuant
to s 165B, given the
appellant at his trial did not seek such a direction, and did not seek to
identify the purported forensic disadvantage.
Moreover, it is difficult to see
how a direction as to any alleged forensic disadvantage could have had any real
impact on the jury's
assessment of the appellant's credibility given his
outright denial of the offending.
Having reviewed the record of the trial including the transcript of the
evidence and the judge's summoning, the Court is satisfied
that the evidence
before the jury was significant in nature and quality to eliminate any
reasonable doubt that the accused is guilty
of the offence. Leave to appeal
against conviction should be refused.
Mischaracterisation of the
offence in occasion 3?
This appeal ground states that at the time of the offending, the particular
sexual act referred to in the second paragraph of the
occasion did not exist. It
is submitted that the relevant offence that should have been referred to in the
second paragraph was one
of sexual assault rather than one under s 124 of the
Code regarding penetrative sexual abuse of a child.
However as counsel for the respondent pointed out, the amendment to s 124,
enacted in 1997, was expressly stated to be retroactive.
No error is disclosed
in the way the second particular was described because the particulars
accurately describe what had occurred
and the trial judge was entitled to treat
that offence as one under s 124. Further, as counsel for the respondent
submitted, the
seriousness of the conduct does not depend on the statutory
language in the particulars describing the offence.
The sentence imposed by the trial judge was submitted by counsel for the
appellant to be manifestly excessive. Insofar as this ground
relies on what was
said to be a mischaracterisation of the second particular on occasion three,
that submission is rejected for the
reasons just expressed in relation to that
ground. The sentencing judge was entitled to sentence on the basis that the
placed his penis in the mouth of his daughter who was three or four
years old at the time.
In order for the sentence imposed to be considered manifestly excessive it must
be shown that the sentencing discretion miscarried
in that the sentence was
unreasonable or plainly unjust in the circumstances: see
House v King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Counsel for the appellant submitted that when the personal circumstances of her
client are considered, as well as other surrounding
considerations, the sentence
can be seen to be manifestly excessive.
Factors relevant to sentencing in cases involving persistent sexual abuse of a
child were discussed by Pearce J in
DPP v Harington
[2017] TASCCA 4
Tas R 128 at
. That judgment in this regard was quoted with approval by
the Court in
SRR v Tasmania
[2023] TASCCA 6
the four major factors relevant to sentencing in cases of
this kind were said to be:
The relative
ages of the offender and the complainant;
Whether the
offender was in a position of trust or authority with regard to the complainant
which facilitated the commission of the
The situation of
the complainant and the degree to which the compliant was taken advantage of;
Evidence about
whether the complainant has suffered or has likely suffered as a consequence of
the offending.
Each of the above factors justifies a severe sentence in this matter. The
appellant was in middle age and the complainant was a
young child when the
offending occurred. The appellant, as the father of the complainant, was a
person in a position of trust of
the closest kind. The complainant was taken
advantage of by the behaviour of the appellant in a stark way. The complainant
from long lasting psychological problems arising from the criminal
conduct of the appellant. In addition, the appellant showed no
remorse, was not
a youthful offender, and is not entitled to the benefits which would have flowed
from a guilty plea.
The appellant contends that the appellant's age and ill-health were
particularly pertinent to sentence and the failure of the trial
judge to give
sufficient weight to those factors has resulted in a manifestly excessive
sentence. The trial judge clearly took such
factors into account. She said:
"In fixing his sentence, I have also moderated the length of it to
some extent to take account of his age and health issues, and the
prospect that
his final years may be spent in prison. The sentence must reflect his personal
circumstances, however, sentencing goals
of general deterrence, protection of
children, and vindication of the victim are just as important today as they were
crimes were committed. It is important that other would-be offenders
see that the passing of decades does not mean a heavy sentence
is avoided; there
should not be a tangible incentive to silence child victims."
Such comments reveal the trial judge was alive to the need for the sentence to
reflect the appellant's age and ill-health, but as
one of a myriad of factors
that needed to be accommodated within the sentence. His age and ill-health had
to be balanced against
the objective seriousness of the offending, the strong
need for general deterrence and the appellant's high moral culpability given
appalling breach of trust. The approach taken by the trial judge was consistent
with the approach enunciated in
Smith v The Queen
(1987) 44 SASR 587 at
589. The imposition of a minimum non-parole period was consistent with the
trial judge acknowledging the
appellant's age and ill-health within the
Given the seriousness of the offending, a high range penalty was appropriate.
General deterrence and denunciation for the offending
conduct and vindication of
the appellant was required in the circumstances of this case. A sentence of nine
years' imprisonment with
a non-parole of period of four years and six months was
not unjust or unreasonable.
Disposition
Leave to appeal against conviction is refused.
The appeal against sentence is dismissed.
The refusal of leave to appeal in this case should be seen as an expression of
the Court's view that the proposed appeal against
conviction was wholly
unarguable. Appeals so brought, unnecessarily tax judicial resources, as may be
seen from the long and detailed
reasons for judgment required of Wood J in
(above). Care must be taken by counsel, as officers of the Court, to
identify arguable grounds of appeal.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (172 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter