URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASADT/2021/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Anthony Higgins & Anor v Circular Head Children's Services Inc & Anor [2021] TASADT 9 (4 November 2021)
[2021] TASADT 9
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
Anthony Higgins & Anor v Circular Head
Children’s Services Inc & Anor
[2021] TASADT
HIGGINS, Anthony
HIGGINS, Joel
CIRCULAR HEAD CHILDREN’S SERVICES INC
GIGGLES EARLY LEARNING
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
On the papers
DELIVERED ON:
4 November 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Tribunal Member L Mackey
CATCHWORDS:
Anti-Discrimination – application to dismiss
complaint - costs
Anti-Discrimination Act
Singh v Department of Justice
[2018] TASADT 5
, Loone v State of Tasmania
(Department of Communities - Housing)
[2021] TASADT 5
, Capocchi v West &
[2020] TASADT 10
, Summers v State of Tasmania (Department of Education)
[2020] TASADT 5
DETERMINATION:
(a) The complaint is dismissed pursuant to
& (b) of the Act on the basis that it is misconceived, lacks substance and
it would be just and appropriate to do so.
(b) There be no order as to costs.
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant:
Respondent:
T. Glynn (Glynns Lawyers)
Second Respondent:
Edler (Jonathan Smith Lawyers)
[2021] TASADT 9
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. Application is made by the respondents for the dismissal of
the complainant’s request to review the decision of the
Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner’s (ADC) rejecting his complaint. The
request for review was made pursuant to s72 of the Anti-Discrimination Act
(ADA). The dismissal is sought primarily pursuant to ss80 and 99 of the
2. On 12 March 2021 the complainant made a complaint to the ADC. The
respondents to the complaint were Circular Head Children’s
Services Inc
(CHCS) and Giggles Early Learning (GEL). CHCS and GEL operate centres offering
childcare services. The complainant
asserts that he and his son have been
discriminated against by the refusal of the respondents to accept/retain his son
at their respective
childcare centres due to the complainant’s disability.
3. An incident occurred on, or about 6 March 2020 at the centre operated by
CHCS. When leaving his son for care at the centre the
complainant became
agitated, swore and shouted. Subsequently the complainant contacted GEL on
multiple occasions by telephone during
which he presented in an aggressive and
irrational manner. The complainant attributes the behaviour to his disability
being a post-traumatic
stress disorder. CHCS and GEL thereafter refused to
provide care for his son.
4. The complaint was accepted by the ADC for
investigation as to whether the conduct of either respondent in the provision by
of their services and facilities discriminated against the complainant
and/or his son on the basis of the complainant’s disability
or was conduct
which was otherwise prohibited under the ADA.
5. Following investigation the
ADC rejected the complaint primarily on the basis that the respondents’
conduct in no longer
providing care for the complainant’s son or not
accepting him into their care was not on the basis of the complainant’s
disability.
The Request for Review
6. The complainant requested a review
of the decision of the ADC. A telephone conference with the Registrar of the
Tribunal was appointed
for 6 September 2021 in respect to the application for
review. The notes of the telephone conference reflect that the complainant
expressed a belief that he could not win and an intention not to take the matter
further before terminating the call. By email to
the Tribunal Registrar dated 7
September 2021 the complainant stated that he did not agree to the matter being
7. A directions conference was listed before me on 28 September
2021. At that time all parties attended by telephone. The complainant
have legal representation. The two respondents did. Very quickly the
complainant adopted an aggressive and combative approach
and refused to engage
in any discussion concerning the preparation of the request for review for
hearing. Reasonably quickly, following
the commencement of the conference, he
departed by terminating the call.
The Application to Dismiss the
8. The respondents seek an order dismissing the complaint and a
timetable for the making of submissions in that regard was made.
dated 28 September 2021 the complainant was informed of the respondents’
application for the complaint to be dismissed
and the timetable for the
provision of submissions by them. The respondents’ submissions for
dismissal were forwarded to the
complainant on 22 October 2021. The complainant
informed the Tribunal registry on the same date that he would not respond to the
application and submissions and he has not done so.
9. Dismissal is sought
pursuant to ss80 and 99 of the ADA. Section 80 of the ADA is the following
“80. Directions conference
(1) Before an inquiry into a
complaint is held, the Tribunal is to arrange for a directions conference to be
conducted in relation
to the complaint.
(2) The Tribunal, by written notice,
may require any person to –
(a) attend a directions conference;
(b) provide and produce specified information and documents to a
directions conference.
(3) A person, without reasonable excuse, must not fail
to comply with a requirement notified under subsection (2).
Penalty: Fine
not exceeding 10 penalty units.
(4) The Tribunal, if the complainant does
not, without reasonable excuse, comply with a requirement to attend a directions
in respect of that complaint, may –
(a) dismiss the
complaint; and
(b) order the complainant to pay costs to the
respondent.
(5) A directions conference is to be held in private.
Tribunal may give any directions it considers necessary to ensure that the
inquiry is conducted fairly and expeditiously.”
With respect to the
application of s80 the argument is that the manner in which the complainant
conducted himself at the telephone
and directions conferences listed before the
registrar and myself in this mater including the abrupt termination of his
participation
constituted a failure to comply with the requirement to attend.
Whilst I have some sympathy with the view that attendance required
by s80 ought
to have a qualitative component, by its terms it does not. All that is required
is that the complainant be present
at the directions conference, not that he
remain present or engage appropriately in the proceedings. I find therefore
that the short-lived
and combative appearance of the complainant at the
conferences was nevertheless an attendance and s80 does not provide a basis for
the dismissal of the application for review.
10. In any event the scope of
the power to dismiss under s80 is limited in its terms to inquiries. This
proceeding is one of review
not inquiry and as such s80 does not equip the
Tribunal with the discretion to dismiss in these circumstances.
11. This then
leaves the discretion to dismiss under s99. That section, excluding s99(1)
which applies to inquiries only, has application
to both matters of review and
inquiry. In its terms s99 provides:
Tribunal may dismiss a complaint if it finds after an inquiry that the complaint
is unsubstantiated.
(2) The Tribunal may dismiss a complaint at any time if it is satisfied that
(a) the complaint is trivial, vexatious, misconceived or lacking in
substance; or
(b) dismissing the complaint would, for some other reason, be just and
appropriate.
(3) If the Tribunal dismisses a complaint on the ground that it is vexatious,
it may order the complainant to pay a specified fine
not exceeding 10 penalty
12. In exercising a discretion under s99 to dismiss a
complaint, and as held in other decisions in this Tribunal (Singh v Department
[2018] TASADT 5
and Loone v State of Tasmania (Department of
Communities - Housing)
[2021] TASADT 5)
the following principles ought to be
(a) The power to dismiss should be exercised with
(b) This is particularly so if the complainant is
unrepresented.
(c) In considering the exercise of a power to dismiss the
merit of the complaint is relevant.
13. The complainant is unrepresented. He has expressed an
intention not to prosecute his request for a review yet appears not to
request its withdrawal under s98A. He has failed to engage in the preparation
of the review for hearing and indeed has hampered
its progress by adopting a
combative response at the telephone and directions conferences. When given the
opportunity to make submissions
in response to those of the respondents seeking
dismissal of the application he has declined to do so.
14. When considering
the merits of the complaint and the request for review for the purposes of
determining an application for dismissal
under s99 it is inappropriate to make a
determination on competing issues of fact but rather I must consider the
complaint as put
by the complainant;
exercise, therefore, to be undertaken by the Tribunal when considering such an
application at an interlocutory stage is
to consider whether the complaint made
is capable of establishing discrimination under the Act. In so doing, the
Tribunal is not
engaging in a process of determining the facts; it is required
to accept that the complainant will be able to prove the matters he
in his complaint at any
15. A consideration of the material before the ADC, its
investigation and decision does not, on its face, demonstrate error. The
distinction between a disability that causes behavioural issues and the
behavioural issues themselves is an important one to make.
There is no evidence
of the existence of the disability beyond the complainant’s claim that he
suffers from a mental health
condition, specifically a post-traumatic stress
disorder which caused him to act inappropriately at the relevant times. For the
of this application, I have assumed that he can demonstrate that he
does indeed suffer a mental health condition and that his behaviour
is a product
of that condition.
16. It is entirely possible that the respondents’
actions in not receiving the complainant’s son for childcare, leaving
aside the question as to whether there had been any request for enrolment at
GEL, was the product of the complainant’s behaviour.
For both respondents
the behaviour, consisting of aggressive, persistent, and irrational interactions
of the complainant with their
staff caused the respondents concern regarding the
safety of the staff and that of the children in their care. I do note the
of other explanations from the respondents for their actions in this
matter. I do not discount those explanations but for the purpose
of determining
this application I take the complainant’s case at its highest, that the
refusal for the respondents to retain
or enrol the complainant’s son at
their centres was due to his behaviours as outlined earlier in these reasons.
17. Whilst the complainant’s behaviour could quite well have been the
cause of the respondents’ decision to not accommodate
complainant’s child at their centres there is no evidence that it was the
complainant’s claimed disability that resulted
in or contributed to the
child’s exclusion. It is apparent that it was the behaviours of the
complainant in his interactions
with the respondents, as distinct from the
disability, that resulted in the respondents acting to exclude the complainant
child. There is no assertion by the complainant that persons without
his disability, but acting as he did, would have been treated
differently and no
basis upon which I could reasonably infer that this would be the case.
18. I find therefore that the complainant’s complaint was misconceived
and lacked substance. He has not demonstrated a breach
of the ADA and that the
decision of the ADC was likely a correct one.
19. On the basis of the
combative and negative interactions that the complainant has had with the
Tribunal at the two conferences
held in his request for review, the absence of
any submission by him in response to the application to dismiss his complaint,
view I have reached regarding the absence of merit in the complaint and the
request for review I dismiss the complaint as it lacks
substance, is
misconceived and it would be just and appropriate to do so, s98(2)(a) and (b).
Application for Costs
20. In the event of the complaint being dismissed
both respondents seek an order that the complainant pay their costs. The ADA
that for inquiries each party is to pay his or her own costs, s95.
This is not an inquiry but a request for a review. Section 99A
of the ADA,
however provides:
Tribunal may make an order as to costs in relation to any inquiry or review
before it if the Tribunal considers circumstances
justify the order.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), the Tribunal may make an order that a
party's representative at any inquiry or review before
it pay all or part of the
costs of the inquiry or review.
(3) The Tribunal may make an order that costs in relation to an inquiry or
review before it be taxed by a district registrar of the
Magistrates Court
(Civil Division), the registrar of the Tribunal or such other person as the
Tribunal considers appropriate.
(4) The provisions of Division 2 of
Magistrates Court (Civil
Division) Rules 1998
apply to the taxation of costs referred to in subsection
(3) as if references to an action were read as references to an inquiry
21. The question in this case is whether the circumstances
justify the order. I have found earlier in these reasons that the complaint
discrimination and prohibited conduct made by the complainant and asserted by
him as having been on the basis of his disability
was misconceived, lacking in
substance and that it was just and appropriate to dismiss the complaint. In
these reasons I have also
made reference to the complainant’s conduct
which has hampered the progress of his request for review in the Tribunal. The
respondents, through their legal representatives, have had to attend two
direction conferences without achieving any substantive
progress in the
resolution of the review as a direct result of the complainant’s conduct.
An application for costs made by
a successful respondent in the context of a
request for a review heard in the Tribunal was considered by Chairperson Clues
in Capocchi
v West & Bates
[2020] TASADT 10.
In that case the Tribunal
observed, as I have done, that
of the ADA applies only to inquiries and not
to reviews [10]. The Tribunal also adopted the decision of Tribunal Member
in Summers v State of Tasmania (Department of Education) & Ors
[2020] TASADT 5
that whilst there are a number of matters that will
ordinarily be relevant to whether a discretion in the Tribunal to award costs
should be exercised the Tribunal should not confine itself to those matters.
The relevant matters were identified as:
• the conduct of the parties during the
proceedings;
• the motivation of the complainant in making the
• whether there was a reasonable basis to make the
• whether the complaint was trivial, vexatious or lacking in
• whether the position taken by the complainant was genuine
(if ultimately found to be misconceived);
• public interest
considerations
22. As previously commented upon the complainant’s
pursuit of his complaint and review has been poor. His behaviour has caused
frustration and delay in the resolution of the review in the Tribunal. No doubt
this frustration was felt by the respondents. However,
the complainant was
unrepresented. There is no suggestion that his motivation for making the
complaint was in any way mal fides.
Whilst I have found that the complaint
lacked substance, I did not find that it was trivial or vexatious. There is no
which it could be concluded that the actions of the complainant in
bringing the complaint and requesting the review were disingenuous.
complainant’s behaviour has been obstructionist, I do not find that the
circumstances justify an order that he
pay the costs of the respondents.
Determination
23. For the reasons stated above, the Tribunal determines
(a) The complaint is dismissed pursuant to s99(2)(a) &
(b) of the Act on the basis that it is misconceived, lacks substance and
would be just and appropriate to do so.
(b) That there be no order as to
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
Singh v Department of
[2018] TASADT 5
Capocchi v West &
[2020] TASADT 5
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (209 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter