URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASWRCT/2021/38.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:23:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The State of Tasmania (Department of Communities Tasmania) v S. [2021] TASWRCT 38 (1 November 2021)
[2021] TASWRCT 38
WORKERS REHABILITATION AND COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
The State of Tasmania (Department of Communities
Tasmania) v S.
[2021] TASWRCT 38
THE STATE OF TASMANIA (DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITIES
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
14 October 2021
DELIVERED ON:
1 November 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Commissioner Wilkins
CATCHWORDS:
Entitlement to compensation – whether reasonably
arguable case
Lamont v MRD Supermarkets Pty Ltd
[2016] TASSC 15
; St Helens
Oysters Pty Ltd v Coatsworth
[2007] TASSC 90
Bradshaw v Tasmanian
[2020] TASFC 2;
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
DETERMINATION:
A reasonably arguable case exists
REPRESENTATION:
Solicitors:
Everett Flight & Associates
Office of the Solicitor General
[2021] TASWRCT 38
Commissioner Wilkins
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. The worker is employed as a Child Safety Officer with Child
Safety Services (CSS) within the Department of Communities on the North-West
Coast of Tasmania.
2. The worker made a claim for compensation in July 2021,
in relation to a major depressive condition. The claim was supported by
initial workers compensation medical certificate dated 19 July 2021 which
certified the worker to have been incapacitated for
any work from 26 April 2021
onwards. The worker was diagnosed as having suffered a depressive
3. In the claim form, the worker identified that her condition had
occurred at 4:00 pm on 23 April 2021, and had first been noticed
on 15 January
2021. In her claim form, the worker referred to having experienced
“emotional harm; discrimination; disrespect;
lack of support; lack of
policy and process followed at FGC and after FGC held on the 15/Jan”. The
worker also provided a
lengthy statement in relation to the circumstances
surrounding her claim.
4. The employer elected to dispute liability to pay
compensation in relation to the worker’s claim, and referred the claim to
the Tribunal under s81A of the Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
5. The grounds of dispute were:
(a) The worker had not suffered an injury arising out of or
in the course of her employment, in accordance with s25(1)(a) of the Act,
neither had she suffered a disease to which her employment contributed to a
substantial degree, in accordance with s25(1)(b) of the
Act; and/or
injury suffered by the worker is a disease arising substantially from reasonable
action taken in a reasonable manner by the
employer to discipline or counsel the
worker (s25(1A)(a); and/or
(c) Any injury suffered by the worker is a disease
which arises substantially from reasonable administrative action taken in a
manner by the employer in connection with the worker’s
employment, in accordance with s25(1A)(c).
6. The s81A referral requires the Tribunal to determine whether
the employer has demonstrated that it has, on the evidence filed in
the referral, a reasonably arguable case to dispute its liability to pay
compensation by way of weekly payments or benefits
payable under Division 2 of
Part VI in respect of the injury.
7. The test for liability under s25(1)(a)
under the Act - whether a worker has suffered an injury which arose out of or
in the course
of employment - is applicable only where the worker has suffered
an injury which is not a disease. In the course of submissions,
both counsel
agreed that the injury suffered by the worker is an injury which is a disease.
Accordingly, the applicable test for
liability is that set out in s25(1)(b) of
the Act, that is, whether the worker’s employment contributed to the
injury to a
substantial degree, within the meaning of s3(2A) of the
In relation to the employer’s first ground of dispute, it is therefore
only necessary for me to have regard to s25(1)(b),
and not to s25(1)(a).
Section 81A – What is a reasonably arguable case?
8. The onus is on the employer to establish that a reasonably
arguable case exists (see, for example, Lamont v MRD Supermarkets Pty
9. The test as to whether the employer has met that onus was set
out by Evans J in St Helens Oysters Pty Ltd v Coatsworth
[2007] TASSC 90
paragraph 10:
case will not be reasonably arguable unless the case itself is reasonable in the
sense that there is a reasonable prospect
of the claim being rejected following
a final hearing......The very notion of a “reasonably arguable
case”, like the
very notion of a “prima facie case”, precludes
a final determination of a disputed question of fact......On the face
reasonably arguable case will exist concerning the liability of an employer to
pay a worker if it is reasonably arguable
on the material available in relation
to the claim or identified deficiencies or weaknesses in the claim that,
following a contested
hearing it may be rejected.”
10. In the context of considering what amounts to a reasonably
arguable case under s81A, Estcourt J in Bradshaw v Tasmanian Networks
, accepted the submission from counsel for the employer that “what
the employer is required to prove is not that there is no
liability under s25 of
the Act, but only that there exists, on the evidentiary material the employer
relies upon in the s81A proceedings,
a reasonable chance that the worker will be
unable to discharge the onus of proof that will ultimately rest with the worker
of the Act.....on a final hearing of the worker’s
The worker’s statement
11. In her comprehensive statement in support of the claim for
compensation, the worker set out the background to her claim. She
said that in
June 2020, three children were placed into the care of the worker and her family
as part of a ‘kinship care agreement’.
The children at the time
were aged 11 (A, a girl), 12 (J, a boy) and 13 (E, a girl). They were the
children of the niece of the
12. It is clear from the worker’s
statement and the matters put into evidence by the employer that fostering the
children under
the the kinship care agreement was not a part of the
worker’s role as a Child Safety Officer.
13. The worker’s
statement went on to raise many issues, as follows:
• The children’s case manager went on leave after
three weeks, and then resigned, with no subsequent case manager being
for a period of five months.
• The worker’s team leader declined
to provide her with support during supervision because the team leader felt
was a conflict of interest.
• There was no out-of-home-care case
manager for the children for an extended period.
• There was a failure
to provide the children’s case care plans until 10 weeks into the
placement, when the worker said
the children had “very complex and high
needs” and the care plans should have been provided much
• Over the period October and November 2020, the two girls, A
and E, disclosed that their brother had been touching them inappropriately
they did not feel safe with him. Strategies put in place by the worker and her
family to prevent this occurring were unsuccessful.
• The worker
requested a different placement for the male child, J. After the worker made
this request she discovered all three
children had been listed for new foster
care placements. She said this had not been discussed with her and was against
of the two girls.
• The worker requested a family group
conference (FGC) be convened.
• The worker’s phone calls and
emails to Child Protection Services were not answered.
December, J was moved to a new placement. The following weekend all three
children went to respite together. The
younger sister reported to the worker
that her brother had behaved inappropriately. An email from the worker about
this to Child
Protection Services did not receive a response.
took place in mid-January 2021. The worker was not invited. Her daughter was
invited. The children were not asked
• After the FGC the
worker’s daughter initially told the worker that she was not permitted to
discuss what happened at
the FGC with her, until Child Safety Services had
• A week or so later, in the absence of any
lawyer had said he wanted the girls removed from the
worker’s care, and all three children placed in a new foster care
together. He said the worker and her family were unfit carers. The
worker’s daughter reported that the case manager and the
team leader supported this request.
• At the end of January 2021, the
worker requested an investigation in relation to issues she raised about the way
the FGC was
conducted. She said the outcome supported her position, and she
received a verbal apology.
• A ‘care concern’ was lodged
against her, which has not been finalised.
• On 23 April 2021 the
worker requested new placements for both the girls, A and E. She said in her
23 April I requested a new placement for both E and A because I got to the point
where it just wasn’t working and
felt that the Department was expecting
way too much from us and I had totally lost faith in the Department and felt
completely broken
by what I had endured over the past 10+ months. I was sick of
always being under the microscope (care concerns and foster care assessment).
Every time the girls have reported worries or minor things to anyone they have
been taken as an absolute truth and decisions have
been made before any
discussion has occurred with us to clarify the details of those
worries......
How can we support the children if we are not all working together as part
of the same team? Family is everything to me and I found
it so hard to say I
had had enough knowing that the girls would be returning to foster care and most
likely be separated.”
• The worker also said in her statement:
“If I treated anyone the way that Tash and
other CSS staff have treated me and my family I would have got my butt kicked
been made accountable for my actions. The way she has treated the girls is
also abusive. Not believing their repeated disclosures
of inappropriate
touching and not feeling safe when spending time with their brother J which has
caused them more emotional harm.
I have found it so hard to continue to do my job on my cases when others
were doing harm towards me and my family and not following
processes or
procedures. Let alone treated me with enough respect to even return my phone
calls or emails. I have felt distracted
and disappointed over the
Department’s mismanagement of this matter with things such as foster care
assessments, care concerns
and FGC outcomes not being finalised. How can I move
forward when I have been given no closure? The request to end the placement
my attempt to get all of the outstanding matters resolved because I could not
cope with being left hanging any longer. This
still has not occurred, or if it
has, then I have not been informed about those outcomes.
I am way past wanting an apology. I no longer feel that I can continue to
work in a Department that is so broken that it is causing
more pain for children
and their families. I have been treated so poorly and nobody deserves to be
treated that way let alone a
co-worker with 16+ years of experience and
dedicated service with CSS.”
The employer’s evidence
14. In addition to the claim and initial certificate already
referred to, the employer filed a significant number of documents in
the referral, only some of which appear to be relevant to the dispute in
relation to the worker’s current claim
for compensation. In particular, I
consider it unnecessary to set out the 90 (approximately) pages in relation to
claims for compensation
that were made by the worker in 2010, 2017 and 2019,
save to note that these documents were all apparently forwarded to Dr Scheepers,
Consultant Psychiatrist, whose independent medical assessment of the worker was
organised by the employer.
15. The employer relied upon a statement of Ms
Jodie Franklin. Ms Franklin is a Child Safety Manager within the Department of
Communities.
Ms Franklin set out in her statement that, at the time the worker
took over the role of a kinship carer for the children in question,
and the employer agreed on some boundaries to enable a distinction to be
maintained between the worker’s professional
role and her caring role. Ms
Franklin said it was agreed that the worker’s daughter would provide
primary care to the children
during the worker’s working hours, and any
case management related communication would go via the worker’s daughter
that time (with some exceptions) and that other processes were put in
place to ensure maintenance of the children’s confidentiality
including an agreement that the worker would not discuss issues arising from her
care role in front of her co-workers
16. In relation to the complaint the
worker had made about the FGC, Ms Franklin confirmed there had been a review
following the worker’s
complaint, the outcome of which was that the
Department acknowledged the conference could have been managed better. Ms
Franklin said
that the FGC state co-ordinator spoke to the worker and
acknowledged some of her concerns.
17. Ms Franklin went on in her
the same time as the FGC, discussions had been occurring regarding the quality
of care being provided by [the worker].
In January 2021 the children’s
Separate Representative.......had requested that all three children be removed
from [the worker’s]
care based on concerns that she was engaging the
children in conversations that were for adults only and providing the children
misleading information.
The allocated CSO at the time had also raised a number of concerns
regarding the care the children were receiving and hence a formal
care concern process commenced. Whilst this process was not substantiated, it
did identify concerns. It was during this
process that [the worker] asked for
the placement to end. At the same time a decision was made by the Team Leader
that the girls
needed to be removed from [the worker’s] care, this then
occurred on 27 April 2021 (the male child was removed in November
18. Ms Franklin’s statement concluded with the
Department’s position that the issues the worker raised in her claim for
compensation were issues arising out of her role as a kinship carer, and not
from her role as a Child Safety Officer with the employer.
19. The employer
also relied upon a statement of Ms Kellylee Munting, Ms Munting said in her
statement that she was the worker’s
Team Leader in CSS, and the
worker’s direct supervisor. She said in her statement that when she was
advised the worker had
expressed interest in being considered as a kinship carer
for the children in question, she raised some concerns because of long
performance issues relating to the worker, and in particular she had concerns
boundaries in place, and
distinguish between a role as carer and her professional role. Ms Munting
observed that historically, the
worker had a number of issues raised around
appropriate boundaries, lack of professionalism and maintaining confidentiality.
said she had a meeting with the worker in June 2020:
“The purpose of the
meeting was to develop clear boundaries between [the worker’s] caring role
and her professional role
as a CSO. [The worker] agreed with the boundaries
that were established. It was also discussed the importance of distinguishing
my role as her supervisor for her employment as a CSO and not as her
supervisor/support for her caring role. I was clear that I
was not able to
support her in her caring role. I advised [the worker] that I would not be
involved with the children’s case
management or any decisions regarding
20. Ms Munting in her statement went on to detail a number of
occasions where the worker had not maintained the agreed boundaries,
discussed the children in front of her work colleagues. She said that she spoke
to the worker about maintaining the agreed
boundaries. Ms Munting set out in
her statement other instances where she considered the worker had not been able
to maintain a
distinction between her personal and private roles. She
“With regards to [the worker] advising that
‘the failure to follow process or procedures in respect of events as a
carer has caused conflict in her role as a Case Manager’, the
context I can provide around this statement is that [the worker]
was unable to
implement boundaries between her work role and her caring role. She was unable
to differentiate between the two and
how she perceived she was being treated as
a carer and a colleague being one and the same. Her caring role appeared to
already existing practice issue in her work role. [The
worker’s] experience as a carer appeared to make her question her values
and purpose as a CSO.”
21. The employer also relied upon an email exchange between the
worker and the Safety Health and Wellbeing section of the Department,
the worker making her claim for compensation in June 2021. In an email of 20
July 2021, a workers compensation liability
consultant asked the worker for
clarification as follows:
“Upon review of your statement and my
understanding of the situation is that the concerns you have raised are
regarding the
children that were in your care and the subsequent injury you have
sustained arose out of your role as a foster carer. Could you
please confirm
that this is correct.”
22. The worker’s response, of the same date, was:
“Most of the emotional trauma was caused by
the children’s 5 different case managers not following process or
over the past ten months, which then caused conflict for me in my
role as a case manager for other children on my case load and me
proper process. Every time I asked for help or raised issues that needed to be
sorted I was ignored or further conflict
and harm was caused. It was hard to
focus on my job when others were not doing their job correctly and causing
further harm and
I tried EAP and Sam the wellbeing worker but both suggested that I lodge a
formal complaint. No real emotional support was provided.
The issue I have is both professional as well as personal. 10 months of
prolonged emotional harm and conflict with no supports being
provided. I have
many emails where I raised concerns and nobody listened. The conflict from the
FGC with a significant factor for
me again on both the personal and professional
level. I deserve to be treated with more respect than I have been. The
harm has re-triggered depression and anxiety issues caused from the
two previous workers comp claim.”
23. Finally, the employer relied upon a report of Dr Johan
Scheepers, which has already been referred to. Dr Scheepers’ conclusion
in his report does not support the employer’s position about causation, in
that he expressed the view that he considered that
the worker’s employment
to be the major contributing factor to the worker’s condition, which he
diagnosed as major depressive
24. Dr Scheepers noted the
worker’s history of previous workers compensation claims. He noted the
worker to be a vulnerable
individual who has suffered with recurrent bouts of
depression since she was 18 years of age. He had concerns about the
ongoing ability to continue in her role dealing with the
wellbeing of children, but considered an administrative role would be more
appropriate for the worker.
25. In response to a particular questions put to
him, Dr Scheepers responded as follows:
“Did the diagnosed injury arise substantially from any particular
action or actions taken by the employer? If so, what action
“[The worker] indicated that she was distressed in the instance
taking care of who,
incidentally, also were a part of her own family. [The worker] alleges that the
department does not function
properly, she called the system 'broken'. The lack
of what she perceives as proper care of children causes her distress, not only
for her own family but for the children in general and this seems to have caused
her current relapse into a major depressive episode.
These are alleged
shortcomings; I cannot comment upon the factual nature of her
“If the diagnosed injury did not arise substantially from any
actions of the employer, what factor was causative?”
“I consider that [the worker’s] personal involvement in
this matter, in as much as the three children were relatives
in the sense of
being nieces and a nephew, played some role in the extent of her distress.
However, she did mention that the distress
had a more general quality in the
sense that the department, in her estimation, did not provide adequate care for
children. I cannot
comment upon the accuracy of this allegation.”
“What does [the worker] report as the cause of her current
condition?”
“[The worker’s] opening statement to me was, 'I've lost
faith in the system. There is no support. There is no back-up.
Children suffer.
The system is broken'. It was evident she had become deeply distressed at what
had happened to the foster children
that were in her care.”
“Do you accept this as the cause?”
“I consider it is likely that [the worker] had, in fact, become
distressed about what had happened to the foster children
and probably also
become distressed at the way her behaviour had been received by her employer. I
also consider that she is intrinsically
vulnerable and probably does not have
the emotional resources to be engaged in this type of work.”
The employer’s position
26. The employer’s argument in relation to the first
ground of dispute is that it is reasonably arguable that the interactions
the employer that caused the worker to become unwell were interactions that
arose in her capacity as a “consumer”
of the services of the
employer in her role as a kinship carer, and not in her capacity as a worker
which might potentially be compensable.
In particular, counsel for the employer
points to the worker’s extensive statement in support of her claim, which
he submitted
clearly articulates that it was the worker’s role as a
kinship carer which was the substantial cause of the injury that she
In addition, counsel for the employer referred to the email from the worker that
had been sent to the Safety Health and
Wellbeing section of the employer on 20
July 2021. He submitted that that email supports the employer’s position
kinship care arrangement was the substantial significant cause of the
worker’s injury. The worker’s loss of confidence
in the Department
and her colleagues, it was submitted, arose from her experience as a consumer of
the departmental services, and
not as an employee of the Department.
relation to Dr Scheepers’ report, counsel for the employer submits that
the report generally accepts that the worker’s
injury arises substantially
from the kinship carer arrangement, and that Dr Scheepers’ report, when
read as a whole, does not
discriminate between the worker’s overlapping
personal and professional roles.
28. In relation to the grounds of dispute
that raise the employer’s reliance upon s25(1A)(a) and (c), counsel for
the employer
submitted that the matters detailed in the statements of Ms
Franklin and Ms Munting in relation to arrangements that were put in
establish boundaries between the worker’s role as a kinship carer and her
role as a Child Safety Officer amounted
to reasonable administrative action, and
the occasions referred to where the worker had to be spoken about where she had
abide by those boundaries amounted to, arguably, reasonable action
taken to discipline or counsel the worker in relation to keeping
her personal
and professional roles separate.
The worker’s position
29. In relation to the first ground of dispute, it is submitted
on behalf of the worker that the evidence currently before the Tribunal
the worker’s contention that the issues the worker experienced in her role
as a kinship carer highlighted the failings
in the broader Child Safety Service.
The worker’s concerns, particularly as expressed to Dr Scheepers, were not
her own foster children, but children generally within the system,
who she felt were being unprotected and disadvantaged by the employer’s
failings and “broken system”.
30. In relation to the
employer’s argument raising s25(1A), it was submitted that the lack of
specific dates and timeframes
in the information relied upon by the employer
to identify any nexus between the employer’s actions of that nature
and the worker’s incapacity.
The question of causation – is it reasonably
31. It is worth setting out the observations of Evans J in St
Helens Oysters Pty Ltd v Coatsworth (supra) in relation to the question
causation and psychological injuries of this nature:
is notorious that the genesis for conditions such as stress, anxiety and
depression may be multi-faceted. The causes may
be many and varied and it can
be very difficult to identify the most significant causative factors. In the
context of litigation,
a final determination as to the existence of such a
condition and the causative role of any factor, almost invariably turns upon
adjudicator’s assessment of the veracity and reliability of the
complainant. Accordingly where the worker claims to suffer
from a condition of
this nature in circumstances where there are a variety of potential causes for
the condition, an employer may
show a reasonably arguable case concerning
liability by providing evidence of plausible potential causes that are
inconsistent with
liability.”
32. I accept that on the face of the claim for compensation,
and the material filed in support of the employer’s s81A referral,
is a distinction between the worker’s personal role as a kinship carer for
the three children, and her professional role
as a child safety officer with the
33. Dr Scheepers’ report, although it does not support the
employer’s argument in relation to the cause of the worker’s
condition, is not determinative of the issue. It is not clear that the
distinction between the worker’s personal and professional
roles was made
clear to Dr Scheepers when his opinion was sought. The report itself does not
appear to recognise that there is any
distinction. Dr Scheepers is expressing
his opinion about what is, effectively, an issue which would be a matter for
final determination
by the Tribunal.
34. Having regards to the observations
of Evans J set out in paragraph 31 above, I am satisfied the employer has
demonstrated that
the personal issues arising from the worker’s kinship
carer arrangement demonstrate a plausible potential cause of the worker’s
mental health condition that is inconsistent with the proposition that the
employment is the major or most substantial contributing
factor to that
condition. In particular, I observe that the claim for compensation itself
appears to show temporal connections between
the onset of the worker’s
mental health condition, and matters that seem to related to her role as a
carer, rather than her
professional role. Ultimately, the relative causative
contributions of employment and non-employment factors could only be determined
by the Tribunal following a full arbitrated hearing.
Is there a reasonable argument that either s25(1A)(a) or (c)
might apply?
35. I accept that the employer is able to point to actions and
interactions between the employer and the worker that would conceivably
to reasonable action to counsel or discipline the worker, or reasonable
administrative action undertaken in connection with
the worker’s
employment. In particular, I have in mind the steps the employer took to assist
the worker to establish and maintain
boundaries between the worker’s
personal and professional roles whilst she was at work, and to remind her of
those boundaries
when they were crossed.
36. However, I can discern nothing
in the materials presently before the Tribunal that would tend to show that
there is a connection
between those actions, and the worker’s major
depressive condition that is the subject of the claim for
compensation.
37. It is my view that the employer has not demonstrated it has
a reasonably arguable case that it might be able to rely on s25(1A)
it of liability to pay compensation to the worker.
Determination
38. Because I am satisfied that the employer has demonstrated
that it has a reasonably arguable case in relation to the issue of causation,
that is, under the first ground of dispute in the s81A referral, there will be
orders under s81A(3)(c) and (d) of the Act.
COMMISSIONER
S3(2A) provides that employment
contributed to a disease to a substantial degree only if it is the major or most
significant factor
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (138 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter