URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMACT/2015/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:17:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Wright v Motor Accidents Insurance Board [2015] TASMACT 1 (27 May 2015)
[2015] TASMACT 1
MOTOR ACCIDENTS INSURANCE
Wright v Motor Accidents Insurance Board
[2015] TASMACT 1
WRIGHT, Howard
ACCIDENTS INSURANCE BOARD
ACTION NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
Written submissions and agreed facts
DELIVERED ON:
27 May 2015
DECISION OF:
Member: S R Carey
: Motor vehicle accident, personal injury, statutory
entitlements, death benefits, death after period of time from accident,
pre-existing
medical condition, dies of complication of existing medical
condition, treatment for physical injuries interrupts treatment of pre-existing
medical condition, whether death resulted directly from motor vehicle accident,
conflicting medical opinion.
Motor Accidents (Liabilities and Compensation) Act
Accidents (Liabilities and Compensation) Regulations
Kooragang Cement Pty Ltd v Bates
[1994] 35 NSWLR 452
DETERMINATION:
The respondent shall pay to the applicant death
benefits in respect of the death of Janet Mary Wright as prescribed by
Regulation 1
Motor Accidents (Liabilities and Compensation)
Regulations
REPRESENTATION:
Solicitors:
Compensation Lawyers
Pedder Schuh Lawyers
[2015] TASMACT 1
Member: S R Carey
INTRODUCTION
1 This is a referral to the Tribunal by Howard Wright in
respect of the refusal by the respondent to accept that the death of his
Janet Mary Wright, was as a result of a motor vehicle accident that occurred on
21 March 2013. Agreed facts provide that the
applicant was married to Janet
Wright, on 1 March 1958 and they were still married at the date of her death.
On 21 March 2013 the
vehicle being driven by the applicant, in which his wife
was the front seat passenger, was involved in a motor vehicle collision
Gravelly Beach Road, near Blackwell in Tasmania. Both vehicles involved in the
collision were registered in Tasmania. As a result
of the collision, Mrs Wright
suffered a number of physical injuries. Mrs Wright died on 10 July 2013. At
the time of the accident
and at the time of his wife’s death, the
applicant was partially dependent upon her.
2 The issue to be determined by
the Tribunal is whether the applicant wife’s death (being a personal
injury by definition in
of the Act) resulted “directly” from the
subject motor vehicle injury. The certificate of death issued on 12 July 2013
in relation to Mrs Wright’s death certifies that the cause or condition
directly leading to her death was “peritonitis”
with antecedent
causes being “metastatic colon cancer and clostridium difficile
DETERMINATION
3 Mrs Wright had been diagnosed with metastatic colon cancer
approximately 10 years before the accident. Mrs Wright’s treating
oncologist, Dr Jeremy Power, outlines the immediate past history in relation to
that condition in a report of 28 May 2014
and such outline is accepted by the
Tribunal. In that regard although noting that Mrs Wright had been experiencing
more and more
side effects in recent time, there remained treatments that may
have had an effect in prolonging her life. It was conceded as unusual
someone to have multiple treatments of chemotherapy for metastatic colon cancer
for over 10 years and continuously respond each
time that a new treatment is
commenced. This made Mrs Wright’s malignancy very unusual. It would
appear that her condition
would progress but each course of chemotherapy would
provide positive results and extend prognosis for death. The median survival
time for someone with this condition was approximately 2 years; however Mrs
Wright had survived for over 10 years with repeated lines
of palliative
chemotherapy. The expectation was that Mrs Wright may possibly have survived a
number of months, even as much as 12
months or longer, had the chemotherapy
treatment been able to be maintained. However, upon her admission to hospital
for treatment
for physical injuries suffered in the accident this palliative
chemotherapy which was designed to extend her survival time was discontinued.
Such treatment was contraindicated due to the negative effects of treatment on
the immune system, wound and injury healing and other
side effects such as
fatigue and lethargy, diarrhoea and other toxicities that could have adversely
impacted upon her recovery from
the serious physical injuries she required and
the need for functional rehabilitation in order to return her to maximum
mobility following her injuries.
4 As a result of the motor vehicle
accident Mrs Wright sustained:
• A fracture of the C2 vertebrae;
fracture of the left ankle;
• Right ankle fracture;
tibial plateau fracture;
• Left second metacarpal fracture.
5 As a result of these injuries she underwent surgery,
particularly in relation to her ankle fractures and she was hospitalised between
21 March 2013 and 21 June 2013.
6 The medical records show that during the
course of Mrs Wright’s orthopaedic treatment with external fixation of the
MRSA was cultured from the pin site which required a course of
Vancomycin antibiotics. This was complicated by a clostridium difficile
infection which was treated with oral Metronidazole. Later in her admission
there was a further relapse of clostridium difficile
requiring a second course
of Metronidazole. Mrs Wright was discharged home on 21 June 2013 apparently
well, and her discharge medication
included Metronidazole apparently to continue
the course of treatment for the clostridium difficile infection.
7 Mrs Wright
was readmitted to hospital on 6 July 2013 with a complaint of a 4 day history of
lower abdominal pain and diarrhoea.
At that time chemotherapy treatment for her
cancer was still in abeyance due to ongoing treatment for the motor vehicle
fractures. Upon admission the clostridium difficile toxin was
identified on faecal samples which was negative for other pathogens.
Wright declined intervention of surgery or CT scanning, clinical assessment was
a questioned diagnosis of peritonitis. On that
basis it was explained to Mrs
Wright that management could require surgical intervention if there was a
perforated intenstine; without
same Mrs Wright was advised that survival was
unlikely. Mrs Wright declined the option of undergoing surgery. There was
subsequently
an acute onset of abdominal pain on 8 July 2013 with clinical
situation consistent with peritonitis and bowel perforation although
no confirmation of same. However, antibiotics were withdrawn and palliative
care only provided.
9 On behalf of the applicant it is submitted that reliant
upon the opinion expressed by Dr Power, Mrs Wright’s death was as
of peritonitis caused by the clostridium difficile toxin which was a likely
complication of antibiotic treatment that Mrs
Wright had required in respect of
the physical injuries she sustained as a result of the motor vehicle accident.
In the alternative,
it is submitted, once again in reliance upon Dr
Power’s opinion, that if Mrs Wright’s death had been as a result of
pre-existing metastatic colon cancer then this death, at the date at which
it occurred, was as a result of the inability of Mrs Wright
to continue with
palliative chemotherapy which had been successful up until that time to have
delayed her death from that condition.
10 On behalf of the respondent it is
submitted, reliant upon an opinion of Dr Yeliena Baber, forensic pathologist,
dated 11 November
2014, that immunosuppressed patients such as cancer patients
undergoing therapy are particularly susceptible to clostridium difficile
associated disease and need not be exposed to antibiotics to develop the
clinical disease. Dr Baber also concluded, noting that
no examinations or
surgery had been performed to confirm the diagnosis of the peritonitis that the
link of clinical peritonitis with
the initial motor vehicle incident was
tenuous. She comments that Mrs Wright’s primary diagnosis of metastatic
colonic carcinoma
could not meaningfully be excluded as the cause of her
abdominal pain, diarrhoea and peritonitic symptoms. In the alternative, it
submitted that Mrs Wright’s refusal to undergo appropriate investigation
to confirm the nature and cause of her condition
and also to refuse treatment
was action which broke the chain of causation between the physical injuries
suffered in the motor vehicle
accident and her eventual death.
11 The issue
to be determined by the Tribunal is whether in the circumstances outlined it can
be established on balance that Mrs Wright’s
death “results
directly” from the motor vehicle accident. In this regard our legislation
does not suffer the difficulty
of having different tests applying to the
causative event itself and the subsequent connection between that event and the
consequence
of such event. The relevant provisions (s23(1) and
(4) of the Act
r1 of the Regulations) all use common terms in providing an
entitlement to receive a death benefit if the personal injury (death)
directly from the motor vehicle accident. Clearly Mrs Wright suffered physical
injuries in circumstances satisfying this
requirement and scheduled benefits, I
infer, have been paid in that regard. However, it must be decided whether the
causal connection
between the motor vehicle accident, the suffering of physical
injuries, the need of medical treatment, the consequences of that treatment
the eventual deterioration in her health leading to death can be viewed so as to
conclude death was a direct result of the motor
vehicle accident. The term
“results directly” is the description of the causative link required
by the legislation in
order to establish an entitlement to compensation. It is
well established that determining such a causative link is a question of
and what is required is a “common sense evaluation of the causal
chain” (Kirby P: Kooragang Cement Pty Ltd v Bates
[1994] 35 NSWLR 452
463-464). These comments relate to the term “results from” and this
involves tracing the causal chain ensuring there
is no occurrence or event where
it might be said that the chain was broken (e.g. by novus actus interveniens) or
a situation where
there becomes an insufficient connection. Consideration needs
to be given as to whether the word “directly” limits or
additional requirements to that basic test of causation.
12 It was submitted
on behalf of the respondent that the word “directly” requires a
direct and immediate connection between
the motor vehicle as the cause of the
injury and the death or injury. If this is meant to convey some close temporal
connection,
it is not accepted because a direct causal link need not be
dependent upon a period of time. The word “immediate” as
the Macquarie Dictionary denotes a circumstance “not separated by any
intervening medium”. This is consistent
with the discussion concerning
the causal chain as set out above.
13 The cause of death on the death
certificate is “peritonitis” and there is no evidence explaining
this condition; however
I am aware that this term describes an inflammation of
the membrane which lines the inside of the abdomen and all the internal organs
(“the peritoneum”). The existence of peritonitis was not confirmed
by any available investigations such as CT scan or
surgery but was based upon a
clinical assessment by those treating Mrs Wright at the time. No evidence was
adduced generally about
the condition peritonitis; however my own research
discloses that it may be “primary”; that is occurring spontaneously
or “secondary; that is resulting from some other condition. The medical
evidence does raise the likelihood or possibility
of a primary peritonitis in
this case in the nature of enterocolitis (colitis). Dr Power
“Clostridium difficile is well known to cause an enterocolitis
which can be a fatal infection and present as peritonitis.”
14 Further,
in his report of 28 January 2015:
“Nonetheless, I do restate that [Mrs
Wright] had many clinical features consistent with clostridium difficile colitis
that peritonitis
is a known complication of this infection...”
Baber described:
“The spectrum of clinical presentation of clostridium
difficile associated disease (CDAD) varies from asymptomatic carrier state,
self-limited antibiotic related diarrhoea to fulminant colitis with or without
toxic megacolon or perforation.”
16 Having considered the medical
records and the opinions of Drs Baber and Power, I am not persuaded that Mrs
Wright had suffered
a perforation in her digestive system or colon that led to
the peritonitis. The reasonable options open on the evidence are a clostridium
difficile related peritonitis or the progression of her colorectal cancer. The
treaters do not appear to have considered the likelihood
or not of the
pre-existing cancer presenting in the terminal stages. The preponderance of
opinion from those directly involved was
that the presentation was in some way
connected to the confirmed clostridium difficile infection and no notation is
made of the cancer
save for the recorded history indicating that the treaters
were aware of her pre-existing condition.
17 Given the diagnosis was based
upon clinical examination by a number of treaters (although not confined by
investigation means available)
I conclude that Mrs Wright was suffering the
effects of clostridium difficile associated disease either as a colitis or
peritonitis
or alternatively it progressed from one to the other over time. I
am satisfied that the clostridium difficile infection was as a
antibiotic medication required by Mrs Wright due to her orthopaedic injuries.
It follows that the Tribunal is satisfied
that the effects of the clostridium
difficile associated disease were suffered as a direct result of the motor
vehicle accident as
this infection or condition was as a result of the treatment
(antibiotic therapy) required by Mrs Wright in respect of physical injuries
suffered in the motor vehicle accident.
18 On behalf of the respondent, the
failure by Mrs Wright to undergo available medical treatment is suggested as a
circumstances that
breaks the causal link between her death and the motor
vehicle accident. In this regard there is little evidence concerning Mrs
Wright’s physical and mental state at that time and whether, in fact, any
available treatment may or may not have led to a
more favourable outcome. As
outlined, the Tribunal was satisfied that the “directly results”
causal chain exists from
the motor vehicle accident to Mrs Wright’s death,
medical intervention may or may not have halted or delayed the final outcome
the lack of such medical intervention cannot be shown to have become a new cause
of her death displacing the motor vehicle accident
and consequences of that
accident. Mrs Wright had obviously had a difficult time suffering significant
physical injuries as a result
of the motor vehicle accident which required her
to spend numerous weeks as an inpatient in hospital during a time when she no
knew her cancer was likely to have advanced and her overall prognosis in
that regard was for a limited period of life. Spending
this precious time
recovering in hospital at her terminal admission would have been unsettling for
her. It is not difficult to infer
returning to hospital to face further
invasive investigation would not have been welcomed by Mrs Wright. The medical
treaters of
Mrs Wright do not (from the medical records) appear to have
discouraged her wishes. Her medical condition, given the background
pre-existing cancer, was clearly grave. There has been no material provided
that would establish that her decision to forgo
treatment was unreasonable in
the circumstances that existed at that time.
19 The Tribunal does not
consider that the common law concept requiring mitigation of damage is
necessarily applicable to this case.
Any obligation in that regard fell to Mrs
Wright not to the applicant, her husband, who is the one seeking relief in these
proceedings.
Additionally, it is arguable whether in these circumstances such a
doctrine applies as the relief sought relates to a prescribed
statutory benefit,
the entitlement of which is either established by an applicant or is
20 Accordingly the Tribunal upholds the referral and shall order that
the respondent shall pay to the applicant death benefits as
prescribed by
Regulation 1
Motor Accidents (Liabilities and Compensation)
Regulations 2010
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (80.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter