URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASWRCT/2021/30.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:23:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
S. v Candice Care Inc. [2021] TASWRCT 30 (6 September 2021)
[2021] TASWRCT 30
WORKERS REHABILITATION AND COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
S. v Candice Care Inc.
[2021] TASWRCT 30
CANDICE CARE INC.
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
24 August 2021
DELIVERED ON:
6 September 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Commissioner Wilkins
CATCHWORDS:
Application for interim determination, ruling or direction
- claim taken to be accepted under s81AB – delay in payments of
compensation and benefits under Division 2 of Part VI -
Candice Care Inc. v
[2021] TASWRCT 20;
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
DETERMINATION:
The employer is to pay outstanding expenses claimed by
the worker in accordance with Division 2 of Part VI of the Act within seven
The employer is to pay the worker’s costs of and incidental to the
s60A referral.
The worker has liberty to apply to the Tribunal if the employer fails to
make timely payments of compensation under the Act in the
REPRESENTATION:
Solicitors:
Everett Flight &
Carter Newell Lawyers
[2021] TASWRCT 30
Commissioner Wilkins
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. The worker made a claim for compensation on or about 19
February 2021. The uninsured employer disputed liability to pay compensation
pursuant to s81A of the Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988 (the
Act). The course of that s81A referral has been set
out in my decision Candice
Care Inc. v S.
[2021] TASWRCT 20.
2. Ultimately, I determined that the worker
had not been served with notice of the dispute as required by s81A(1)(a) and (b)
Act, and the Tribunal was without jurisdiction to hear the
employer’s s81A referral.
3. The worker has now made an application
pursuant to s60A of the Act, seeking an interim order from the Tribunal, in
relation to
what the worker says are unpaid weekly payments of compensation and
benefits payable under Division 2 of Part VI of the Act.
The s60A Application
4. The worker’s application was accompanied by a number
of documents, including correspondence between the solicitors for the
the solicitors for the employer, and correspondence from the employer’s
solicitors to the worker.
5. By letter of 12 July 2021, the worker’s
solicitors referred to a number of receipts for medical and related expenses
had been provided to the employer between 30 April 2021 and 11 June 2021.
Copies of invoices and receipts were enclosed. The worker’s
noted that the expenses had not been disputed within 28 days in accordance with
the Act, and sought confirmation that
the expenses would be paid.
letter of 15 July 2021 to the worker’s solicitors, the employer’s
solicitors advised:
• The receipts enclosed in the correspondence of 12 July
2021 had not previously come to the attention of the
workers compensation medical certificates had been provided covering periods of
incapacity after 16 April
employer disputed liability to pay those expenses pursuant to s77AB(2)(b) of the
7. By letter of 19 July 2021, the worker’s solicitor
responded to the employer’s solicitor with copies of emails from
worker’s wife to the employer in April, May, June and July 2021 that had
forwarded the workers compensation medical certificates
and receipts for medical
8. On 26 July 2021 the worker’s solicitors sent to the
employer’s solicitors a workers compensation medical certificate
July 2021, certifying the worker to be wholly incapacitated until 20 August
2021, together with receipts for general practitioner
and psychologist
attendances, and a table setting out what was said to be weekly payments of
compensation and medical expenses that
were outstanding.
9. On 27 July 2021,
the employer’s solicitors wrote to the worker. They referred to previous
correspondence to the worker on
14 July 2021 whereby they had advised the worker
that the employer, pursuant to s77AB(2)(b), disputed payment of the medical
forwarded by the worker’s solicitors to the employer’s
solicitors on 12 July 2021. They referred to workers compensation
certificates forwarded by the worker’s solicitors on 19 July 2021, and 26
July 2021, certifying the worker to be incapacitated
until 20 August 2021. On
the basis of what was expressed to be the employer’s
“dissatisfaction” with the workers
compensation medical
certificates, the employer’s solicitors advised the worker that the
employer, pursuant to s77AB(2)(b),
disputed its obligation to pay the further
medical expenses forwarded on 19 July 2021.
10. No referral has been filed in
the Tribunal on behalf of the employer in accordance with s77AB of the
The worker’s position
11. As at the date of the s60A hearing, the worker says that
the amount of $2315.01 is outstanding by way of benefits payable under
2 Part VI of the Act.
12. On behalf of the worker, it was submitted that the
expenses in relation to which orders were sought could be broadly categorised
expenses for general practitioner attendances for ongoing workers compensation
certification, and expenses for ongoing psychological
treatment. Counsel for the
worker submitted that any purported dispute of the medical and related expenses
had not occurred in accordance
with the Act.
13. In relation to weekly
payments of compensation, the worker says that payments are outstanding.
Continuing workers compensation
medical certificates for total incapacity,
covering the period 21 June 2021 to 20 August 2021, had been provided to the
with partial payments having been received in June and July, but
nothing by way of weekly payments since mid-July.
14. The worker says that up
until the fortnight ending 8 August 2021, an amount of $6463.20 was payable, and
for the fortnight ending
22 August a further $2205.53 was due to be paid by 26
August 2021 – the total of weekly payments outstanding being $8668.78
The employer’s position
15. Counsel for the employer advised the Tribunal that, since
the s81A referral had been dismissed, the employer had made a claim
workers compensation insurer in Queensland in relation to the worker and the
worker’s claim was currently being investigated
by Workcover in
Queensland. The employer says that the claim ought not to have been accepted in
Tasmania, and the worker ought effectively
to await the outcome of the
Workcover investigation before his expenses under Division 2 of Part VI of the
Act are reimbursed to
16. In relation to outstanding weekly payments of
compensation, the Tribunal was advised that the amount of $6463.20 calculated to
be owing to the worker up until 8 August
was not an agreed amount. The basis of the dispute about that figure was not
identified. Counsel for the employer indicated that
an amount of $5751.40 had
been processed by the employer for payment for the worker on 19 August 2021, and
was expected to be deposited
in the worker’s bank account on the day of
the s60A hearing. Counsel for the employer further advised that weekly payments
for the worker’s pay period ending 22 August was due to be
‘processed and paid’ on Thursday 26 August 2021.
17. S60A of the Act empowers the Tribunal to make interim
determinations. It relevantly provides:
Tribunal may make an interim determination, ruling or direction in respect of a
claim for compensation referred to
it, whether or not liability for the claim
has been accepted or disputed.
(1A) The Tribunal may make an interim
determination, ruling or direction in the following circumstances:
(a) where a delay by one side of the
proceedings substantially prejudices the other side;
(b) where a party fails to comply with a
direction of the Tribunal or a conciliator;
(c) where the Tribunal is otherwise satisfied
that the interests of justice require it.”
18. S77AB permits an employer, under certain circumstances, to
dispute that it has liability to pay expenses claimed under Division
VI of the Act. S77AB(1) sets out the circumstances in which the section is
available to an employer as follows:
“(1) This section
applies to an employer of a worker who has made a claim for compensation
(a) either –
(i) the employer has not accepted, or is
not to be taken under section 81AB to have accepted, liability to
pay compensation for an
injury to the worker; or
(ii) the employer has not been
determined by the Tribunal or a court to be liable to pay compensation for an
injury to the worker;
(b) the Tribunal has not made orders under
either section 81A(3)(c) or (d) in relation to the
injury to the worker; and
(c) the employer receives from an injured
worker a claim for payment of an expense under this Division; and
(d) the amount of the expense, when combined
with amounts for expenses under this Division that the employer has already paid
in relation
to the worker's injury, is not more than
19. S77AB(2) provides:
“(2) If this
section applies to an employer, the employer, within 28 days of receiving a
claim for payment of an expense referred
in subsection (1)(c) –
(a) must pay the expense; or
(b) if the employer is of the opinion that
the expense is unreasonable or unnecessary, must –
(i) serve the worker with a notice
specifying why the expense is unreasonable or unnecessary; and
(ii) notify in writing the service
provider who rendered the account that liability for the expense is disputed
because the expense
is unreasonable or unnecessary and give the reasons why the
expense is unreasonable or unnecessary; and
(iii) refer the dispute to the Tribunal
under this section.”
The claims for payment of expenses- have they been validly
20. By correspondence of 15 July 2021 and 27 July 2021, the
employer’s solicitors purportedly disputed liability to pay expenses
Division 2 of Part VI of the Act, in accordance with s77AB(2).
21. S77AB is
only available to an employer to whom the section applies, as provided by
s77AB(1). In this case, because the employer’s
dispute in relation to its
liability for the claim failed for want of jurisdiction, the employer is taken
to have accepted liability
in respect of the claim in accordance with s81AB of
22. From the date of the Tribunal’s order in relation to the
s81A referral, s77AB was not available to the employer to dispute
liability to
pay the claimed expenses.
23. The Act contemplates that claims for payment of
expenses will be received by the employer from the worker. The worker appears
have attempted to do this by his wife sending the claimed expenses to the
employer by email. If her emails had not been blocked
by the employer, the
expenses would have been payable by the employer within 28 days of
24. As it is, the expenses were forwarded to the employer’s
solicitors by the worker’s solicitors on 19 July 2021 and
26 July 2021.
They ought to have been paid within 28 days.
Weekly payments of compensation
25. An employer is liable to pay to a worker weekly payments of
compensation in accordance with the Act where partial or total incapacity
work is supported by a certificate in the approved form.
26. Once again, the
worker attempted to provide workers compensation medical certificates, via
emails sent by his wife, to the employer.
If her emails had not been blocked by
the employer, weekly payments ought to have been made on those certificates when
27. When the certificates were received by the
employer’s solicitors from the worker’s solicitors on 19 July 2021
26 July 2021, weekly payments of compensation ought to have been made at
28. The Tribunal, upon enquiry of the worker’s solicitors,
was advised on 1 September 2021 that neither the funds purported
to be paid on
19 August 2021, nor the funds that were going to be processed and paid on 26
August had been paid into the worker’s
bank account.
September 2021, the worker’s solicitors advised the Tribunal that the
worker had received into his bank account that
day $4,835.20, which were said to
tally with payslips provided on 19 August 2021. Weekly payments of compensation
for the fortnight
ending 22 August 2021 had not been received.
S60A – should there be an interim determination, ruling
or direction?
30. The Tribunal may make an interim determination, ruling or
direction where, amongst other things, delay by one side of the proceedings
substantially prejudices the other side.
31. I am satisfied that the worker
has demonstrated that there has been delay in the employer paying to the worker
expenses claimed
as benefits under Division 2 of Part VI of the Act.
further satisfied that the worker has been substantially prejudiced by that
delay. He appears to have been covering the cost
of his own medical and related
expenses for a number of months. His attempts to seek reimbursement for those
expenses in accordance
with the Act appear to have been thwarted – first
by the employer blocking his wife’s emails, and then by the purported
‘disputes’ of liability to pay those expenses under s77AB of the
33. Whether or not the employer has made some form of claim on its
Queensland workers compensation insurer, there is no doubt that
there is now, in
Tasmania, an accepted claim under the Act, and the worker has the right to
receive his entitlements to compensation
in relation to that claim.
appropriate for a direction that the employer pay to the worker, within seven
days, any expenses claimed in accordance with
Division 2 of Part VI of the Act,
which are as yet unpaid, and which are set out in the correspondence from the
worker’s solicitors
to the employer’s solicitors dated 12 July 2021,
15 July 2021 and 26 July 2021.
35. S60A requires that the Tribunal to make
an order giving effect to any determination, ruling or direction made under that
There will be an order accordingly
36. Although it appears that has
also been some delay in processing the worker’s weekly payments, I
understand that since the
s60A application was made to the Tribunal, weekly
payments have now been made. Counsel for the employer advised me in the course
of the s60A hearing that the weekly payments for the period ending 22 August
2021 would be paid.
37. In the circumstances, I do not think I need to make
any direction under s60A in relation to the worker’s weekly payments
compensation at this stage. However, I give the worker liberty to apply further
on this s60A referral in the event that the employer
fails to make timely
payments of compensation in accordance with the Act in the future.
worker further sought a direction from the Tribunal reminding the employer that
claims for reimbursement of medical expenses
under the Act can be sent directly
to the employer without the intervention of solicitors. I do not consider this
to be necessary.
The employer’s solicitors have indicated they have
instructions to accept those documents and medical certificates on behalf
employer. The worker can forward his documents to the employer’s
solicitors on that basis.
39. The worker has also sought an order that the
employer pay the worker’s costs of and incidental to the s60A referral.
for the employer did not address this in the s60A hearing. It is
appropriate that there is an order for costs under s59 of the Act
in favour of
the worker.
COMMISSIONER
The worker’s wife had
sent the receipts and certificates via email. Apparently the employer had
blocked her emails without
telling her that it had done
See footnote
Referred to in paragraph
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (117 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter