URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFC/2025/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:14:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Poulton v Conrad [2025] TASFC 7 (19 September 2025)
[2025] TASFC 7
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (FULL
Poulton v Conrad
[2025] TASFC
: POULTON, Adam
CONRAD, Jeff
APPEALED FROM:
[2025] TASSC 2
DELIVERED ON:
19 September
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Shanahan CJ, Estcourt J, Jago J
Appeal and New Trial – General principles – Points and objections
not taken below – When not allowed to be raised
on appeal –
Particular case – Question of law – Whether point not raised on
intermediary appeal can be raised on
a subsequent appeal – Where the
appellant raised and argued the point at trial and subsequently abandoned it on
the intermediary
appeal – Single ground in this appeal contrary to the
case run below – If the appellant were allowed to rely on the
appeal pleaded then the respondent would be denied opportunity to cross-appeal
below – The appellant's notice of
appeal should be confined to the ambit
of the facts run on intermediary appeal – Appeal dismissed.
Appeal and New Trial [100]
Appeal and New Trial – Appeal general principles – Right of
appeal – When appeal lies – Error of law –
Particular cases
involving error of law – Failure to give reasons for decision –
Adequacy of reasons – Trial Judge
held bitcoin intangible – Upheld
Magistrates finding of conversion and detinue – Appellant submit
intangible property
not subject to action – Argument allowed despite not
raised below – Person or entity with key to access the wallet is
control of the Bitcoin – That control equates to possession of property
sufficient for conversion and detinue – Powerful
case for reconsidering
dichotomy between choses in possession and choses in action to recognise
intangible property – House
of Lords highly persuasive but not binding
– Company did not shield appellant – Appellant was in possession of
the Bitcoin
to establish action – Appeal dismissed.
Aust Dig Appeal
and New Trial [25]
Legislation:
Magistrates (Civil
Division) Act 1992
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act
AA v Persons Unknown and Ors
[2019] EWHC 3556
Barnett v Tasmania Water and Sewage Corporation Pty Ltd
[2018] TASFC
Colonial Bank v Whinney
30 Ch D 2619
Dovuro Pty Ltd v Wilkins
[2003] HCA 51
(2003) 215 CLR 317
Henderson v Walker
[2019] NZHC 2184
National Provincial Bank v Ainsworth
[1965] UKHL 1
[1965] 1 AC 1175
OBG Ltd v Allan
[2007] UKHL 21
[2008] AC 1
Parker v The Queen
[1963] HCA 14
Port Jackson Stevedoring Pty Ltd
Salmond & Spraggon
(Aust) Pty Ltd
133 CLR 300
Port of Melbourne Authority v Anshun Pty Ltd
[1981] HCA 45
(1981) 147 CLR 589
Poulton v Conrad
[2025] TASSC 2
Re Blockchain Tech Pty Ltd
[2024] VSC 690
Yanner v Eaton
[1999] HCA 53
Your Response Ltd v Datateam Business Media Ltd
[2014] EWCA Civ 281
(2015) 1 QB 41
REPRESENTATION
McTaggart SC
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Murdoch Clarke
[2025] TASFC 7
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 7/2025
File No 896/2025
ADAM POULTON v JEFF CONRAD
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
SHANAHAN CJ
19 September 2025
Serial No 7/2025
File No 896/2025
ADAM POULTON v JEFF CONRAD
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
SHANAHAN CJ
19 September 2025
dispute began with an action in the Magistrates Court that arose out of an
arrangement between the parties made in December
2013, whereby the appellant
was, on behalf of the respondent, to invest the sum of $10,000 paid to the
appellant by the respondent,
in the digital currency bitcoin. There was some
dispute as to whether the respondent dealt with the appellant personally or his
related company Get Paid In Bitcoin Pty Ltd ("Get Paid In Bitcoin"). The
magistrate held that the appellant did use the money to
acquire a quantity of
bitcoin on behalf of the respondent, however a dispute arose regarding the
bitcoin, together with other crypto
currency derived from the acquired bitcoin,
which the appellant retained as a claimed fee for his services.
matter was heard by Magistrate R Webster. It then went by way of a single judge
appeal before Brett J before coming before this
Full Court. An account of that
process lies at the heart of the disposition of this
The Magistrate's Court
action, in the Magistrates Court, pleaded a number of causes of action,
including detinue, conversion or trespass to goods, restitution,
contract, and
negligence. The jurisdictional limit of the Magistrates Court is $50,000. That
court has an equitable jurisdiction,
by s 9 of the
Magistrates (Civil
Division) Act 1992
including but not limited to, at s 9(k): "any other
matter which is within the equitable jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and which
is in respect of an amount that does not exceed the prescribed amount other than
(i) an action for the administration of a deceased
person; or (ii) an action for
the execution of a trust or for a declaration that a trust exists". The rider
at s 9(k)(ii) may explain
why no action was brought by the respondent in respect
of the $10,000 provided to the appellant being impressed with a trust to invest
those funds in bitcoin.
alternative claim in restitution was particularised in the form of a claim for
unjust enrichment, ie:
"Further or in the alternative, in the circumstances as pleaded, the
Defendant has received the benefit of $10,000 transferred to
Claimant and the Claimant claims $10,000 less bitcoin received from the
Defendant as restitution by reason of the following:
was no contractual relationship between the Claimant and the Defendant;
Defendant has received the benefit of $10,000 from the Claimant;
Claimant has not had the $10,000 or a valuable equivalent since transferring it
to the Defendant and has therefore been put to
loss and expense.
would be unjust for the Defendant to retain the $10,000 less bitcoin given to
the Claimant."
magistrate addressed the respondent's claims on the basis that the claims were
"...in detinue and conversion or alternatively
... damages for breach of
contract and/or negligence". It is unclear as to the disposition of the action
pleaded in restitution/unjust
enrichment, there was no reference to it by the
magistrate in his reasons.
magistrate accepted the respondent's evidence but rejected that of the appellant
unless it was "corroborated by clear, unambiguous
and reliable evidence." The
appellant's evidence-in-chief at trial was that:
"Yeah the arrangement was um for me to acquire Bitcoins for him ... So it was
early in 2014 um I had um personal Bitcoins that I had
already from past
dealings. Um I was already in the early stages of my business at that point in
time so I actually had ah Bitcoins
um that were fir Get Paid In Bitcoin as my
float. And um yeah the agreement with Jeff was for me to look at the market as
discussed in a few scenarios in my emails with him. And that was for me
to deploy the funds that he sent to me, um over the next
coming days and week,
um in any manner that I see fit to um acquire Bitcoins um at a representative
market price at that time. And
um you know, in that process I used ah some of
the float that I had previously um along with a small amount that I actually
on um an exchange called Coinjar at that time.
Yeah so there were three times that I purchased um Bitcoins for Jeff ... Yeah
of ah December there was $1000 Bitcoin purchased and that
amount of Bitcoins were um received from Coinjar. Um and I also added
worth of Bitcoins from our pooled um holdings. On 6
there was another $1000 um resulting 1.0908 um Bitcoins. Um and there was five
and a half thousand allocated from my
holdings at the equivalent exchange rate.
February a similar, so the $500 was purchased then um
giving me an exchange rate and two and a half thousand dollars was allocated
from our um Bitcoin holdings.
I let him know the acquisition had been done
I started the process of moving the funds to a paper wallet and um gave these
to Jeff I think it was June or July 2014".
in cross-examination:
"I came up with the idea of putting it on a paper wallet and actually gave
Q: Up until July 2014 when you've had this fantastic idea after hours of
research to put the Bitcoin on a paper wallet, um up until
that point it was
only you who could control the Bitcoin you'd acquired for Mr Conrad wasn't it?
magistrate had the benefit of expert evidence as to the nature of bitcoin and
how it was traded and held, being reports from
Mr Andreas Hufschmidt a day
trader and financial analyst on behalf of the respondent, and Mr Joseph
Richards, a bitcoin trader and
operator of a "digital currency exchange" with an
annual turnover of $25 million, on behalf of the appellant.
expert evidence of Mr Richards, the appellant's expert, before the magistrate,
was to the effect that in 2013 bitcoin "was mostly
unheard of",
"A fundamental part of being able to transact bitcoin is the use of software
called 'wallet ap'. In 2103 ... [t]here were exceptions
but typically a bitcoin
user would be operating software on their computer ... The wallet app also has
one or more addresses which
can be shared with others to receive bitcoin funds.
'Bitcoin addresses are a jumble of numbers and letters, much like email
These addresses can be shared with other people and other services
when you wish to receive funds. When the funds are received,
it is possible
(both in the user's wallet and on the public blockchain ledger visible to the
whole world) to see which address received
which amount, and when.' Further,
'bitcoin transactions typically take 10 minutes' and 'Like foreign exchange
rates and share prices,
the value of bitcoins is determined by trading on
various markets worldwide.'"
Richards explained how that lack of familiarity might be addressed by the
"practical" interim step of providing a bitcoin purchaser
with a paper wallet
whilst they learnt how to operate an electronic wallet and retain "custody" of
the bitcoin:
"A practical solution to a buyer's inability to operate a bitcoin wallet is
to print a 'paper wallet' which contains the secret 'key'
(similar to a very
very large PIN number) which allows the holder of a paper key to retrieve their
funds at the time they are capable
of operating their own bitcoin wallet.
A person offering
services could have charged $300 to $1000
(or more) for the time and effort involved in securing the digital private keys
and producing
these in a format (such as a paper wallet) to their client."
(Italics added.)
Richards explained that the "paper wallet" was a method of delivering bitcoin to
the respondent:
"... Mr Poulton ...[the appellant] ... could have discharged his
responsibility in
the bitcoins by delivering all of them
(rather than some) to Mr Conrad ... [the respondent] ... on a paper wallet."
(Italics added.)
Richards described the holdings of bitcoin in the paper wallet as a "supply" and
as equivalent to "custody", and described the
possibility of "physical" loss of
"It appears from Mr Poulton's affidavit that Mr Poulton wished to discharge
this responsibility, and indeed the initial
of funds to Mr Conrad
via paper wallet due to an up-coming overseas trip. This was a prudent step to
take to ensure that Mr Conrad
of part of his funds in the
event of incapacity of Mr Poulton ...
Many bitcoin have been lost in the past due to the death of a bitcoin
investor or loss of the private key. Although paper wallets
can also result in
loss should the paper wallet be destroyed, spreading Mr Conrad's
bitcoins over multiple holding methods was appropriate and demonstrated
and consideration.
It seems likely that the process of explaining how to take custody of the
funds via the paper wallet and later an electronic wallet
would take some time
and effort". (Italics added.)
respondent's claim in negligence was based on Mr Hufschmidt's opinion that the
appellant had
acquired bitcoin on behalf of the respondent
due care and skill
. That conclusion was challenged by the appellant's
expert, Mr Richards, and the magistrate dismissed this aspect of the claim.
magistrate accepted that the appellant was entitled to a fee, however held that
he was not entitled to claim a portion of the
bitcoin that he had acquired for
the respondent in order to satisfy that entitlement. Despite finding that the
appellant was entitled
to a fee for his services in purchasing bitcoin (and
assessing an appropriate fee), the magistrate dismissed the claim in contract
"In this case it was agreed the defendant would invest the claimant's $10,000
in Bitcoin however nothing of value, such as an agreement
to pay a fee, was
promised in return. That is there was no consideration and accordingly there
can be no enforceable contract."
respondent's claims in detinue and conversion were successful. The magistrate
found that all of the cryptocurrency should have
been returned to the respondent
upon demand. He awarded damages (including exemplary damages and interest),
limited to the monetary
Before interest and allowing a sum of $1,500 for the appellant's fee, the
damages were $46,000.
late medieval, early modern, forms of action sought to protect
rights over chattels. The nature of the remedy reflected the type of alleged
interference with such rights. Wrongful appropriation
, wrongful detention in
and wrongfully disposing
of the chattel in
. Trover emerged in the second half of the
fifteenth century as an action on the case in which the plaintiff alleged that
in possession of certain goods and lost them, and the defendant found
them and converted them to his own use. The loss and finding
traversable so the question resolved as to whether the plaintiff's right to
possession had been infringed by the act of
conversion: Fleming, JG
The Law of Torts
, Law Book Company Limited,
7th Edition at p 50. As Fleming notes, "in truth the action is proprietary in
substance only tortious
in form. For want of a vindicatory action, early
English law had to employ a tortious remedy as a substitute":
at p 49. It came to be accepted that refusal to deliver after demand
was evidence of conversion.
plaintiff in an action for conversion or detinue must show an
right to possession at the time of the act of conversion. Thus, those remedies
require proof that a defendant has wrongfully taken,
transferred, withheld or
denied possession to a plaintiff who is so entitled.
magistrate made the following finding, in the context of the action in
conversion, as to the nature of the respondent's right
to immediate possession
of the bitcoin acquired by the appellant on his behalf:
"In so far as conversion is concerned the claimant ... [respondent] ... gave
the defendant ... [appellant] ... $10,000 so the defendant
could invest in
Bitcoin on the claimant's behalf. Accordingly once the defendant either
purchased Bitcoin from Coinjar or allocated
some of his own Bitcoin to the
claimant, at the same rate that he purchased Bitcoin from Coinjar,
claimant had a right to possession of those Bitcoin because they were purchased
There is no evidence to suggest the Bitcoin which the defendant
acquired for the claimant belonged to anyone other than the claimant
is no evidence to suggest anyone else has a better right to possession of that
Bitcoin than the claimant.
" (Italics added.)
important matter here, and why I have set out the expert evidence of the
appellant's expert, Mr Richards, is the apparent absence
of any case based on
the premise that bitcoin, being intangible,
could not be possessed
by implication
transferred
. The expert evidence of Mr Richards on behalf
of the appellant assumed that bitcoin, despite being intangible, could be
by reference to "custody" and was capable of "physical" possession
through the medium of a "paper wallet". The descriptions given
by Mr Richards
tended to equate control (access to the electronic private key numbers relevant
to the bitcoin) with possession.
appellant (defendant) by paragraph 11 of its defence admitted that part of the
bitcoin acquired by the appellant with the respondent's
(claimant's) $10,000 had
been "transferred" to the respondent by the use of a paper
"11 On or about 24 July 2014, the Defendant transferred 6
bitcoins into a paper wallet and gave this wallet to the Claimant at his
premises of [address specified]:
Claimant did not request that the Bitcoins be
transferred to him
Defendant did this unilaterally, for security reasons in preparation of the
Defendant taking an overseas trip.
transferring the Bitcoin to the paper wallet
was to keep the
majority of Bitcoins secure whilst the Defendant was away and not in a position
to move Bitcoins via the Bitcoin
exchange accounts if necessary.
the Defendant handed over the paper wallet, the Defendant advised the Claimant
the paper wallet contained 6 Bitcoins
defendant also advised the Claimant that he was able to verify
the number of
Bitcoins in the paper wallet
by scanning the QR code using any QR scanner."
(Italics added.)
no unambiguous positive defence was pleaded to the actions by the respondent in
conversion and detinue asserting that such
relief was not known to law, it is
possible that is what was contemplated by the averment at paragraph 27 of the
defence responding
to those claims (at paragraph 14 of the Amended Claim) in the
following terms:
"27 Paragraph 14 is denied and the Defendant says further that the
allegations in paragraph 14 are vague, ambiguous, likely to cause
embarrassment or delay in the proceeding and are likely to be struck out."
the nature of the expert evidence adduced at trial, the appellant (defendant)
clearly raised and argued whether an action
in detinue or conversion in respect
of bitcoin was available, and the magistrate allowed the point to be taken, no
doubt based on
the broad nature of the averment at paragraph 27 of the defence.
The magistrate considered the point at paragraph 76 of his reasons
(italics are
"In his closing submissions the defendant ... [appellant] ... disputes that
Bitcoin is a good or that it amounts to property. He
no court in
the world has given Bitcoin the title of goods or property or given rights to
cryptocurrency which is capable of attracting
conversion or detinue
his reply to the claimant's ... [respondent's] ... closing submissions the
defendant repeats that submission but then refers
me to the High Court decision
in England and Wales of
AA v Persons Unknown and
[2019] EWHC
wherein Bryan J considered this very issue in the context of granting a
proprietary injunction. His Honour noted the difficulty
in treating
cryptocurrency as property because the English common law recognised no forms of
property other than choses in possession
and choses in action. He came to the
conclusion however that a crypto asset such as Bitcoin is property because it
meets the four
criteria set out in Lord Wilberforce's definition of property in
National Provincial Bank v Ainsworth
[1965] UKHL 1
[1965] 1 AC 1175
as being definable,
identifiable by third parties, capable in their nature of assumption by third
parties, and having some degree
of permanence ... Bryan J noted that the same
conclusion was arrived at by the Singaporean International Commercial Court in
B2C2 Limited v Quoine PTC Limited
[2019][ SGHC (1) 03 [142]. Further he
noted at [60] two other English authorities where crypto currency has been
treated as property.
Shair.Com Global Digital Services Ltd v Arnold
2018 BCSC 1512
the Supreme Court of British Columbia granted an ex parte
preservation order to the plaintiff company against its former chief operating
officer with respect to digital currencies that might still be in the
defendant's possession and by so doing accepted crypto currency
could amount to
magistrate also noted the New Zealand decisions of
Ruscoe v Cryptopia Ltd (in
[2020] NZHC 728
[2015] NZSC 147
[2016] 1 NZLR 678
Commissioner
of Police v Rowland
[2019] NZHC 3314
, which dealt with what constituted
property under various
definitions. In
Henderson v
[2019] NZHC 184
the Court extended the tort of conversion to purely
personal digital information, including emails.
terms of Australian precedents the magistrate considered
Yanner v Eaton
[1999] HCA 53
(1999) 201 CLR 351
at 365-367 where Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, Kirby and Hayne JJ
discus what "property" is, in the context of a dispute as to whether native
title rights protected the right of a member of the Gunnamulla clan of the
Gangalidda tribe to hunt for juvenile estuarine crocodiles,
despite the then
requirements of s 54(1)(a) of the
Fauna Conservation Act
which only permitted the taking of fauna by the holder of a licence, permit,
certificate or other authority granted and
issued under that Act. Albeit there
were exceptions including taking fauna during "open seasons" and when and where
it was not protected
fauna, their Honours observed (footnotes omitted, italics
"[17] The word 'property'; is often used to refer to something that belongs
to another. But in the Fauna Act, as elsewhere in the
law, 'property' does not
refer to a thing; it is a description of a legal relationship with a thing.
It refers to a degree of power that is recognised in law as power permissibly
exercised over the thing
. The concept of "property" may be elusive. Usually
it is treated as a 'bundle of rights'. But even this may have its limits as an
analytical tool or accurate description, and it may be, as Professor Gray has
said, that 'the ultimate fact about property is that
it does not really exist:
it is mere illusion'. Considering whether, or to what extent, there can be
property in knowledge or information
or property in human tissue may illustrate
some of the difficulties in deciding what is meant by 'property' in a subject
[18] Nevertheless, as Professor Gray also says, 'An
extensive frame of reference is created by the notion that 'property' consists
primarily in control over access. Much of our false thinking about property
stems from the residual perception that 'property' is
itself a thing or resource
rather than a legally endorsed concentration of power over things and
resources.'
[19] 'Property' is a term that can be, and is, applied
to many different kinds of relationship with a subject matter. It is not 'a
monolithic notion of standard content and invariable intensity' ...".
magistrate cited
R v Toohey Ex parte Meneling Station Pty Ltd
[1982] HCA 69
at 342 for the proposition that the test formulated by Lord Wilberforce
National Provincial Bank v Ainsworth
[1965] UKHL 1
[1965] 1 AC 1175
has been applied
in Australia. Further, that when confronted by the question of whether
something is property, the courts have focussed
on various integers,
(i) whether it is possible to exclude others from the right in question:
Milirrpum v Nabalco Pty Ltd
(1971) 17 FLR 141
(ii) whether something is treated in commerce as a valuable proprietary right:
Halywood Corporation Ltd v Chief Commissioner of Stamp Duties
at 403; and
(iii) enforceability against third parties generally:
Wily v St Georges
Partnership Banking Ltd
[1999] FCA 33
(1999) 84 FCR 423
magistrate described the issue in the following terms, "when considering whether
something amounts to property it is necessary
to consider a range of factors
none of them are definitive
". It is certainly interesting to consider
whether property has such an innominate quality. This description is evocative
observations of Professor Gray in
magistrate, at [82], then considered the factors identified and found, no doubt
in part in reliance upon the expert evidence
tendered by the appellant
(defendant), that:
"... there are in my view, factors that support the conclusion Bitcoin
holding rights are proprietary in nature. The most forceful
of these is that
Bitcoin are treated as valuable, transferable items of property by Bitcoin
traders and users. As the evidence in
this case demonstrates there is an active
market for trade in Bitcoin and substantial amounts of money can change hands
between transferors
and transferees of Bitcoin ...".
Ultimately,
the magistrate held that bitcoin constituted property and could be the subject
of claims in conversion and detinue.
In particular, he concluded at [83] that
the relevant bitcoin software "restricts control of a holding to the person in
of the relevant private key or pin", and that these holding rights
"are definable, identifiable by third parties, capable of assumption
parties and sufficiently stable to satisfy the test" in
National Provincial
Bank v Ainsworth
[1965] UKHL 1
[1965] 1 AC 1175.
The Intermediate Appeal
appellant appealed against the magistrate's decision pursuant to
Magistrates Court (Civil Division) Act
. The nature of such an
appeal is a rehearing conducted on the evidence before the magistrate (see
Barnett v Tasmania Water and Sewage Corporation Pty Ltd
[2018] TASFC
notice of appeal of 3 October 2023 disclosed five grounds of appeal, that the
learned magistrate erred in fact and/or law as
finding at [94] of his reasons that the torts of detinue and conversion had been
established on all the evidence;
finding at [45] that the respondent dealt personally with the appellant and not
Get Paid In Bitcoin;
finding at [103] that the appropriate measure of damages included the increase
in the value of bitcoin from the time of the alleged
conversion and alleged
wrongful detention;
finding at [112] that the respondent was entitled to damages which included
bitcoin cash and gold; and
finding at [112] that the respondent was entitled to exemplary
finding at [94] referenced at ground 1 was to the effect "Accordingly, I find
the torts of detinue and conversion established".
No further particulars were
given and there was no
attack on the findings at [82] or [83] of
the magistrate's decision, and the reference to "the sufficiency of the
evidence" suggested
an error in fact finding or assessment of the evidence
rather than a challenge to the proposition that such rights were susceptible
action in conversion or detinue.
appeal was heard by Brett J. Only one ground was pursued before the learned
primary judge, namely that the magistrate erred,
"by finding at [94] of his
reasons that the torts of detinue and conversion had been established on all the
evidence.":
Poulton v Conrad
[2025] TASSC 2
appellant made three arguments to the learned primary judge in support of the
sole ground of appeal. They were, (i) that the
respondent failed to plead a
demand on 5 March 2018, (ii) that the appellant's dealings with the respondent
were on behalf of the
appellant's company, Get Paid In Bitcoin, and not him
personally and, (iii) that if the appellant was entitled to retain 1.5 bitcoin
as his fee, then the respondent's claims in conversion and detinue must fail
because the respondent was not entitled to immediate
possession of the property.
It was implicit in the manner in which the appellant conducted the appeal
before Brett J that bitcoin was property capable of immediate
Brett J noted at [6] that the finding of the magistrate that bitcoin amounted
to property, for the purpose of the causes of action
in detinue and conversion,
was not challenged in the appeal, no doubt because he was alive to the ambiguity
in the manner in which
ground 1 was pleaded before him. I set out that finding
in full because it reflects the position of the parties below, referring
bitcoin, Brett J observed at [6]:
"Because of its digital nature, it is intangible. However, the magistrate
held that it constitutes property. In particular, his
Honour concluded that the
relevant software 'restricts control of a holding to the person in possession of
the relevant private key
or pin' and these holding rights 'are definable,
identifiable by third parties, capable of assumption by third parties and
sufficiently
stable to satisfy the test' in
National Provincial Bank v
[1965] UKHL 1
[1965] 1 AC 1175.
In other words, the person who holds the
wallet, which contains the private key, will exclusively control the Bitcoin
His Honour's findings concerning Bitcoin amounting to
property, for the purposes of the causes of action in detinue and conversion,
has not been challenged in this appeal
." (Italics added.)
J rejected each of the three arguments made in support of ground 1 and concluded
"I can detect no error in the magistrate's determination of the claim in
detinue and conversion. The sole ground of appeal has not
been made out.
Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed."
is that finding by Brett J at [38] below that ultimately became the target of
the error asserted by the appellant in the appeal
appeal, as set out in the appellant's notice of appeal, asserts that Brett
"Erred in law or fact in finding at [32] that the Defendant was in possession
of the bitcoin at all material times when bitcoin is
intangible property and
cannot be possessed and therefore erred in finding that the magistrate correctly
found that the claims in
detinue and conversion had been established."
will be seen, paragraph [32] of Brett J's reasons was in a section dealing with
the appellant's argument that the evidence established
that it was actually the
appellant's company, not him personally, that acquired and had possession of the
disputed crypto currency
at all relevant times, and in particular at the time
that the respondent demanded its return. Accordingly, the argument made before
Brett J was that as a matter of fact, the company not the appellant had
possession of the bitcoin when demands where made for its
return. That argument
is entirely consistent with the proposition that bitcoin is property, capable of
possession and susceptible
to actions in conversion and
[32] needs to be read in context and, accordingly, I now set out his Honour's
reasons from [30]-[33]. They read as follows:
"[30] Both parties accept that the magistrate correctly recited the elements
of both detinue and conversion in his reasons for judgment.
It is also correct
to observe that in the circumstances of this case, it was necessary for the
respondent to establish that the appellant
was in actual possession of the
crypto currency when the demands for its return were made and refused by him.
This is a primary element
of the tort of detinue, and was conduct relied upon to
establish the inconsistent dealing necessary to establish the tort of
conversion.
It is clear the magistrate proceeded on the basis that the appellant
was in actual possession of the crypto currency at the relevant
[31] There is no doubt that the evidence established that the $10,000 was
paid into an account, which in actual fact was in the name
of the company.
However, the evidence also overwhelmingly established that it was the appellant
personally who not only dealt with
the respondent, but was also in actual
control of the Bitcoin. In this regard, the proprietary nature of a person's
interest in crypto
currency is important. The excludability of the asset and
hence its value, arises from personal control of the wallet and private
the magistrate observed, the conduct and communications of the appellant
conveyed that it was he, personally, that exercised
this control. He did not
claim throughout the course of the relevant dealings that he was only doing so
on behalf of the company.
The mere fact that money went into and came out of an
account in the name of the company does not change this reality. Further and
any event, the appellant confirmed in evidence that he was the alter ego of the
company. There is no suggestion that anyone else
was involved. The fact was
confirmed by the appellant in his re-examination when he was asked by his
counsel to explain his understanding
of legal personalities. He replied:
'I presume because I was the sole shareholder of Get Paid in Bitcoin that
.... me and Get Paid in Bitcoin is the same entity.
[32] The nature of Bitcoin and the defendant's control over it makes it clear
in my view that he was in possession of the relevant
property at all material
times. It is trite law that a person is in possession of property if that
person has actual control of
the property and an intention to possess it. See
Pollock and Wright
Essay on Possession in the Common Law
Clarendon Press Oxford 1888. In this case, I am satisfied that the appellant's
relationship to the crypto currency in dispute satisfied
those criteria.
[33] Accordingly, I reject this argument."
appellant's notice of appeal must be confined, in this regard, to the ambit of
the learned primary judge's determination of that
one argument, ie the
appellant's reliance on the corporate veil.
one view the appellant might be precluded from advancing the ground of appeal
upon which he now seeks to rely before this Court.
Court Civil Procedure Act
provides, relevantly:
47 Powers of Full Court on hearing of appeals
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a Full
Court, on the hearing of every appeal, shall have and may exercise all the
powers, and duties of the Court, whether as to amendment or
otherwise, and shall have power to draw inferences of fact not inconsistent
the findings of the jury, if any, and to affirm, reverse, or vary, as to all or
some or any one of the parties, any judgment,
order, or determination appealed
from, and to give any judgment or make any order or determination which ought to
have been given
or made, and to grant a new trial in any cause or matter in
which there has been a trial (whether with or without a jury), and to
further or other order as the case may require.
(2) On the hearing of every appeal from a judgment
given, or an order or other determination made, by a judge sitting without a
a Full Court shall have full power to review the judgment, order, or
determination appealed from on questions of fact as well as
(3) On the hearing of any appeal a Full Court,
if it is satisfied that no injustice will thereby be done,
any party to raise any point of law which was not raised at the trial
may determine the appeal on any such point." (Italics added.)
reliance was placed by the appellant upon the proposition that he be allowed to
raise a new legal argument on appeal before
this Court pursuant to s 47(3). It
is immediately clear that the argument sought to be run on this appeal is
contrary to the case
run by the appellant before Brett J, and is made in
relation to a point that, whilst not argued before Brett J, was live at the
before the magistrate, see the magistrate's reasons at
s 47(3) can have no application here because it applies only when points of law
are sought to be argued that were not raised
at trial. The single ground relied
upon before this Court
raised at the trial but was
below, before Brett J. Any injustice arising in allowing the appellant to now
rely upon a position contrary to that advanced before
Brett J emerges not
because the point was not raised at trial but because of the position taken by
the appellant below, a position
that reflects forensic judgments by the
appellant upon which the respondent is entitled to rely.
Submissions
by the respondent before this Court complained that if the appellant were now
allowed to rely on the ground of appeal
pleaded, it would deprive the respondent
of the opportunity to cross-appeal before Brett J and seek to broaden the
grounds considered
below which may have included seeking to support the decision
before the magistrate on alternative grounds. Here the pleaded causes
in restitution and unjust enrichment are noted, see [4]-[5] above. Propositions
emerging in exchanges with members of
this Court that suggested that the
respondent may now be able to commence fresh proceedings against the appellant
by pursing an equitable
remedy, merely crystallise the potential prejudice to
the respondent because any such further proceedings may be precluded on the
basis of the principles in
Port of Melbourne Authority v Anshun Pty Ltd
[1981] HCA 45
(1981) 147 CLR 589.
Port of Melbourne Authority v Anshun Pty Ltd
the High Court upheld an
order staying a common law action in tort by a crane owner; in circumstances
where a workman had been awarded
damages having sued the crane owner and a hirer
in respect of injury to the worker arising out of the crane hire, and the owner
separate proceedings against the hirer seeking an indemnity in respect
of those damages. The owner was estopped in the subsequent
action from raising
an indemnity agreement because the owner had unreasonably refrained from raising
it in the initial action and
it was so closely connected with the subject matter
of the initial action that it was to be expected that the owner would have
it as a defence as against the hirer. It was held that a judgment in the
subsequent action on the indemnity if in favour of the
owner would conflict with
the orders made in the first action:
"In this situation we would
prefer to say that there will be no estoppel unless it appears that the matter
relied upon as a defence
in the second action was so relevant to the subject
matter of the first action that it would have been unreasonable not to rely on
it. Generally speaking it would be unreasonable not to plead a defence if,
having regard to the nature of the plaintiff's claim,
and its subject matter, it
would be expected that the defendant would raise the defence and thereby enable
the relevant issues to
be determined in the one proceeding. In this respect we
need to recall that there are a variety of circumstances, some referred to
the earlier cases, why a party may justifiably refrain from litigating an issue
in one proceeding yet wish to litigate the issue
in other proceedings, eg
expense, importance of the particular issue, motives extraneous to the actual
litigation, to mention but
reluctant to allow a point or objection to be raised for
the first time on appeal if that point was either expressly
, or in effect
conceded or abandoned in the courts below: see
Sutton v Gundowda Pty Ltd
[1950] HCA 35
(1950) 81 CLR 418
per Latham CJ, Williams and Fullagar JJ at 438;
[1986] HCA 33
(1986) 162 CLR 1
per Gibbs CJ, Wilson, Brennan and Dawson JJ at
Port Jackson Stevedoring Pty Ltd v Salmond & Spraggon (Aust) Pty
[1978] HCA 8
(1978) 139 CLR 231
per Barwick CJ at 241, Mason J and Jacobs J
concurring at 271, Murphy J concurring at 283-284;
Igaki Australia Pty Ltd v
Coastmine Pty Ltd
(1996) 34 IPR 37 (FAFC)
O’Sullivan v Watson
(1986) 7 NSWLR 693
per Mahoney JA at 699. As Barwick CJ observes in
Jackson Stevedoring Pty Ltd
Salmond & Spraggon (Aust) Pty
"... it should only be in the clearest case and for
the most cogent reasons that a party who has conceded ...[a] ... matter at trial
should be allowed to make the validity of what has been conceded the basis for
overturning the result at trial."
same principle must be applied to attempts to appeal from an intermediate appeal
before a single judge. The appellant sought
to rely on the finding by Brett J
at [38] as a general endorsement of the magistrate's finding in respect of every
element of the
actions in detinue and conversion, but that proposition should be
approached very carefully because that finding has to be understood
as bound by
the ambit, substance and context of the argument before Brett J.
Dovuro Pty Ltd v Wilkins
[2003] HCA 51
(2003) 215 CLR 317
, Kirby J dealt with the
applicable principles (Footnotes omitted.):
"[88] In this Court a
like principle has been insisted upon, although it is usually explained in terms
of the rules of procedural
fairness or natural justice. If a concession
withdrew from the field of litigation an issue that might have been affected by
it would normally be unjust (unless repaired by relevant admissions or
concessions) to permit a reopening of the point on appeal.
[89] Such cases apart there remains in every contested application a decision
to be made. On the one hand if all the facts of possible
relevance to the issue
have been adduced and the question is one of a pure question of law or of legal
construction the interests
of justice may require that a party be allowed to
withdraw a concession and to make submissions on a point of law or a
construction
abandoned below. Such an approach is hardly surprising. A court
is normally obliged to apply the law. Parties do not have the
power by their
concessions or agreement, to require a court to do otherwise. Sometime,
however, by the course followed at trial,
a party may put itself beyond rescue.
In such a case, although the law remains as it is, the party may be disabled
from invoking
[90] Even where the issue is one of pure law or of legal construction and its
consideration involves no procedural unfairness, a court
may nevertheless refuse
to allow a party to re-open an issue earlier conceded. The court must weigh the
public interest in the finality
of litigation; the desirability that appellant
courts should normally have judicial findings and reasoning before considering
point; and the need to uphold the efficiency and authority of the judicial
[91] It has been suggested that some of the earlier decisions, amenable to
permitting issues of law and construction to be argued
absent prejudice,
represent "words ... uttered in another age and in other circumstances". The
more urgent contemporary demands for
case management and efficiency indeed
suggest the need to reconsider some of the earlier dicta. On the other hand,
such considerations
do not override the duty of Australian courts to the law and
to the determination of justice as between the parties according to
Especially in a lengthy and complex trial, it is easy enough for a point of law
or construction to be overlooked or mistaken.
Because judicial decisions are
not mechanical but affect the interests of parties (and often express the law in
ways important for
other or later litigants) cases continue to arise where
concessions at trial are seen to have been erroneous, unnecessary or unwise.
long as the appellate court can safely decide the point, taking into account the
reasons that exist for denying it consideration,
this Court would rarely
interfere so as to require a different conclusion."
is my view that the finality of litigation, the procedural unfairness to the
respondent in the appellant conducting the appeal
to Brett J on a diametrically
opposed basis to its approach in this Court and arguably, thereby, encouraging
the respondent to adopt
a limited responsive position, the absence of full
argument before Brett J on the point raised before this Court in the context of
the novelty and importance of the issues raised, all militate against allowing
the appellant to rely upon the ground pleaded in this
Court. It is no answer to
these observations, in the context of contemporary case management and the
opportunities denied a litigant
in the respondent's position, to suggest that
the quality of the issue as a matter of law and the fact that it was argued at
before being abandoned and then resuscitated, assuages any disadvantage to
a party or the public interest in the appropriate resolution
of such matters.
That is so despite the rider at s 9(k)(ii) of the
Magistrate's (Civil
Division) Act
1992 (discussed at [3] above).There is no way back through the
waters of the Lethe. Consequently, I would dismiss the appeal on
the trial before the magistrate was not a long or complex trial the issues
raised for decision had a novel quality and were
of obvious importance. The
legal status of bitcoin and other crypto assets, as neither choses in action nor
choses in possession,
is yet to be authoritatively settled by Australia's curial
court. In those circumstances, the availability of common law actions
conversion and detinue in a case such as this remains at large, as does their
suitability as remedies in this context for contemporary
times. The efficacy of
remedies developed in the fifteenth century for protecting species of wealth in
the twenty first century
deserves close attention in an appropriate case but not
at the expense of a litigant in the respondent's position.
have had the benefit of reading the reasons of Estcourt J. He would dismiss the
appeal on the substantive question raised by the
single ground. Were the matter
to proceed on another basis, other than the basis upon which I dismiss this
appeal, I consider that
bitcoin as a specie of wealth traded commercially and
widely dealt with as property (as reflected in the expert evidence led by the
parties in this case) falls to be legally recognised and treated as a
proprietary interest. Such wealth confers rights upon the
holder of the
relevant key or PIN, it is more than merely a collection of information or data.
Indeed, the UK High Court in
D'Aloia v Persons Unknown
[2024] EWHC 2342
at 36 ([156]) considered whether a crypto asset "Tether" constituted
"The asset is more than mere data. It is a set of
transactional functionalities
The most important of these is the
capacity of the person who holds the private key to effect new transactions
which will be recognised
as valid by the rules of the system. Analysed in this
way, the asset can be viewed as a specific transactional power over unique
entries on the ledger."
Confirmation,
or recognition, of crypto assets as property would be consistent with the
burgeoning legislative treatments of such
assets as property.
said the issue, as to the availability of conversion and detinue, then devolves
to whether crypto assets, such as bitcoin, are
capable of possession. Pollock
and Wright,
An Essay On Possession In Common Law
, Clarendon Press, Oxford
1888, state "a person is in possession of property if that person has actual
control of the property and
an intention to possess it". The learned authors
make a distinction between de facto possession and possession at law. It is
that, given this case's focus on detinue, that de facto possession was in
1888 described as "detention" on the Continent and may
be paraphrased as
"effective occupation or control": see Pollock and Wright,
An Essay On
Possession In Common Law
, Clarendon Press, Oxford 1888 p 12. De facto
possession has a mental element, "An act which is not done or believed to be
the exercise or assertion of dominion will not cause the person doing it
to be regarded as the de facto exerciser of the powers of
use and enjoyment":
see Pollock and Wright,
An Essay On Possession In Common Law
, Clarendon
Press, Oxford 1888 p 13.
the question of possession at law the learned authors observe at section 5.4,
"To have the actual apparent power of preventing
interference with a thing is
different, and has to be distinguished, from having the power of such prevention
attributed to one by
law, so that the inter-meddler may be rightfully resisted
at the time, or may afterwards be compelled by legal process to make reparation
in some form. When the fact of control is coupled with a legal claim and right
to exercise it in one's own name against the world
at large, we have possession
in law as well as in fact."
the context of this case, that account is somewhat circular and the metaphysics
of the nineteenth century are not broad enough
to imagine twenty first century
specie of wealth, or the potential application of fifteenth century remedies
thereto. Indeed, the
actions of detinue and conversion retain the feudal
flavour of mediating competing rights to possession. But the central premise
underpinning the common law concept of possession remains control, with an
intent to exercise dominion; and in the case of crypto
currency that is
represented by the relevant key or PIN. Those exclusive signifiers, whilst
data, are contemporary avatars of the
various means by which the common law
recognises and secures proprietary rights, whether that be by occupation or
other devices by
which dominion is claimed over entitlements to wealth.
appeal must be dismissed.
File No 896/2025
ADAM POULTON v JEFF CONRAD
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
19 September 2025
The appeal and its background
appeal began its life as an action in the Magistrates Court at Hobart which was
heard by Magistrate R Webster.
The action arose out of an arrangement between the parties made in December
2013, whereby the appellant was, on behalf of the respondent,
to invest the sum
of $10,000 paid to the appellant by the respondent, in the digital currency
Bitcoin. The magistrate held that
the appellant did use the money to acquire a
quantity of Bitcoin on behalf of the respondent, however a dispute arose as to a
of the Bitcoin, together with other crypto currency derived from the
Bitcoin, which the appellant retained as a claimed fee for his
The action pleaded a number of causes of action but only the claims in detinue
and conversion were successful. The magistrate accepted
that the appellant was
entitled to a fee, however his Honour held that he was not entitled to claim a
portion of the Bitcoin he had
acquired for the respondent in order to satisfy
that entitlement. The magistrate found that all of the cryptocurrency should
been returned to the respondent upon demand. He awarded damages (including
exemplary damages and interest), limited to the monetary
Magistrates Court, namely $50,000. Before interest and allowing a sum of $1,500
for the appellant's fee, the
damages were $46,000.
The appellant appealed against the magistrate's decision pursuant to
Magistrates Court (Civil Division) Act
. The nature of such an
appeal is as a rehearing conducted on the evidence before the magistrate (see
Barnett v Tasmania Water and Sewage Corporation Pty Ltd
[2018] TASFC
The appeal was heard by Brett J (
Poulton v Conrad
[2025] TASSC 2).
There were five grounds of appeal but only one was pursued before the learned
primary judge, namely that the magistrate erred, "by
finding at [94] of his
reasons that the torts of detinue and conversion had been established on all the
The learned primary judge noted at [6] that the finding of the magistrate that
Bitcoin amounted to property, for the purpose of
the causes of action in detinue
and conversion, was not challenged in the appeal. That was true, in the sense
that the arguments
made to his Honour did not raise the issue that because of
its digital nature Bitcoin is intangible and thus not amenable to claims
conversion and detinue, however, as can be seen above, the ground of appeal
itself could be taken as wide enough to embrace such
an argument.
The magistrate held that Bitcoin constituted property which could be the
subject of claims in conversion and detinue. In particular,
he concluded at
[83] that the relevant Bitcoin software "restricts control of a holding to the
person in possession of the relevant
private key or pin" and these holding
rights "are definable, identifiable by third parties, capable of assumption by
third parties
and sufficiently stable to satisfy the test" in
Provincial Bank v Ainsworth
[1965] UKHL 1
[1965] 1 AC 1175.
The appellant made three primary arguments to the learned primary judge in
support of the sole ground of appeal. They were, that
the respondent failed to
plead a demand on 5 March 2018, that the appellant's dealings with the
respondent were on behalf of the
appellant's company and not him personally and,
that if the appellant was entitled to retain 1.5 Bitcoin as his fee, then the
respondent's
claims in conversion and detinue must fail because the respondent
was not entitled to immediate possession of the property.
The learned primary judge rejected each of those arguments and
"I can detect no error in the magistrate's determination
of the claim in detinue and conversion. The sole ground of appeal has not
made out. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed."
The appeal to this Court as set out in the appellant's notice of appeal,
asserts that the learned primary judge:
"Erred in law or fact in
finding at [32] that the Defendant was in possession of the bitcoin at all
material times when bitcoin is
intangible property and cannot be possessed and
therefore erred in finding that the magistrate correctly found that the claims
detinue and conversion had been established."
As will be seen, paragraph [32] of the learned primary judge's reasons was in a
section of his reasons dealing with the appellant's
argument that the evidence
established that it was actually the appellant's company, not him personally,
that acquired and had possession
of the disputed crypto currency at all relevant
times, and in particular at the time that the respondent demanded its return.
Accordingly,
the argument was that as a matter of actual fact, the appellant did
not have possession of the Bitcoin when demands where made for
its return.
Paragraph [32] needs to be read in context and accordingly I set out his
Honour's reasons from [30]-[33]. They read as follows:
parties accept that the magistrate correctly recited the elements of both
detinue and conversion in his reasons for judgment.
It is also correct to
observe that in the circumstances of this case, it was necessary for the
respondent to establish that the appellant
was in actual possession of the
crypto currency when the demands for its return were made and refused by him.
This is a primary element
of the tort of detinue, and was conduct relied upon to
establish the inconsistent dealing necessary to establish the tort of
conversion.
It is clear the magistrate proceeded on the basis that the appellant
was in actual possession of the crypto currency at the relevant
is no doubt that the evidence established that the $10,000 was paid into an
account, which in actual fact was in the name of
the company. However, the
evidence also overwhelmingly established that it was the appellant personally
who not only dealt with the
respondent, but was also in actual control of the
Bitcoin. In this regard, the proprietary nature of a person's interest in Crypto
currency is important. The excludability of the asset and hence its value,
arises from personal control of the wallet and private
keys. As the magistrate
observed, the conduct and communications of the appellant conveyed that it was
he, personally, that exercised
this control. He did not claim throughout the
course of the relevant dealings that he was only doing so on behalf of the
The mere fact that money went into and came out of an account in the
name of the company does not change this reality. Further and
in any event, the
appellant confirmed in evidence that he was the alter ego of the company. There
is no suggestion that anyone else
was involved. The fact was confirmed by the
appellant in his re-examination when he was asked by his counsel to explain his
understanding
of legal personalities. He replied:
"I presume because
I was the sole shareholder of Get Paid in Bitcoin that .... me and Get Paid in
Bitcoin is the same entity."
nature of Bitcoin and the defendant's control over it makes it clear in my view
that he was in possession of the relevant property
at all material times
It is trite law that a person is in possession of property if that person has
actual control of the property and an intention to
possess it. See
Essay on Possession in the Common Law
, Clarendon Press
Oxford 1888. In this case, I am satisfied that the appellant's relationship to
the crypto currency in dispute satisfied
33 Accordingly, I reject this argument." (Italics
The appellant's notice of appeal might be said to be confined to the learned
primary judge's determination of that one argument
relying on the corporate
veil. There is however, something of a problem with that because as already
noted, his Honour observed at
[6] of his reasons that the finding of the
magistrate that Bitcoin amounted to property, for the purpose of the causes of
in detinue and conversion, was not challenged on the appeal,
notwithstanding that he also found at [38], that he could detect no
error in the
magistrate's determination of the claim in detinue and conversion and that
the sole ground of appeal
had not been made
out. In my view, given those findings, that sole ground of appeal could be taken
as wide enough to embrace the
appellant's present legal argument before this
I can see however, that, notwithstanding the breadth of the notice of appeal,
in view of the limited submissions before the learned
primary judge, it might be
argued that the appellant should be precluded from advancing the ground of
appeal on which he now relies.
Supreme Court Civil
Procedure Act
provides, relevantly:
47 Powers of Full
Court on hearing of appeals
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a Full Court, on the hearing of
every appeal, shall have and may exercise all the jurisdiction,
powers, and
duties of the Court, whether as to amendment or otherwise, and shall have power
to draw inferences of fact not inconsistent
with the findings of the jury, if
any, and to affirm, reverse, or vary, as to all or some or any one of the
parties, any judgment,
order, or determination appealed from, and to give any
judgment or make any order or determination which ought to have been given
made, and to grant a new trial in any cause or matter in which there has been a
trial (whether with or without a jury), and to
make such further or other order
as the case may require.
(2) On the hearing of every appeal from a judgment given, or an order or
other determination made, by a judge sitting without a jury,
a Full Court shall
have full power to review the judgment, order, or determination appealed from on
questions of fact as well as
(3) On the hearing of any appeal a Full Court, if it is satisfied that
will thereby be done,
may allow any party to raise any point of
law which was not raised at the trial
, and may determine the appeal on any
such point." (Italics added.)
The respondent argues that there is significant injustice and prejudice to him
in this ground of appeal now being raised for the
first time. In particular, the
respondent submits that he has been "denied the opportunity to conduct the
magistrate’s hearing
and the appeal before Brett J around the issue of
whether Bitcoin is capable of being possessed and what that means for the
[r]espondent’s
I do not accept the respondent's submission.
In my view the question of whether Bitcoin is property for the purposes of the
law of conversion and detinue is purely one of law.
I cannot conceive of any
further evidence or cross-examination at trial that could have affected that
question. There is no injustice
to the respondent that cannot be remedied by
orders for costs. In the end result, given the view I have reached about the
legal question
there is no injustice to the respondent at all. Appropriate
orders for costs will follow the event. The respondent’s submission
had the appellant squarely raised the present legal question before the primary
judge, the respondent might have cross-appealed
against the magistrate’s
puzzling finding that the respondent’s claim in contract failed for want
of consideration, does
not reveal prejudice. That could only have been a
forensic decision based on the respondent’s assessment of the
appellant’s
prospects of success on the appeal as pursued by
Can Bitcoin be possessed
So understood, and confined to the facts of this case, the question arising on
this appeal is whether Bitcoin can be possessed for
the purposes of the torts of
conversion and detinue, and in particular, possessed by someone
The following description of Bitcoin was set out by the magistrate at [5]-[8]
of his comprehensive, yet regrettably unpublished,
Jeff Conrad v
Adam Poulton
[2023] TASMC:
What is Bitcoin?
is a cryptocurrency which first became available on financial markets in 2009.
It is a virtual currency which is designed
to act as money and a form of payment
which is outside the control of any one person, group or entity such as banks or
governments.
There is therefore no third-party involvement in financial
transactions. It is created, distributed, traded and stored using a
decentralised
ledger system known as a blockchain which is a shared database. It
can be purchased on various cryptocurrency exchanges and can be
used as payment
for goods or services. One Bitcoin is divisible into a number of decimal
within the blockchain is secured by using encryption methods. When a transaction
takes place on the blockchain, information from
the previous block is copied to
a new block with the new data, encrypted, and the transaction is verified by
validators who are called
miners. When a transaction is verified a new block is
opened and a Bitcoin is created and given as reward to the miner who verified
the data within the block.
use Bitcoin you need to have a crypto currency wallet. Wallets hold the private
keys, akin to a PIN, to the Bitcoin a person owns
which needs to be entered when
a transaction is being conducted. Wallets that are connected to the internet are
referred to as hot
wallets whereas wallets which are kept off-line are termed
cold wallets. Usually cold wallets come in the form of hardware like a
or it might be in the form of a paper wallet which is a piece of paper with the
person's printed private keys and a public
wallet address.
price of Bitcoin can be highly volatile and can fluctuate in response to world
events which may include political, macroeconomic
or regulatory changes, e.g. a
central bank's decision to raise or lower interest rates or declarations by
governments on how they
will treat Bitcoin for tax purposes. Market sentiment
can also result in the price to fluctuate significantly."
Academics might argue that the definition above is somewhat simplistic, however
in my view it is sufficient for present purposes
(see Robert Stevens, "
is not property
(2023) 139 L.Q.R. 615
and Hin Liu, "
Crypto as property:
a response to Professor Stevens
(2025) 141 L.Q.R 392).
In my view, it is obvious that when a person or entity creates an entitlement
to Bitcoin and it is distributed and stored or traded,
the person or entity who
has the key to access the wallet is in
of the Bitcoin and can be
properly, in law, be called its owner. To say that says nothing about whether
the Bitcoin is a chose in
action or a chose in possession, or some other as yet
innominate digital asset. In the present case there is no issue as to the fact
that the legal entity that was the owner of the Bitcoin was the appellant's
company Get Paid in Bitcoin Pty Ltd, the identity of
which the respondent was
questions for this Court are whether that control equates to possession, whether
that possession is of property amenable to the
causes of action of conversion
and detinue, and if so whether property can be possessed by anyone other than
the company itself.
The evidence before the magistrate was that insofar as Bitcoin is concerned,
there is a relationship between Bitcoin, which is the
digital representation of
value made up of three interconnected pieces of information, namely the Bitcoin
address, the Bitcoin holding
or balance in that address and the public and
private key associated with the address, and the right ascribed to a person with
to the Bitcoin under the Bitcoin software and by the community of Bitcoin
users, namely the capacity to trade a Bitcoin for other
value or use it for
Further, as noted by the magistrate at [83] of his Honour's reasons, Bitcoin
rights involve "an inherent excludability" because
the Bitcoin software
restricts control of a holding to the person in possession of the relevant
private key, Bitcoin software prescribes
how the transfer and trade of Bitcoin
can occur, and transactions are verified through the Bitcoin mining
There are a number of authorities in the United Kingdom, New Zealand and
Australia which are set out in the magistrate's decision,
which have decided
that Bitcoin is property for various statutory purposes and for the purposes of
proprietary injunctive relief,
but none of them have decided that Bitcoin is
property for the purposes of the torts of conversion and detinue.
The closest of them is
Henderson v Walker
[2019] NZHC 2184
where Thomas
J was ready to extend the tort of conversion to purely personal digital
information, including the content of private
emails. In that case, having
reviewed two English cases to which I will shortly refer, his Honour
"[269] There may also be a distinction between digital assets
and choses in action, as was argued before the Court of Appeal of England
Your Response Ltd v Datateam Business Media Ltd
unnecessary to consider the matter in detail, but suffice to say the issues of
overlap between conversion and the economic
torts that plagued the House of
OGB Ltd v Allan
do not cause any concern in the present context.
In other words, it does not necessarily follow from extending the tort of
beyond the traditional divide of tangible property that choses in
action such as contractual rights ought to be covered by the tort
[270] Standing back, it seems obvious that digital assets should be afforded
the protection of property law. They have all the characteristics
of property
and the conceptual difficulties appear to arise predominantly from the
historical origins of our law of tangible property.
There is a real difference
between digital assets and the information they record. Such permanent records
of information are already
convertible when they take a physical form and it
would be arbitrary to base the law on the form of the medium, especially now
digital media has assumed a ubiquitous role in modern life."
However, while his Honour accepted that there may be circumstances in which a
person can be liable for converting digital assets,
none of those circumstances
apply to the defendant's conduct in the case and the plaintiff had therefore
failed to make out the cause
It is difficult to say that the relationship between the Bitcoin software and
the right of a person with access to the key is a
chose in action and it is
equally difficult to say that, leaving aside cold wallets, that the relationship
is a chose in possession.
The parties do not quarrel with the magistrate's adumbration of the elements of
the two torts. His Honour said at [86]-[87] of his
establish a claim in detinue the claimant must prove the following:
the claimant
must make a specific demand for the return of the goods on the person who has
legal possession of them and the claimant's
immediate right to possession must
simultaneously subsist at the time the demand is made;
the claimant's
demand must have been refused by the defendant; and
where the goods
are in the actual possession of the defendant the refusal to return the goods to
the claimant must be unreasonable.
87 To establish a claim in
conversion the claimant must prove the following:
the claimant
must establish a right to the immediate possession of the goods; and
the defendant
has dealt with the goods in a manner which is inconsistent with the rights of
the claimant coupled with an intention
of denying the claimant's rights or
asserting a right that is inconsistent with them."
Yanner v Eaton
[1999] HCA 53
201 CLR 351
plurality of the High Court said:
"16 What, then, is the meaning to
be given to s 7(1) and its provision that some fauna is the property of the
Crown and under the
control of the Fauna Authority? Did it, as the respondent
submitted, give rights to the Crown in respect of fauna that were inconsistent
with the rights and interests upon which the appellant relied?
word 'property' is often used to refer to something that belongs to another.
But in the Fauna Act, as elsewhere in the law, 'property'
does not refer to a
thing; it is a description of a legal relationship with a thing. It refers to a
degree of power that is recognised
in law as power permissibly exercised over
the thing. The concept of 'property' may be elusive. Usually it is treated as
of rights'. But even this may have its limits as an analytical tool
or accurate description, and it may be, as Professor Gray has
said , that 'the
ultimate fact about property is that it does not really exist: it is mere
illusion'. Considering whether, or to
what extent, there can be property in
knowledge or information or property in human tissue may illustrate some of the
difficulties
in deciding what is meant by 'property' in a subject matter . So
too, identifying the apparent circularity of reasoning from the
availability of
specific performance in protection of property rights in a chattel to the
conclusion that the rights protected are
proprietary may illustrate some of the
limits to the use of 'property' as an analytical tool . No doubt the examples
could be multiplied.
Nevertheless,
as Professor Gray also says , '
An extensive frame of reference is created by
the notion that 'property' consists primarily in control over access. Much of
thinking about property stems from the residual perception that
'property' is itself a thing or resource rather than a legally endorsed
concentration of power over things and resources
is a term that can be, and is, applied to many different kinds of relationship
with a subject matter. It is not 'a monolithic
notion of standard content and
invariable intensity
'. That is why, in the context of a testator's will,
'property' has been said to be 'the most comprehensive of all the terms which
can be used, inasmuch as it is indicative and descriptive of every possible
interest which the party can have'.
'property" is a comprehensive term it can be used to describe all or any of very
many different kinds of relationship between
a person and a subject matter
To say that person A has property in item B invites the question what is the
interest that A has in B? The statement that A has
property in B will usually
provoke further questions of classification. Is the interest real or personal?
Is the item tangible
or intangible? Is the interest legal or equitable? For
present purposes, however, the important question is what interest in fauna
vested in the Crown when the Fauna Act provided that some fauna was 'the
property of the Crown and under the control of the Fauna
Authority'?" (Italics
For present purposes the "important question" is whether the relationship
between the appellant's company and the Bitcoin software,
signified by the
company's control over the relevant digital key, was control that could be
exercised by the appellant, and whether,
as a result the appellant was in
possession of property which was amenable to the torts of conversion and
In my view it was, and he was. He was, on the evidence, the only human agency
able to interact with the Bitcoin software and thus
in my view he possessed the
property that it represented as at the date of the respondent's demand. His
company's ownership of the
Bitcoin at that time is not to the point.
I am reinforced in my view by, not only by the fact that Thomas J reached the
same conclusion in
Henderson v Walker
(above) but also by the result
reached by Bryan J in
AA v Persons Unknown and Ors
[2019] EWHC 3556
Honour, at [56]-[61], relying on the authority of the UK Jurisdictional Task
Force which, under the chairmanship of Sir Geoffrey
Vos, the Master of the
Rolls, had published a Legal Statement on Crypto assets and Smart contracts.
Bryan J said as follows:
"56 Turning then to the relevant principles
in relation to the granting of a proprietary injunction, the first and perhaps
fundamental
question that arises in relation to this claim for a proprietary
injunction is whether or not in fact the Bitcoins, which are being
held in this
account of the second defendant with the third or fourth defendants are property
at all. Prima facie there is a difficulty
in treating Bitcoins and other crypto
currencies as a form of property: they are neither chose in possession nor are
they chose in
They are not choses in possession because they are
virtual, they are not tangible, they cannot be possessed. They are not choses in
action because they do not embody any right capable of being enforced by action.
That produces a difficulty because English law traditionally
views property as
being of only two kinds, choses in possession and choses in action
Colonial Bank v Whinney
[1886] UKLawRpAC 34
[1885] 30 Ch D 261
[at 285] Fry LJ said:
'All personal things are either in possession or action. The law knows no
tertium quid between the two.'
that analysis Bitcoins and other crypto currencies could not be classified as a
form of property, which would prevent them being
the subject of a proprietary
injunction or a freezing injunction. This exact issue has recently in November
2019 been the subject
of detailed consideration by the UK Jurisdictional Task
Force ('UKJT') which has published a legal statement on Crypto assets and
contracts, ('the Legal Statement'). The UKJT is chaired by Sir Geoffrey Vos, and
Sir Antony Zacaroli is also a member. However,
neither in their judicial
capacity was responsible for the drafting of the legal statement, nor have
either in their judicial capacities
endorsed that legal statement. Indeed Sir
Geoffrey Voss explained in the foreword to the Legal Statement: 'It is not my
judge nor that of the UKJT or its parent, the UK Lawtech Delivery
Panel, to endorse the contents of the Legal Statement'. Those responsible
drafting the Legal Statement were Laurence Akka QC, David Quest QC, Matthew Lavy
and Sam Goodman.
It follows that the legal statement is not in
fact a statement of the law. Nevertheless, in my judgment, it is relevant to
the analysis in that Legal Statement as to the proprietary status of
crypto currencies because it is a detailed and careful consideration
shall come on to, I consider that that analysis as to the proprietary status of
crypto currencies is compelling and for
the reasons identified therein should be
adopted by this court
difficulty identified in treating crypto currencies in property, as I say,
starts from the premise that the English law of property
recognises no forms of
property other than choses in possession and choses in action. As I have already
identified, crypto currencies
do not sit neatly within either category. However,
on a more detailed analysis I consider that it is fallacious to proceed on the
basis that the English law of property recognises no forms of property other
than choses in possession and choses in action. The
reasons for this are set out
between paragraphs 71 to 84 in the Legal Statement:
Colonial Bank
case concerned a dispute about shares deposited as security
for a loan. The borrower was declared bankrupt and there was a contest
shares between the plaintiff bank and the trustee in bankruptcy. The case was
not about the scope of property generally:
there was no dispute that the shares
were property. The relevant question was rather whether they were things in
action within the
meaning of the
Bankruptcy Act
1883, an issue of
statutory interpretation. If so, then they were excluded from the bankrupt
estate by section 44 of that Act.
LJ and Cotton LJ held that the shares were not things in action. They relied
principally on previous case law where the court
had come to a similar
conclusion in relation to the predecessor statute, the
Bankruptcy Act
1869. They also drew some support from sections 50(3) and 50(5) of the 1883 Act,
which appeared to make a distinction between shares
and things in action.
LJ reached the opposite conclusion, reasoning principally from what he
considered to be the essential nature of a share. A share
constituted 'the right
to receive certain benefits from a corporation, and to do certain acts as a
member of that corporation' and
was therefore, in his view, closely akin to a
debt. He supported his conclusion by a comparison of shares to other,
established,
things in action, such as partnership interests and interests in
LJ's statement that "personal things" are either in possession or in action, and
that there is no third category, may carry the
logical implication that an
intangible thing is not property if it is not a thing in action. It is not
clear, however, whether Fry
LJ intended that corollary and it should not in any
case be regarded as part of the reasoning leading to his decision (and so
in other cases). The question before him was whether the shares were
things in action for the purpose of the Bankruptcy Act, not
whether they were
property, still less the scope of property generally.
in making the statement Fry LJ attributed a very broad meaning to things in
action. He approved a passage from
Personal Property
by Joshua Williams,
which described things in action as a kind of residual category of property: "In
modern times [sc. by the 19th
century] ... several species of property have
sprung up which were unknown to the common law ... For want of a better
classification,
these subjects of personal property are now usually spoken of as
... [things] in action. They are, in fact, personal property of
an incorporeal
nature...".
appeal, the House of Lords also framed the question as one about statutory
interpretation. They reversed the Court of Appeal's
decision, approving the
judgment and reasoning of Fry LJ. They did not explicitly address the issue of
exhaustive classification
between things in action and things in possession and
said nothing about the definition of property. Lord Blackburn did say, however,
that "in modern times lawyers have accurately or inaccurately used the phrase
'[things] in action' as including all personal chattels
that are not in
possession". Thus, to the extent that the House of Lords agreed with Fry LJ on
the classification issue, that seems
to have been on the basis that the class of
things in action could be extended to all intangible property (i.e. it was a
class of all things not in possession) rather than on the basis that
the class of intangible property should be restricted to rights
that could be
claimed or enforced by action.
view is that
Colonial Bank
is not therefore to be treated as limiting the
scope of what kinds of things can be property in law. If anything, it shows the
of the common law to stretch traditional definitions and concepts to
adapt to new business practices (in that case the development
of shares in
companies).
was referred to in
Allgemeine Versicherungs-Gesellschaft Helvetia v
Administrator of German Property
by Slesser LJ as showing "how the two
conditions of [thing] in action and [thing] in possession are antithetical and
how there is
no middle term". Again, however, the case was not about the scope
of property generally but about whether something that was undoubtedly
should be classified as a thing in possession or a thing in action.
Colonial Bank
was cited in 2014 in
Your Response v
. In that case, the claimant sought to assert a lien over a database
in digital form but faced the obstacle of the previous decision
of the House of
OBG Ltd v Allan
that there could be no claim in conversion for
wrongful interference with a thing in action because it could not be possessed.
an attempt to distinguish the case from
, the claimant argued that,
even if the database could not be regarded as a physical object, it was a form
of intangible property
different from a thing in action and so was capable of
being possessed.
Court of Appeal rejected the argument. Moore-Bick LJ said that
Colonial Bank
made it "very difficult to accept that the common law recognises the
existence of intangible property other than [things] in action
(apart from
patents, which are subject to statutory classification), but even if it does,
the decision in
OBG Ltd v Allan
[2007] UKHL 21
[2008] AC 1
prevents us from holding that
property of that kind is susceptible of possession so that wrongful interference
can constitute the
tort of conversion."
He said that
there was "a powerful case for reconsidering
the dichotomy between [things] in possession and [things] in action and
recognising a
third category of intangible property, which may also be
susceptible of possession and therefore amenable to the tort of conversion"
the Court of Appeal could not do that because it was bound to follow the
decision in OBG.
The other members of the court agreed.
Court of Appeal did not, and did not need to, go so far as to hold that
intangible things other than things in action could never
be property at all,
only that they could not be the subject of certain remedies. The intangible
thing with which they were concerned
was a database, which (as Floyd LJ said)
would not be regarded as property anyway because it was pure information. They
did not have
to consider intangible assets with the special characteristics
possessed by cryptoassets.
other cases, the courts have found no difficulty in treating novel kinds of
intangible assets as property. Although some of those
cases are concerned with
the meaning of property in particular statutory contexts, there are at least two
concerning property in
general. In
Dairy Swift v Dairywise Farms Ltd
court held that a milk quota could be the subject of a trust; and in
Armstrong v Winnington
, the court held that an EU carbon emissions
allowance could be the subject of a tracing claim as a form of 'other intangible
even though it was neither a thing in possession nor a thing in
number of important 20th century statutes define property in terms that assume
that intangible property is not limited to things
in action. The
Proceeds of Crime Act
2006 all define property as including things in action 'and other intangible
property'. It might be said that those statutes are
extending the definition of
property for their own, special purposes, but they at least demonstrate that
there is no conceptual difficulty
in treating intangible things as property even
if they may not be things in action. Moreover, the
Patents Act
further in providing, at s30, that a patent or application for a patent 'is
personal property (without being a thing in
action)'. That necessarily
recognises that personal property can include things other than things in
possession (which a patent clearly
is not) and things in action.
conclude that the fact that a cryptoasset might not be a thing in action on the
narrower definition of that term does not in itself
mean that it cannot be
treated as property."
conclusion that was expressed was that a crypto asset might not be a thing in
action on a narrow definition of that term, but
that does not mean that it
cannot be treated as property. Essentially, and for the reasons identified in
that legal statement, I
consider that a crypto asset such as Bitcoin are
property. They meet the four criteria set out in Lord Wilberforce's classic
of property in National Provincial Bank v Ainsworth
[1965] UKHL 1
[1965] 1 AC 1175
as being definable, identifiable by third parties, capable in their nature of
assumption by third parties, and having some degree
of permanence.
was the conclusion of the Singapore International Commercial Court in
Limited v Quoine PTC Limited
[2019] SGHC (I) 03 [142].
are also two English authorities to which my attention has been drawn where
crypto currencies have been treated as property,
albeit that those authorities
do not consider the issue in depth. They are, and I have already mentioned them,
Vorotyntseva v Money -4 Limited t/a as Nebeus .com
, the decision of
Birss J, where he granted a worldwide freezing order in respect of a substantial
quantity of Bitcoin and Ethereum,
another virtual currency, and the case of
Liam David Robertson
, where Moulder J granted an asset preservation order
over crypto currencies in that case.
those circumstances and for the reasons I have given, as elaborated upon in the
Legal Statement which I gratefully adopt as what
I consider to be an accurate
statement as to the position under English law, I am satisfied for the purpose
of granting an interim
injunction in the form of an interim proprietary
injunction that crypto currencies are a form of property capable of being the
of a proprietary injunction." (Italics added.)
In my view, this Court should not, in the light of the comments of Moore Bick
Your Response Ltd v Datateam Business Media Ltd
[2014] EWCA Civ 281
(2015) 1 QB 41
out above, simply follow the decision of the House of Lords in
[2007] UKHL 21
[2008] AC 1.
The decision in that case that there could be no claim in
conversion for wrongful interference with a chose in action because it
be possessed, is foreign to contemporary common sense and the reality of the
digital world. Ritual incantations such as
those of Fry LJ in
Colonial Bank v
[1886] UKLawRpAC 34
30 Ch D 261
[285], that "all personal things are
either in possession or action" and "[t]he law knows no
tertium quid
between the two", no longer reflect today's commerce and intercourse.
Re Blockchain Tech Pty Ltd
[2024] VSC 690
, Attiwill J was dealing
with the question of whether an interest in Bitcoin may be subject of a
bailment. His Honour went some way
in meeting the view expressed by Moore Bick
LJ in holding that an interest in Bitcoin is property, but his Honour found that
property is intangible, is not held in possession and cannot be the subject
of a bailment. He said at [383]-[389]:
"383 For the following
reasons, I find that a person's interest in Bitcoin is property.
it is necessary to identify 'the thing'. The thing is Bitcoin. It is an
electronic coin. It is data in the form of a unique
digital address on a network
of computers (also referred to as a shared public ledger). A public
cryptographic key is generated that
identifies the unique digital address on the
shared public ledger. As observed by Gendell J in
: 'the data
allocated to one public key will not be confused with
The identity of the
holder of the public key is not public. Lord Justice Birss said in
'[t]he blockchain does not reveal the relationship between the digital addresses
and any person'.
As a result, an
interest in Bitcoin is identifiable but not the identity of the person who has
the interest. A person must use a
'wallet', in the case of Bitcoin, a Bitcoin
wallet, to obtain and access a public cryptographic key on the network.
an interest in Bitcoin is also identifiable by third parties. I have already
said that the public key identifies an address
of Bitcoin at that address on the
shared public ledger. A person has the power to control and deal with the
Bitcoin and to exclude
third parties from accessing or dealing with it. This is
because a private cryptographic key is also generated. Both the public and
private keys are required to deal with the Bitcoin. As observed by Gendall J in
A varied public key and a new private
key for the cryptocurrency are generated after each transfer of cryptocurrency.
The private
key, in effect, is like a PIN. Anyone who learns of the private key
attached to a public key can transfer the public key but the
private key, having
been used once in respect of the public key, cannot be used again.
These features of cryptocurrencies inhibit two potential
practices. First, the existence of the private key inhibits the possibility
involuntary transfers – it gives the power to exclude third parties from
access. And secondly, the creation of a new private
key after each transfer or
disposition inhibits a holder from purporting to transfer the cryptocurrency
data twice.
a person's interest in Bitcoin has a degree of permanence or stability. Bitcoin
are recorded on the shared public ledger. As
observed by Gendall J in
, this contains the 'entire life history of a
cryptocoin'.
Bitcoin are held at a
certain digital address. Bitcoin remain stable at the address until there is a
transaction concerning those
Bitcoin. A transaction must involve the use of the
public key and the private key. Upon a transaction concerning Bitcoin, the
of Bitcoin at the owner's address is reduced and the number of Bitcoin at
the next owner's address is increased. This process involves
the owner of the
Bitcoin (the transferor) using their private key to digitally sign a hash which
records the details of the transaction.
This hash comprises a digital message
which records the previous transactions by which the transferor initially
received the Bitcoin
as well as the public key of the new owner to whom the
Bitcoin are to be allocated (the transferee). Upon verification by the Bitcoin
network, this transaction record is added to the blockchain. The parties in this
case referred to such a transaction as a 'transfer'.
For convenience, I will
refer to such a transaction as a '
Bitcoin transfer transaction
will refer to the Bitcoin transfer transaction taking place as a Bitcoin being
'transferred'. This does not involve the actual
transfer of the person's
interest in Bitcoin, but it is a convenient reference. Gendall J describes this
process as involving one
asset being replaced with another
although a Bitcoin transfer transaction does not involve the 'transfer' of a
person's interest in the Bitcoin, this does not
mean that an interest in Bitcoin
is not property. This is because alienability is not an indispensable attribute
of property. Bitcoin
are also the subject of very active trading markets,
including cryptocurrency exchanges, throughout the world, including in
a person's interest in Bitcoin may be readily distinguished from a mere interest
in information, including electronic data.
This is because an interest in
Bitcoin includes the power:
(a) to undertake transactions on a network by the use of a public key and a
private key; and
(b) to exclude third parties from accessing or dealing with the Bitcoin.
a result, I find that a person's interest in Bitcoin is property. It is not a
chose in possession as it is intangible. It cannot
be possessed. It is a chose
in action. As I have already said, it is well established in Australia that a
chose in action comprises
a heterogeneous group of rights which have only one
common characteristic in that they do not confer the present possession of a
tangible object. That is the case with Bitcoin."
With respect, I agree entirely with the analysis by Attiwill J, but I regret I
do not agree with his Honour's conclusion, which,
in my respectful view, does
not go far enough to meet the exigencies of the digital age and should not be
followed as to the way
in which Bitcoin should be characterised.
As Moore-Bick LJ said in
Your Response Ltd
(above), there is a powerful
case for reconsidering the dichotomy between choses in possession and choses in
action, and for recognising
a third category of intangible property. Such a
category in my view, would comprise property that is capable of assumption by
parties, that is rivalrous, that is capable of exclusive control, and that
is susceptible of possession. As such it should be amenable
to at least, the
torts involved in the present case, namely, conversion and detinue. Bitcoin
falls into such a category, and it should,
in my view, be so regarded by this
For competing academic views as to so regarding Bitcoin, see the discussions by
Robert Stevens,
Crypto is not
" (above) and Hin Liu, "
Crypto as property: a response to
Professor Stevens
As to any precedential obstacle to the view I take, there is no decision that
legally binds this court on the question of whether
Bitcoin is amenable to the
torts of conversion and detinue.
As to the decision in
(above), this Court, while treating
decisions of the English House of Lords (as it was known), as highly persuasive,
is not bound
to follow those decisions. In
Parker v The Queen
111 CLR 610
Dixon CJ said at p 630:
Stapleton v. The
[1952] HCA 56
(1952) 86 CLR 358
we said: "The introduction of the
maxim or statement that a man is presumed to intend the reasonable consequences
of his act is seldom
That was some years before the decision in
Director of Public Prosecutions v.
(1961) AC 290
, which seems only too unfortunately to confirm the
observation. I say too unfortunately for I think it forces a critical situation
in our (Dominion) relation to the judicial authority as precedents of decisions
in England. Hitherto I have thought that we ought
to follow decisions of the
House of Lords, at the expense of our own opinions and cases decided here, but
having carefully studied
Smith's Case
(1961) AC 290
I think that we
cannot adhere to that view or policy. There are propositions laid down in the
judgment which I believe to be misconceived
and wrong. They are fundamental and
they are propositions which I could never bring myself to accept. I shall not
discuss the case."
I conclude that the learned primary judge did not err in his determination that
"the nature of Bitcoin and the defendant's control
over it makes it clear in my
view that [the appellant] was in possession of the relevant property at all
material times".
I would dismiss the appeal.
File No 896/2025
ADAM POULTON v JEFF CONRAD
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
19 September 2025
I agree, for the reasons given by Shanahan CJ, that the appellant should be
prohibited from agitating the appeal on the basis that
Bitcoin is intangible
property and cannot be possessed, given the diametrically opposed position that
was taken before Brett J.
Should, however, there arise an occasion to consider the substance of the
appeal on an alternate basis, I agree with the reasons
given by Estcourt J and
would concur with his conclusion that:
"... there is a powerful case
for reconsidering the dichotomy between choses in possession and choses in
action, and for recognising
a third category of intangible property. Such a
category in my view, would comprise property that is capable of assumption by
parties, that is rivalrous, that is capable of exclusive control, and that
is susceptible of possession. As such it should be amenable
to at least, the
torts involved in the present case, namely, conversion and detinue. Bitcoin
falls into such a category, and it should,
in my view, be so regarded by this
I would dismiss the appeal.
Tulip Trading
809 [112]–[113].
Ibid [116].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (445 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter