URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFC/2025/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:14:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Fitch v George Town Seafoods Pty Ltd [2025] TASFC 3 (28 March 2025)
[2025] TASFC 3
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (FULL
Fitch v George Town Seafoods Pty Ltd
[2025] TASFC 3
: FITCH, Ian James
GEORGE TOWN
SEAFOODS PTY LTD
323/2024, 2640/2023
28 March 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
August 2024
JUDGMENT OF:
Wood and Estcourt JJ, Martin
Appeal and New Trial – Procedure – Tasmania – Other matters
– Appeal against a judge's decision dismissing
application to extend time
to appeal and two interlocutory applications concerning Tasmanian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal's
dismissal of worker's compensation claim –
Appeal against another judge's decision dismissing application to extend time to
bring application for judicial review of the same Tribunal decision and refusal
of judge to recuse himself – Appeals dismissed.
Aust Dig Appeal and New Trial [399.3]
Supreme Court Rules
(Tas), rr 495(5), 692(1), 692(3)
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Judgment Number:
[2025] TASFC 3
paragraphs:
Serial No 3/2025
File No FCA 323/2024 & 2640/2023
IAN JAMES FITCH v GEORGE TOWN SEAFOODS PTY LTD
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
of the Court:
Interlocutory
application dated 15 May 2024 on 323/2024 and interlocutory application filed 27
May 2024 on 2640/2023 dismissed.
Serial No 3/2025
File No FCA 323/2024 & 2640/2023
IAN JAMES FITCH v GEORGE TOWN SEAFOODS PTY LTD
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
28 March 2025
Court is concerned with two appeals by the appellant, both of which are devoid
of merit. In respect of both appeals the appellant
has sought to rely on lengthy
affidavits and other material containing voluminous irrelevant and scandalous
assertions demonstrating
clearly that the appeals in both proceedings were
devoid of merit and an abuse of the Court's processes.
appeals were heard on Monday, 26 August 2024. The appellant appeared by
video-link from Launceston. At the outset of the hearing,
the appellant
indicated he was present only for the purpose of appearing and did not wish to
make submissions or answer questions.
The appellant persisted in asking
questions of the Court as to the appeal books and material available to the
Court, questions which
reached the point of amounting to an insult to the Court.
Ultimately the appellant was advised that he would be provided with a copy
all the material made available to the Court.
the conclusion of submissions by counsel for the respondent, the appellant
answered a number of questions aimed at eliciting from
the appellant any
submissions he wished to make concerning the merits of his appeals. In the
course of answering those questions,
the appellant indicated that his case with
respect to the appeals was set out in an email sent to the Court on Sunday, 25
2024. The email was addressed to the "Lowest of the Low", and commenced
with the words "To the Nefarious and the Iniquitous". To
put it mildly, the
email was replete with repeated allegations of corruption within the Court,
corruption and criminal conduct by
counsel, corruption in the Tasmanian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal and corruption on the part of at least one Supreme
Court judge.
It is unnecessary to canvass the details. The allegations are wide
ranging and unsupported by any evidence. They are scandalous
presentation of them to the Court amounts to an abuse of process.
the hearing of the appeals the appellant sent emails to the Supreme Court for
our attention. These have been read to ensure
they do not contain any material
which might assist the appellant. They do not advance his case in any way.
However, they brought
to light two outstanding interlocutory applications which
should have been referred to this Court. We have considered these applications.
They both lack merit, do not bear on our determination of the appeals and are
dismissed. Our reasons for so concluding are set out
after our reasons for
dismissing the appeals.
appellant's appeals to this Court have their origins in the decision of the
Tasmanian Civil and Administrative Tribunal dismissing
a claim by the appellant
for compensation. That decision was made on 8 November 2021.
months later the appellant sought to appeal against the Tribunal's decision.
The appeal came before Brett J on 6 February 2024.
His Honour was of the view
that not only should an extension of time within which to appeal be refused, but
there was no merit in
the appeal.
appellant did not appear before Brett J on 6 February 2024, but his Honour did
not rely upon the non-appearance of the appellant
when dismissing the appeal.
First, his Honour noted that there had been no attempt to identify an error in
the reasons of the Tribunal.
Plainly, his Honour was referring to the question
of an error of law which might have founded a basis for an appeal.
his Honour referred to the ground contained in the Notice of Appeal which
asserted that the proceeding before the Tribunal
was "unconstitutional",
together with a reference to a failure to afford a fair hearing. Brett J noted
that the material before
him did not identify an error by the Tribunal and,
referring to the word "unconstitutional" being used a lot in the written
filed by the appellant, stated that he had "no idea" of the meaning
attributed by the appellant to that word.
found that no relevant error had been identified in the reasons of the Tribunal,
while it was not necessary to do so, Brett
J addressed the merits of the
decision. His Honour found that the reasons of the Tribunal were "unimpeachable"
and were based upon
unchallenged evidence. Ultimately his Honour concluded that
"clearly" no error appeared in the reasons and the appeal had "no merit
substance".
J also had before him two interlocutory appeals in respect of which the
appellant has appealed to this Court against the decision
of Brett J to dismiss
those appeals. In addition, there were a further six interlocutory application
appeals which Brett J also dismissed.
There is no appeal to this Court against
the decision with respect to those six interlocutory applications.
he had the power to dismiss the appeals on the basis that the appellant had not
appeared at the hearing, Brett J indicated
he would dismiss those appeals on
that basis, irrespective of any question of merit. However, his Honour accepted
submissions for
the respondent with respect to those appeals and made the
following finding:
"It is clear to me that there is simply no merit
to any of the applications that are made and the Associate Judge was perfectly
to proceed as he did to dismiss those applications."
appellant's grounds of appeal, coupled with his affidavits and emails to which
we have referred, suggest that Brett J erred in
dealing with the merits of the
Tribunal's decision because the right of appeal was limited to establishing an
error of law. This
contention cannot be sustained in view of the reasons of
Brett J in which he spoke of the absence of error before dealing with the
of the decision.
3 of the notice of appeal appears to be addressed to the dismissal of the two
interlocutory appeals which ground 3 asserts
were "induced or affected by
Corruption", leading to a failure to apply appropriate procedures and a breach
of the rules of natural
justice. I would assume, however, that this complaint
also encompasses the appeal with respect to the Tribunal's decision.
simply, there is no evidence of corruption or a breach of the rules of natural
justice. In an affidavit, the appellant claims
that Brett J was misled by
counsel for the respondent who stated in written submissions that the appellant
had not filed a workers
compensation appeal book, nor two interlocutory
application appeal books. Counsel was in error. The mistake was explained
submissions to this Court.
any event, before the matter was heard by Brett J, two appeal books had been
filed by the appellant, and an additional appeal
book had been filed by the
respondent. Counsel's error was of no consequence. It was an error and not
evidence of corruption.
decisions of Brett J were plainly correct. The appeal against his Honour's
decisions is without merit and is dismissed.
addition to seeking to appeal against the decision of the Tribunal, on 25 August
2023 the appellant applied for a review of the
Tribunal's decision under the
Judicial Review Act
. He also sought an extension of time within
which to file the application for review. The decision of the Tribunal having
made on 8 November 2021, the application for review was not filed until 25
August 2023. The applications were listed to be heard
before Pearce J on 14
September 2023, but the applicant chose not to appear.
2022, Pearce J had delivered a decision in related matters, a decision with
which the appellant disagreed. In advance of the hearing
of the application
Judicial Review Act
the appellant sought that Pearce J
disqualify himself, a request which was declined by Pearce J. The appellant was
advised that Pearce
J would consider any application advanced by the appellant
at the hearing on 14 September 2023. The appellant advised that he would
attend the hearing.
reasonable basis for the recusal application is demonstrated in the papers. His
Honour was correct in declining to recuse himself
in advance of the
appellant, having chosen not to appear, Pearce J delivered brief ex tempore
"I have concluded that this is an appropriate case in which
I should exercise the power under the
Judicial Review Act
dismiss the application. Notice was given to Mr Fitch that he would be given the
opportunity to make submissions about whether
I should take such a course but he
has informed the court that he does not wish to avail himself of that
opportunity.
Judicial Review Act
applies only to a decisions of an
administrative character. Applications for an order to review of a decision may
be made on any one
or more of the grounds stated in
The ground upon
which Mr Fitch relies is the one stated in subparagraph (g), that the decision
was induced or affected by fraud.
The material provided to the court by the applicant leads me to conclude that
I should, of my own motion, order that the application
be dismissed at the
earliest appropriate opportunity. This is such an opportunity. It would be
inappropriate for the application
to extend time to be continued. The same
applies to the application for an order of review itself to the extent that Mr
Fitch's affidavit
constitutes such an application. Mr Fitch's affidavit is
lengthy but its content is irrelevant, irrational and scandalous. This court
should not entertain the material he wishes to rely on or allow proceedings to
persist which provide him with the means of ventilating
such material. There is
no reasonable basis for his application.
In my view it does not concern an administrative decision. The decision of
the Tribunal is not one to which the Act applies. Even
if I were to be wrong
tainted by fraud is not only frivolous
but is, when it is utterly without
foundation, an abuse of process.
Although this court may allow an amendment to specify a difference ground
there is no reason to consider, in this case, that any other
potential ground of
review stated in
has any prospect of success whatsoever.
The application to extend time and the application itself are both
dismissed."
is unnecessary to canvass the details of the appellant's attack upon the
decision of Pearce J, much of which amounts to no more
than scandalous
assertions without any basis in the evidence or the conduct of the proceedings.
Pearce J was correct in declining
to recuse himself and in dismissing the
applications.
This appeal is also devoid of merit and is
Reasons for dismissing interlocutory
applications
noted at [4] above, after the hearing of the appeals, the appellant sent a
number of emails to the Supreme Court for our attention
and these have been
considered. Amongst these emails was a copy of a Supreme Court record of court
proceedings before Acting Justice
Porter on 18 June 2024 with respect to an
application brought by the appellant for a subpoena to issue to the Office of
Complaints Commissioner, and also for one to issue to Dr R Doolabh of
I-Med Radiology.
record of the order made by his Honour is as follows:
application on matter number 323/2024 dated 15 May 2024 is to be filed and
brought to the attention of those Judges constituting
the Full Court."
It transpired that the interlocutory application dated 15 May 2024 was filed
but not brought to the Court's attention, as ordered.
the time that order came to light, this Court's judgment was pending and to be
delivered on 9 September 2024. As a consequence
of the Court becoming aware of
the order, the judgment was not delivered and instead, at the listing on 9
September, the Court thanked
the appellant for drawing attention to the order
and directions were made that the parties provide written submissions with
to the application dated 15 May 2024.
appellant was granted 14 days to file written submissions regarding the basis
for his interlocutory application and the reasons
why he says the order should
be made. The respondent was granted seven days to file written submissions in
response. It was noted
that if any other orders of a judge of this court had
been made requiring outstanding applications of the appellant to be heard by
this Court, they would be considered if brought to the Court's attention, and
the Court would allow the same timeframe to file written
submissions with
respect to any such application or applications.
Subsequently,
counsel for the respondent drew the Court's attention to an interlocutory order
made by Justice Brett on 18 June 2024
in relation to two applications on two
files: 3486/2023 and 2640/2023. The applications were for the provision of
reasons from Justice
Estcourt and Justice Pearce, respectively. The
interlocutory order made by Justice Brett was that: "leave is granted for the
applications
to be filed and referred to the Full Court in each matter
respectively and each be treated as an application for a statement of reasons."
In fact, both applications had been filed on 27 May 2024.
a decision of Justice Estcourt on 3486/2023 has been appealed. The order made
by Brett J was for the application with
respect to that decision to be listed
before the Full Court hearing the appeal from the corresponding decision. The
appeal is not
before us and indeed, we would not have permitted the appeal to be
listed before the Court, constituted as it is. There is no need
for this Court
to make an order referring the application to the Full Court hearing that appeal
as the Registrar is bound to give
effect to the interlocutory order of Justice
decision of Justice Pearce on 2640/2022 has been appealed and the appeal is
before us. In accordance with the order of Brett
J, the application for reasons
to be provided should be determined by us. It should be noted that there is an
administrative process
for the Full Court to be alerted to, and informed about,
a point or question referred to the Full Court hearing an appeal: r 692(3)
Supreme Court Rules
Unfortunately, that was not followed in this case.
Now that we are aware of the application, it shall be considered in connection
with the appeal from the decision of Pearce J.
return then to the interlocutory application dated 15 May 2024 for the issue of
subpoenas to be heard at the time of the hearing
of the appeal to the Full
Court, which is file 323/2024. The Court has a copy of the appellant's
interlocutory application on that
appeal file and an attached subpoena to
produce documents or things to the Office of the Health Complaints Commissioner
the production of:
"The full response I-Med Radiology
provided the OHCC that I-Med would not authorise the release of pertaining to a
Complaint as per
an email from Senior Investigation Officer Andrew Muthy dated
27 June 2022.
OHCC Reference #H2202-121"
second subpoena also attached is addressed to Dr R Doolabh of I-Med Radiology.
The Schedule of documents provides that Dr Doolabh
of a Report you done on the 06/09/2021 regarding a Bilateral Shoulder MRI Scan,
re the accompanying Receipt."
It is clear that the subpoenas are sought for the purpose of this appeal and
the application should be considered by this Court, in
accordance with the order
of Porter AJ.
relation to the application for subpoenas to issue, the appellant filed written
submissions by email after the listing on 9 September,
including submissions
made in an affidavit sworn 17 September 2024, and these have been
considered. In the affidavit, the appellant
makes the point that the subpoena
applications have been filed by him pursuant to r 495(5) of the
Supreme Court
, and therefore the determination should be made in Chambers and not in
Court. The interlocutory application is in terms of a "request
Subpoenas issued pursuant to r 495 of the
Supreme Court Rules
Presumably, the Registrar of the Court referred the request to a judge for
directions pursuant to r 495(5).
that was the case, a judge has power to refer the application to the Full Court
pursuant to r 692(1). The rule states that
a judge may refer an appeal, or any
point or question arising in an appeal, for determination by the Full Court.
Presumably, Porter
AJ referred the application to issue subpoenas as a point or
question arising in the appeal for determination by this Court. An
pursuant to r 692(1) can be made regardless of whether the application was made
to a judge to be heard in Chambers or in Court.
Again, unfortunately, the
process for the Full Court to be alerted to and informed about a point or
question referred to the Full
Court hearing an appeal pursuant to r 692(3),
was not followed in this case.
14 October 2024, the appellant sought to file by email a bundle of documents on
file 323/2024, which was declined by the Registrar.
It is described as: "A
simple Folder put together to ideally act as an Appeal to this Full Court to
have resolved amicably these
what can only be seen as illegal Proceedings
occurring in the Supreme Court for what can only be seen as Very Unacceptable
The appellant seems to be relying on the bundle as a type of "appeal
book" for these proceedings, "in an attempt to simplify Matters
regarding the
above Case# [323/2024]" rather than as submissions, although submissions are
included in the documents. While these
documents have not been accepted for
filing, and fall outside the timeframe allowed for written submissions, they
have been read
to ensure there is nothing that might advance the appellant's
case on the appeals before us such that the bundle of documents should
formally before this Court. There is not.
appellant's submissions that the subpoenas should be issued include the
proposition that the two subpoenas "would have realised
my Legitimacy but more
so the Allegations made against certain Personnel that are responsible for the
tampering of my Medical Information
that ultimately led to the Dismissal of the
Appeal at the Tribunal Level ...". The appellant's position is that the
subpoenas should
issue to enable him to establish his allegation of a radiology
report having been fabricated.
argument for the respondent is that:
"The Appellant failed to appear
at the hearing of the matter in the Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
Tribunal on 21 September
2021 or obtain the documents sought on subpoena at the
hearing. Pursuant to
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act
such evidence:
'... shall be admitted only by special leave of the Full Court, which
shall only be granted in cases in which –
(a) the evidence was not in the possession of the party seeking to have it
admitted, and could not by proper diligence have been obtained
by him, before
the termination of the trial; or
(b) there is some other special circumstance which, in the opinion of the
Full Court, justifies the admission of it
the Full Court does not give special leave to admit the evidence sought to be
obtained by subpoena, then it cannot be taken into
account on the appeal. As
noted by the respondent, a critical question is whether the evidence could, by
proper diligence, have
been obtained by the appellant before the termination of
respondent's argument should succeed. In view of the circumstances, the
threshold for the granting of special leave by this
Court would not be met. The
material circumstances involve the following. The appellant did not appear at
the hearing before the
Tribunal and the medical evidence relied upon by the
employer was unchallenged. Written submissions were filed on behalf of the
employer after the hearing and a copy sent to the appellant to give him an
opportunity to respond. The appellant responded in writing
and according to the
decision, he made submissions that the "medical evidence relied upon by the
employer was wrong, and that the
worker's conclusion about the appropriate
diagnosis of his condition, based on his radiological investigations and the
Articles that he provided to the Tribunal, was correct":
Town Seafoods Pty Ltd
[2021] TASCAT 1
. The Tribunal accepted the
employer's medical evidence in its entirety and found against the appellant: at
is nothing to suggest that the evidence now sought to be obtained by subpoena
could not, by proper diligence, have been obtained
by subpoena at the time of
the Tribunal hearing.
fact that the appellant did not participate at the hearing, did not contest the
employer's evidence, and did not seek to issue
the subpoenas at that time,
warrants the dismissal of the applications to have the subpoenas issued. There
is no valid justification
for the admission of fresh evidence on the appeal.
The appellant had the opportunity to produce his own evidence before the
and indeed, an indulgence was extended to him and some material
received from him, notwithstanding the late stage of the hearing.
The time to
produce the evidence he relied upon for his case was at the hearing; that was
the forum to agitate the issues at stake,
and there was ample opportunity for
him to pursue the issuing of subpoenas at that time. The application for the
subpoenas to issue
should be dismissed. To the extent that it is necessary, we
direct the Registrar that the subpoenas are not to be issued.
noted, in a second interlocutory application, the appellant applied for an order
that Pearce J provide a statement of reasons
with respect to his decisions under
appeal. However, oral reasons for the decisions were given, and the appellant
has the transcript
of those reasons. While the reasons are succinct, brevity
was appropriate given the circumstances; particularly, that the appellant
not make submissions against an order dismissing the applications, and did not
attend the hearing. The reasons are perfectly
adequate, revealing the basis
upon which Pearce J concluded that an extension for time should not be
granted and the application
for a review of the Tribunal's decision should be
dismissed. The reasons given by Pearce J for his decision that he should not
himself, were also adequate given the spurious nature of the application
that he should do so. The reasons provided complied with
his Honour's obligation
to provide sufficient reasons.
these reasons, we dismiss both interlocutory applications.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (154 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter