URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASHPT/2021/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Medical Board of Australia v Dr Stuart Lynch (No 2) [2021] TASHPT 3 (16 September 2021)
[2021] TASHPT 3
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL
Medical Board of Australia v Dr Stuart Lynch (No 2)
[2021] TASHPT 3
MEDICAL BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
LYNCH, Stuart
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
15 September 2021
DELIVERED ON:
16 September 2021
DECISION OF:
Chairperson Clues
CATCHWORDS: apprehended bias
Ebner v Official Trustee in
(2000) CLR 337
; Helow v Home Secretary
[2008] UKHL 62
[2008] 1 WLR 2416
for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Jia Legeng
(2001) 205 CLR 505
Livesey v New South Wales Bar Association
[1983] HCA 17
(1983) 151 CLR 288
DETERMINATION: The application for the Chair to recuse or
disqualify herself is dismissed.
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
B. McTaggart SC/C Sluiter
Solicitors:
Respondent:
HWL Ebsworth Lawyers
[2021] TASHPT 3
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. This is a referral made by the Medical Board of Australia
(the applicant) to the Tribunal pursuant to s193 of the Health Practitioner
Regulations National Law 2009 and
Health Practitioners Tribunal Act
, with respect to the conduct of the respondent which it asserts amounts to
professional misconduct or in the alternative unprofessional
applicant asserts that:
(a) Between approximately 2013 and 13 October 2019 the
respondent transgressed professional boundaries that should, and ordinarily
delineate the medical practitioner/patient relationship by engaging in
inappropriate physical contact with, and/or making inappropriate
comments to his
patients AA and BB.
(b) Between on or about 22 August 2019 and 11 October
2019, the respondent breached conditions on his registration and/or on the
applicant’s
Gender Based Restriction Protocol as applicable at the
3. The hearing of this application commenced on 13 September
4. The applicant’s case comprised evidence from AA, BB and
AA’s mother, CC. At the conclusion of the applicant’s
respondent gave evidence. At the conclusion of the respondent’s evidence,
senior counsel for the respondent (Mr
McTaggart SC) stated the
I could just raise a matter before you retire, and I don’t do this
critically, but I do it to clear the air. I note
the Chair’s comments
during the course of Dr Lynch’s
cross-examination, in particular
the comment made when there was an objection to him being cross-examined about
his past sexual incident,
that that was a bit rich after what happened to
yesterday and there was also a comment made to the effect that it
was inappropriate that attempts were made to get the file from
New South Wales
police and medical records without Dr Lynch’s
instructions.
I raise it because it appears to me there’s a possibility that the
Chair may be trying to tar Dr Lynch with conduct of counsel,
which I submit has
been completely appropriate. In a case where there’s serious allegations
made against Dr Lynch
that have the potential to damage his career which
are supported in the large by one complainant, counsel in my submission acted
appropriately in seeking the summonses to obtain the relevant records
to test the account given by the complainant and also appropriately
examined her as to credit when she gave evidence
yesterday.”
5. At the time I indicated that my response to the objection
did not think there was a sound basis for an objection. Further, in relation to
the question raised about obtaining documents
from the New South Wales police,
that was asked as a result of the respondent’s answer to a question during
cross-examination
where he said the documents were obtained without his
knowledge. I queried with junior counsel as to whether there were instructions
to get the documents. I specifically stated there is no criticism of counsel at
all and Mr McTaggart SC said that he accepted that.
6. The hearing was then
adjourned to resume the following day.
7. Upon review of the transcript, I
determined that the matters raised by Mr Taggart SC in fact amounted to
allegations against me,
as Chair, of actual bias or an apprehension of bias.
Accordingly, before the respondent called further evidence I advised the parties
that I had formed the view that I needed to provide the respondent with the
opportunity to make an application that I recuse or disqualify
myself on the
basis of actual or reasonable apprehension of bias. I stood the matter down to
enable the respondent and his counsel
to consider their position.
The Application
8. An application was made by the respondent that I recuse
myself from the hearing. Mr McTaggart SC stated that he had instructions
make an application to seek that I recuse myself on the basis of bias or
apprehended bias. The application that was made was
on the basis of apprehended
bias alone.
The Respondent’s Submissions
9. The grounds of the respondent’s application are as
(a) After the respondent’s counsel objected to a
question asked of the respondent during cross-examination in relation to his
childhood sexual abuse, I stated words to the effect “That’s a bit
rich given what happened to [AA] yesterday”.
It was submitted that the
clear reference from the Chair was that senior counsel’s questioning of AA
was inappropriate even
though there had been no objection to his questioning and
he was allowed to question AA as he did by the Tribunal which was necessary
appropriate.
(b) During cross-examination of the respondent in relation to
obtaining a file from the New South Wales police concerning a claim
made by AA against a general practitioner in Sydney, the Chair asked junior
counsel whether the respondent was saying
that the documents were obtained
without his instructions. It was submitted that this suggests that pursuing the
summons was inappropriate
in circumstances where the documents sought were
relevant and there was ultimately no objection to the inspection of
(c) When advising the parties that I had formed the view that the
matters raised by Mr McTaggart SC at the conclusion of the respondent’s
evidence amounted to allegations that my conduct constituted actual bias or an
apprehension of bias, I said:
note the matters were purportedly raised ‘to clear the air’.
However, having reviewed the transcript, I have
formed the view that what was
raised amounts to allegations that my conduct in the course of proceedings
constituted actual bias
or an apprehension of
Mr McTaggart SC objected to my use of the word
“purportedly” in relation to counsel’s submissions and said it
“that really what counsel was up to yesterday was a veiled
recusal application”.
10. Mr McTaggart SC submitted that:
conduct gives rise to a reasonable apprehension that the Chair lacks
impartiality towards Dr Lynch’s counsel. It
suggests an empathy for AA
generally but also what she had to go through giving her evidence in
circumstances where Dr Lynch was
entitled to appropriately test her evidence.
In the circumstances it is submitted there is a reasonable apprehension that you
not be able to bring a fair and impartial mind to your statutory
The Applicant’s Submissions
11. Counsel for the applicant submitted that the application is
completely “misgiven”. He submitted that the proper focus
applied to the interactions between the bar and the bench.
12. With respect
to the first ground relating to the objection that was made by the
respondent’s counsel to a question asked
during the applicant’s
cross-examination of the respondent about his previous sexual assault history,
the comment made by the
Chair to the effect of “That’s a bit
rich” was a fair comment and was in effect a ruling on the objection. It
is one of the Chair’s functions to rule on objections and the comment
could not possibly induce in the mind of a fair minded
observer that the Chair
has a bias one way or the other between the parties. The suggestion that this
ruling demonstrated some empathy
generally towards AA is “absurd”.
The turn of phrase “That’s a bit rich” is no different from
for example “What’s good for the goose is good for the
13. With respect to the second ground what was at issue was
the respondent’s position with respect to AA’s credibility
particular his pursuit by subpoena of her New South Wales police records to
attack her credit. The respondent gave evidence
to the effect that he had left
it to his advisors. The Chair enquired of junior counsel whether this had been
done without instructions.
This was merely discourse between counsel and the
bench. The discourse was valid and in no way would a fair minded person be
the impression as a result of that discourse that the Chair would be
incapable of exercising an impartial mind in determining the
application.
14. With respect to the third ground about the use of the word
“purportedly”, that could not be viewed by a fair minded
being any sort of attack on counsel for the respondent.
The Context
15. To enable the context of the exchanges between the Chair
and Mr McTaggart SC to be properly understood I refer to the following
from the transcript:
(a) The First Ground
McTaggart SC’s cross-examination of AA:
“McTaggart: Do you recall discussing with her
options for psychological trauma?
McTaggart: She says she saw you once and you didn’t return. Do you
remember that?
McTaggart: She says during the time that you were seeing her both in 2013 and
2014 she asked specifically for details about all childhood,
adolescent and
adult trauma including any kind of sexual trauma. Do you remember her asking
McTaggart: She says that you told her that your father was physically
violent to your mother and that was ongoing until the marriage
ended. Remember
telling her that?
McTaggart: She says that you reported once incident of physical violence to
you at age 13.
Chair: I’m sorry to interrupt, I’m just - where’s all this
McTaggart: Well the witness is here.
Chair. I know. Do we have to – alright, I’m just, I just think
we should tread carefully.
McTaggart: Alright.
Chair: She’s not represented and I’m just wondering where
it’s all going. Anyway I’ll give you a little bit
McTaggart: Ms Taylor also says you told her about another partner being
violent in 2008, you remember that?
McTaggart: And about the partner being physically and sexually violent in
McTaggart: She says that you denied any other trauma in your life at any age.
AA: I don’t recall telling her.
McTaggart: You didn’t tell her about the incident with the doctor in
Sydney in 2009 as being, at all, in particular it being
a traumatic event for
McTaggart: No, I’m asking whether you agree with that.
AA: I don’t’ recall so I can’t say.
McTaggart: I’m just wondering if it wasn’t traumatic for you,
traumatic enough for you to mention to Ms Taylor why it
does then feature in
your complaint against Dr Lynch.
Cox: Well I think she’s answered that hasn’t she? She’s
answered that before by saying that it provided context
for what he should have
known when treating her.
Chair: I’ve stated what I think about it. I don’t think
it’s, I think we’re done here.
McTaggart: We’ll move on.
Chair: Do you need a moment.
AA: Yes please.”
Mr Cox’s cross-examination of the
respondent:
“Cox: Dr Lynch, you had
a traumatic event in your adolescence?
Respondent: No
Cox: Youth?
Respondent: I did not have a traumatic event in my adolescence.
Cox: You reported to Dr Evenhuis –
Sluiter: Well I object if he’s going to go into the subject matter
because it’s clearly distressing for Dr Lynch and
it’s not really
part of the notification.
Chair: That’s pretty rich after what happened to
Respondent: No fine. Hammer me with it. Yeah go for it, I don’t mind,
go for it. The most traumatic thing that happened to
me in my life has happened
in the last 2 years. Okay, so this happened to me in my childhood, not my
adolescence though sir. Childhood
trauma is different to adolescent
(b) The Second Ground
“Cox: It was put by
your counsel last week
[directions hearing on 10 September 2021]
attempts were being made then to obtain a file from the New South Wales police,
okay, concerning a claim of assault made by
against a general
practitioner in Sydney. Does that – any knowledge of that?
Respondent: Ask counsel what they did with regard to that. That’s not
my decision and I don’t think that was discussed
with me nor was getting
the medical records, none of that was discussed with me, that’s why I
listen to counsel.
Cox: I just wanted your comment about, it might have been a miscommunication,
but it was my understanding that the purpose of that
was to show that no
complaint actually existed.
Sluiter: Well I object to that because I don’t think that was ever
said, certainly not in my recollection. The purpose of
to simply see if a
complaint had been made and if so the contents of that complaint. It’s a
bit unfair to put to Dr Lynch
a specific purpose.
Chair: Is Dr Lynch saying he didn’t have any knowledge that these
records were being produced, without instructions, is that
Respondent: No, I’m not saying I’m saying do what - work on my
behalf. That’s what they’re supposed to do,
that’s what
they’re employed for.
Chair: Alright.
Cox: And, what was, and this is why I wanted to ask you about it
Sluiter: Well Dr Lynch has already said he didn’t’ know
specifically what was being sought so.
Cox: So, okay.
Respondent: People tell me we’re going to access these records –
why? Because we need to access them for your case.
(c) The Third Ground
“Chair: I wish to
refer to the matters that were raised by Mr McTaggart SC at the conclusion of Dr
Lynch’s evidence yesterday.
I note the matters were purportedly raised to
‘clear the air’. However, having reviewed the transcript, I have
the view that what was raised amounts to allegations that my conduct in
the course of proceedings constituted actual bias or an apprehension
According to the transcript it was suggested that I might ‘tar’
Dr Lynch with conduct of counsel on the basis that:
‘when there was an objection to him being cross-examined about his past
sexual incident that that was a bit rich after what
happened to
yesterday and there was also a comment made to the effect that it was
inappropriate that attempts were made to get the file from New
South Wales
police and medical records without Dr Lynch’s express
instructions.’
Accordingly, I have formed the view that I need to provide Dr Lynch with the
opportunity to make an application that I recuse myself
on the basis of actual
or reasonable apprehension of bias
I will now stand the matter down to enable Dr Lynch and his counsel to
consider their position.
Once counsel has instructions the hearing will resume. If an application is
to be made, we can discuss how that will proceed. If
no application is to be
made, the respondent’s next witness can be
16. The applicable test is whether a fair minded and well
informed lay observer might reasonably apprehend that the Tribunal might
bring an impartial and unprejudiced mind to the determination of the matter on
its merits (see Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
17. The apprehension of bias principles are identified in the
following passages of Ebner:
in the absence of any suggestion of actual bias, a question arises as to the
independence or impartiality of a judge
(or other judicial officer or juror), as
here, the governing principle is that, subject to qualifications relating to
waiver (which
is not presently relevant) or necessity (which may be relevant to
the second appeal), a judge is disqualified if a fair-minded lay
observer might
reasonably apprehend that the judge might not bring an impartial mind to the
resolution of the question the judge
is required to decide [41]. That principle
gives effect to the requirement that justice should both be done and be seen to
[42], a requirement which reflects the fundamental importance of the
principle that the tribunal be independent and impartial. It
is convenient to
refer to it as the apprehension of bias principle.
7. The apprehension of bias principle may be thought to find its
justification in the importance of the basic principle, that the
tribunal be
independent and impartial. So important is the principle that even the
appearance of departure from it is prohibited
lest the integrity of the judicial
system be undermined. There are, however, some other aspects of the apprehension
of bias principle
which should be recognised. Deciding whether a judicial
officer (or juror) might not bring an impartial mind to the resolution of
question that has not been determined requires no prediction about how the judge
or juror will in fact approach the matter. The
question is one of possibility
(real and not remote), not probability...
8. The apprehension of bias principle admits of the possibility of human
frailty. Its application is as diverse as human frailty.
Its application
requires two steps. First, it requires the identification of what it is said
might lead a judge (or juror) to decide
a case other than on its legal and
factual merits. The second step is no less important. There must be an
articulation of the logical
connection between the matter and the feared
deviation from the course of deciding the case on its merits. The bare assertion
a judge (or juror) has an “interest” in litigation, or an
interest in a party to it, will be of no assistance until the
nature of the
interest, and the asserted connection with the possibility of departure from
impartial decision making, is articulated.
Only then can the reasonableness of
the asserted apprehension of bias be
18. The test of apprehended bias considers the perspective of
the hypothetical fair minded lay observer and is not concerned with
fanciful or
unreasonable apprehensions of
. It presumes
that the fair minded lay observer has knowledge of all of the circumstances of
the case attributed to her
. In the case of
Helow v Home Secretary
[2008] UKHL 62
[2008] 1 WLR 2416
it was said at [2418]:
“The observer who is fair minded is the sort of
person who always reserves judgment on every point until she has seen and fully
understood both sides of the argument. She is not unduly sensitive or
suspicious... Her approach must not be confused with that of
the person who has
brought the complaint. The assumptions that the complainer makes are not to be
attributed to the observer unless
they can be justified objectively. But she is
not complacent either. She knows that fairness requires that a judge must be,
seem to be, unbiased. She knows that judges like anybody else have
their weaknesses... Then there is the attribute that the observer
“informed”. It makes the point that before she takes a balanced
approach to any information she is given, she will
take the trouble to inform
herself on all matters that are relevant. She is the sort of person who takes
the trouble to read the
text of an article as well as the headlines. She is able
to put whatever she had read and seen into its overall social, political
geographical context. She is fair minded, so she will appreciate that the
context forms an important part of the material which
she must consider before
passing judgment.”
19. The standard will be offended in circumstances where, in
the eyes of the fair minded observer, a decision maker proceeds to determine
question by reference to something other than the evidence. The inquiry in
relation to whether apprehended bias exists is directed
to determining whether
the decision maker exhibits a propensity to prejudgment of a matter.
Prejudgment occurs when the decision
maker’s conclusion is not capable of
being altered by evidence or
test in relation to apprehended bias is concerned with prejudgment, not
predisposition. In the case of Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural
Affairs v Jia Legeng
(2001) 205 CLR 505
at [71] and [72] Gleeson CJ and Gummow J
“Decision makers
including judicial decision makers, sometimes approach their task with a
tendency of mind, or pre-disposition,
sometimes one that has been publicly
expressed, without being accused or suspected of bias. The question is not
whether a decision
maker’s mind is blank; it is whether it is open to
persuasion... natural justice does not require the absence of any
pre-disposition
or inclination for or against an argument or
conclusion.”
Consideration
21. In this case, the respondent has identified three grounds
that he says leads to a conclusion that there is a reasonable apprehension
as Chair, I will not be able to bring a fair and impartial mind to my statutory
22. Having considered the grounds carefully and the context in which
they were stated the comments could not be described as anything
(a) A ruling on an objection that was made.
minds could differ as to the appropriateness of the words “That’s
pretty rich” when making a ruling on
an objection. However, it is clear
that the response was an overruling of the objection made.
(b) A question to
counsel to clarify an answer given by the respondent.
The discourse between
the Chair and counsel in relation to the police records was to seek
clarification in relation to an answer given
by the respondent. It was
(c) An accurate description of the circumstances.
the word “purportedly” was entirely appropriate in the circumstances
in which it was used.
23. In summary, the respondent submits that because the Chair
was allegedly critical of counsel, a fair minded and well informed lay
might reasonably apprehend that the Chair might not bring an impartial and
unprejudiced mind to the determination of the
matter on its merits. In
particular, the Chair would prefer the evidence of AA in favour of the
respondent.
24. At the conclusion of the respondent’s evidence when the
matters were raised by Mr McTaggart SC I specifically stated that
there was no
criticism of counsel and he responded that he accepted that.
25. In this
matter, the respondent has not articulated any “logical connection”
between the words said by the Chair and
“the feared deviation from the
course of deciding a case on its merits”.
26. Nothing has been advanced
on behalf of the respondent to establish that I would make a determination in
this matter without regard
to the evidence. The bare assertion that the
respondent has a reasonable apprehension that I will not be able to bring a fair
impartial mind to my statutory task is insufficient.
27. As stated in the
case of Livesey v New South Wales Bar Association
[1983] HCA 17
(1983) 151 CLR
it was held that:
would be an abdication of judicial function and an encouragement of procedural
abuse for a judge to adopt the approach that
he should automatically disqualify
himself whenever he was requested by one party to do so on the grounds of a
possible appearance
of prejudgment or bias, regardless of whether the other
party desired that the matter be dealt with by him as the judge or to whom
hearing of the case had been entrusted by the ordinary procedures and practice
of the particular court.”
28. It has been held that for a tribunal member to stand down
where there are no legal grounds for disqualification may amount to
abdication of the member’s
. It has also
been held that if a member stands down without sufficient grounds that would
encourage tactical objections and abuse
of process in other
. This matter is part heard, in fact the
evidence has almost been concluded and therefore if I stand down this could
cause hardship
to the parties in terms of costs and delays.
29. Viewed in
context there was no actual criticism of counsel. Even if criticism could be
implied nothing has been advanced by the
respondent to satisfy me that there is
a rational basis for concluding that a fair minded lay observer acting
reasonably would apprehend
prejudgment in favour of the applicant or that I
would favour the evidence of AA over the respondent.
Determination
30. Having considered the submissions of the parties I do not
accept that a fair minded lay observer acting reasonably would entertain
apprehension alleged. The application to recuse or disqualify myself is
CHAIRPERSON
Gascor v Ellicott
[1997] 1 VR 332.
Livesey v New South Wales
Bar Association
[1983] HCA 17
(1983) 151 CLR 288
Laws v Australian
Broadcasting Tribunal
[1990] HCA 31
(1990) 170 CLR 70
at 87-8 and 95.
Mount Carmel College v
Hobart City Council
[2015] TASRMPT 57B at
Re Polites: ex parte
Hoyts Corporation Pty Ltd (No 2)
[1991] HCA 25
(1991) 173 CLR 78.
Livesey v New South Wales
Bar Association
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (170 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter