URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASSC/2025/51.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:21:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Pegg v Anti-Discrimination Commissioner [2025] TASSC 51 (14 October 2025)
[2025] TASSC 51
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA
Pegg v Anti-Discrimination Commissioner
[2025] TASSC
: PEGG, Mark Alexander
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION COMMISSIONER
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
26 September
JUDGMENT OF:
Administrative law – Judicial review – Grounds of review –
Procedural fairness – Consequence of failure to
accord procedural fairness
– Applicant lodged complaint with Equal Opportunity Tasmania –
Application was out of time
– Applicant not afforded opportunity to
explain entire delay – Argues material breach of the rules of natural
– Whether the Commissioner's decision was tainted by
unreasonableness – The Commissioner ought to have
allowed the applicant to explain the seven-week delay after accepting an
explanation for the previous three-year delay – Unreasonable for
Commissioner to settle on a fraction of the whole as unexplained
and decline to
accept the complaint – Application granted.
Aus Dig Administrative Law [1076]
Legislation:
Judicial Review Act 2000
Discrimination
Clarence City Council v South Hobart Investment Pty Ltd
[2007] TASSC
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Intervenor:
State Litigation
Judgment Number:
[2025] TASSC 51
paragraphs:
Serial No 51/2025
File No 2451/2024
PEGG v ANTI-DISCRIMINATION COMMISSIONER
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT ESTCOURT J
14 October 2025
The application
The applicant, Mark Alexander Pegg, has sought an order of review under the
Judicial Review Act 2000
on the ground that he is aggrieved by a decision
of the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner (the Commissioner), not to accept for
investigation
his complaint of discrimination under the
Anti-Discrimination
(the Act), on the basis that the conduct he complained of occurred
outside the 12-month time limitation provided for by s 63(1) of
the Act, and the
Commissioner was not satisfied that it was reasonable to accept the complaint
made out of time (the decision).
Section 63 of the Act provides as follows:
"63 Time limit on
(1) A complaint is to be made within 12 months after the alleged
discrimination or prohibited conduct took place.
(2) The Commissioner may accept a complaint made after the 12-month time
limitation has expired if satisfied that it is reasonable
The applicant claims that the Commissioner's decision is vitiated by a failure
to accord him procedural fairness and/or by an improper
exercise of power.
originating application states as follows:
"(1) That the decision of
the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner made on 28 June 2024 and communicated to me
on 4 July 2024 (file reference
24/05/019/ps) not to accept my Complaint for
Investigation be set aside, on the basis that:
a) There was a breach of the rules of natural justice, for the purposes of
Section 17(2)a)
Judicial Review Act 2000
b) There was an improper exercise of power, for the purposes of
Section 17(2)e)
Judicial Review Act 2000
In a document entitled "further and better grounds" the applicant, amongst
other things, argues that having heard nothing from Equal
Opportunity Tasmania
until after the 42 days provided in the Act had expired, and then having
explained his own delay in lodging
his complaint for a period of three years, it
was unreasonable for him not to have been given an opportunity to explain, what
be seen was regarded as a determinative delay, a period of seven weeks
between March and May 2024.
The applicant states that he "could have readily supplied the additional
information", had he "been afforded an opportunity", but
that opportunity was
denied to him.
As to the asserted improper exercise of power, the applicant contends that the
Commissioner failed to take a relevant consideration
into account, exercised her
power according to a rule, without regard to the merits of the particular case,
and exercised her power
"capriciously".
I should say at once that in my view no question arises on the material before
me as to a failure to take account of a relevant
consideration as that term is
understood in law, and no question arises as to eschewing the merits of the
applicant's complaint in
favour of a rule, as apprehend the relevant principles.
As I understand the applicant's case from exchanges with him during oral
argument, the real issues are whether there was a material breach of the rules
of natural justice and/or whether the Commissioner's
decision was tainted by
unreasonableness.
The background
following history is gratefully adopted from the written contentions of counsel
for the intervenor, the Attorney-General, Ms
Winton, with which no relevant
issue was taken by the applicant:
"6 The factual basis for the
Applicant's complaint is set out in the Commissioner's Decision at Court Book
(CB) 13. Relevantly, the
Applicant alleges that the Principal of his son's
school preferred information about the Applicant provided by the Applicant's
Ms Donohue, to information provided by the Applicant. The Applicant
alleges that Ms Donohue 'word[ed] up' staff at my son's school
the Principal then 'used to brief his superiors' at the Department for
Children, Education and Young People (DECYP).
The Applicant contends the 'less
favourable treatment that I am alleging relates to [the Principal] selecting or
preferring Ms Donohue's
accounts over mine.'
7 The Principal's alleged conduct occurred 'in or about June 2020.'
Applicant discovered the alleged conduct in 2023 when he gained access to the
emails contained at CB 71 – 86 (the Emails)
during the course of Family
Court proceedings. The Emails came to light when Ms Donohue subpoenaed documents
from DECYP in 2022.
The Applicant obtained access to them in October of
It is the content of the Emails that comprises the alleged unlawful
October 2023 and April 2024 the Applicant took no action with respect to the
9 April 2024 Mr Pegg sent a defamation 'concerns notice' for the purposes of
Defamation Act 2005
, to the Secretary of the Department of Premier
and Cabinet (DPAC) with respect to the Emails. That concerns notice was
supplemented
with further particulars by way of a letter from the Applicant to
the Premier on 12 April 2024, wherein the Applicant wrote:
Recently I've discovered why my efforts to improve my son's situation at the
school have been unsuccessful. Since 2020, Michael Park
the Principal has been
'briefing' his superiors about me, so that each time I complained about Oscar
being assaulted or bullied he
'briefed' Anne Douglas and others at Learning
Services, to suggest I was a disturbed person, a domestic abuser, and a homeless
It is awkward and embarrassing, but the 'information' provided to Mr Park
and also an officer
of the Department of Education. Ms Donohoe and I have a current family matter
relating to Oscar in the Federal
Court, and she started 'briefing' Mr Park on
our 'family circumstances' around 2019 or 2020, apparently to ensure I received
favourable treatment in connection with my son's schooling. She was also
motivated to damage my credibility, so her interests and
those of Mr Park
joined, at least from 2020 onwards. That had a devastating impact on Oscar and
6 May 2024, the Secretary of DECYP issued a 'further particulars notice' to the
Applicant for the purposes of s 14A(3) of the
Defamation Act
taking issue
with the Applicant's defamation claim.
7 May 2024, after receiving the Secretary's response to his defamation action,
the Applicant lodged his complaint with the Commissioner
complaint was lodged seven months after the Applicant became aware of the
subject Emails. There is no material difference between
the substance of the
Applicant's defamation action and his discrimination complaint. The subject of
the complaint, namely the Emails
in which Mr Park allegedly shared 'briefing'
material with his superiors derived from information obtained from Ms Donohue,
is identical
to subject of the defamation action.
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner's complaint form has a field directed to s 63
of the Act, which asks whether the matter happened
more than 12 months ago. The
form provides a box in which the complainant can describe 'why you waited until
now to make your complaint
(the First Opportunity).
19 June 2024 Ms Struwe, an Investigation and Conciliation Officer at Equal
Opportunity Tasmania (EOT), emailed the Applicant to
afford him an opportunity
to be heard in relation to the Commissioner's exercise of discretion under s 63
(the Second Opportunity).
Ms Struwe noted that the discrimination occurred in
2020, set out s 63, provided the following explanation of the factors that the
Commissioner is legally required to consider, and requested the applicant to
make submissions addressing those factors (emphasis
deciding whether to exercise the discretion under section 63(2) of the Act, in
[2005] TASADT 1
– [33] the Anti-Discrimination
Tribunal of Tasmania (as it then was) set out the relevant factors that the
Commissioner must
consider, with reference to relevant cases:
period, from the date of the alleged events to the date of lodging the complaint
is to be explained, not just the period
extending from the expiration of the
12-month date
Ramadan v Legal Holdings
[2001] NSWCA 41)
must be a satisfactory explanation for the delay (
Buderim Ginger Limited v
[2002] QCA 177).
Whether the
delay was attributable to the acts or omissions of the complainant or his or her
legal representatives, the respondent,
Buderim Ginger Limited v
[2002] QCA 177).
• The length of the delay
Buderim Ginger Limited v Booth
[2002] QCA 177).
Whether it would
cause prejudice to the respondent (
Buderim Ginger Limited v Booth
Having to defend a matter long after the circumstances which gave rise
to it have passed can be oppressive to a defendant (
[2005] TASADT
Once prejudice
to the respondent is established, the limitation period should only be
overridden in exceptional circumstances (
[2005] TASADT 1).
The complainant
bears the onus to make out a case for extension of time (
Brisbane South
Regional Health Authority v Taylor
(1996) 186 CLR 541).
The merits of
the complaint should not be used as a basis for an out of time decision
McAulliffe v Puplick and Anor
(1996) EOC 92-800
Buderim Ginger
Limited v Booth
[2002] QCA 177).
It is also important to note
[2005] TASADT 1
, the Anti-Discrimination Tribunal
(as it then was) took the view that
the time limitation in the Act has a
specific purpose and should only be extended where it is reasonable to do
. A limitation period is the general rule; an extension provision is the
exception to the rule (
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v Taylor
(1996) 186 CLR 541).
Your complaint relates to alleged discrimination that occurred outside of the
12 month limit.
Please provide your response to the following questions:
(1) the date you received the documents as per your RTI
request/application.
(2) the reason(s)
for the delay in lodging your complaint from the time
you discovered the alleged discrimination (ie when you received the RTI
and the date you lodged your complaint on 7 May 2024
(3) What prejudice do you say you will be subject to if the Commissioner does
not exercise her discretion under section 63(2) to accept
your complaint out of
If you would provide your response within 7 days or in any event Wednesday 26
June 2024, that would be appreciated.
Please make contact with me by reply to this email if you have any questions
11.00 am today until
Tuesday 25 June 2024, however I will be monitoring my email.
Applicant replied to Ms Struwe
on the same day
, 19 June 2024, which
coincided with his son's last day at school. The Applicant did not respond to
the substance of Ms Struwe's
queries going to delay. Instead he explained that
'but it wasn't until my ex-wife subpoenaed documents in 2022 (as part of our
Court matter) that I got access to the documents I supplied to you, with
my complaint ... as a result of all of this, I didn't become
aware of the
discriminatory material until October 2023.' The explanation was entirely
unresponsive to the substance of Ms Struwe's
email dated 26 June 204 Ms Struwe provided the Applicant with a third
opportunity to explain his delay (the Third Opportunity).
She noted that he
'didn't become aware of the discrimination until October 2023' and requested
'your reasons as to why it took from October 2023 until May 2024 to lodge
[his] complaint
26 June 2024
the Applicant
replied as follows:
Yes during the relevant time period I was entirely occupied with trial
preparations, and the trial itself, in our family law matter.
As I tried to meet the first trial date in December, my RSI returned & I
was totally incapacitated.
That was partly because Hobart Registry of FCFCOA refused to provide a
reasonable adjustment (I complained to Commonwealth Human Rights
Commission in
November, no response from them so far. I guess business is booming .. . )
Then we got a new trial date of March, and I had to prepare for that.
Trial concluded on 14 March.
So I literally did complain at my first available opportunity
28 June 2024
the Commissioner made the Decision which was communicated to
the Applicant on 4 July 2024.
Whilst the Commissioner determined that the
Applicant 'provided a satisfactory explanation for the period between June 2020
and October
,' she decided:
Notwithstanding my
determination above, I am not satisfied that Mr Pegg has provided adequate
reasons for the delay in lodging his
complaint from
March 2024 until May
He has not provided me information as to why once his Family court matter was
finalised why it took
almost 2 months
to lodge the complaint. Mr Pegg is
aware of the complaint process in my office, and I am aware that he sought
information in 2021,
regarding his concerns with the Department of Education (as
it was then) and Goulbourn Street Primary.
I have been made aware that he was advised of the 12 month limitation period
when he sought information from my office."
As to that last point made by the Commissioner, the intervenor notes that,
quite apart from being advised of the time limit by Equal
Opportunity Tasmania
in 2021, the applicant "evidenced his awareness of the 12 month limitation
period in his letter to the Secretary
of DECYP of 16 February 2024. In that
letter he wrote that the "
Anti-Discrimination Act
requires that complaints be
lodged within 12 months, but that of course requires an awareness that a breach
has occurred...".
The applicant's argument
The applicant's written contentions were, relevantly, as
"2 On 7 May 2024, I complained to the Commissioner about
the bullying to which my son was subjected at his primary school, and in
particular the less favourable treatment I received from the school principal,
other school staff and staff of the Tasmanian Department
of Education, when I
tried to get the bullying stopped.
Commissioner wrote to me on 4 July 2024, to advise she had not accepted my
complaint . In her Reasons for Decision document dated
28 June 2024, the
Commissioner noted that her decision was due on 18 June 2024, and acknowledged
she was making it outside the 42
day period required by the Act
Originating Application for judicial review of the Commissioner's decision dated
19 August 2024 appears as Item 1 in the Court
Book, see page 2.
Struwe from the Office of the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner first made
was outside the 42
days. The 42 days expired on 18 June 2024.
assist in explaining why my complaint was three years out-of-time, I supplied
additional information via email to Ms Struwe on
19 June 2024, but concluded
I do hope this answers your queries.
but please do get back to me, if you need further information.
my time is quite tight today, as dear son has now been bullied out of his
school (gaslighting, daily shouting and regular selective
punishments from his
class teacher).
and I need to go in, to support him on what looks likely to be his last day.
Struwe followed up with me via email on 26 June 2024. She requested additional
information 'To full (sic) comply with time limit
requirement of the Act', and I
immediately supplied additional information .
effect of the information I supplied on 26 June 2024 was that the 'period of
delay' in lodging my application that I needed to
account for to allow the
Commissioner to exercise her discretion under Section 63 was no longer three
years, as it had been prior
to my email exchanges with Ms Struwe. Rather, the
'period of delay' that I needed to account for was now a period of seven weeks,
specifically the period 14 March 2024 to 7 May 2024.
could readily have accounted for this 'missing period' of seven weeks, but
neither Ms Struwe nor the Commissioner provided me with
an opportunity to do so.
In all the circumstances, prior to making the decision not to allow my
out-of-time complaint, it was fair
and reasonable for Ms Struwe or the
Commissioner to provide me with a further opportunity to be heard, specifically
to explain the
'missing' seven weeks.
Commissioner's decision not to accept my complaint represents a breach of the
rules of natural justice, allowing the Court to
make an order of review,
pursuant to
Section 17(2)a)
Judicial Review Act 2000
of my Application)
Judicial Review Act 2000
Section 17(2)
provides that a person may apply
to the Court for an order of review, on the basis:
(a) that a breach of the rules of natural justice happened relating to the
making of the decision;
Since the Act does not define 'the rules of natural justice', it is necessary
to look to common law, where the expression 'natural
justice' can be used
interchangeably with the expression procedural fairness. It is well accepted
that there is no fixed content
to the duty to afford procedural fairness. The
fairness of the procedure depends on the nature of the matters in issue, and
would be a reasonable opportunity for parties to present their cases in the
relevant circumstances. The High Court has provided
the following authorities:
A) 'the expression "procedural fairness" conveys the notion of a flexible
obligation to adapt fair procedures which are appropriate
and adapted to the
circumstances of the particular case.' (Mason J in
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
B) the content of the requirement of procedural fairness may be affected by
what is said or done during the decision-making process
Re Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
(2003) 214 CLR 1
, per Gleeson, CJ)
Hearing Rule is a key component of procedural fairness. It requires that the
decision-maker give to a person whose interests
may be adversely affected by a
decision an opportunity to present his or her case. So, for example, if a
decision-maker informs
a person affected that he or she will hear further
argument upon a certain point, and then delivers a decision without doing so,
may be easy to demonstrate that unfairness is involved. (
Re Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs; ex parte Lam
(2003) 214 CLR 1
approach of Ms Struwe and the Commissioner also gives rise to a review under
Section 17(2)e
Judicial Review Act 2000
– on the basis that it was
an improper exercise of power. For the purposes of Sections 17 and 18 of the
Act, the phrase 'Improper
exercise of power' is further defined in Section 20f),
which provides:
(f) an exercise of a discretionary power in accordance with a rule without
regard to the merits of the particular case; (Ground 2
of my Application)
if the Commissioner's rule would ordinarily have meant the whole period of three
years must be accounted for, before she would
exercise her discretion under
Section 63, in my case and because of the considerable pressure I was under
which I had detailed on
19 June, it was not reasonable in all the circumstances
for the Commissioner to apply that rule to me. Rather, I had 'successfully'
accounted for all but seven weeks out of a three year period. With the result
that, the only reasonable outcome was that the Commissioner
exercise her
discretion, and accept my complaint out-of-time." (My
The intervenor's argument
The intervenor's response to the applicant's contentions was as
Contention 1 – the Applicant was afforded
procedural fairness
Commissioner gave the Applicant three opportunities to be heard as to his time
delay. The Applicant failed to properly avail himself
of those opportunities.
rules of natural justice are synonymous with the principles of procedural
fairness. As Gleeson CJ said in S157/2002
... in the past, it was
customary to refer to the duty to observe common law requirements of fairness as
a duty 'to act judicially'.
... Later, the duty came to be referred to as a
duty to observe the requirements of 'natural justice'. Later again, it became
to speak of 'procedural fairness'.
termed 'natural justice' or 'procedural fairness,' there are two aspects to the
rule: the fair hearing rule and the rule against
bias. The obligation to afford
natural justice or procedural fairness arises where the exercise of power is
likely to affect a person's
requirements of the fair hearing rule are flexible and will be determined by
what is fair in all the circumstances of a particular
case. That flexibility
was emphasised by Tucker LJ in a passage that has been approved by the High
[t]he requirements of natural justice must depend on the
circumstances of the case, the nature of the inquiry, the rules under which
tribunal is acting, the subject-matter that is being dealt with, and so forth.
Accordingly, I do not derive much assistance
from the definitions of natural
justice which have been from time to time used, but, whatever standard is
adopted, one essential
is that the person concerned should have a reasonable
opportunity of presenting his case.
relevant statutory framework behind a decision is critical to understanding what
natural justice requires. Justice Kitto characterised
this as the 'necessity of
allowing full effect in every case to the particular statutory framework within
which the proceeding takes
place.' His Honour explained that the framework
... express and implied provisions of the relevant Act and
the inferences of legislative intention to be drawn from the circumstances
which the Act was directed and from its subject-matter.
this it follows that the construction of the Act's relevant provisions provide
the basis for determining what natural justice
requires. The prima facie
position is that a complaint made outside of the 12-month time limitation in s
63(1) of the Act is incompetent
unless and until the Commissioner exercises her
discretion to accept the complaint if satisfied that it is reasonable to do so.
Bullard v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal
(Bullard) Geason J held at [38]
that 'a complaint that is not accepted under s 63 of the Act, is incapable of
rejection; s 64 is
not engaged when a complaint is not accepted under s 63.'
That is, acceptance by the Commissioner of an out of time complaint under
is a 'gate' through which an out of time complaint must pass before it is
'capable of rejection' under s 64.
Tasmanian Health Service v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal
Estcourt J followed Geason J's approach, holding that 'acceptance by the
Commissioner of an out of time complaint under s 63(2)
of the AD Act is the
gate, or jurisdictional fact, that enlivens the Commissioner's power to reject a
complaint under s 64(1).'
Decision reflects this jurisdictional issue. The Decision does not purport to be
a rejection under s 64(1), which would give rise
to merits review in the
Tribunal. The relevant 'decision' for the purposes of
Review Act 2000
(the JRA) is the decision not to accept a complaint made
after the 12-month time limitation has expired under s 63(2). The Applicant
here seeks an order setting aside that decision: CB 2. Were that order to issue,
the Applicant's complaint would remain incapable
of acceptance or rejection
under s 64. The Commissioner would still need to make a decision whether it is
reasonable for her to accept
the complaint out of time under s 63(2).
learned authors Creyke, Groves and McMillan describe the hearing rule as
Before an administrative decision that adversely affects
an individual's right, interest or legitimate expectation is made, the
decision-maker
must give the person prior notice that a decision may be made,
provide them with the information (particularly prejudicial information)
which the decision may be based, and advise them of the person's right to make a
submission in reply.
31 That is precisely what the Second Opportunity did.
Applicant's contention that the dates that he needed to account for changed
between the Second Opportunity and Third Opportunity
cannot be sustained. The
dates did not change. Ms Struwe's email of 19 June 2024 clearly requested
reasons for the delay up to the
date upon which the Applicant lodged his
complaint, 7 May 2024. The email of 26 June 2024 requested the same thing.
The Applicant simply failed to address the relevant period despite being
given the opportunity to do so
. He also failed to identify any prejudice he
would suffer should the Commissioner not accept his out of time complaint.
Applicant asserts that 'it was reasonable for Ms Struwe to seek further
information from me, regarding the 'missing' dates.'
Ms Struwe did seek further
information regarding the 'missing' dates, by her email of 26 June 2024. The
Applicant simply failed to
make use of the opportunity.
Applicant complains that he did not hear from EOT until after the 42 days
provided for by s 64(2) of the Act. That would only
be relevant to the hearing
rule if he were denied the opportunity to be heard as a result of that delay. He
was not, and indeed was
afforded 7 days in which to respond.
Applicant states that 19 June 2024 was a difficult day for his family. That may
have been so, but he was not obliged to respond
that day. It was open to him to
wait until the impact of the events of 19 June 2024 had passed before providing
Ms Struwe with a
Applicant effectively contends that he is entitled to a fourth opportunity to
supply the additional information. This was the
Applicant's out of time
complaint. He was provided with two express opportunities to provide an
explanation but failed to do so.
It was incumbent upon him to provide a
meaningful response to enable the Commissioner to exercise her discretion in his
Applicant was clearly afforded ample opportunity to be heard. He did not make
effective use of those opportunities.
any event, even if the Applicant had been given further procedural fairness, he
could not have supplied satisfactory 'additional
information' for the reasons
dealt with in Contention 2 below. He was occupied pursuing his defamation
complaint against DECYP in
the period between 14 March 2024 – 7 May
Contention 2 – Any purported breach of procedural fairness was not
Attorney-General's primary contention is that there was no error of procedural
fairness. But even if there was, it could not have
been material.
LPDT v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
the plurality of the High Court distilled the
principles in relation to whether a failure to observe the conditions of a
of decision-making authority, such as the obligation to afford
procedural fairness, is 'jurisdictional,' or one that 'voids' the
decision. Their Honours wrote at [7]:
In most cases, however, an
error will only be jurisdictional if the error was material to the decision that
was made in fact, in the
sense that there is a realistic possibility that the
decision that was made in fact could have been different if the error had not
. That is because it is now accepted that a statute which contains
an express or implied condition to be observed in a decision making
ordinarily to be interpreted as incorporating such a 'threshold of materiality'
in the event of non compliance.
the Commissioner decided it was not reasonable for her to accept the Applicant's
complaint under s 63(2), she did not hear the
respondent DECYP as to prejudice:
CB 16. For the same reason, the Commissioner did not consider whether the
complaint was capable
of acceptance under s 64, that is, whether it disclosed a
possible breach of the Act: CB 16.
Abblitt v The Anti-Discrimination Commissioner
(Abblitt) Pearce J
accepted that a respondent to an out of time complaint is entitled to be heard
by the Commissioner prior to acceptance
under s 63(2). The matter was put
beyond doubt by Chief Justice Blow in State of Tasmania v Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner where
His Honour held at [31] – [32] that the 'Commissioner
has a common law duty of procedural fairness [to the respondent] that
observed whenever it is necessary to decide whether it is reasonable to accept a
complaint to which s 63 applies.'
Commissioner is obliged to afford DECYP procedural fairness. In the period
between 14 March 2024 – 7 May 20204 the Applicant
was prosecuting a
'defamation suit against the Tasmanian Government.' That is, he was pursuing
his defamation claim in preference
to his claim of discrimination.
afforded an opportunity, DECYP will raise the matter of his defamation claim and
make submissions as to the prejudice that an
extension of the time limit would
cause it. Those submissions are likely to undermine and challenge the
previously untested representations
the Applicant has made to the
Commissioner.
inference may be drawn from the evidence contained within the affidavit of
Alison Jane Scandrett that, on the balance of probabilities,
there is no
realistic possibility that a different decision could have been made if the
Applicant were afforded another opportunity
to be heard.
MZAPC v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
Gagler, Keane and Gleason JJ explained at [39] (footnotes omitted, emphasis
Bearing the overall onus of proving jurisdictional error,
the plaintiff in an application for judicial review must bear the onus of
proving on the balance of probabilities all the historical facts necessary to
sustain the requisite reasonable conjecture. The burden
of the plaintiff is not
to prove on the balance of probabilities that a different decision would have
been made had there been compliance
with the condition that was breached. But
the burden of the plaintiff is to prove on the balance of probabilities the
facts necessary to enable the court to be satisfied of the realistic
possibility that a different decision could have been made had
compliance with that condition.
Applicant has objected to the admission of Ms Scandrett' s affidavit into
evidence on the ground of relevance at [16]. The evidence
is relevant to the
question of materiality. The burden is on the Applicant to satisfy this Court
that there is, on the balance of
probabilities, a realistic possibility that
setting aside the Commissioner's decision on the ground of natural justice could
to a different decision being made. It is open to the Attorney-General to
lead evidence to disprove the Applicant's counterfactual.
only is it improbable that an additional opportunity to be heard would assist
the Applicant through the 'gate' of s 63, it is
also improbable that preferring
the account of one spouse over another, both of whom are parents of a child
attending a school, amounts
discrimination or prohibited conduct within the
meaning of Part 4 of the Act on the prescribed grounds of 'marital status,'
status' or 'family responsibilities.' There is no nexus between the
Applicant's prescribed attributes and the conduct complained
of, given that both
parents possess the same prescribed attributes
Contention 3 - the Commissioner's exercise of
discretionary power was proper
Applicant has led no evidence to support his contention that there was an
improper exercise of power for the purposes of s 17(2)(e)
of the JRA.
his further and better grounds (CB 4) the Applicant alleges that 'apparently Ms
Struwe had placed the Commissioner under considerable
time pressure to make the
decision.' There is no evidence before the Court to substantiate that assertion.
Rather, the evidence demonstrates
the opposite. Though the Commissioner was
outside the 42 days provided for by s 64(2), the Commissioner provided the
Applicant with
two opportunities to be heard.
to the impact of exceeding the 42 day time limit, Ms Struwe relied upon the
decision Tribunal Member Brett, as His Honour then
was, in the unreported
Mr K von Stalhein vs Deloitte Touche & Tohmatsu
Brett determined at [12] 'that the failure of the Commissioner to make the
decision within 42 days, does not render that
decision invalid.' The Intervener
respectfully relies upon Member Brett's reasoning, which is consistent with the
High Court's reasoning
in Project Blue Sky v ABA.
as the Applicant relies upon the pressure he was under on 19 June 2024 at [14]
of his submissions, the Intervener repeats
his submissions that the Applicant
could have waited until that pressure had passed to reply and, in any event, the
Applicant was
given a further opportunity explain his delay up to 7 May
In my view, the Commissioner ought to have afforded the applicant the
opportunity to explain the reason for his delay for the seven-week
between March and May 2024. When confronted with a request for an explanation of
the reasons for the delay in lodging a complaint
for a period of some three
years, it is to my mind, understandable that a lay person might perceive that an
explanation in broad
general terms was sufficient. That appears to me, by way of
inference from the tenor of the applicant's response to the Commissioner
June 2024, to be exactly what he apprehended.
I also note that the Commissioner appears to have been wholly satisfied as to
the very long delay, by a broad and general explanation,
namely the applicant's
response of 26 June 2024 that during the relevant time period he "was entirely
occupied with trial preparations,
and the trial itself, in our family law
It is trite that the content of natural justice varies according to the
circumstances of the case. In
Clarence City Council v South Hobart Investment
[2007] TASSC 16
, Underwood CJ, (with whom Slicer and Blow JJ agreed)
said at [27]:
"27 The content of natural justice varies from case to
Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Commission; Ex parte
Angliss Group
(1969) 122 CLR 546, the High Court expressed agreement at 552
– 553 with this observation of Tucker LJ in
Russell v Duke of
[1949] 1 All ER 109
'The requirements of natural justice must depend on the circumstances of the
case, the nature of the inquiry, the rules under which
the tribunal is acting,
the subject matter that is being dealt with, and so forth.'
The High Court said at 553:
'It is plain that when it is necessary to consider a question of fairness in
relation to a tribunal the whole of the circumstances
in the field of the
inquiry are of importance. The nature of the jurisdiction exercised and the
statutory provisions governing its
exercise are amongst those
circumstances.'"
In this case it seems to me that the real issue was one of fact and degree, a
proposition with which Ms Winton appeared to agree
in exchanges during her oral
submissions.
Having gone to great lengths to set out for the applicant what matters were
required to be addressed by way of explanation for the
whole period of the
delay, and having decided that a period of years was explained by a broad and
general statement that for some
three years the applicant had been "entirely
occupied" with trial preparations, and the trial itself, in a family law case,
reasonable for the Commissioner to simply settle on a fraction of the
whole as unexplained and decline to accept the complaint? In
my view, it was
Having decided that the period of some seven weeks remained in her mind
dispositive of the exercise of her discretion as at 28 June
2024, a mere two
days after her receipt of the applicant's explanation, the Commissioner, in my
view, ought reasonably to have asked
the applicant for an explanation for the
period that vexed her.
The question of reasonableness can be interrogated by asking whether an
unexplained delay of a week would have brought about the
same result? In my view
it ought not, but on the apparent logic in this case it might have done. And
would a delay of eight weeks
have called for an opportunity for a further
explanation to be given? In my view it should, but again on the apparent logic
case it may not. In this sense I accept the applicant's submission that
the exercise of the discretion appears capricious.
In my view, having considered a delay of three years as explained by a broad,
general and frankly, unconvincing explanation, the
period of seven weeks was, by
comparison, relatively inconsequential and would have required the appearance of
some special characteristic,
such as nonchalance or wilful disregard of
obligation, to have warranted an adverse exercise of power.
As to the question of the materiality of an error of law comprised by the
failure to afford natural justice, I am not well placed
to decide the
counterfactual. Some attempt was made to say what might have been said if the
Commissioner had asked for a further
explanation, but the content of the
applicant's further explanation would have depended very much on the question
posed by the Commissioner
and the nature and extent of the detail required by
her. It still does. This may be a pyrrhic victory for the applicant.
As to the submission there is no nexus between the applicant's "prescribed
attributes and the conduct complained of, given that
both parents possess the
same prescribed attributes" (see paragraph 48 of the intervenor's submissions
set out at [12] above, I am
not well placed to make a decision refusing an order
of review on the material I have before me in evidence. It remains however a
consideration for the Commissioner. As I have already noted, the applicant's
success in this application may be short lived.
If the denial of natural justice was not a material error, I am nonetheless of
the view that the exercise of discretion in this
case was capricious and as such
constituted
unreasonableness.
In reaching my decision I have found it unnecessary to have regard to any of
the evidentiary material I received under
Disposition
The application is allowed, and I make an order setting aside the
Commissioner's decision, with effect from today and referring
the matter to
which the decision relates to the Commissioner for further consideration taking
my decision into account.
I will hear the parties as to the precise terms of the order.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (166 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter