URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFC/2023/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v Glynn Williams [2023] TASFC 1 (8 March 2023)
[2023] TASFC 1
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (FULL COURT)
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v Glynn Williams
[2023] TASFC 1
: LEGAL PROFESSION BOARD OF
WILLIAMS, Glynn
APPEALED FROM:
Profession Board of Tasmania v
Glynn Williams
[2022] TASSC 46
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Estcourt J, Jago J, Porter AJ
Profession and Trades – Lawyers – Professional misconduct and
unprofessional conduct – Construction of
Profession Act
– Legal practitioner offering to settle dispute if
client’s ex-wife withdrew complaints to police made by her against
client – Appeal against finding of mere unprofessional conduct allowed
– Declaration of guilt of professional misconduct
substituted.
Profession Act 2007
Council of the Law
Society of New South Wales v Webb
[2013] NSWCA 423
, considered.
Profession and Trades [1130].
REPRESENTATION
Cuthbertson SC
: B McTaggart
Solicitors:
Tremayne Fay
Rheinberger
Respondent:
Glynn Williams Legal
[2023] TASFC 1
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 1/2023
File No 2261/2020
LEGAL PROFESSION BOARD OF TASMANIA v GLYNN WILLIAMS
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
of the Court:
Declaration
of guilt of unprofessional conduct set aside.
Declaration
of guilt of professional misconduct made.
Serial No 1/2023
File No 2261/202
LEGAL PROFESSION BOARD OF TASMANIA v GLYNN
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
17 March 2023
do not have the slightest doubt that it is professional misconduct for a lawyer
to offer to settle a client's dispute with another
person on the condition that
the other person withdraw a criminal complaint that person has made against the
client and which is
pending before a court.
is what occurred in the present case, however the learned primary judge, Geason
J, found that the conduct amounted only to unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
this appeal the appellant challenges the finding and consequential declaration
of unprofessional conduct but does not seek to
disturb the other orders made by
his Honour.
February 2018, a client of the respondent was charged with two counts of common
assault against his former wife after she had
made complaints to Tasmania Police
alleging that the respondent had assaulted her. She had taken out a police
family violence order
against the client for her protection.
9 March 2018 the client wrote to the complainant, through the respondent,
offering to settle their matrimonial property dispute
on terms which included
that "all legal pursuits and accusations cease including Tas Police. All
matters are then resolved, finalised".
19 March 2018 the client was charged with the crime of perverting justice in
breach of s 105 of the
Criminal Code Act
1924. The respondent appeared
on behalf of his client in the Burnie Magistrates Court in respect of that
of that notwithstanding, subsequently, on 13 April 2018 and 31 May 2018, the
respondent himself wrote to the lawyer acting for
the client's former wife
conveying an offer to settle the matrimonial property dispute between the
parties on terms expressed to
be conditional upon the withdrawal by the former
wife of the complaints she had made to Tasmania Police against his client.
Relevantly,
the terms "unsatisfactory professional conduct", and "professional misconduct"
are defined in
Legal Profession Act
as follows:
420 Unsatisfactory professional conduct
For the purposes of this Act –
unsatisfactory professional conduct
includes conduct of an Australian
legal practitioner occurring in connection with the practice of law that falls
short of the standard
of competence and diligence that a member of the public is
entitled to expect of a reasonably competent Australian legal practitioner.
421 Professional misconduct
(1) For the purposes of this Act –
professional misconduct
(a) unsatisfactory professional
conduct of an Australian legal practitioner, where the conduct involves a
substantial or consistent
failure to reach or maintain a reasonable standard of
competence and diligence; and
(b) conduct of an Australian legal
practitioner whether occurring in connection with the practice of law or
occurring otherwise than
in connection with the practice of law that would, if
established, justify a finding that the practitioner is not a fit and proper
person to engage in legal practice.
(2) For finding that an Australian legal
practitioner is not a fit and proper person to engage in legal practice as
mentioned in subsection
(1), regard may be had to the suitability matters that
would be considered if the practitioner were an applicant for admission to
legal profession under this Act or for the grant or renewal of a local
practising certificate."
Section 422 of the Act identifies types of conduct caught by these
422 Conduct capable of constituting unsatisfactory professional conduct
or professional misconduct
(1) Without limiting section 420 or 421, the
following conduct is capable of constituting unsatisfactory professional conduct
or professional
misconduct:
(a) conduct consisting of a contravention of this
Act, the regulations or the legal profession rules;..."
essence, in response to an investigation into his conduct by the appellant, the
respondent's explanation was that he was bound
by his client's instructions and
those instructions were that the accusations made by his former wife were
an explanation is no answer to the appellant's assertion of professional
misconduct. In my view, in writing as he did, at the
very least, the respondent
was guilty of professional misconduct in the form of "unsatisfactory
professional conduct ..., where the
conduct involves a
substantial
failure to reach or maintain a reasonable standard of competence and diligence"
(Emphasis added), within the meaning of s 421(a)
of the Act. I reject the
respondent's submission that his failure was not substantial.
a conclusion involves an evaluative exercise, however to my mind the gravity of
the attempt to have charges pending before a
court withdrawn or undermined
justifies a conclusion that the conduct amounts to "substantial failure to reach
or maintain a reasonable
standard of competence". Whatever his client's
instructions were and no matter what his belief in those instructions was, the
respondent's
conduct had a tendency to prevent or defeat the due course of
justice or the administration of the law. I reject the respondent's
submissions
to the contrary, notwithstanding that the charge of perverting the course of
justice against the respondent's client
was not proceeded with, and the charges
against him were dismissed or discontinued.
also reject the submission made by the respondent that "[t]he Appeal submissions
overlook the central element to the practitioners
conduct which was that the
practitioner failed to realise that there was a limit on the application of
Section 131
Evidence Act 2001
", (exclusion of evidence of settlement
negotiations). Whether or not the respondent believed that evidence of his own
or his client's
offers of settlement conditioned upon the withdrawal of the
complaints were inadmissible in evidence is hardly to the point. It
making of those offers, so conditioned, that had a tendency to prevent or defeat
the course of justice or the administration
of the law.
Nor does it matter that the respondent's conduct would not have amounted to the
commission of a crime because of the lack of the
required intention to prevent
or defeat justice or the administration of the law. The standard of competence
and diligence required
of a legal practitioner is to be evaluated on the basis
of what a reasonable member of the public would be entitled to expect of
practitioner. The offers, conditioned as they were, fell substantially short of
the required standard, whether or not they amounted
to a crime.
reaching that evaluative conclusion I respectfully adopt the approach of Brett J
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v Barclay
[2022] TASSC 14
case his Honour said at [11]:
"Although the matter was not the
subject of extensive argument before me, I think it is clear that these
statutory definitions provide
the relevant basis upon which the Court must
characterise the practitioner's conduct. It is clear, in my view, that the
definitions
are intended to replace any notions of what amounts to
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct, formulated
the common law and statutory schemes which are no longer in effect. Under the
legislative definitions, the first step is to
determine whether the conduct
amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct. This involves an evaluative
assessment of the conduct,
measured against the standard of competence and
diligence that a member of the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably
Australian legal practitioner. The second step is to determine
whether the unsatisfactory professional conduct amounts to professional
misconduct. In making this determination, an assessment must be made as to
whether the conduct involved a substantial or consistent
failure to reach or
maintain a reasonable standard of competence and diligence. It is the finding
that the relevant failure has
been substantial or consistent which is critical
to this determination. A further observation which can be made about the
legislative
scheme incorporated into this legislation is that the standard of
competence and diligence required of a legal practitioner is to
be evaluated on
the basis of what a reasonable member of the public would be entitled to expect
of the practitioner. I think that
this results in an important shift of
emphasis away from the formulation which preceded this legislation, which
depended upon what
practitioners of good repute and competency would reasonably
consider to be conduct which could be described as disgraceful or dishonourable.
See for example,
A Legal Practitioner v Law Society of Tasmania
13 Tas R 448.
This change of emphasis in favour of the expectation of
a reasonable member of the public, as opposed to other practitioners, is,
view, entirely consistent with the primary purpose of disciplinary proceedings,
which is the 'protection of the public, the
preservation of the reputation of
the legal profession and the proper administration of justice'. See my comments
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v Lester
[2021] TASSC 41.
Of course, conduct which falls within those earlier definitions may also inform
this Court's exercise of its inherent jurisdiction,
which is preserved by s 510
of the Act, but this is in addition to the statutory definitions, and not
instead of them, see
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v Kitto
31 Tas R 91
, per Blow CJ at [12]."
learned primary judge reached the view that s 421 was not engaged because "the
second limb of s 421 is not satisfied". In so
concluding his Honour accepted a
submission made to him by senior counsel for the respondent, Mr McTaggart SC.
That is to say that
his Honour thought that ss 421(a) and (b) were to be read
conjunctively and that professional misconduct could only be found if the
conduct justified a finding that "the practitioner is not a fit and proper
person to engage in legal practice". That is not so.
it were so then there could never be a case in which conduct of a lawyer
than in connection with the practice of law could
justify a finding of professional misconduct. If the two paragraphs "must be
conjunctively then
personal misconduct
not occurring in connection
with the practice of law could not be professional misconduct" (
the Law Society of New South Wales v Parente
[2019] NSWCA 33
per Basten and
Meagher JJA at [8] (Emphasis added).
This point was conceded by the respondent on the hearing of the appeal through
his counsel Mr McTaggart.
I reject the submissions made by Mr McTaggart that the judgment of Meagher JA
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v Webb
[2013] NSWCA 423
should be taken as authority for the proposition that consideration of
the concept of substantiality in s 421(a) of the Act requires
consideration of
the questions of the practitioner's diligence and competence and in those
respects his fitness to continue in practice.
Such considerations are squarely
within the terms of the alternate route to professional misconduct in s
Even if the consideration contended for by Mr McTaggart was required, I am of
the view that the practitioner's conduct was sufficiently
serious as to in fact
raise questions of his competence and diligence and in that respect his fitness
to practice. Mr McTaggart did
not go so far as to argue that a practitioner must
be found to be unfit to continue in practice before a finding of professional
misconduct may be made against him or her, only that the learned primary judge
ought to have considered the question. Any failure
by the learned primary judge
to consider this issue was not a determinative error, in all of the
circumstances of the respondent's
conduct and his explanations for that
would uphold the appeal and set aside the declaration that the respondent is
guilty of unprofessional conduct and substitute a
declaration that the
respondent is guilty of professional misconduct.
To the extent that it might be necessary to now consider the appropriateness of
the learned primary judges punitive orders, the
Court is satisfied that there is
no need to disturb them.
File No: 2852/2020
LEGAL PROFESSION BOARD OF TASMANIA v GLYNN
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT JAGO J
17 March 2023
I have read the Reasons for Judgment of Estcourt J. I agree that the appeal
should be allowed, the declaration made on 4 August
2022 be set aside and in its
place there be a declaration that the appellant is guilty of professional
misconduct for the reasons
expressed by his Honour. I also agree the
consequential orders made by Geason J should not be disturbed.
agree with the additional Reasons of Porter
File No: 2852/2020
LEGAL PROFESSION BOARD OF TASMANIA v GLYNN WILLIAMS
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT PORTER AJ
17 March 2023
On the application of the appellant, the Legal Profession Board, Geason J
declared the respondent guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct within the
Legal Profession Act
(the Act). The
respondent was reprimanded and ordered to undertake and complete a course in
legal ethics and professional responsibilities.
The Board appeals to this Court against the declaration, seeking in its place a
declaration that the respondent is guilty of professional
misconduct. The Board
did not appeal against the consequential orders and is content they remain the
same in the event the appeal
I have had the advantage of reading the reasons for judgment of Estcourt J in
which his Honour sets out the facts and the relevant
provisions of the Act. For
the reasons his Honour gives, I agree that the appeal should be allowed, the
declaration made on 4 August
2022 be set aside and in its place there be a
declaration that the appellant is guilty of professional misconduct. Assuming it
necessary to revisit the consequential orders, I am also satisfied those made
by Geason J should be left undisturbed.
grounds of appeal are that the primary judge erred in holding that for a finding
of professional misconduct to be made, both
paragraphs (a) and (b) of s 421(1)
need to be satisfied. The second ground alleges a failure on the part of the
primary judge to
make a declaration of professional misconduct, having found the
respondent's conduct constituted a serious failure to reach a standard
competence and diligence.
Estcourt J has noted, at the hearing of the appeal senior counsel for the
appellant conceded ground 1. The concession was one
properly made: see
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v Parente
[2019] NSWCA 33
Tangsilat v Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
which deal with the same provisions as in this State. Neither of
those cases was cited to the primary judge although senior counsel
Board, in reply to the respondent's first instance argument, referred to
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v Kitto
[2019] TASSC 39
31 Tas R 91
and what was implicit in the approach taken at [11] and [22].
arguing ground 2, senior counsel for the respondent submitted that for there to
be a finding under s 421(1)(a) of a substantial
failure to reach or maintain a
reasonable standard of competence and diligence, the conduct must also be
"sufficiently serious to
raise questions as to the practitioner's competence and
in that respect his fitness to continue in practice."
want to add a few remarks about the submission and the meaning of professional
misconduct as it is defined in s 421(a) of the Act.
For convenience I will set
out the paragraph again:
"Unsatisfactory professional conduct of an
Australian legal practitioner where the conduct involves a substantial or
consistent failure
to reach or maintain a reasonable standard of competence and
diligence."
As Estcourt J has noted, the respondent's submission is squarely based on a
statement made by Meagher JA (with whom Leeming JA and
Simpson J agreed) in
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v Webb
[2013] NSWCA 423
. Paragraphs [21] and [22] should be looked at as a whole. They read as
Legal Profession (Amendment) Act 1987
th[e] distinction between minor and serious professional misconduct [in
Legal Profession Act 1987
as originally enacted]
replaced with one between unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional
misconduct; the latter including unsatisfactory
professional conduct which
involves a substantial or consistent failure to reach or maintain the required
standard of competence
and diligence. As defined ... professional misconduct
includes by paragraph (b) conduct which, if established, would justify a finding
that the legal practitioner is not a fit and proper person to engage in legal
practice. In this context, and having regard to the
history of these provisions,
particularly the distinction drawn in the 1987 Act as originally enacted,
is plain that paragraph (a) of the definition describes serious misconduct which
calls into question the lawyer's competence and
diligence and, in those
respects, his or her fitness to continue in practice
. [My emphasis]
22 The distinction made by that definition is between conduct which involves
a 'substantial' failure to reach or maintain the required
standard and conduct
which involves a "consistent" failure to do so. The former directs attention to
the nature and consequences
of the failure, which may be sufficiently serious to
raise questions as to the lawyer's competence and diligence and thereby warrant
the description "substantial". The reference to a 'consistent failure' is to
ongoing or persisting acts of failing on different occasions
to reach or
maintain the required standard. The same or similar failures which occur on a
series of related occasions and are explained
by an overarching error of
judgment on the part of the lawyer (which is not itself the or a relevant
failure which is the subject
of complaint) do not involve a 'consistent failure'
in the sense in which that expression is used in this definition."
I agree that the case is not authority for the respondent's proposition. I do
not think the Court intended by the highlighted statement
in par [21] to
introduce into paragraph (a) of the definition, a requirement for the conduct to
be of sufficient seriousness to call
into question – whatever that may
mean – the lawyer's competence and diligence "and in those respects
fitness to continue
in practice." With respect, if it were so intended, I would
be satisfied that it is plainly wrong. In my view, particularly when
alongside par [22], the statement is a comment simply in the context of his
Honour's summary of the operation of the former provisions
which dealt with
professional conduct.
any event, as Estcourt J says, in this case the correctness or otherwise of the
statement would have no bearing on the outcome
given the facts of the matter.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (128 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter