URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASRPDComm/2009/31.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:20:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
City of Hobart Planning Scheme 1982 Amendment 1/2009 [2009] TASRPDComm 31 (22 July 2009)
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Planning and Approvals Act 1993
Resource Planning
and Development Commission Act 1997
Decision and Reasons for Decision
CITY OF HOBART PLANNING SCHEME 1982
Draft Amendment 1/2009
Draft Amendment 1/2009 has 6 parts relating to Precinct 33 including the
establishment of a Lower Sandy Bay escarpment building
meeting on 18 May 2009 and pursuant to Section 8 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission Act 1997
, the Commission
delegated to Mr Robin Nolan and Commissioner Roger Howlett jointly and
powers and functions under
sections 40
(2), of the
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
in relation to draft amendment
1/2009 to the City of Hobart Planning Scheme 1982; and
connection with the exercise of those powers in performance of those functions,
its powers under Part 3 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Representors and Issues raised in
Representations
Representations were received from the following:
Ms Sorrel Standish-White
W & K Murlagh
Ms Pamela King
Mr Graeme Clennett
Mr Warwick Risby
Ms Raeleen Lawrence
Mr & Mrs Clive & Sandy Skilbeck
Mr & Mrs Damon & Elizabeth Thomas
Mrs Maria Fiotakis
Ms Lisa Romero
Mr & Mrs David & Jan Ritz
Cassy O’Connor MP
Ms Jillian Goater
Professor Craig Johnson
Mr Thomas Daniel Sprod obo Gleewyn Georgene Sprod
Ms Anne Barwick
Mr & Mrs DC & DM Thomson
Ms Suzanne Lockhart
Ms Stephanie Cooper
Ms June Noble
Mr Peter Watson
Mr & Mrs Richard & Irene Donaldson
Mr Peter Rumney
Mr & Mrs Graeme & Helen Yeoland
Mr & Mrs A & M Loidl obo M Packer, V O’May and K & D
Mr & Mrs Douglas & Susan Carter
Mr Paul Thomson
Ms Lynda Hove
Ms Marian Thomson
Mr Josef Giedl
Date and Place of Hearing: Tuesday 30 June 2009
Resource Planning and
Development Commission
144 Macquarie Street, Hobart
at the Hearing
Mr J McIlhenny represented the Hobart City
Representors
Ms S Lockhart
Mrs S Carter and Mr R Giblin of the Precinct 33 Residents Group.
A number of other representors attended the hearing as
Council advised that the catalyst for the draft
amendment was a submission received by a community group known as
33 Residents Group’. The group raised concerns regarding
the detrimental impact of inappropriate development occurring on
the foreshore
side of Sandy Bay Road, south of Blinking Billy Point, and the effect of this on
the character of the area and residential
This area of Lower Sandy Bay is within the Residential 2 zone and the Riverview
Precinct (No. 33). It is characterised by relatively
long and narrow
rectangular lots with short frontages to Sandy Bay Road and the foreshore with
mostly high water title to the River
Derwent. An escarpment, of varying
magnitude, is present above high water mark. Difficulties associated with
building on excessive
slopes has resulted in development being concentrated on
the more moderate sloping upper and middle portions of these lots. While
land containing the escarpment is (generally) unable to be built upon, its area
is used to determine site coverage and calculate
the dwelling unit factor
causing a disproportionate pattern of development concentrated on the more
moderate slopes. Redevelopment
over recent years has seen increased dwelling
density which has generated amenity issues including visual intrusion,
overshadowing
and loss of privacy. In addition the scale of buildings often on
resubdivided rear lots has encouraged building close to, and to
overhang, the
escarpment with the representors claims that this is adverse to the environment
of the river edge and the visual amenity
of the river.
Issues raised in the representations
Of the 31 representations received, Twenty nine representations were in support
of the draft amendment while the remaining two representations
following issues associated with the draft amendment:
relating to steep areas being excluded from calculations to determine density
and reduction in height restriction should
apply to other areas within the
municipality;
dwellings should be included as a dwelling unit when calculating density;
All existing
development should be included in the area used to calculate the number of new
dwellings to prevent over development;
surrounding the interpretation of the introductory paragraph to clause
Council’s Response to the Representations
Council’s s.39(2) report considered the representations received during
the exhibition period of the draft amendment. Council
resolved that issues
raised in the representations warranted modifications to part 1 of the draft
amendment concerning clause AS1.2.
Council’s recommended modification is
assessed below.
Commission’s assessment of the draft amendment
The draft amendment relates to Schedule K – Rescode and principally
precinct 33. The matters specific to precinct 33 are to:
define a Lower
Sandy Bay Escarpment Line
exclude areas
east of the Lower Sandy Bay Escarpment Line from the site area used to calculate
dwelling unit factor and maximum site
reduce the site
coverage to 25% and reduce the height of buildings to 7.5m;
additional clause AS4.5 stipulating a 20m building setback from the Lower Sandy
Bay Escarpment Line;
insert a new
Clause PC4.5 ensuring buildings are ‘designed and sited to avoid, remedy
or mitigate any adverse effects on landscape
and visual values of the
estuary’; and for general application to residential zones
restructure
AS1.2 and AS1.4 providing for a more comprehensive and consistent format.
exclude any part
of a site not zoned Residential from the site area used to calculate maximum
site coverage;
City of Hobart Planning Scheme 1982
Precinct 33 is located within the Residential 2 zone. The objective of the zone
is ‘to enhance the character and amenity of
areas of predominantly
detached houses, with limited development of complementary dwelling types and
minimum intrusion ...of non-residential
The Statement of Desired Future Character for the Riverview Precinct (no.33)
Development within the Precinct should be confined to residential activities
and should acknowledge the fine river views and vistas
afforded to residents and
motorists alike.
Table A1 of the Use Schedule (Schedule A) permits Use Groups I –
development of land for a house, ancillary flat, home occupation.
II, IV, V, VI, VII, XI and XVI are discretionary, these include development of
land for a flat, elderly persons unit,
domestic business, consulting rooms,
community centre, hospital, welfare institution, educational establishment,
active recreation
and local shop.
Schedule K – Rescode applies to development involving use Groups I-IV and
subdivision in the Residential zones.
Policy context for the draft amendment
The draft amendment addresses the planning scheme provisions in the subject area
relating to dwelling density and the bulk of buildings,
being site coverage,
building height and setback. The intent is to bring residential development
standards in precinct 33 into a
dwelling density and building envelope framework
more consistent with other Residential 2 zone areas within the planning scheme.
The area has development constraints requiring policy settings specific to the
situation where there are relatively large lots with
steep escarpments with
considerable building constraints. The transfer of the accrued
‘development rights’ to the less
steep land has concentrated density
and bulk of buildings at a scale larger than otherwise would be able to be
achieved as permitted
development. By reducing the dwelling density the scope
for additional dwellings in the vicinity of the escarpment is reduced and
environmental outcomes improved.
The next policy issue is that although the draft amendment would have the effect
of bringing controls more in line with other areas,
the proposed amendment
constitutes a significant reduction on the permitted development density than is
currently available. This
is likely to increase the use of the performance
criteria thus leading to an increase in the discretionary provisions for
or refusing permits. This is a matter of concern for some sectors in
the community who seek to have planning schemes minimise uncertainty
in approval
processes. It is also an issue which the Commission needs to consider very
carefully to ensure that planning schemes
provide clarity to all parties
involved in the implementation of planning schemes.
When examined on this issue at the hearing Mr McIlhenny accepted that the
changes would likely increase the requests for the exercise
of the performance
criteria, but Council accepted this as part of setting standards in a physically
difficult area where there is
strong demand for housing. Mr McIlhenny also
submitted that Precinct 33 was relatively small and the changed standards should
little impact on total dwelling stock. Whilst the Commission encourages
the regulation of building to match community expectations
and for a balanced
regulatory regime that adds certainty to the approvals process, it acknowledges
the difficulty of building in
precinct 33 and is satisfied that permitted
building status should still be able to be gained through compliance with the
Ms Lockhart claimed that the stricter standards of the draft amendment should be
extended to the rest of the residential zones in
the city. In response to this
representation, the Commission views zones and precincts as mechanisms for
defining standards specific
to relatively small areas of the city where this is
warranted and secondly, this call for wider application is outside the available
determinations on the draft amendment.
An additional matter is the stage of the draft City of Hobart Planning Scheme
that is about to be exposed to public forums prior
to Council submitting the
draft to the Commission for certification. Mr McIlhenny advised the provisions
in the draft amendment
are also in the draft planning scheme. This will allow
for a testing of the proposed provisions during consideration of the planning
scheme approval process.
Having considered the policy context, the separate parts to the draft amendment
are examined below.
1. AMENDMENT 1/2009 - 1
The certified draft amendment specified:
‘Amend Schedule K by omitting
Clause AS1.2 (not including Table 1) and substituting the following:
The number of new dwelling units on a development site shall be the lowest whole
number determined by apportioning the site area
according to the relevant
dwelling unit factors prescribed in Table 1 subject to the following:
(a) the dwelling unit factor does not prevent the development of a single
dwelling on an existing lot;
(b) for the purposes of calculating the dwelling unit factor an ancillary
dwelling shall not be counted as a dwelling unit;
(c) the area of the site associated with existing houses, as determined by AS1.1
(Minimum rear garden area), K.3.2 (Private Open
Space) and K.3.3 (Parking and
Access) shall not be included in the area for the purpose of calculating the
number of new dwellings
Figures 3 & 4
(d) any part of the site not in the Residential 1, 2, 3 or 4 Zones shall not be
included in the site area for the purpose of calculating
the number of new
(e) any part of a site east of the Lower Sandy Bay Escarpment Line (Figure 1A)
shall not be included in the site area for the purpose
of calculating the number
of new dwellings; and
(f) if the site contains existing flats the total number of dwelling units on
the site shall not exceed the number allowed if the
Ms Noble’s representation raised concerns about the application of the
clause where she claimed that the proposed changes would
affect all precincts
and will mean fewer houses will be permitted than under the current provisions.
The representation attached
legal advice that contended the draft clause as
drafted was ambiguous. Alternative wording was provided by the representor that
was adopted by the Council and recommended as a modification to the draft
The proposed revised AS1.2 is as follows:
- In order to aid interpretation of Clause AS1.2, replace the first paragraph of
AS1.2 with:
The number of new dwelling units on a development site shall be determined as
(1) for the Residential Zone, Precinct 46, by dividing the site area
) by 155 for each new dwelling; and
(2) in any other zone or precinct, first by subtracting from the site area
) the figure prescribed in Table 1 for the first new
dwelling and secondly by dividing the balance by the figure prescribed in Table
1 for additional new dwellings subject to the following:
- In Clause AS1.2(b) omit the word “
” and substitute
with the word “
The revised wording shown above removes the ambiguity that had been identified
in the representation and should ensure the existing
provisions are carried in
to the amended provisions.
The amendment for AS 1.2 contains two additional provisions. First, AS1.2(d)
removes any part of a lot in a non residential zone
from the application of the
dwelling unit calculations. This clause applies across the planning scheme and
is an appropriate clarification
for lots in more than one zone. The second
matter at AS1.2(e) is specific to precinct 33 and removes land east of the Lower
Bay Escarpment Line from the calculation of number of new dwellings.
Proposed AS1.2(d) will remove in some cases significant portions
of lots from
the dwelling unit calculations but is a necessary provision to achieve the
objective of reducing excessive concentrations
of dwellings on the less steep
slopes of the precinct.
The parts of the draft amendment concerning AS1.2 and AS1.4 also rationalise the
existing scheme layout by bringing provisions in
brackets and notes signified by
asterisks fully into the respective provisions. This change to remove add-on
notes etc to clauses
is endorsed.
Draft amendment AS1.2 should be approved with the additional modifications
recommended by Council.
2. AMENDMENT 1/2009 - 2
The certified draft amendment specified:
‘Amend Schedule K by omitting
Clause AS1.4 and substituting the following:
A lot shall have a maximum site coverage of:
(1) 40% in Precincts 7 14 15A 19A 25A 26A 27A;
(2) 30% in Precincts 17 19B 21A 21B 22 23 24 25B 25C 25D 26B 26C 27B 27C 30A 30B
34A 35A 35B 37B 46; and
(3) 25% in Precincts 24A 33 35C 36 37C 37D 39;
subject to the following:
(a) the maximum permitted site coverage on any lot with an area greater than
(b) on any lot approved by Council under PC1.4 the maximum site coverage may be
the same as allowed by the building envelope shown
on the subdivision plan;
(c) any part of the site not in the Residential 1, 2, 3 or 4 Zones shall not be
included in the site area for the purpose of calculating
the maximum site
coverage; and
(d) any part of a site east of the Lower Sandy Bay Escarpment Line (Figure 1A)
shall not be included in the site area for the purpose
of calculating the
maximum site coverage.”
This part of the draft amendment is to reduce the maximum building site coverage
from 30% to 25% for precinct 33. In addition as
for AS1.2 above the amendment
removes parts of lots that are in non residential zones from the site coverage
calculations and brings
in former notes into the body of AS1.4. The proposed
changes are in the same context as AS1.2 and should be
3. AMENDMENT 1/2009 - 3
The certified draft amendment specified:
‘Amend Schedule K by inserting
“Figure 1A Lower Sandy Bay Escarpment Line” (Attachment A) after
Clause K.3.1.’
part of the draft amendment is to identify on a plan the Lower Sandy Bay
Escarpment Line and a 20m line up slope of the Escarpment
Line that is to set a
building setback. The showing of these lines on a plan is essential to the
operation of the provisions. The
issue is the presentation of the respective
lines on a plan of suitable scale that to the greatest degree possible removes
over the location of the lines as, particularly the Escarpment Line, is
critical to the operation of the clauses.
Mr McIlhenny described the process of defining the Escarpment Line on the
Council’s GIS system and the plan can be presented
at the scale acceptable
to the Commission. It is considered that the plan to be referred to should be
included physically in the
scheme. This being the case the preferred plan is at
a scale of 1:3000 scale which fits an A3 sheet Whilst this is not a scale
generally used, the detail at this scale should enable the Escarpment Line to be
located with the necessary accuracy for a statutory
Part 3 of the draft amendment should be modified to insert Figure 1A being a
plan an A3 sheet at 1:3000 scale.
4. AMENDMENT 1/2009 - 4
The certified draft amendment specified:
Amend Schedule K Clause AS4.1 by
inserting “33,” in sub-clause (a) after ‘24A’.
This part of the draft
amendment is to reduce the acceptable solution maximum building height from 9m
to 7.5m. Currently a 7.5m height
applies to only 3 precincts, however Mr
McIlhenny advised that the draft planning scheme proposes to extend the 7.5m
permitted height
to all residential zones.
As for the above parts of the draft amendment this is another element towards
reducing the building envelope for precinct 33 consistent
with the intent.
Part 4 of the draft amendment should be approved as certified.
5. AMENDMENT 1/2009 - 5
The certified draft amendment specified:
Amend Schedule K Clause K.3.4 by
inserting the following after Clause AS4.4:
Buildings shall be setback a minimum distance of 20m landward of the top of the
Lower Sandy Bay Escarpment Line (Figure 1A) other
than for the purpose of
extension to an existing building where that extension does not extend further
seaward than the existing
building and is within the existing building’s
footprint.”
The part of the draft amendment introduces, as an acceptable solution, a setback
of 20m from the Escarpment Line for new dwellings,
but allows extensions to
existing buildings. The clause as drafted introduces concepts of existing
building and building footprint
that lack certainty of definition for an
acceptable solution.
As part of the hearing, parties were invited to assist in resolving the
definitional issues, and together submitted the following
as a substitute
Buildings shall be
(a) setback a minimum distance of 20m landward of the Lower Sandy Bay Escarpment
Line (Figure 1A); or
(b) a minor extension (of no greater than 15m
existing building*.
* existing building is one which is in place or approved as at (amendment
The proposed substitute clause provides the basis of an acceptable solution
provision for buildings on lots within the area between
the building setback and
the Escarpment Line. With further modification to define that the extension to
buildings applies to the
area within 20m of the Escarpment Line and to refer to
precinct 33, part 5 of the draft amendment should be approved with
modifications.
6. AMENDMENT 1/2009 - 6
The certified draft amendment specified:
Amend Schedule K Clause K.3.4 by
inserting the following after Clause PC4.4:
A building must be designed and sited to avoid, remedy or mitigate any adverse effects on landscape and visual values of the estuary.”
This part of the draft amendment introduces as a
performance criterion the alternative to the requirement for a setback of 20m
the Escarpment Line for new dwellings and the limitations on building
extensions. The clause as drafted requires elaboration of
‘landscape and visual values of the estuary’ to provide criteria for
assessment.
As for the acceptable solution AS4.5, at the hearing parties were invited to
assist in resolving the definitional issues, and together
submitted the
following as a substitute clause:
A building must be designed and sited to minimise unreasonable impacts on views
of the escarpment from the estuary by means such
(a) The use of suitable landscaping and/or
(b) The use of non-reflective materials on facades visible from the river;
(c) The use of subdued colours.
Buildings shall not extend seaward of the Lower Sandy Bay Escarpment
The substitute clause devised at the hearing adds to the intent to have the view
from the estuary a matter for assessment as the
alternative to the acceptable
solution. This concern for the estuary arises from recent development that has
degraded the river
edge by vegetation removal and extensive ground disturbance.
There is also reference in the representations to prospective land
instability
on the steeper slopes. The second part to the substitute clause prohibits
buildings seaward of the Escarpment Line.
This is a new provision that has
merit but is assessed as being beyond power to introduce as a modification but
should be introduced
as part of the assessment of the performance criteria.
Part 6 of the draft amendment should be approved with
modifications.
Application of State Policies
State Coastal Policy1996:
The draft amendment involves land in the coastal
zone as defined by the Policy. Many aspects of the Policy have application to
land and within the scope of bringing greater protection of the foreshore
and escarpment interface, the draft amendment is assessed
as being prepared in
accordance with the Policy.
Policy on Water Quality Management 1997
The draft amendment concerns land where storm water runoff and waste water can
be managed consistent with the Policy.
National environmental protection measures
National environmental protection measures are assessed as not applicable to the
land in the draft amendment.
Schedule 1 Objectives
(a) to promote the
sustainable development of natural and physical resources and the maintenance of
ecological processes and genetic
The objective is furthered through increasing protection of land primarily from
20m upslope of the escarpment through to the estuary
below. By reducing impacts
on the shoreline ecological processes and genetic diversity should be
(b) to provide for the fair, orderly and sustainable use and development
of air, land and water
The initiation of the draft amendment was prompted
through residents’ concern for the changes taking place in precinct 33
have led to a significant increase in dwelling density and building bulk
over what has been the situation. Loss of waterfront amenity
from the public
domain of the estuary and the building-out of existing houses has not been fair
or orderly. The provisions of the
draft amendment should establish a dwelling
density and building bulk more consistent with the other parts of the
Residential 2 zone.
And to allow a more detailed assessment of proposals which
do not meet the acceptable solution..
(c) to encourage public involvement in resource management and
The draft amendment has been subject to public processes. The application of
the new standards is likely to result in a greater number
of applications that
rely on performance criteria that involve discretion and public processes.
(d) to facilitate economic development in accordance with the objectives
set out in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c)
The amendment furthers this objective albeit further limiting scope for economic
development but consistent with the above objectives.
(e) to promote the sharing of responsibility for resource management and
planning between the different spheres of Government, the
community and industry
in the State.
The draft amendment furthers this objective through community involvement in the
initiation of the draft amendment and government
and industry responding to the
implementation of the revised standards.
The part 2 objectives are furthered principally in
respect to setting controls for the use, development and protection of land
the planning scheme, that secures a pleasant, efficient and safe living
environment and that fully considers land capability.
In accordance with s.40(1) of LUPAA, the draft amendment, representations and
Council’s report have been considered. The application
principally
concerns precinct 33 at Lower Sandy Bay. The area has been under development
pressure and the resultant dwelling density
and building bulk on lots has been
gained through ‘development rights’ over land that is mostly
unsuitable for building
and concentrating those rights in a relatively small
area of the lot. The increased density has brought dwellings much closer to
escarpment and in some cases overhang the escarpment, adversely impacting on
the estuarine environment. The draft amendment
seeks to make the visual values
of the Derwent estuary relevant in decisions on building form and location.
Whilst the draft amendment
significantly reduces the potential for dwellings and
building bulk on lots, the changes are assessed as reasonable in the context
their application.
The draft amendment with modifications is in order and should be
Pursuant to
Section 41(ab)
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
the Commission modifies the draft amendment as set out in Annexure A and
gives its approval to the draft amendment as modified pursuant
to Section 42 of
Robin Nolan
Roger Howlett
Resource Planning and Development Commission
22 July 2009
Attachments: Annexure A
Resource Planning and Development Commission
CITY OF HOBART PLANNING SCHEME 1982
Amendment 1/2009
The Scheme is amended as follows
AMENDMENT 1/2009 - 1
Amend Schedule K by omitting Clause AS1.2 (not including Table 1) and
substituting the following:
The number of new dwelling units on a development site shall be determined as
(3) for the Residential 1 Zone, Precinct 46, by dividing the site area
) by 155 for each new dwelling; and
(4) in any other zone or precinct, first by subtracting from the site area
) the figure prescribed in Table 1 for the first new
dwelling and secondly by dividing the balance by the figure prescribed in Table
1 for additional new dwellings subject to the following:
(a) the dwelling unit factor does not prevent the development of a single
dwelling on an existing lot;
(b) for the purposes of calculating the dwelling unit factor an ancillary flat
shall not be counted as a dwelling unit;
(c) the area of the site associated with existing houses, as determined by AS1.1
(Minimum rear garden area), K.3.2 (Private Open
Space) and K.3.3 (Parking and
Access) shall not be included in the area for the purpose of calculating the
number of new dwellings
Figures 3 & 4
(d) any part of the site not in the Residential 1, 2, 3 or 4 Zones shall not be
included in the site area for the purpose of calculating
the number of new
(e) any part of a site east of the Lower Sandy Bay Escarpment Line (Figure 1A)
shall not be included in the site area for the purpose
of calculating the number
of new dwellings; and
(f) if the site contains existing flats the total number of dwelling units on
the site shall not exceed the number allowed if the
site were vacant.”
AMENDMENT 1/2009 - 2
Amend Schedule K by omitting Clause AS1.4 and substituting the following:
A lot shall have a maximum site coverage of:
(4) 40% in Precincts 7 14 15A 19A 25A 26A 27A;
(5) 30% in Precincts 17 19B 21A 21B 22 23 24 25B 25C 25D 26B 26C 27B 27C 30A 30B
34A 35A 35B 37B 46; and
(6) 25% in Precincts 24A 33 35C 36 37C 37D 39
subject to the following:
(a) the maximum permitted site coverage on any lot with an area greater than
(b) on any lot approved by Council under PC1.4 the maximum site coverage may be
the same as allowed by the building envelope shown
on the subdivision plan;
(c) any part of the site not in the Residential 1, 2, 3 or 4 Zones shall not be
included in the site area for the purpose of calculating
the maximum site
coverage; and
(d) any part of a site east of the Lower Sandy Bay Escarpment Line (Figure 1A)
shall not be included in the site area for the purpose
of calculating the
maximum site coverage.”
AMENDMENT 1/2009 - 3
Amend Schedule K by inserting “Figure 1A Lower Sandy Bay Escarpment
Line” (Attachment A) after Clause K.3.1.
AMENDMENT 1/2009 - 4
Amend Schedule K Clause AS4.1 by inserting “33,” in sub-clause (a)
after ‘24A’.
AMENDMENT 1/2009 - 5
Amend Schedule K Clause K.3.4 by inserting the following after Clause AS4.4:
‘In Precinct 33:
(a) a building shall be setback a minimum distance of 20m landward of the Lower
Sandy Bay Escarpment Line (Figure 1A); or
(b) where an existing building at within 20m landward of the Lower Sandy Bay
Escarpment Line an extension to the floor area including
open balconies and
verandahs of no greater than 15m
AMENDMENT 1/2009 - 6
Amend Schedule K Clause K.3.4 by inserting the following after Clause PC4.4:
In Precinct 33 a building must be designed and sited to minimise unreasonable
impacts on views of the escarpment from the estuary
by means such as:
(a) minimising land disturbance and retention of native vegetation
(b) the use of suitable landscaping;
(c) the use of non-reflective materials on facades visible from the estuary;
(d) the use of subdued colours on external building surfaces; and/or
(e) . siting the building including the extent of any cantilevered section no
further seaward than the Lower Sandy Bay Escarpment
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (167 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter