URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASSC/2025/46.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:21:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Director of Public Prosecutions v Brown [2025] TASSC 46 (26 September 2025)
[2025] TASSC 46
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA
of Public Prosecutions v Brown
[2025] TASSC
: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
DELIVERED ON:
26 September
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
18 September
JUDGMENT OF:
Shanahan CJ
Criminal Law – Sentence – Post-custodial orders – Other
Application for
high risk offender order – Applicant sentenced to 8-year custodial term
– Earliest release date 31 October
2025 – Relatively high risk of
reoffending as assessed by sentencing judge – Long history of violence and
Applicant would be denied the support he needs and his
re-integration with the community would be put at significant risk in absence
order – Applicant poses an unacceptable risk of committing another serious
offence unless a high risk offender order is
made – Order made.
Aust Dig Criminal Law [3425]
Legislation:
Dangerous Criminals and High Risk Offenders Act
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Office of Director of
Public Prosecutions
Respondent:
Tasmania Legal
Judgment Number:
[2025] TASSC 46
paragraphs:
Serial No 46/2025
File No 594/2025
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS v CHRISTO
REASONS FOR DECISION SHANAHAN CJ
26 September 2025
Director of Public Prosecutions ("DPP") applies, by an application filed on 2
July 2025, for a high risk offender order in respect
of the respondent, Christo
Brown, pursuant to
Dangerous Criminals and High Risk Offenders
State filed submissions dated 15 September 2025.
hearing the parties on 18 September 2025, the DPP applied to amend the
application to change the date of Mr Brown's conviction
for the crime of rape
from "28 July 2018" to "28 September 2018". I made an order to that
Brown was initially represented by Legal Aid. Legal Aid subsequently indicated,
prior to the hearing, that it would apply to
withdraw. Indeed counsel for the
respondent made that application at the outset of the hearing. Ultimately,
however, Mr Brown agreed
that Legal Aid continue to represent him. Ms Clark
appeared for him at the hearing of this application. The assistance of counsel
for both parties was valuable.
Brown's earliest release date is 31 October 2025.
Brown is a "relevant offender" for the purposes of the
. He was born on 30
March 1997 and is currently aged 28 years.
Brown was sentenced by Pearce J to eight years' imprisonment with eligibility
for parole following his conviction for the rape
of a 76 year old woman in 2015.
I will not reiterate the facts but note the sentencing judge's assessment that
Mr Brown's risk of
reoffending was "relatively high".
As a fourteen year old, Mr Brown also has one prior conviction for a serious
offence under the
being the crime of arson for which he was convicted with
other offences on 6 August 2012.
on bail Mr Brown spent time in Queensland where he was convicted of a sexual
assault which occurred in July 2016. Again,
I will not reiterate the facts.
July 2019 Mr Brown was convicted of four counts of assault and an aggravated
burglary in relation to an incident in January 2015.
He has been in custody
since 9 November 2017. As it can be seen, he has served a longer time in prison
than the non-parole period
for the sentence on his conviction for rape and, at
the time of his release, will not have been in the general community for eight
I have read the materials supplied. In particular, but not limited to, the
Behaviour and Management Report submitted to the DPP
on 1 April 2025, and the
Risk Assessment Report of Associate Professor Rajan Darjee dated 22 June 2025.
The first was provided to
the DPP pursuant to
and the latter
pursuant to
the hearing it became clear that the making of the order, as such, was not
opposed, with the points of contention focussing
upon (i) two of the conditions
sought by the DPP relating to the terms of a curfew and the consumption of
alcohol, and (ii) the length
of the operational period of such an order.
Essentially, Mr Brown wishes to move to Perth, Western Australia, to avoid
pro-criminal
connections in Tasmania which he considers may hamper his
rehabilitation and reintegration into the community.
have carefully considered material and the submissions put on behalf of Mr
Brown. I have also noted reports of his conduct in
prison over recent times.
In his letter to the Court dated 20 August 2025 provided at a time when Legal
Aid had indicated it was
proposing to withdraw, Mr Brown attaches at "1" an
undated letter to the sentence panel where he notes at un-numbered p 2 (italics
added), "Through my support networks, and my hard work in the courses that are
available to me I have been incident free for the
entire time I have been in the
minimum facility,
demonstrating that in the right environment with the right
I can successfully pursue rehabilitation." That passage recognises
and demonstrates Mr Brown's need for on-going support in the
community following
his release.
the absence of an order Mr Brown would be denied the support he needs and his
re-integration with the community would be put at
significant risk. This
conclusion has to be understood in the context of the Behaviour and Management
Report. That report described
Mr Brown's attitude as a prisoner (p 3). Albeit
that they are disputed by Mr Brown (see his account set out above), the summary
provided examples of Mr Brown's reported conduct in prison, to the effect
"These behaviours indicate a disregard for rules and a tendency to intimidate
and make inappropriate advances towards female staff.
Mr Brown can be polite
and courteous, however he is often observed engaging in inappropriate behaviour
towards female staff. There
is no basis upon which I can conclusively resolve
these factual disputes. However in exercising the Court's jurisdiction in this
matter, I am primarily concerned with risk rather than establishing the precise
nature of Mr Brown's conduct in prison."
summary the Behaviour Management Report stated (at p 4):
"(i) Mr Brown is a young man, with a long history of violence and drug use.
Mr Brown has made treatment gains, and his behaviour
change has been noticed
among wider staff. However, Mr Brown still presents with many of the risk
factors associated with sexual
and violent offending, and he is in the above
average risk of future sexual offending. Therefore Mr Brown will require a high
of intervention and risk management in the community if he is to be
released on parole.
(ii) Mr Brown has shared his willingness and openness to continue working
through his anxiety and substance use in the community.
Mr Brown has been
eligible for parole for several years but has not completed the relevant
treatment to be eligible.
(iii) Mr Brown has had effective engagement; however it is noted his risk has
been assessed in a custodial environment. To mitigate
the risks he poses, Mr
Brown would benefit from strict community supervision so he can effectively
integrate into the community with
his risk assessment, Associate Professor Darjee notes of Mr Brown (p 29) that
"Given the level of risk, ... [Mr Brown] ... is
assessed as posing he will
require long term intensive monitoring, supervision and intervention in the
community to prevent further
sexual violence. He is likely to require external
risk management for a long period of time. The offence specific treatment he
has received in custody has not significantly reduced the risk he poses,
ameliorated relevant dynamic factors, or helped him develop
relevant prosocial
skills ... In addition, he will require ongoing restrictions and interventions
so he does not use alcohol or other
substances in the community".
Brown sought to vary the conditions the DPP sought at paragraphs (k) and (n),
In respect of (k), by amending the relevant curfew
times provided, and at (n) by
allowing the consumption of alcohol up to the legal limit.
I am satisfied that, as recommended by Community Corrections, a curfew with
inbuilt flexibility is required, and it will
only be made verifiable by way of
electronic monitoring, with resort to police checks in exigent circumstances.
On the basis of
the material provided to me, I consider that the conditions
relating to curfew and alcohol consumption as sought by the DPP should
varied as sought by Mr Brown.
the whole of the material provided to the Court and the submissions made at the
hearing, I am satisfied to the high degree of
probability as required by
, that Mr Brown poses "an unacceptable risk of committing another
serious offence" unless a high risk offender order is made in relation
to the length of the order, the DPP sought the maximum term of five years. I
explained to Mr Brown, through his counsel, that
he may be in a stronger
position to seek to vary or have the order discharged after a period of
demonstrated compliance in the community.
accept the DPP's submission as to the required length of the order. I do so on
the basis of the risk assessment provided and because
that the safety of the community must be the paramount consideration when
determining whether or not to make an order. Further,
necessarily implies the significance of that consideration when framing any
conditions to apply upon any such order being made, including
its length.
I have said, on the whole of the material, I am satisfied that a high risk
offender order should be made in respect of Mr Brown.
I am satisfied that the
operational period sought, of five years, is appropriate. I will impose the
conditions as sought by the
DPP to reflect the recommendations provided to me
and also pursuant to
make a high risk offender order for a period of five years to commence on the
date of release.
relation to the conditions of the order, there will be the core conditions as
. These will be conditions (a)–(j) of the
(a) a condition that the
must not, during the
operational
of the order, commit an offence that is punishable by
imprisonment;
(b) a condition that the
must report by close of business on Monday, 3 November 2025 to a
at an address as directed by Community Corrections;
(c) a condition that the
must, during the
operational
of the order, report to a
as required by the probation officer;
(d) a condition that the
must, during the
operational
of the order, reside at premises approved by a probation officer;
(e) a condition that the
must, during the
operational
of the order, permit a police officer to enter the premises at which
(f) a condition that the
must, during the
operational
of the order, permit a police officer to –
(i) conduct a search of the premises at which the
resides; and
(ii) conduct a frisk search, within the meaning of the
Warrants Act 1997
at the premises at which the
resides or at any other place or premises; and
(iii) take a sample of any substance found on the premises at which the
resides or on the person of the offender;
(g) a condition that the
must comply with any reasonable and lawful directions of a police officer,
, including any directions as to the kind of employment, or the place
of employment, of the offender;
(h) a condition that the
must, during the
operational
of the order, if directed by a
to engage in a personal development activity, counselling or
treatment, engage in that activity, counselling, or treatment, in accordance
with any directions given by the probation officer;
(i) a condition that the
must not leave the State of Tasmania except with the approval of the Director of
Corrective Services;
(j) a condition that the
must, during the
operational
of the order, submit to the supervision of a
as required by the
are additional conditions the Court may impose under
and the State seeks
the application of a further six conditions – refer to
ss 38(2)(a)
(2)(b), These will be conditions (k)–(p) of the order,
(k) a condition that the offender must, during the operational period of the
order, between 8:00 pm and 6:00 am daily, be at premises
approved by a probation
officer and present himself to police if required to do so, except if
the offender is not, for a relevant
reason, at the premises or has the
prior approval of the probation officer to be absent;
(l) a condition that the offender must, during the operational period of the
order or unless determined by a probation officer, submit
to electronic
monitoring, including by wearing or carrying an electronic device;
(m) a condition that if the offender is, in accordance with paragraph (l),
required to submit to electronic monitoring –
(i) the offender must not remove, tamper with, damage or disable any device used
for the purpose of the electronic monitoring;
(ii) the offender must not allow anyone else, except a probation officer, police
officer or prescribed officer, to remove, tamper
with, damage or disable any
device or equipment used for the purposes of electronic monitoring; and
(iii) the offender must comply with all reasonable and lawful directions given
to the offender in relation to the electronic monitoring;
(n) a condition that the offender must not, during the operational period of the
(i) consume alcohol or an illicit drug; or
(ii) possess, use or administer, including self-administer, a substance included
in Schedule 1 of the
Misuse of Drugs Act 2001
or in a manner that would
be unlawful under the
Poisons Act 1971
(o) a condition that the offender must, during the operational period of the
order, when directed to do so by a police officer, probation
prescribed officer, submit to a breath test, urine test, or other test, for the
presence of alcohol, illicit drugs or
medication; and
(p) a condition that the offender must engage in any psychiatric, psychological,
therapeutic or counselling interventions as reasonably
directed by a probation
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (145 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter