URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASGAB/2021/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
KGQ (Administration) [2021] TASGAB 9 (4 February 2021)
KGQ (Administration)
[2021] TASGAB 9
HEARING DATE(S):
4 February 2021
DATE OF ORDERS:
4 February 2021
DATE OF STATEMENT OF REASONS:
18 March 2021
Mrs M Williams, Member
Mr M Trezise, Member
A/Prof J Breen,
APPLICATION:
Application for Administration
CATCHWORDS:
Administration – accommodation issues related to financial
circumstances – least restrictive option – vulnerability
financial exploitation
LEGISLATION CITED:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION:
This decision has been anonymised for the purposes of publication
STATEMENT OF REASONS
Applicant made an application for Administration in respect of Mr KGQ dated 11
September 2020.
hearing of the Application was adjourned on 9 October 2020, with the Public
Trustee (Tas) appointed as Administrator of the estate
of Mr KGQ for the period
of the adjournment and any subsequent adjournment. The adjournment was sought by
the Legal Aid Commission
of Tasmania (‘LACT’), acting on behalf of
Mr KGQ, pending obtaining of an independent medical report by Mr KGQ, as he
disputed the medical evidence before the Board. Mr KGQ has consulted a
psychiatrist, Dr Anca Corbu, but he told the Board that her
report is not able
to be provided for a period of approximately six months, as time is required to
them to be acquainted with each
other and for her to make a comprehensive
assessment. Therefore, on 11 January 2021 LACT, on Mr KGQ’s instructions,
the matter to be listed and for the Application to be determined on 4
February 2021.
4 February 2021, the Guardianship and Administration Board (‘the
Board’) found that Mr KGQ is a person with a disability,
unable, by reason of that disability, to make reasonable judgments in respect of
his estate and that he is in need of
an Administrator. Full terms of the Order
made are set out at the conclusion of this Statement of Reasons.
KGQ, via LACT, has requested a written Statement of Reasons in relation to the
Board’s decision.
Board heard the Application on 4 February 2021.
attendance at the hearing were:
KGQ (the proposed represented person);
Ewan Higgs, Housing Services Program Manager, Hobart City Mission (as substitute
Applicant, as the applicant was on annual leave);
Robert Wise, Baptcare;
Jessica Watson, Public Trustee;
Gabriella Harvey, Office of Public Guardian;
Ben Harris, LACT; and
Duncan Massey, Advocacy Tasmania.
Board had before it the following documents:
of Emergency Administration Order dated 17 September 2020;
Application
for Guardianship and Administration dated 11 September 2020;
Care Professional Report from Dr Megan McKeown dated 11 September 2020;
Care Professional Report from Dr Angela Retchford dated 27 August 2020;
of Drug Dependency dated 26 July 2020;
Party Notification dated 9 September 2020;
to pharmacies dated 18 August 2020;
Tool Impact, Relationships Australia, undated;
from Applicant to the Board, undated;
from Ms Ford, undated;
from Mr McGill dated 7 April 2020;
from Mr Robert Wise dated 3 September 2020;
Mercury’ newspaper article dated 9 March 2020;
Trustee report dated 16 September 2020;
Administration Order dated 9 October 2020; and
from Mr Ben Harris, LACT, dated 11 January 2021.
Legislation
the Board determines an Application for Administration Order it needs to be
satisfied of the matters in section 51 of the
Guardianship and Administration
1995 (‘the Act’). Those requirements are that the
represented person:
person with a disability; and
unable by reason of the disability to make reasonable judgements in respect of
matters relating to all or any part of his or her
estate; and
in need of an administrator of his or her estate.
Board must also balance the principles in section 6 of the Act, which are:
means which is the least restrictive of a person’s freedom of decision and
action as is possible in the circumstances is
adopted; and
best interests of a person with a disability or in respect of whom an
application is made under this Act are promoted; and
wishes of a person with a disability or in respect of whom an application is
made under this Act, are if possible, carried into
Administration Order may be made for a period of up to 3 years, unless continued
under section 68 of the Act.
Board had before it the Health Care Professional Report (‘HCPR’)
dated 11 September 2020 from Dr Meg McKeown, General
Practitioner
(‘GP’), who had been Mr KGQ’s GP since 24 July 2020. In her
opinion, Mr KGQ has two conditions related
to alcohol use: alcohol related
dementia and acquired brain injury, with those disabilities being moderate but
deteriorating. In
addition, Dr. McKeown states that Mr KGQ has a diagnosis of
bipolar affective disorder, which has been evident since approximately
(noted on previous GP records) with that disability being moderate and
fluctuating.
Board also had before it an additional HCPR from Dr Angela Retchford, Mr
KGQ’s GP for approximately six years (prior to
Dr McKeown). Dr Retchford
also provides a diagnosis of bipolar affective disorder, and additionally,
alcohol abuse/misuse with benzodiazepine
dependence, with all disabilities
having been evident for ‘years’.
KGQ, in giving evidence and responding to questions from the Board, disputed the
contents of Dr McKeown’s report, other than
the diagnosis of bipolar
affective disorder. He stated he had only seen Dr McKeown twice, and she has
made many incorrect assumptions
application, his driver’s licence being suspended and difficulty
collecting his
medications (with reference to the Third Party Notification to
Department of State Growth and the Drug Dependency Notice to pharmacies
in the Board papers above). He firmly disputes he has alcohol related dementia
and acquired brain injury, or any current
issues in relation to alcohol. He
confirmed that he does have bipolar disorder, for which he takes medication
(Seroquel 50mg slow
release in the morning and 200mg a night). He disputed that
he has benzodiazepine dependence, adding that up until recently he had
taking one Valium in the morning and two at night, but that his (now) GP has
reduced that dose to two at night only. He does
not take illicit drugs. He
denied he is an alcoholic. He stated he enjoys drinking ‘once a fortnight
or so’ but now drinks
cider or beer, being ‘more mellow’ with
his drinking compared to the past, when he drank spirits. He told the Board that
he has been to ‘rehab and detox’ on three separate occasions,
related to alcohol. He said that 15 to 20 years ago he
was in a coma for about
23 days and almost died, and that this this was caused from having consumed
three bottles of vodka each day.
Unable by reason of the disability to make reasonable
McKeown and Retchford outline in their respective HCPRs that due to the
disabilities, Mr KGQ’s planning and reasoning skills,
impulse control and
susceptibility to influence are affected. Additionally, Dr McKeown notes that
Mr KGQ’s expressive and
receptive communication are affected. Both
reports outline Mr KGQ’s vulnerability, that he is easily manipulated by
easily coerced by others to give them money and his prescription
medication. As a result, Mr KGQ has multiple debts and is essentially
(living in a van or emergency accommodation such as that provided by ‘Safe
substitute applicant, Mr Higgs, gave evidence at the hearing that he has known
Mr KGQ for approximately 12 months through the
Hobart City Mission ‘Safe
Space’ program, which he manages. Mr Higgs’ concern is that Mr KGQ
is open to manipulation
from others, particularly in relation to his finances,
with the result that he does not have sufficient money to support himself,
as to buy food and register his van. Mr Higgs gave some examples of Mr
KGQ’s decision making. Mr KGQ stated to him and
others that he was staying
at a Housing Tasmania premises, but in fact Mr KGQ had illegally parked his van
outside at a Housing Tasmania
premises in [a suburb in Tasmania] and was using
an extension cord to access power from those premises. Mr KGQ, at other times,
state he is staying in shared premises but is unable to provide any detail
of where and with whom. There is concern that he is sleeping
in a van that is
unregistered and his driver’s licence has been suspended, so he has no
capacity to move the van without relying
on acquaintances, which puts the van at
risk of being towed away.
KGQ gave evidence that his bipolar affective disorder does not affect his
ability to manage his finances. He stated he is able
to meet his debts through
payment plans. The principal issue for him is that the Administrator takes his
entire Centrelink payment,
leaving him with insufficient funds to purchase food,
cigarettes and meet his daily living expenses. In regard to whether he is easily
manipulated by others, he stated ‘people sometimes take my kindness for
weakness.’ but he has got better in not giving
money to people. For
example, if a person does not pay him back, he will now not lend them money
again. An example given is that
in the past his daughter has taken both his
medication and money. He explained she is an ‘ice’ addict and that
longer have any contact with each other.
Need for an Administrator
to need for a substitute decision maker in relation to Mr KGQ’s estate,
the HCPRs note there is a clear need for an Administrator
in relation to all
aspects relating to financial matters including day-to-day finances due to his
vulnerability and the need to pay
debts and ongoing day-to-day expenses.
Similar concerns are noted in the Application.
Higgs gave evidence that Mr KGQ has stayed overnight ‘on and off’ at
the Safe Space premises over that period of time.
He stated Mr KGQ can be too
kind (referring to the manipulation by others which he has observed). In
addition to the examples of
Mr KGQ’s decision making (noted above), Mr
Higgs explained to the Board that accommodation options for Mr KGQ are very
as he has a much-loved dog, which restricts the available rental
properties. Housing Tasmania properties are an issue as Mr KGQ has
a debt with
them. In summary, Mr Higgs stated that Mr KGQ remains vulnerable to financial
exploitation and it is distressing at
times to see Mr KGQ with no money because
his acquaintances take advantage of him. In his view, Mr KGQ needs ongoing
support for
financial matters and decisions to enable him to get to where he
wants to be in life.
addition to a letter authored by Mr Robert Wise from Baptcare, dated 3 September
2020, Mr Wise gave evidence at the hearing that
for 12 months Mr KGQ has been
participating in Baptcare’s mental health program
‘Connections’. Over that time,
they have met on a weekly to
fortnightly basis. Mr Wise first met Mr KGQ in [the suburb in Tasmania], after
he had moved out of
a rental (that had not ended well). At that time Mr KGQ was
living in a caravan with no heating, despite it being winter. Mr KGQ
crisis support (Baptcare is not a crisis support service) so Mr Wise has reached
out to other agencies for assistance
to provide emergency food relief, dog food,
clothing blankets and support. Additionally, over the past 12 months, Mr KGQ
from one form of unstable accommodation to another and has had
acquaintances who have taken or borrowed money from him, because of
susceptibility to influence. Mr Wise stated, at times, Mr KGQ’s decision
making can compromise his own safety, providing
an example of when he parked his
van outside Housing Tasmania premises in [a suburb in Tasmania] and a
significant crime occurred
relating to that residence. The concern was that, by
implication, Mr KGQ could have become involved in the Police investigation.
Wise stated that often Mr KGQ has no money, and he has been seen regularly
begging outside supermarkets for money over the past
few months.
KGQ gave evidence that his position is that he wants to gain back control of the
entirety of his Centrelink pension, that it is
‘impossible to live on $250
a week’ that the Public Trustee (‘PT’) give him out of his
pension. He stated
cigarettes alone cost him $120 per week. He said that he has
been left so short of money that he has been begging, but only as a
the PT not providing sufficient funds. Mr KGQ did agree that a ‘lump
sum’ compensation payment (which he is
to receive shortly from the State
Government for unfortunate abuse he suffered at Ashley Boys Home) can be
administered by the PT,
as they are in a position to assist paying all
outstanding debts from that sum. He stated that he sleeps in his van with his
and ‘lives rough’ but that will only be until his compensation
payment comes through. With whatever amount of money is
left in compensation
after payment of his debts, he plans to buy a mobile van and a boat, retire and
travel. He outlined to the Board
that he has debts with Housing Tasmania,
pharmacies and from penalties from court. He had arrangements with all debtors
(except for
Housing Tasmania) on payment plans before the Administration Order
was in place, so there was no need for PT to become involved or
to continue to
be involved in his day-to-day finances. In his view the PT have been paying out
‘bulk money’ for these
fines and debts, leaving him with a small
weekly payment, whereas he would have put each debt on a different, lesser
payment plan.
Watson, (PT), in addition to the PT report included in the Board’s papers,
advised in relation to the compensation payment,
their office has been contacted
by personnel from the Redress scheme and the matter is in the final stages. As
of the date of the
hearing an offer was being prepared, with three components:
compensation (an unknown but not insignificant amount); an apology; and
offering of counselling and psychological services. Ms Watson clarified that Mr
KGQ (since January 2021) has had an increase in
weekly payment from $250 to
$300. In terms of decisions made on behalf of Mr KGQ, PT have recently paid
registration fees and for
a radiator for the van, and on an ongoing basis, PT
also pays Telstra accounts, the chemist account (not yet cleared) and penalty
payments ($25 per fortnight). There are ongoing frequent requests from Mr KGQ
for additional funds in respect to tobacco and alcohol.
She considers there is
an ongoing need for an Administration Order. In relation to the weekly payments,
Mr KGQ struggles to make
the payment last longer than a few days and there is a
clear need to continue to meet bills and debts. In relation to the compensation
payment, an administrator is required to pay out all outstanding debts, and to
support his plans in relation to the balance of the
funds in the future.
Office of the Public Guardian (OPG), Ms Harvey, submitted there is no current
decision-making role for OPG. Mr KGQ’s ongoing
needs regarding
accommodation relate to financial matters that are more suitably dealt with by
Harris on behalf of Mr KGQ submitted that:
is no need for appointment of a Guardian in relation to accommodation matters as
Mr KGQ’s issues are financially based;
is no need for appointment of an administrator in respect to the Centrelink
portion of administration as Mr KGQ has taken steps
and laid out plans to manage
his Centrelink benefit in way that would be able to manage his day to day needs
and meet his debts by
payment plans; and
does see a need for an Administrator in relation to administration of the
forthcoming compensation payment.
Mr Massey, submitted on Mr KGQ’s behalf that:
KGQ is keen to impress on the Board that although he has been ‘an easy
touch’ when it comes to lending money and choosing
his acquaintances in
the past, he has taken steps to ensure this no longer occurs;
KGQ very much wants to be released from the auspices of the PT in relation to
his fortnightly Centrelink pension and wants to be
in charge of his own money as
he receives insufficient funds to meet his day to day needs; and
KGQ is not concerned as to the prospect of Administration of his compensation
Determination
Is Mr KGQ a person with a disability?
on the medical evidence contained in the two HCPRs at hearing, the Board is
satisfied that Mr KGQ is a person with a disability
as defined in section 3 of
the Act. The diagnosis of bipolar disorder is not disputed. On the evidence,
there is a clear history
of extensive alcohol use in the past, which both GPs
noted that has caused disabilities. At the time of the hearing there was no
medical evidence to the contrary regarding alcohol misuse causing disability.
Is Mr KGQ unable, by reason of the disability, to make
reasonable judgements in respect to his estate?
overwhelming, indeed only, evidence placed before the Board is that, by reason
of the disability, Mr KGQ is unable to make reasonable
judgements in respect to
his financial circumstances/estate. Mr KGQ remains vulnerable to financial
exploitation as a result of his
disability, which affects his ability to make
reasonable judgements in respect to financial matters.
a need for appointment of an Administrator?
Board found that there is a clear need for current decisions to be made for Mr
KGQ related to day to day and other financial matters.
Mr KGQ’s stated
views are that he wishes to regain control of his Centrelink pension fortnightly
payment, but that the Administrator
would be of assistance in relation to the
pending lump sum payout. The Board acknowledges that Mr KGQ has taken positive
avoid manipulation by others. He is personable. He is now clearly on a
much better life trajectory. Nonetheless, the weight of evidence
is that there
is a cogent and ongoing need for the appointment of an Administrator due to Mr
KGQ’s ongoing vulnerability to
financial exploitation, the need to ensure
that Mr KGQ’s outstanding debts and accounts are paid and to ensure Mr
compensation payment is safeguarded.
these circumstances, the Board considered that it is in Mr KGQ’s best
interests that there is an Administrator appointed
and that a plenary
Administration Order is required. There is no need for a Guardianship Order in
relation to accommodation. There
are no current decisions to be made in respect
to accommodation and accommodation issues are largely related to Mr KGQ’
circumstances.
Length of Order
Board considers that given Mr KGQ’s compensation payment is imminent,
(which may well go towards assisting with payment
of his outstanding debts and
therefore assist with ongoing accommodation issues) and that Mr KGQ is obtaining
an independent medical
opinion (which may take a period of six months) the least
restrictive option is to make an Administration Order of significantly
duration than the maximum three-year period allowed under the Act. Therefore,
the Board determined that the appropriate length
of the Administration Order is
just six months.
Public Trustee (Tas) is appointed as Administrator of the estate of Mr KGQ.
Order remains in effect until 3 August 2021.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (177 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter