URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMACT/2018/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Warner v Motor Accidents Insurance Board [2018] TASMACT 3 (1 June 2018)
[2018] TASMACT 3
MOTOR ACCIDENTS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
Warner v Motor Accidents Insurance Board
WARNER, Paul Leslie Silos
MOTOR ACCIDENTS INSURANCE
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
28 May 2018
DELIVERED ON:
1 June 2018
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Chairperson Webster
CATCHWORDS:
Costs – appropriate scale of costs – consent
Motor Accidents (Liabilities & Compensation) Act
Accidents Compensation Tribunal Regulations
Motor Accidents
(Liabilities & Compensation) Regulations
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
; Unilever Australia Limited v Gunn,
Rose Jane & PD Wholesalers
[1998] TASSC 143
Bugg v Motor Accidents
Insurance Board
[2016] TASMACT 3
; Simmons v Motor Accidents Insurance
[2016] TASMACT 1;
Brook v Motor Accidents Insurance Board
[2017] TASMACT 3;
Re Safetycare Australia Pty Ltd
[1999] VSC 321
Gorman v Gorman
[2004] NSWSC 741
Christian Youth Camps Limited v
Cobaw Community Health Services Limited
[2014] VSCA 112
Chen v McNamara
& Son Pty Ltd
[2012] VSCA 229
Yunupingu v Goodsell
(Unreported
decision of the Supreme Court of the Northern Territory dated 24 December 1998);
Blackley v Rigby
[2013] NTSC 12
Geoform Design Pty Ltd v Randwick
City Council
[1995] NSWLEC 80
(1995) 87 LGERA 140
Trident Seafoods Pty
Ltd v Dransfield
[1993] TASSC 87
DETERMINATION:
1. The Motor Accidents Insurance Board pay the account
of Dr Allison dated 12 November 2017 (tax invoice no. 33722KH) in the sum of
2. The Motor Accidents Insurance Board pay the applicant’s
costs of the referral, such costs to be taxed, if not agreed, at
the rate of 85%
of the fees set out in Part 1 of Schedule 1 of the
Supreme Court Rules
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Murdoch Clarke
Respondent:
Phillips Taglieri
[2018] TASMACT 3
Chairperson Webster
INTRODUCTION
1. On 21 March 2018 the applicant, Paul Warner, filed a
reference in the Motor Accidents Compensation Tribunal (“the
in which he says he is aggrieved by the failure or refusal of
the respondent to make payment by way of scheduled benefits in relation
injuries he sustained in a motor vehicle accident which occurred on 11 November
2017. Attached to that reference was a copy
of a letter from his solicitors,
Murdoch Clarke, to the respondent of 14 November 2017 together with his
application for scheduled
benefits and a tax invoice addressed to him for
medical services provided by Dr Helen Allison on 12 November 2017 in the sum of
(the account).
2. A teleconference was held between the parties and
the Deputy Secretary of the Tribunal on 5 April 2018. At that time the Deputy
Secretary was advised the reference had resolved and a consent memorandum would
be forwarded to the Tribunal.
3. On 18 April 2018 the Tribunal received a
consent memorandum signed by both parties which is dated 5 April 2018. It is in
the following
consent the parties seek the following Orders:
the Applicant is entitled to payment of Scheduled Benefits in accordance with
Motor Accidents (Liabilities and Compensation) Act 1973
and Regulations
thereunder in relation to the injuries he sustained in the motor vehicle
accident occurring on 11 November 2017.
the Respondent Motor Accidents Insurance Board pay the Applicant’s costs
of the Referral, such costs to be taxed if not
agreed pursuant to
Schedule 1 of the
Supreme Court Rules 2000
4. The consent memorandum was provided to me on 4 May 2018 at
which time I caused the parties to be advised that I wished to hear
with respect to the power of the Tribunal to make the orders sought. The
reference was therefore listed for submissions
on 17 May 2018.
5. The hearing
did not proceed on 17 May 2018 due to the unavailability of counsel for the
respondent. The reference was therefore
adjourned until 28 May 2018 at the
request of the parties.
6. On 24 May 2018 the Tribunal received a joint
written submission in relation to the second order in the consent memorandum set
in paragraph 3 above. I requested the attendance of the parties on 28 May
2018 because no submissions were provided with respect
to the first order in the
consent memorandum.
DETERMINATION
7. When this matter came on for hearing on 28 May 2018 I
indicated I was not prepared to make the first order sought because it was
required. It simply restates what the legal position is; that is so long as Mr
Warner satisfies the statutory preconditions
to the entitlement to scheduled
benefits then he is entitled to payment of scheduled benefits in accordance with
the Motor Accidents
(Liabilities and Compensation) Act 1973 (“the
Act”) and the
Motor Accidents (Liabilities and Compensation) Regulations
(“the Regulations”). There was nothing on the file with
respect to what expense and/or period of disability allowance
was in dispute
apart from the account. I therefore enquired what orders with respect to what
benefits the applicant actually required.
Counsel for the applicant indicated
the only order that was needed was in relation to payment of the account
attached to the reference.
Counsel for the respondent had no difficulty with
such an order. I therefore ordered the respondent pay the account of Dr Allison
dated 12 November 2017 (tax invoice number 33722KH) in the sum of
8. The second order sought relates to the question of costs.
Regulation 14(1)
Motor Accidents Compensation Tribunal Regulations 2009
deals with the question of costs. That regulation provides:
determining a reference, the Tribunal may order a party to the reference to pay
costs to another party to the reference
and may fix the reasonable amount of
those costs.”
9. That regulation vests in the Tribunal an unfettered
discretion which must be exercised judicially. Ordinarily the proper exercise
of that discretion dictates that costs follow the event and are therefore
awarded to the successful party. The rationale for such
an order was explained
by McHugh J in Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
at 567 in the
following terms:
“The rationale of the
order is that it is just and reasonable that the party who has caused the other
party to incur the costs
of litigation should reimburse that party for the
liability incurred. The order is not made to punish the unsuccessful party.
function is compensatory. Thus, in civil proceedings an order may, and
usually will, be made even though the unsuccessful party
has nearly succeeded or
has acted reasonably in commencing the
proceedings.”
10. The ordinary rule that costs follow the event may be
departed from where the conduct of the successful party, other than that
gave rise to the claim, was unreasonable or improper or where that party did
something connected with the proceedings which
was calculated to cause
unnecessary litigation or expense: Unilever Australia Limited v Gunn, Rose Jane
& PD Wholesalers
[1998] TASSC 143.
It is clear from the material on file
and the consent memorandum that the ordinary rule is not to be departed
11. The usual practice in this Tribunal in making an order for costs
under r14 is to order the unsuccessful party pay the successful
costs of the reference at the rate of 85% of the fees set out in
Schedule 1 of the
Supreme Court Rules 2000
(“the usual practice”).
That practice has been followed in recent years in Bugg v Motor Accidents
Insurance Board [2016]
TASMACT 3, a decision of former Chairperson Carey,
Simmons v Motor Accidents Insurance Board [2016] TASMACT 1, a decision of former
Tribunal Member Chandler, and by me in Brook v Motor Accidents Insurance Board
[2017] TASMACT 3 and Bennett v Motor Accidents Insurance
Board [2018] TASMACT
12. In the joint written submission the parties agreed the Tribunal has an
unfettered discretion in relation to costs which must be
exercised judicially.
In addition the following submissions were made:
page 142 to 143 of his book Law Of Costs, Gino dal Pont says:
‘If a Court or Tribunal is found to have jurisdiction to order costs,
that the litigants have agreed as to the allocation of
costs, or the
quantification, does not itself oust the court’s jurisdiction to make an
alternative allocation or quantification.
However, as courts are rarely
inclined to act inconsistently with the agreement of litigants, circumstances
must be exceptional
for a court to make any such order.’
In relation to this issue the following cases are relevant:
Re Safetycare Australia Pty Ltd
(1999) VSC 312
At paragraph 12, Byrne J. noted ‘I will not make an order which flies
in the face of the parties agreement that each bear its
own costs of the Federal
Court proceeding.’
Gorman v Gorman
(2004) NSWSC 741
At paragraph 105 Barrett J. said: ‘The courts
as to costs is broad...The powers with respect to costs must nevertheless be
exercised judicially...But the duty to act
judicially in relation to costs must
mean that if the court is told that, as a result of an agreement between them,
one particular
party does not seek costs against another party, it is not open
to the court to make, with respect to those two parties, the very
both wish to avoid.’
Christian Youth Camps Limited v Cobaw Community Health Services Limited
(2014) BSCA
At paragraph 10 the court said: ‘As a rule, agreement governing parties
liability for costs will be given effect to –
at least when they are
‘plainly and unambiguously expressed’ – unless there is some
overriding discretionary consideration
which would make enforcement of the
agreement unjust. In the present case, in our view, the parties should be
treated as bound by
the terms of the agreement they made.’
Chen v McNamara & Son Pty Ltd
(2012) VSCA 229
At paragraph 8 the court said: ‘An agreement to pay costs on a
‘special’ basis is only a factor in forming the exercise
court’s discretion, but not requiring the exercise of that discretion in a
particular way. Generally however, where
the parties have unmistakably agreed
to the making of a special costs order, such a term will be given effect to
unless there is
some other discretionary consideration that militates against
the making of such an order.’”
13. Accordingly the parties contended:
(a) both parties in the matter were represented by
experienced counsel;
(b) the respondent (to whom the order is directed) is a
large organisation;
(c) the parties have unambiguously expressed the terms in
which they wish to finalise this matter;
(d) the court has jurisdiction to
make an order in the terms sought;
(e) there is nothing in the circumstances
that militates against the making of such an order and to do so would be unjust
in the circumstances.
14. Re Safetycare Australia Pty Ltd (supra) dealt with an
application to inspect certain books of a company. An earlier application
similar terms in the Federal Court had been discontinued on the basis that each
bear its own costs. It seems the Federal Court
had no jurisdiction to entertain
that application. In making an order for costs in the Supreme Court
application, three exceptional
orders were sought, the third of which was that
the costs of the Supreme Court application should include the costs of the
Court application. The Court refused to make that order on two bases,
the second of which is produced in the joint submission above.
The first was as
will not make an order for costs which includes the cost of the Federal Court
proceeding. First, I incline to the view, although
it is not a concluded view
for I heard no argument on it, that the
Supreme Court Act 1986
confer this power. The Federal Court proceeding is not a matter in the court or
incidental to such a matter.”
15. The circumstances of Re Safetycare Australia Pty Ltd
(supra) and Gorman v Gorman (supra) clearly differ from the present case.
the former costs of another application in another jurisdiction were sought to
be included in the application and in the latter
case there was a prior
agreement not to seek costs at all. In Christian Youth Camps Limited v Cobaw
Community Health Services Limited
[2014] VSCA 112
there was an agreement which
was entered into 2 years before the hearing of the appeal that each party, if it
were successful in
the appeal, would not seek to recover costs against the other
party above $50,000.00. Accordingly the maximum payable, in respect
of costs, to
the party which lost the appeal was $50,000.00. The cases of Christian Youth
Camps Limited v Cobaw Community Health
Services Limited (supra) and Chen v
McNamara & Son Pty Ltd (supra) suggest that where the parties have
unambiguously expressed
the terms on which they wish to finalise the matter then
generally, unless there is some overriding discretionary consideration,
court or tribunal will make an order for costs which is consistent with the
agreement of the parties. I will proceed, in considering
this matter, with that
principle in mind.
16. Regulation 14 provides a wide unfettered discretion to
order one party to the reference to pay the costs of another. Accordingly
agreement between the parties in this case cannot provide a fetter. As I have
it is trite that the consent of the parties does not clothe a court or tribunal
with jurisdiction where it otherwise does not exist.
Likewise the fact that the
parties to this referral have agreed to the form of the order for costs or their
quantum does not, of
itself, oust the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to make an
order on a different basis or quantum: Yunupingu v Goodsell (Unreported
of the Supreme Court of Northern Territory dated 24 December 1998) at paragraphs
6-8 and Blackley v Rigby
[2013] NTSC 12
17. However it is clear given
the cases of Christian Youth Camps v Cobaw Community Health Services Limited
(supra), Chen v McNamara
& Son Pty Ltd (supra) and Geoform Design Pty Ltd
Architects v Randwick City Council
[1995] NSWLEC 80
(1995) 87 LGERA 140
152 an agreement between the parties as to costs is relevant to the exercise of
a court or tribunal’s discretion.
I accept too that the agreement between
the parties will form the basis of an order unless there is some other
discretionary consideration
that militates against making the consent
18. In this case the amount recovered by the applicant is not large
when compared to other referrals lodged in this
Neither is the reference complex. I also note the usual practice with respect
to orders for costs in this jurisdiction and the
fact that this referral was
brought in an inferior jurisdiction to that of the Supreme Court; however costs
are sought on the Supreme
Court Scale. Despite the agreement I am not persuaded
the order for costs which has been agreed should be made. I say this because
the following matters which, when taken together, in my view outweigh the
exercise of the discretion in the terms of the agreement.
Those matters are the
claim in this case is very small and is not complex, the claim was brought in an
inferior jurisdiction to
the Supreme Court and if the usual practice is not
followed this will result in inconsistency between decisions in this
19. I note the usual practice has been influenced not only by
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Regulations 2011
by the Supreme Court decision of Zeeman J. in Trident Seafoods Pty Ltd v
[1993] TASSC 87.
In that case there was an appeal from the Workers
Compensation Commissioner who had dismissed an application made by the appellant
for an order that the respondent pay the appellant’s costs of an
unsuccessful application which the respondent had made. At
that time s59 of the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1998 prohibited the granting of
costs to or against any party unless
there was some special features arising
from the circumstances of the case before the Commissioner that warranted the
making of an
order for costs in favour of one of the parties. After considering
the matter Zeeman J. concluded the Commissioner could have reached
the position
that an order for costs should have been made but in respect of the level of
costs counsel for the appellant submitted
the costs should be ordered on Table A
which was the highest award of costs available in the Supreme Court at that
time. Zeeman
J., however, said with respect to that submission at [14]:
“I am not persuaded
that that is appropriate. The proceedings were proceedings in an inferior
court. Table A is the highest
scale of costs applying to this
20. Accordingly the order with respect to costs is the
respondent pay the applicant’s costs of the referral such costs to be
taxed, if not agreed, at the rate of 85% of the fees set out in Part 1 of
Schedule 1 of the
Supreme Court Rules 2000
CHAIRPERSON
Bennett v Motor Accidents
Insurance Board
[2018] TASMACT 2 at [13]
For example the claim in
Brook v Motor Accidents Insurance Board
[2017] TASMACT 3 was in excess of
$1,000,000.00 and it settled for 40% of that sum.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (138 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter