URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFC/2023/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bullard v Tasmanian Industrial Commission [2023] TASFC 3 (15 June 2023)
[2023] TASFC 3
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (FULL
Bullard v Tasmanian Industrial Commission
[2023] TASFC 3
: BULLARD, Tim
INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION
FCA 1786/2022
APPEALED FROM:
Bullard v Tasmanian Industrial
[2022] TASSC 39
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
November, 7 December 2022
JUDGMENT OF:
Geason J, Marshall AJ,
Administrative law – Administrative tribunals – Generally –
Fraud perpetrated on tribunal – Review of State
Service action by
industrial tribunal – Employee suspended on full pay pending investigation
into conduct – Where suspension
on full pay terminated and salary not paid
– Where applicant for review failed to put material information before
– Where respondent knowingly failed to remedy deficiency –
Tribunal unable to properly exercise its jurisdiction –
Application for
judicial review allowed.
SZFD v Minister for Immigration
[2007] HCA 35
(2007) 232 CLR 189
Dig Administrative Law [1095]
Industrial Law – Tasmania – Conditions of employment –
Remuneration – Generally – State Service teacher
without current
registration – Award provision that teacher employee not to be paid salary
where registration not current except
in circumstances beyond the employee's
control – Meaning of "circumstances beyond the employee's control" –
Circumstances
not confined to those presently within the employee's control
– Circumstances extend to those within their control at some
Teaching Service (Tasmanian Public Sector) Award,
Aust Dig Industrial Law [3392]
REPRESENTATION
: P Turner SC, M Jehne
First Respondent
: No appearance
Second Respondent:
No appearance
Australian Education Union
(amicus curiae):
M Wilkinson, S Smith
Attorney-General
(amicus curiae):
K Cuthbertson
Solicitors:
Solicitor-General
First Respondent:
Crown Solicitor (submitting appearance)
Second Respondent:
Rae & Partners Lawyers (submitting
appearance)
Australian Education Union
(amicus curiae):
Australian Education Union
Attorney-General
(amicus curiae):
Crown Solicitor
[2023] TASFC 3
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 3/2023
File No FCA 1786/2022
TIM BULLARD v TASMANIAN INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION and
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
MARSHALL AJ
15 June 2023
of the Court:
appeal is allowed.
is granted to amend of the grounds of appeal by adding Ground 10.
is granted to the appellant to have admitted into evidence the affidavits
relevant to ground 10.
decision made by the first respondent on 29 April 2021 is quashed.
judgment of the primary judge is set aside.
matter of MC's application for review of the decision of the applicant is
referred to the Commission.
is no order as to costs.
Serial No 3/2023
File No FCA 1786/2022
TIM BULLARD v TASMANIAN INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION and
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
MARSHALL AJ
15 June 2023
The parties
appellant, Mr Tim Bullard, has appealed from a judgment of a judge of the Court
("the primary judge"). The primary judge dismissed
an originating application
Judicial Review Act
in which the appellant applied to
quash a decision of the Deputy President of the Tasmanian Industrial Commission
("the Commission").
The Commission is the first respondent to the appeal.
appellant is the Secretary of the Department of Education. The second
respondent ("MC") is a former employee of the State, who
was a member of the
teaching service of the State of Tasmania.
Background facts and
legislative scheme
Commission (through its Deputy President) made a decision on 29 April 2021 to
direct the appellant to treat MC as suspended on
full pay. The appellant had,
on 2 October 2020, directed in effect, that MC be suspended without pay. It
will be apparent from
the factual background discussed below that MC had earlier
been suspended on full pay during the previous month. The review of the
appellant's decision was availed of pursuant to
Service Act
. The practical effect of the decision was to revoke the
status of MC as suspended on full pay and have him treated as suspended
State Service Act
an employee is entitled to apply to
the Commission for a review of any "State Service action" that relates to his or
her employment
in the State Service. There is no dispute in this proceeding
that "State Service action" includes a decision to place a State Service
employee, who has been suspended on full pay, on suspension with no pay. Under
State Service Act
in an application under
the Commission may grant the application and recommend
Employer or the Head of Agency to take such action as the Commission considers
appropriate. (Emphasis supplied.) The Employer
is the Minister administrating
the Act, see the definition of "Employer" in
of the Act, and see also
The appellant is the relevant Head of Agency for the Education Department under
the Act. "Agency" means a government department
under the definition given to
that word in
, the State Service consists of "Heads of Agency,
holders of prescribed offices, senior executives and employees". It is open to
the employer Minister to issue Employment Directions under
of the Act,
concerning, amongst other things, "employment matters" relevant to the Act.
Although not the employer of State Service
employees, the Head of Agency is
given several employer type functions by
of the Act, including determining
duties to be performed, allocation of duties and various other employer type
functions, such as
the preparation of performance management plans for
employees. Any appointments or promotions are to be made by the employer
The parties to the contract of employment are the employer Minister
and the State Service employee.
, the terms and conditions of employment of employees are those specified
in an award relating to the persons engaged in the work
for which they are
employed, or in the absence of an award, as determined by the Employer Minister.
, the salary of a permanent employee is not to be reduced without
the employee's consent, unless in accordance with
deals with breaches of codes of conduct, a consequence of which may be a
reduction of salary. The "State Code of Conduct" is referred
Section 9(14) provides that an "employee must at all times behave in a way that
does not adversely affect the integrity
and good reputation of the State
Service". Pursuant to s 43 of the Act, employment directions may provide for
the suspension from
duties of employees with or without salary. Section 47
deals with redeployment and s 48 with the inability of employees to perform
the hearing of the appeal, the appellant applied to adduce evidence that was not
before the primary judge. The Court received
that evidence provisionally. We
receive it absolutely because it is material which should have been before the
Commission and the
primary judge to provide the full suite of material relevant
to the matter.
11 September 2020, a journalist contacted an officer or employee of the
Department of Education. The journalist said words to
the effect that an
article would be in the in The Mercury newspaper claiming that in the 1980s, a
teacher was responsible for impregnating
a student and that the teacher was
currently working in the Tasmanian school system. The journalist named MC as
the teacher in question.
on 11 September 2020, an officer of the Education Department found
correspondence on MC's file which confirmed the allegation
of the journalist.
The correspondence in question was a letter dated 5 October 1989. The letter is
addressed to the then Secretary
of the Department (then known as Education and
The Arts) and is under the hand of the Director, Southern Region, of that
Department.
letter makes the following points relevant to this appeal:
MC admitted to
the Acting Principal of a high school at which MC was teaching, that MC had
sexual intercourse with a Year 10 pupil,
and as a result that pupil was pregnant
at that time;
That information
was confirmed by the author of the letter with the Acting Principal.
On 5 October
1989, the author of the letter met with MC and MC admitted that he had had
sexual intercourse with the pupil in question.
MC confirmed in
front of three witnesses that he had had sexual intercourse with the student in
MC was told that
if he submitted his resignation, no further action would be taken in the matter.
MC was to confer with the Tasmanian
Teachers Federation (the antecedent of the
current Australian Education Union Tasmanian Branch) ("the
appears from all material before the Court that MC did resign from the teaching
service in October 1989, but was subsequently
re-employed in the teaching
service in or about 1992.
16 September 2020, the appellant wrote to MC advising him that he had appointed
an investigator to investigate an allegation that
MC may have breached the Code
of Conduct under the
State Service Act
One of the particulars of the
allegations was that MC commenced a sexual relationship with a named female
student while he was employed
as a teacher.
16 September 2020 letter also advised MC that he was immediately suspended on
full pay under reg 34 of the State Service Regulations
a separate letter of 16 September 2020, the appellant informed the investigator
that he should put to MC the allegation concerning
MC having a sexual
relationship with the named student.
on 16 September 2020, Mr Watson (Assistant Director Industrial Relations in the
Department) notified the Registrar under
Registration to Work with Vulnerable
2013 ("the Registrar") of the allegations against MC, the subject
of the Departmental investigation. Under s 49 of the
Registration to Work
with Vulnerable People Act
, the Registrar suspended MC's registration under
that Act, being satisfied that MC posed an unacceptable risk to vulnerable
25 September 2020, the Teachers Registration Board Tasmania ("the Board")
suspended the registration of MC as a teacher under
Registration Act
of that Act, the Board is empowered
to suspend the registration of a teacher if it believes, on reasonable grounds,
that a registered
teacher may pose a risk of harm to a student.
28 September 2020, the Board advised MC that it had suspended his registration
as a teacher, based on the Registrar having suspended
his registration to work
with vulnerable people, students in MC's case.
2 October 2020, the appellant wrote to MC advising him that as his registration
as a teacher had been suspended, he was not permitted
to teach in any Tasmanian
school. MC was informed that as he was not registered to teach, he would no
longer be paid a salary but
immediately suspended henceforth without pay.
2 October 2020 letter referred to the Teaching Service (Tasmanian Public Sector)
Award ("the Award"). The Award is an industrial
instrument made by the
Commission. It regulates most of the terms and conditions of teachers in State
government schools in Tasmania.
The Union is a party to the Award.
II, clause 7 of the Award provides that:
"The responsibility to
maintain a current registration with the Teachers Registration Board rests with
the individual teacher employee.
In accordance with the
Registration Act
(TR Act), a teacher employee must have a current
registration issued by the Teacher's Registration Board. Except in
circumstances
beyond the employee's control, where a teacher employed is not
currently registered as detailed above, the employee will not be paid
until a current registration certificate is issued."
16 October 2020, MC filed an application with the Commission, challenging the
decision of the appellant to place him on suspension
with no pay, as distinct
from on suspension with full pay.
then lawyer contended before the Commission that the suspension of MC's
registration was due to circumstances beyond his control
given that the
suspension of his registration as a teacher occurred without the Board offering
MC procedural fairness. It was submitted
that MC was never given an opportunity
to address the Board on why his registration should not be cancelled. The
appellant submitted
to the Commission that he was required to suspend MC's
registration as a teacher given MC's permission to work with children had
suspended. In a witness statement provided to the Commission, MC stated that he
did not appeal against the decision of the
Board as it "...was the result of the
suspension of [his] Registration to Work with Vulnerable People".
Deputy President of the Commission had before her the Departmental
correspondence of 16 September 2020 to MC, which made an allegation
engaging in a sexual relationship with a student. The Deputy President did not
have before her the October 1989 correspondence,
which noted that MC had
admitted to such a relationship and had subsequently done so in the presence of
the then Secretary of the
Department and other witnesses. Both MC and the
respondent to his application failed to disclose that critical information to
Commission. If that information had been before the Commission, it would
have been immediately apparent to the Deputy President
that any failure to
accord procedural fairness to MC would not have resulted in any practical
injustice as MC had admitted to the
conduct which led to his registration for
Working with Vulnerable People being suspended and consequently his registration
as a teacher
being suspended. The representatives of the appellant before the
Commission also failed to disclose that critical information based
genuinely held but misguided belief that it would prejudice a future criminal
trial. At no stage, leading up to the conclusion
of the criminal proceeding
against MC later in 2021, or before, did MC contest those critical facts.
upholding the application of MC, the Commission was influenced by the decision
of the appellant to suspend him with no pay occurring,
without any input from
MC, thereby leading to what appeared to the Commission to be a denial of
procedural fairness.
decision not to pay salary to MC and treat him as suspended without pay was made
by the appellant. It was made because MC was
not currently registered to work
as a teacher because his registration had been suspended by the Board. The
appellant was obliged
to stop paying MC's salary unless it could be shown that
the suspension of his registration as a teacher was beyond MC's control
accordance with the Award. To determine whether his registration was beyond his
control, it is pertinent to ask what MC could
have submitted, with utmost
honesty, as to why the suspension of his registration was beyond his control.
One submission may have
been that he should not have had his registration
suspended because the allegations made against him were false. That is a
that was best made to the Board before it suspended his registration,
but it gave him no opportunity to do so. However, as MC admitted
Commission, the decision of the Board was consequent upon his registration to
work with vulnerable people being suspended.
Any denial of natural justice may
lie at the feet of the Registrar of that body, but that person was only
concerned about the very
making of the allegations which were the subject of an
investigation and acted with what was effectively a safety concern. Had MC
the opportunity to present submissions with full disclosure to the Registrar,
the result would not have been any different given
admissions MC had made in
1989 regarding the conduct which was relevant to the decision to suspend his
permission to work with vulnerable
provided a submitting appearance for the appeal. The Union, upon being invited
to participate in the appeal by the Court, made
submissions to the Court on the
construction of c1 7 of Part II of the Award. It contended that "the
circumstances beyond the control
of the employee" exception to loss of pay meant
that there should be no cessation of pay until an investigation has run its
The Union referred the Court to the line of authority stating that
industrial instruments should be considered in a broad and generous
trite law that a liberal approach should be applied to the construction of
industrial awards and agreements. See most
recently, in the local context,
Gutwein v Tasmanian Industrial Commission
[2021] TASFC 9
33 Tas R 107.
See also the discussion at [33]-[47] below. There is no material before the
Court relating to the circumstances leading to the introduction
of cl 7. Even
if there had been such evidence, it would have been of little value as
ordinarily there are competing considerations
as to why parties agreed upon a
certain wording in industrial instruments. In the ordinary case, in the absence
of compelling evidence
that a serious breach of the Code of Conduct had
occurred, it may be prudent to await the outcome of an investigation before
of salary is terminated. However, if the appellant had called upon MC
to show why his salary should not stop, and had MC acted honestly,
he would have
been compelled to disclose the 1989 admissions and, in any event, the appellant
would have been obliged to put those
allegations to him. In other words, no
practical injustice occurred even if there was a relevant denial of procedural
Further, as MC admitted before the Commission, the suspension of his
registration by the Board followed the suspension decision
concerning his permit
to work with children. Therefore, there was no issue about MC being denied
natural justice by the Board.
The real question is whether there was a denial
of natural justice by the appellant who considered himself compelled not to pay
who was not registered and, in light of the allegations against MC,
considered that there was no matter beyond MC's control that
was relevant to the
decision not to continue to pay MC, despite his lack of registration as a
matter may be tested this way. If MC had had the opportunity to make
submissions to the appellant, what could he have said in
good conscience? What
were the circumstances beyond his control that led to the cancellation of his
registration as a teacher?
He had admitted to a sexual relationship with a
female student. He had admitted to impregnating that student. It is not as if
of that happened. He further made admissions in his guilty plea to a
charge under s 125A of the
Criminal Code.
is not necessary to explore the limits of circumstances beyond the employee's
control in the context of cl 7 of the Award. It
may be intended to include
circumstances where suspension of registration has occurred in error, or when
false allegations have been
made, or in circumstances where registration lapses
because of an unusual circumstance. One may envisage, by way of example, a
teacher attending a conference overseas who is unexpectedly detained in another
country, or a situation where the Education Department
has confused two people
with identical first names and surnames.
The appellant sought judicial review of the decision of the Commission. The
parties did not disclose to the primary judge the evidence
put on appeal
concerning the events of 1989 and the admissions made by MC at that time. Had
that material been before the primary
judge, in all likelihood he would have
found that the review conducted by the Commission under
Service Act
was not a proper review, but was affected by jurisdictional
error given the failure of the parties to make a full and frank disclosure
relevant facts, for the reasons set out below.
Commission upheld the application of MC because it considered MC was denied
procedural fairness. Due to the failure of the parties
before the Commission to
make full disclosure of all relevant facts, it was not apparent to the
Commission that there would have
been no practical injustice arising out of any
denial of procedural fairness, even if there was such
appellant sought to add a new ground of appeal, called ground 10. That ground
stated that:
"The decision of the Deputy President was induced or
affected by fraud comprised by the failure of the parties to put before her
evidence, namely that the allegations which caused the suspension of
[MC's] registration under the
Registration Working with Vulnerable People Act
(the RWVP Act)
Teachers Registration Act
(the TR Act)
were true and that [MC] had admitted that they were true, and in consequence,
proceedings to challenge the decisions
to suspend his RWVP Act registration
and/or his TR registration would have been futile".
For reasons which follow, we consider that it is appropriate to allow leave
to add that ground to be permitted to be relied upon by
the appellant.
was not a ground raised before the primary judge but it should have been raised
before him. That is no bar to it being raised
on appeal as it is "expedient in
the interests of justice" to do so. See
Murad v Assistant Minister for
Immigration and
Border Protection
[2017] FCAFC 73
250 FCR 510.
SZFDE v Minister for Immigration
[2007] 232 CLR 184
at [52]. We
agree with the submission of counsel for the appellant that the Commission in
conducting the review of the appellant's
decision should have had before it all
material relevant to conducting and deciding that review. The absence of that
material vitiated
the review. Accordingly, there was a failure by the
Commission to properly exercise its jurisdiction through no fault of its own.
Consequently, we consider that ground 10 is made out and that the appeal should
be allowed on that basis. The primary judge considered
the application before
him based on the glaringly incomplete material facts before the Commission.
Although allowing the appeal,
we make no criticism of his Honour's decision
based as it was on incomplete material. The outcome, like the outcome of the
before the Commission was affected by the failure of the parties to
disclose crucial material facts. As French J (dissenting) said
for Immigration v SZDFE
[2006] FCAFC 142
[2006] 154 FCR 365
"a decision made
in the purported exercise of statutory powers may be quashed where the decision
has been induced or affected by fraud
or by circumstances analogous to fraud."
In that appeal from the judgment of the Full Court the High Court affirmed the
French J. See also at [153]. Although in that case the person
complaining about the decision was the one whose conduct vitiated
it, it does
not follow that a different legal result should ensue when both parties are at
fault. In the final analysis the decision
of the decision-maker was vitiated by
both parties failing to disclose facts vital to the proper consideration of the
decision vitiated for conduct in the nature of fraud by a moving
party cannot be revived as a valid decision by conduct of the same
nature by the
respondent party: once vitiated, always vitiated. A party who should have raised
crucial matters before an administrative
decision-maker, the same matters not
disclosed by the moving party, should not be at risk of the moving party being
rewarded for
the failure to be full, frank and honest in seeking to invoke the
of the view we have taken about ground 10, we do not consider it essential to
deal with the other grounds of appeal, but
in case we are in error as to ground
10, we make the following observations about those
Proper interpretation of clause 7 of the Award
the correct interpretation of cl 7 is central to some of the other grounds of
appeal discussed below we consider it important
to say something about the
correct approach to its interpretation. We have had the advantage of reading the
draft judgment of Porter
AJ. We have reached a different view from his Honour as
to whether ground 10 is made out. Therefore, the judgment of Porter AJ, insofar
as it deals with the interpretation of cl 7 of the Award, is of significance.
respectfully disagree with Porter AJ as to the corrrect interpretation of cl 7
of the Award for the reasons which follow.
the Full Court of the Federal Court in
WorkPac Pty Ltd v Skene
264 FCR 536
sets out a useful summary of the test for
the interpretation of industrial instruments, especially by referring to them
"interpreted in a vacuum divorced from industrial realities", the
latest word on the approach to interpretation of awards in this
at [27] the latest statement on
the topic of interpretation of industrial instruments from the High Court in
Amcor Limited v Construction Forestry Mining Energy Union
[2005] HCA 10
222 CLR 241
was examined and applied. In particular the judgment of Kirby J at
[96] expressed agreement with the approach of Madgwick J to interpretation
industrial agreements in
Kucks v CSR Ltd
(1996) 62 IR 182
at 184 where
Madgwick J, sitting in the Industrial Relations Court of Australia
"It is trite that narrow or pedantic approaches to the
interpretation of an award are misplaced. The search is for the meaning intended
by the framer(s) of the document, bearing in mind that such framer(s) were
likely of a practical bent of mind: they may well have
been more concerned with
expressing an intention in ways likely to have been understood in the context of
the relevant industry and
industrial relations environment than with legal
niceties or jargon. Thus, for example, it is justifiable to read the award to
effect to its evident purposes, having regard to such context, despite mere
inconsistencies or infelicities of expression which might
tend to some other
reading. And meanings which avoid inconvenience or injustice may reasonably be
strained for."
at [146], Callinan J said:
"There is substance in the
observations of Madgwick J in
which I have quoted
although it is not with any jargon of the workplace or a particular industry
that the Court is concerned in this
Further at [147], Callinan J said that "(i)t is important to keep in mind
therefore the desirability of a construction, if it is
reasonably available,
that will operate fairly towards both parties".
would any ordinary teacher bound by the Award consider how cl 7 of the Award
worked? The first paragraph provides that "(t)he
responsibility to maintain
current registrations with the Teachers Registration Board rests with the
individual employee". A teacher
would understand by that provision that she or
he is obliged to keep her or his registration current. The wording is directed
"an employee" that is, someone who is already in the teaching service who has
a current registration and who is obliged to maintain
that currency to continue
to work as a teacher in the State system.
second paragraph of cl 7 of the Award states that "In accordance with the
Teachers Registration Act 2000
a teacher employee must have a current
registration issued by the Teachers Registration Board". This paragraph
emphasises the notion
set out in the first paragraph of the clause that current
registration under the TR Act is required in order to work as a teacher.
third paragraph of cl 7 states:
"Except in circumstances beyond the
employee's control, where a teacher employee is not currently registered as
detailed above, the
employee will not be paid salary until a current
registration certificate is issued."
teacher employed under the Award would understand the importance of being
currently registered because if she or he was not currently
registered she or he
would not be able to be paid a salary until a certificate of current
registration was obtained.
opening words "except in circumstances beyond the employee's control" provide an
exception to non-payment of salary where the
employee does not have a current
certificate of registration due to circumstances for which that employee is not
at fault. Registration
may have lapsed and not been renewed because of an
unplanned absence outside of Australia, or it may have been cancelled due to a
mistake of fact or identification by an administrative official in the relevant
government department. There is no reason to limit
the examples, which
constitute "except in circumstances beyond the employee's control". An
examination of the individual circumstances
in each individual situation is
our opinion an interpretation of cl 7 which holds that the clause has no
operation when a teacher is not registered gives the
words at the beginning of
the third paragraph no work to do at all. It is abundantly clear from cl 7 that
registration must be maintained
by a teacher after entering the teaching service
and that if the teacher does not have a current registration certificate he or
will not be paid a salary. However where "circumstances beyond the
employee's control" have resulted in the failure to have current
registration,
salary will be paid. The outcome depends on whether the circumstances causing
that result were within or beyond that
employee's control. For example, where a
teacher bearing the same name as a teacher who has committed crimes against
children loses
a working with children permit as a result of misidentification
and subsequently has her or his registration cancelled, that person
will have an
excellent chance of being entitled to salary despite the cancellation. The same
may apply to someone detained in a foreign
prison through no fault of their
respectfully disagree with the view of Porter AJ that cl 7 "only applies where
the employee is qualified to be registered but
has not applied to be registered,
or a registration has lapsed, and the employee has not re-applied".
we have said, cl 7 refers in the first paragraph to an employee. One must be an
employee of the teaching service in the first
place in order to be registered.
The clause does not refer to someone who has not applied to be registered though
qualified to do
so, because it is a condition of registration that a person is
first engaged to work as a teacher at a school. Having been engaged
to work as a
teacher (after graduation from a tertiary institution), a person cannot proceed
to teach without obtaining registration
from the Teachers Registration Board;
see s 11(1) of the
Teachers Registration Ac
agree with Porter AJ that cl 7 may apply when registration has lapsed. The
example of a teacher held in a foreign prison and unable
to maintain a current
registration is an example of how that might occur. In that case the employee
may not reapply, but that is
no warrant for excluding other circumstances beyond
an employee's control such as a case of mistake. There is no need to limit the
is no justification for arbitrarily limiting the circumstances which may be said
to be circumstances beyond the employee's
control. To do so would be to employ a
"narrow or pedantic" approach to award interpretation. There is nothing in cl 7
to indicate
that those circumstances were meant to be confined to those
identified by Porter AJ, even putting to one side the need to qualify
a teacher before being registered. To do otherwise is to ignore the judgment of
Madgwick J in
as approved by Kirby and Callinan JJ in
this case, MC’s registration lapsed due to circumstances within his
control, being the conduct that led to the cancellation
of his working with
children permit and consequently the cancellation of his registration as a
1 asserts that, in effect, the suspension of registration under the
with Vulnerable People Registration Act
meant that the appellant was
precluded from paying salary to MC. we reject that submission because it leaves
no work for the exception
in cl 7 of the Award. A teacher who is not registered
Teachers Registration Act
may still be in receipt of full pay
in circumstances where the registration was cancelled or lapsed due to
circumstances beyond that
employee's control. The mere cancellation of the
registration under the
Working with Vulnerable People Act
cannot oust the
operation of the Award. We accept that the facts and circumstances of this case
were such that MC could not have
put anything to the Registrar to cause him to
come to a different view. The "beyond the employee's control" exception either
or it did not. Contrary to the submissions of counsel for the appellant
there is nothing in the
Financial Management Act
which precludes the
Commission giving a direction to the appellant to revoke a decision to place a
teacher on leave without pay where
that teacher no longer has a working with
children permit. It is not impossible to envisage a situation of mistaken
identity in
relation to the withdrawal of such a permit. A direction to pay a
teacher in such circumstances, even though that the teacher is
not working, does
not conflict with
Financial Management Act
Such direction
would be one validly made under s 65 of the
State Service Act
contended on behalf of the appellant that the Secretary of a Department is
"responsible for the financial management of the
agency in an efficient,
effective and economical manner, indirectly, in particular, ensuring that
expenditure by the agency is in
accordance with the law". In our view such
direction would be a lawful under s 65 of the
State Service Act
submission to the contrary is devoid of merit. It ignores the presence of the
word "direct" in
State Service Act
and the submission
that underlies it ignores the existence of clause 7 of the Award.
reject the submission of counsel for the Attorney to the effect that an employee
cannot be paid without rendering service. Clause
7 of the Award shows that is
possible if the failure of the teacher to maintain registration was actually
beyond the teacher's control.
Gapes v Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd
(1980) FCA 26
, Smithers and Evatt JJ referred to the judgment of
Sir John Latham in
Amalgamated Colleries of WA Ltd v True
[1938] HCA 19
at 423-424 where the following was said:
person is employed to do work to which an award applies, the parties are bound
by a contract. Their legal relations are
in part determined by the contract
between them and in part by the award. The award governs their relations as to
all matters with
which it deals..."
entitlement to payment pursuant to an award has its genesis in statute not
contract. See
Byrne v Australian Airlines Limited
[1995] HCA 24
410 per Brennan CJ, Dawson and Toohey JJ at [5] and also at [9] where the
plurality said "The award regulates what would
otherwise be governed by the
1 stands for a proposition that is contrary to law. If on a proper construction
of an award an employee can be in receipt
of payment in a rare case where full
service or no service is rendered, the award must be obeyed. It is noteworthy
that employees
suspended on full pay awaiting disciplinary investigations also
render no service. This ground fails.
2 asserts that there is no right to payment when there is no right to work.
Again, that is so in most circumstances where
registration to teach is
suspended, but as with ground 1, that submission gives the exception in cl 7 of
the Award no work to do.
Awards may entitle workers to payment, notwithstanding
that no work as directed is performed. It all depends on the terms of the
award, binding the employer (Minister) and the State Service employee. See
and the discussion above relevant to ground 1. On this topic, at p
70 of the transcript, junior counsel for the appellant made the
submission that
the Award did not provide an entitlement to salary and that if an award was
breached the remedy would be one of contract.
In the federal sphere, since the
Conciliation and Arbitration Act
1904 (Cth), federal industrial
legislation has provided a pathway for suing for breaches of an award. Failure
to pay in accordance
with an award can result in civil penalties and an order
for payment of money wrongfully withheld in the federal jurisdiction. In
local context, clause 1, Part III of the Teacher's Award provides that "A
teacher employed in a classification listed in clause
3 ... Will be paid
the minimum rate of salary ... as listed for the relevant classification and
band ...". The Award is a State Award made by the Commission.
Industrial Relations Act
provides a remedy for breach of the Award.
of that Act, an employer in breach of an award is subject to a
financial penalty and the recording of a conviction. Under
Industrial Relations Act
a person convicted of award breach may be
ordered to pay an affected person any sums owed. The avenue to apply for an
award breach
remedy is an application in the magistrates court for the
conviction of the employer. That court can impose an obligation on the
employer to make good the underpayment. This would have been an alternative
method of recovery in the event that MC was
owed wages by his employer under the
State Service Act
in lieu of seeking a review to the Commission. However
the matter would have to be proved to the criminal standard unlike a merits
review before the Commission.
2 is not made out.
3 asserts that the primary judge formed a view about the rights and obligations
of an employer, under the Award, whereas the
appellant was exercising a
statutory duty. Although exercising a statutory duty, the appellant was
exercising functions typically
exercised by an employer and in a practical
sense, devolved to him by the actual employer, the Minister, exercising power
State Service Act
Counsel for the Attorney correctly
submitted that the decision of the appellant was amenable to review under
State Service Act
. This ground is not made
4 challenged the primary judge's interpretation of the words "circumstances
beyond the employee's control". The primary judge
considered that the words
meant circumstances currently within the employee's control, and not
circumstances which were once within
the employee's control but no longer within
their control when the decision to stop payment is made. To the extent it
matters, given
our view on ground 10, we consider that the circumstances in
which a teacher may no longer be registered due to factors outside the
of the teacher, are not limited. They will always depend on the relevant facts
and circumstances applying to an individual
on each occasion. We agree with
counsel for the appellant that those circumstances are not confined to those
that were within the
teacher's control at some past time. To so confine it
would amount to a failure to give the words of the Award a broad, liberal
purposive construction as discussed in
We also accept the
submission of counsel for the Attorney-General, intervening, to the same effect.
In determining which circumstances
were beyond the control of a teacher, the
role played by that teacher at all relevant times, will be a critical factor.
in the current circumstances is a comprehensive administrative review
by an administrative tribunal of an administrative decision;
Human Rights & Equal Opportunity Commission
[1995] HCA 10
183 CLR 245
at 261. Accordingly, the reviewing tribunal should be at large as to factual
circumstances, providing those circumstances are relevant.
There is no reason
to confine these circumstances to what was in the employee's control at some
point in time.
5 alleges that the primary judge erred by not holding that the suspension of MC
as a teacher was within his control. With
the benefit of hindsight and having
regard to the matters raised in ground 10, that is, so but the judgment below in
that regard
was hampered by a lack of full disclosure by both
6 challenges the primary judge's view that the Commission was not in error in
failing to take into account information that
was not before the appellant on 2
October 2020. What was before or not, or what should have been before the
appellant on 2 October
2020 was the result of a failure to provide full and
frank disclosure by the appellant and MC. Given that fact, it is inappropriate
to express a view on what essentially is a request for an advisory
7 contends that the primary judge should have considered that the Commission
acted beyond jurisdiction in directing that the
appellant be placed on full pay
while suspended.
the Commission is determining a review of a State Service action, it may act in
accordance with
State Service Act
Section 51(6)(c)
states that:
"In the case of an application for review under
grant the application and recommend or
the Employer or
Head of Agency ... to take such action as the [Commission] considers
appropriate". (Emphasis applied.)
[77] of her reasons for decision, the Deputy President granted the application
for review of the appellant's decision to cease
to pay MC and directed the
appellant to "recommence the determination of the review at award clause and the
status of the EDY suspension
with pay". The words of that direction are
curious. It would have been sufficient, consistently with what was decided, to
the Secretary to withdraw or cancel his decision to cease to pay MC and
direct that he treat MC as suspended on full pay. In practical
terms, that is
how the direction should be understood. It is a direction within power under
State Service Act
As set out above nothing in the
Financial Management Act
precluded the making of such a payment. Junior
Counsel for the Appellant made unhelpful submissions to this Court about the
conferring a belief on the decision-maker. This submission renders
the word "direct" in
State Service Act
otiose. This is
not a submission which might be expected from the Office of the
Solicitor-General, obliged as it is to adhere to
model litigant principles. The
same may be said about the extraordinary submission that it is not possible to
sue under an award
but only on the contract of employment, as discussed above.
That argument is contrary to law and specifically contrary to the provisions
Industrial Relations Act
as discussed above. The Commission
conducted its review, and it was entitled to make the direction it did, whether
acting de novo
or otherwise. The submission that the Commission was directing
the appellant to hold a particular belief is without merit. The
Commission made
a direction that was open to it because of its view that the appellant did not
make the correct State Service decision.
This is not uncommon in administrative
review on the merits. Ground 7 is without merit.
is pertinent to stress that the Commission is at large in conducting its review
of State Service action within the context of
State Service Act
There is nothing in the wording of
State Service Act
limits the review to material that was only before the original decision-maker.
In coming to a view about whether the original
decision was the correct one, the
Commission is not restrained from examining material that was not before the
original decision-maker,
or material not referred to by that person. The role
of the Commission on review is akin to that of an appeal court considering
appeal on the evidence that was before the court at first instance, together
with any additional evidence admitted on the appeal.
That is not inconsistent
with the approach of Porter J in
Pervan v Frawley
[2011] TASSC 27
where his Honour referred to the Commission "looking it over" with respect
to the original decision with a view to its correction.
After "looking it over"
the Commission had the power to make recommendation and or directions
notwithstanding the financial cost
which might be incurred by the State or the
fact that the appellant was misled to a different view
8 alleges that there was no obligation on the appellant to accord procedural
fairness in any event. This ground cannot be
sustained because the decision to
effectively place MC on no pay cannot be made in breach of cl 7. To do so would
be unlawful consistently
referred to
9 adds nothing further than what is covered by ground 10. It complains about
the decision of the Commission that procedural
fairness was denied. Whether or
not that was so, the ultimate point is that there was no practical
Conclusion and orders
from ground 10 only grounds 4 and 5 of the appeal have merit. However ground 10
provides sufficient basis to determine the
would make the following orders on the appeal:
appeal is allowed.
is granted to amend of the grounds of appeal by adding Ground 10.
is granted to the appellant to have admitted into evidence the affidavits
relevant to ground 10.
decision made by the first respondent on 29 April 2021 is quashed.
judgment of the primary judge is set aside.
matter of MC's application for review of the decision of the applicant is
referred to the Commission.
is no order as to costs.
agree with that part of the order proposed by Porter AJ which is consistent with
our order number 6 having regard to the provisions
Court Civil Procedure Act
. As a matter of law the application for
judicial review is to be remitted to the Commission notwithstanding, from a
practical point
of view, the Commission would have no realistic alternative but
to dismiss it formally.
File No FCA 1786/2022
TIM BULLARD v TASMANIAN INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION and
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
15 June 2023
Introduction
appellant is the Secretary of the Tasmanian Department of Education (the
Secretary). He has appealed from the decision of Blow
CJ dismissing his
application for judicial review of a decision of the Deputy President of the
Tasmanian Industrial Commission (the
Commissioner). The Commission has filed a
notice of submission. The second respondent, MC, was a teacher employed within
the Department
State Service Act
Service (Tasmanian Public Sector) Award
(the Award). He has also filed a
notice of submission.
appeal is a further step in a series of proceedings after the Secretary
suspended MC on full pay pending an inquiry into his
conduct. Shortly after, the
Secretary made a determination to end that situation, noting that as MC was not
then a registered teacher
he was prohibited from teaching. As a consequence, the
Secretary directed MC that he not enter any Departmental school and told him
would not be paid. MC sought a review of the later determination. Under
State Service Act
that review is conducted by the Commission. On
review, the Commissioner directed that MC be reinstated as suspended on full
In the absence of any proper contradictor in the appeal, and as it raises a
number of questions of general importance, the Court
sought assistance. It has
benefited from the submissions on behalf of the Tasmanian Attorney-General and
the Australian Education
Union – Tasmanian Branch (the Union). Each
appeared as amicus curiae.
I have had the advantage of reading the reasons for judgment of Marshall AJ* in
which his Honour has set out the background and
the legislative scheme. I agree
with his Honour as to the ultimate outcome of the appeal but, with respect, take
a different pathway
to the same destination. For the sake of convenience, in
these reasons I will repeat some of the factual material and the relevant
legislation. *[NOTE: Since writing these reasons, Marshall AJ's original reasons
have been incorporated into what is now the expanded
joint judgment of Geason J
and him. I have amended my later references to Marshall AJ's reasons
accordingly.]
A chronology of events
Before setting out the essential events, there are some references that need to
be explained, and some context that needs to be
Section 11(1)
Teachers Registration Act
makes it an offence for a person to teach at a school unless that person is
registered, is a holder of a limited authority or is
under the direct
supervision of a registered teacher. A person may apply for registration and if
the Teachers Registration Board
is satisfied that the applicant satisfies the
criteria for full registration, must grant such registration. (There are
for provisionally and specialist registration which are not
11(2) sets out the criteria for full registration. In addition to specified
academic qualifications, or similar, and sufficient
proficiency in the English
language, the criteria include that the applicant be "of good character", be
"fit to be a teacher" and
be registered under the
Registration to Work with
Vulnerable People Act
) in respect of a regulated
activity, within the meaning of that Act, that primarily relates to children.
By virtue of s 24B(1), of the
, the Board may immediately suspend
the registration of a registered teacher if it believes on reasonable grounds
that the teacher
may pose a risk of harm to a student. Section 24B(2) provides
that the Board is to give notice of the suspension, and must ensure
inquiry into the matter giving rise to the suspension is held and concluded as
expeditiously as possible. That must "take
into account that it may be
appropriate to delay the inquiry until any other investigation by corresponding
registration authority
or other relevant person, or any legal proceeding or
health investigation, relevant to the subject matter of the enquiry is
concluded":
s 24B(2)(b).
Section 46(2) of the
provides that if the Registrar (under that
Act) believes on reasonable grounds that there is new relevant information about
a registered
person, the Registrar is to conduct an additional risk assessment.
Section 49(1C) enables the Registrar to suspend or cancel a person's
registration under that Act if the Registrar reasonably believes that suspension
or cancellation is appropriate, and s 49A enables
immediate suspension while an
additional risk assessment is conducted.
State Service Act
, the Minister administering that Act can
issue Employment Directions which relate to the administration of the State
Service and
employment matters relevant to the Act. Employment Direction No. 4
(ED4) sets out the procedure for the suspension of State Service
employees with
or without pay. Under cl 6.1.a of ED4 a Head of Agency (in this case the
Secretary) who has reasonable grounds to
believe that it is in the public
interest to do so, can suspend an employee with full pay if they believe the
employee has or may
have breached the Code of Conduct in such a manner that the
employee should not continue in the performance of his or her duties.
Head of Agency was not able to suspend an employee without pay; that could only
be done with the approval of the Head of State
Service. Employment Direction No.
5 (ED5) contains procedures for the investigation and determination of whether
an employee has
breached the Code of Conduct. If a Head of Agency has reasonable
grounds to believe a breach of the Code has occurred, an investigation
instigated. It is not necessary to venture into the provisions of the Code.
Of central importance to this appeal is cl 7 of the Award. It is entitled
"Teacher Registration" and contains three limbs, the third
of which provides
that "Except in circumstances beyond the employee's control, where a teacher
employee is not currently registered
..., the employee will not be paid salary
until a current registration certificate is issued."
Before going further, I mention the state of the material before this Court. As
Geason J and Marshall AJ have noted, the Secretary
applied to this Court to
adduce evidence that was neither before the Commission – some of it
related to later events –
nor before the primary judge. The evidence was
in the form of three affidavits with annexures. The deponent is Stuart Locke,
former Senior Workplace Relations Consultant with the Department of
Education. Mr Locke was involved in coordinating the Department's
response to
the allegations and represented it at the Commission hearing.
In argument, counsel put that there were essentially three documents to be
relied on; two Departmental minutes to the Secretary
and the 1989 letter. The
affidavits were received provisionally. Because of the view I have reached about
the different grounds,
in strict terms the documentary evidence does not fall to
be considered, but the additional material has value in that it relates
number of different grounds and has some importance in the overall context of
the matter. There is general resistance to the
admission of further evidence in
judicial review proceedings: see for instance
MZXLD v Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship
[2007] FCA 1912
and the cases
cited. However, in this appeal, the material goes to legal points and I think
"special circumstances" exist within
the meaning of
Court Civil Procedure Act
. I would grant special leave for it to be
The short chronology is as follows:
11 September 2020
A journalist
published alleging that a teacher, still working
in schools, was responsible for
a student falling pregnant in the 1980's; MC was named as the teacher.
A search of
Departmental records uncovered relevant correspondence; in particular a letter
dated 5 October 1989 from the then Director
of the Southern Regional Office of
the Education Department to the then Secretary of the Department (the 1989
letter). This revealed
details of discussions with MC and asserts that
admissions were made by him.
16 September 2020
Under cl 6.1.a
of ED4, the Secretary suspended MC on full pay and instigated an inquiry under
A Departmental
officer notified the Registrar of the allegations.
The Registrar
suspended MC's registration under the
and notified MC
accordingly.
The Registrar
notified the Secretary that MC's registration under the
28 September 2020
Acting under its
emergency power of suspension under s 24B of the
, the Teachers
Registration Board suspended MC's registration, instituted an inquiry as it was
required to do under the section, and
notified MC accordingly.
September 2020
The Secretary
was briefed by a Departmental officer about these developments.
October 2020
The Secretary
made a determination that MC was "no longer suspended on full pay", with the
suspension under ED4 ended. MC was told
that as his registration was suspended
he was prohibited from teaching. He was directed that he was not to enter any
Departmental
school and told he would no longer be paid a salary from that
16 October 2020
MC sought a
review of the Secretary's determination pursuant to
Service Act
3 December 2020
The Secretary
wrote to MC's lawyers stating that he was not satisfied that MC had taken all
reasonable steps available with respect
to the decision of the Teachers
Registration Board. He said he understood that MC had "now" been charged with
persistent sexual abuse
of a child or a young person, and that Tasmania Police
had said the ED5 investigation cannot resume until the criminal proceedings
22 February 2021
After a number
of conciliation conferences, it was agreed the Commissioner's determination be
on the documents and submissions that
had been filed.
The Commission
granted MC's application and directed the Secretary to reinstate MC's suspension
on full pay pursuant to ED4 from 2
October 2020.
4 June 2021
MC resigned his
employment.
13 July 2021
MC was indicted
on one count of persistent sexual abuse, contrary to s 125A of the Criminal Code
The Secretary's letter to MC of 2 October 2020 contains the critical
determination. After noting that as MC's registration under
was suspended he was not currently registered and must not teach, the letter
"Pursuant to Part II Clause 6 (sic 7) of the Award, it is
your responsibility to maintain a current registration, and in except in
circumstances beyond your control, where you are not registered you will not be
paid a salary. As you are a teacher whose teacher
registration is suspended, and
therefore not registered in accordance with the Act...as You are not entitled to
any salary. I am
not satisfied that the circumstances giving rise to you not
having registration were beyond your control.
I now determine that you are no longer suspended on full pay. The suspension
that I impose under ED4 is now ended. However, as your
teacher registration is
suspended, you are prohibited from teaching and I direct that you must not enter
any DoE school. Accordingly
you will no longer be paid salary, as a teacher,
from the date of this letter."
The Commissioner's decision
MC complained that he had not been given an opportunity to respond to any
allegations by the Department contained in the Secretary's
letter of 16
September 2020, nor had he been asked what steps he had taken to control the
issue of suspension of his registration
at the time that decision was made;
whether the circumstances were beyond his control: "
Each of the processes
which have led to the suspension of my registration as a teacher have been
matters which I have had no say in,
not even being contacted about and have had
no control over
." In summary – as the Commissioner noted – MC
said he had not been contacted about what control he "might have had over
process"; he had no control or choice in the situation and he wished for the
Department to stand by the original decision to
suspend him on full pay until
the matter has been investigated.
The Commissioner said she found it difficult to understand how a decision could
be made without providing any ability for a response
from MC to set out the
circumstances and steps he had taken within his control in relation to his
registration. She said that without
those submissions she was satisfied that the
Secretary was unaware of the circumstances which were within or beyond MC's
Commissioner went on to say that "without reviewing the merit of the decision"
she was satisfied that there was a lack of procedural
fairness in the absence of
seeking submissions and in particular, providing an opportunity for MC to
provide submissions on the possible
outcome of the decision making process. (The
Commissioner took the view that the review was not one based on the merits but
involving a process to "identify errors into which the Secretary fell."
I will return to this point.) The Commissioner concluded:
[the lack of opportunity] significant in the denial of natural justice, as the
factors for consideration for this decision
require clarification of what were
the circumstances including steps taken by [MC], to enable the decision-maker to
determine whether
the circumstances to maintain his registration were or were
not beyond his control."
The decision at first instance
The issues raised before the primary judge were essentially determined by his
Honour as follows.
An employee who
does not perform any work duties is not entitled to the payment of salary unless
he or she has some right to payment
as a result of a provision in a contract or
an industrial award, waiver of an employer's rights, or some other entitling
circumstance.
In this case, MC
was entitled to payment because of cl 7 of the Award and the issue of
circumstances beyond his control.
As to cl 7, the
words clearly refer to the circumstances existing at the time when the question
of payment of a salary to an unregistered
teacher arises for determination; the
words were not reasonably capable of interpretation so as to refer to
circumstances that were
within the employee's control at some past time, but
were no longer within that person's control.
Accordingly, the
exception in relation to circumstances beyond the employee's control relates to
the situation at the time when the
employee is not currently registered and the
issue of payment of salary arises.
MC could have
attempted to change the relevant circumstances by applying to the Magistrates
Court for a review of the decision of
the Teachers Registration Board, sought
judicial review of the decision of the Registrar under the
tried to persuade the Board or the Registrar to reverse their decisions, but he
was not in a position to exert control in relation
to any of these things.
The only finding
of fact reasonably open to the Secretary or the Commission was that on 2 October
2020, and at all material times
thereafter, the circumstances relating to MC's
registration were beyond his control.
The Commissioner
did not err in failing to give any consideration to the evidence about MC being
later charged with a sexual crime,
because such evidence was irrelevant.
The provisions
State Service Act
were wide enough to empower the
Commissioner to give the directions to the Secretary she
The grounds of appeal
There are presently nine grounds of appeal. The tenth one is the subject of an
application to amend. On my analysis, the nine can
be grouped into subject
matters while the proposed tenth ground relates to a discrete issue.
Grounds 1, 2, 4 and 5 concern the proper construction and application of cl 7.
Ground 3 concerns the question of whether the Secretary,
when acting in relation
to the contract of employment and the Award exercises a statutory duty or public
power amenable to correction
Ground 6 and 7 concern the Commission's consequential powers following a review
State Service Act
and raise the nature of that
review, while grounds 8 and 9 relate to issues of procedural fairness concerning
the Secretary's determination
of 2 October 2020.
Ground 10 asserts that the Commissioner's decision was vitiated by fraud, using
that word in the broad sense of "bad faith". I will
deal with the grounds
accordingly and, because of the conclusion I have reached, it is appropriate if
I start with those that relate
to cl 7 of the Award.
The clause 7
It is best if I set out cl 7 in full:
REGISTRATION
The responsibility to maintain a current registration with Teachers
Registration Board rests with the individual employee.
In accordance with the
Teachers Registration Act
, a teacher
employee must have a current registration issued by the Teachers Registration
Except in circumstances beyond the employee's control, where a teacher
employee is not currently registered as detailed above, the
employee will not be
paid salary until a current registration certificate is issued."
There was much debate in the appeal about the construction of the clause and
its application, or I should say, the third limb of
cl 7. In the discussion,
only the Union had enthusiasm for the proposition that the clause excluded from
consideration – as
the primary judge had held – circumstances within
or without the employee's control at some past time, but were no longer within
that person's control. Both the Secretary and the Attorney-General submitted the
contrary view was correct.
The proper approach to the construction of awards and industrial agreements is
WorkPac Pty Ltd v Skene
[2018] FCAFC 131
264 FCR 536
. The Court said:
"The starting point for interpretation of an
enterprise agreement is the ordinary meaning of the words, read as a whole and
in context:
City of Wanneroo v Holmes
[1989] FCA 369
(1989) 30 IR 362
at 378 (French J).
The interpretation '... turns on the language of the particular agreement,
understood in the light of its industrial
context and purpose ...':
Limited v Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
[2005] HCA 10
(2005) 222 CLR 241
(Gleeson CJ and McHugh J). The words are not to be interpreted in a
vacuum divorced from industrial realities (
at 378); rather,
industrial agreements are made for various industries in the light of the
customs and working conditions of each,
and they are frequently couched in terms
intelligible to the parties but without the careful attention to form and
draftsmanship
that one expects to find in an Act of Parliament (
378–9, citing
Geo A Bond & Co Ltd (in liq) v McKenzie
AR(NSW) 498
at 503 (Street J)). To similar effect, it has been said that the
framers of such documents were likely of a 'practical bent of mind'
and may well
have been more concerned with expressing an intention in a way likely to be
understood in the relevant industry rather
than with legal niceties and jargon,
so that a purposive approach to interpretation is appropriate and a narrow or
pedantic approach
is misplaced: see
Kucks v CSR Limited
(1996) 66 IR 182
at 184 (Madgwick J);
Shop Distributive and Allied Employees’
Association v Woolworths SA Pty Ltd
[2011] FCAFC 67
Tracey and Flick JJ);
at [96] (Kirby J)."
The exercise remains a text based one with reference to context and purpose,
bearing in mind the general considerations that arise
from the subject matter
being awards or industrial agreements. Having regard to the way the construction
issue has been approached
in all proceedings to date, I have not lightly come to
the view that the clause does not operate in any of the ways advanced by the
parties. At the risk of taking a narrow or pedantic approach, I would hold that
the clause has no operation where the registration
is not, or ceases, to be
"current" because of the absence of a required qualification under s 11(2) of
my opinion, cl 7 only applies where the employee is qualified to be registered
but has not applied to be registered, or a registration
has lapsed and the
employee has not re-applied. There may be many reasons for such failures. I
should also include the situation
where an application has been made but
communication or procedural (or similar) difficulties intervene. Importantly
however, the
question of circumstances beyond an employee's control is simply
one of why their registration is not current, not why underlying
qualifications
are absent. I take that view for the following reasons.
The clause needs to be looked at as a whole. I think the wording of the clause
is neither appropriate nor sufficient to give rise
to considerations of
registration not being current due to a lack of qualifications. The focus of the
clause is on "current" registration.
The first limb states that responsibility
to maintain current registration rests with the individual employee. Why it
might be thought
it is the responsibility of someone else to maintain the
person's registration, and what is meant by this part of the provision escapes
me. Under s 12 of the
, it is the potential registrant who is to
second limb is merely a reflection of the requirements of the
teacher must have current registration. (Under s 16 of the
registration is for up to five years as determined by the Board.)
can readily be seen that the effect is to make sure teachers maintain their
registration; if they do not, they will not be paid
unless the circumstances of
their not having "current" registration are beyond their control. The plain
object is to avoid difficulties
that arise for the employer in having teacher
employees who cannot teach due to lack of
registration.
Were the clause
construed otherwise, serious complications follow, as this case shows.
problem with construing the clause "otherwise" is that on its face –
contrary to the Union's submission – it would
also apply when registration
is cancelled
. No reason was
advanced as to why that would not be so. If the requirement to maintain
registration applies to the maintenance of
the underlying qualifications, it is
significant that those things include requirements of good character and of
being fit to be
a teacher. That requires the maintenance of standards of
behaviour. If that interpretation of the clause is correct, it directly
an obligation on the employee in those behavioural respects. I very much doubt
that was intended by the clause and it is
not supported by the language
Court has no evidence about this, but it might be assumed that if an employee's
registration is not current, then the Department
is notified by the Board, or
perhaps the Department carries out its own regular checks. In any event, for
the third limb to come
into play, an issue of whether there are circumstances
beyond the employee's control must arise, and there must be some dialogue
between the employee and the employer about why current registration has not
been maintained. To that extent, the employer would
have to consider the
circumstances of why the current registration had not been maintained. That
would almost always involve input
from the employee.
the clause extends to underlying qualifications for registration, then the
employer – in effect the Secretary – is
put in the position of
looking into the reasons for that lack of qualification. That could, as in this
case, require noting the
decisions of the Teachers Registration Board and the
Registrar, and considering whether the employee could have
exercised any control over those bodies. That inevitably goes back to
employee's antecedent conduct. That is, what gave rise to any decision by those
bodies. Similarly, the inquiry might have to
go directly to issues such as
whether the employee is of good character.
importantly, and to my mind of particular significance is that as in this case,
assuming that circumstances beyond the employee's
control include past
circumstances over which there is no longer control, it means that in the
exercise under cl 7 the Secretary
might well have to consider allegations of
misconduct which may or may not be denied. In the latter case, in order for a
determination
to be made under the clause, findings about that conduct would
have to be made. For the employee to be paid, the Secretary would
satisfied that there was no conduct justifying the suspension. (Or at least, I
suppose, that there was nothing cogent
to give rise to a sufficient level of
suspicion to justify suspension of registrations.)
The essential difficulty in this approach is highlighted by something said by
counsel for the Attorney-General in the course of
argument: "Now in the ordinary
sense, conduct related reasons could not be said to be outside of the person's
control. Wrongly attributed
conduct reasons....would be." It hardly needs to be
said that in that context, the exercise of deciding whether allegations were
false or not would involve fact finding about the employee's conduct.
Determinations
of the types I have mentioned would impose a significant burden on the
must also be borne in mind that by any "clause 7 inquiry", if I can call it
that, might well be concurrent with an ED5 investigation
and a Teachers
Registration Board inquiry under s 24B(2)(b). I have very grave doubts this was
intended to be the way in which the
clause operates. The simple operation of the
clause assumes continuing qualifications for registration and is to ensure
maintain current registration when not being paid, except when the
failure to be currently registered is not their fault.
its submissions, the Union supports the view of the operation of the clause as
taken by the primary judge. It refers to the special
circumstances that apply to
teaching staff, and makes the following points:
Teaching staff
are placed in a uniquely vulnerable situation in terms of being open to
allegations that would warrant a suspension
Those bodies are
equally placed in the situation of an important duty of care; any potential or
alleged risk must be taken very seriously.
circumstances regularly lead to employees being suspended pending an
investigation.
investigations often result in the issue being found to be minor or non-existent
breaches of the Code or policy.
There is a low
threshold at which an employee's behaviour is investigated.
Union points to the possible length of these investigations, with that length
being extended when other agencies become involved.
All of those may be fair
observations. But in my view, a construction that sees the clause operate in the
way I have outlined, requiring
in certain cases the Secretary to assess evidence
of guilt or innocence of sometimes grave misconduct, is a very strained one. The
construction I favour does, I suggest, give the clause a much more practical and
certain sphere of operation. In this context, it
should perhaps be noted that a
clause in the Award in the form of cl 7 has existed since 12 February 2008,
did not commence until 1 July 2014.
with the task of statutory interpretation, the construction of award clauses is
to give effect to the will of the parties as expressed
in the agreement. Courts
should give effect to that intention, but only as it is expressed in the
agreement. The constructional
task remains to explain the meaning of the text,
not to remedy perceived legislative intention; "Construction is not speculation,
and it is not repair":
Taylor v The Owners – Strata Plan No 11564
[2014] HCA 9
253 CLR 531
per Gageler and Keane JJ at [65]. This may be a
matter that needs to be squarely addressed in the Award. Indeed, in its
submissions,
the Union stated that the effect of the
context is presently the subject of negotiations.
Ground 1 asserts that the suspension of MC's registration under the
provided a separate basis, independent to the operation of cl 7, by
which MC was not entitled to salary. In the appeal, the Secretary
number of examples where teachers may be lawfully disentitled to work, and would
not be entitled to pay. The broad proposition
is correct but if an award
provides that an employee is to be paid in the absence of any entitlement to
work or without performing
any work, then the provisions of the award prevail:
Gapes v Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd
[1980] FCA 21
[1980] 41 FLR 27.
any event, for the reasons I have given, ground 1 must succeed to the extent
that the suspension of registration disentitled MC
to salary, not as an
alternative to clause 7 but because cl 7 had no operation. Ground 2 is a
complaint about the primary judge's
observation that although cl 7 does not
expressly state a teacher will be entitled to pay to salary when they are not
due to circumstances beyond their control, it should be interpreted
as having that meaning. As argued, it was put as an alternative
to ground 1 and
it follows that I do not need to consider it. If I am wrong about the
construction of cl 7, I would agree that the
ground has no merit, for the
reasons given by Geason J and Marshall AJ.
4 complains of an error in the primary judge's interpretation of what is meant
by "circumstances beyond the employee's control."
As earlier noted, his Honour
took the view that the words did not refer to circumstances that were within the
employee's control
at some past time but were no longer within that person's
control, and that accordingly, the exception relates to the situation at
time when the employee is not currently registered and the issue of payment of
salary arises. This issue would seem to be a relevant
one even on the
construction of cl 7 I favour. I agree with the submissions of the Secretary and
the Attorney. With respect, there
is no reason to confine the circumstances to
those which are presently within the person's control as opposed to being within
control at some past time. The focus is on what role the person played in
the circumstances giving rise to the lack of current registration.
5 relates to the facts of this case, the error alleged being a failure to find
that the circumstances of MC's suspension of
registration were beyond his
control. Because of my view of cl 7, it is not necessary for me to decide the
point. Were it to be so,
on the basis of the material now before the Court, I
would accept the Secretary's submissions. Questions of causation arise. On
facts, the circumstances which gave rise to the suspension of MC's registration
, and consequently the
, were not beyond
his control.
Given the terms of this ground I will deal with it next, although there is no
need for me to formally resolve it. The ground asserts
that the decision of the
Commissioner is vitiated because it was induced or affected by fraud. That fraud
is said to consist of the
failure of the parties to put before the Commissioner
material evidence, namely that the allegations which caused the suspension
were true, and that MC had admitted
they were true.
The additional material put before this Court is the material that was in the
Secretary's possession but which was not put before
the Commissioner. The
material withheld consists of the 1989 letter and two briefing minutes to the
Secretary, one dated 16 September
2020, the other dated 28 September 2020 which
shows that the Secretary had knowledge of the 1989 letter. A primary focus of
the argument
was the 1989 letter which, as explained earlier, is a letter from
the then Director of the Southern Regional Office of the Education
Department to
the then Secretary of the Department.
letter details a conversation said to have occurred between the Acting Principal
of the relevant school and MC on 3 October 1989
during which MC admitted having
had sexual intercourse with the student, then under the age of 16. The Director
goes on to advise
the Secretary that two days later he spoke to MC in the
presence of the Acting Principal and the Acting Regional Superintendent during
which MC was asked the direct question whether he had had sexual intercourse
with the student, to which he replied, "Yes".
The evidence before this Court shows that the letter and briefing minutes were
not put before the Commissioner by those representing
the Minister because it
was thought inappropriate that the contents were disclosed as Tasmania Police
were yet to complete their
investigations, and Departmental staff "did not want
to do anything that would improperly interfere [with] the course of the ongoing
police investigation". No legal advice was sought in relation that
In effect, the Secretary further submits that MC ought to have admitted to the
Commissioner that he was guilty of the sexual misconduct
or, at the least it
seems, that many years earlier he had admitted it to Departmental officers. The
1989 letter contains first and
second hand assertions that he admitted to sexual
misconduct with a young student. If the admissions were made, which appears
it is unlikely that he would not remember doing so.
MC did not disclose his guilt or admission of it to the Commissioner, he did not
deny any wrongdoing, and although he complained
of not being given an
opportunity to respond to the allegations made in the Secretary's letter of 2
October 2020, the Commission's
reasons concerning the lack of procedural
fairness focused on him not being given an opportunity to explain how he might
have exercised
control over the actual decisions leading to his suspension.
In any event, the Secretary submits that the failure to put all relevant
material before the Commission gives rise to jurisdictional
error. The Secretary
relies on the High Court's decision in
SZFDE v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2007] HCA 35
232 CLR 189.
For present purposes, that decision
can be taken as authority for the proposition that, depending on the structure
of the legislative
scheme, if fraud disables a reviewing body from the due
discharge of its imperative statutory functions, there is a fraud "on" the
tribunal. The consequence is that a decision made is no decision at all, because
the jurisdiction remains constructively unexercised.
See in particular pars
[24], [29]-[37], and [49]-[52].
involved the fraudulent conduct of a third party migration agent
which caused the relevant tribunal to infer the appellants had consciously
elected not to appear, which in fact was not the case. There was no allegation
that the appellants had any knowledge or notice of
what the migration agent had
done. The Court said it unnecessary for the resolution of the appeal to
determine at large and in generally
applicable terms the scope for judicial
review for "third party fraud" of an earlier administrative decision, where the
for judicial review did not collude in the fraud practised on the
administrative decision-maker or review body, and did not then
learn of the
fraud but complains of it in subsequent proceedings. Rather, the appeal should
be resolved after close attention to
the nature, scope and purpose of the
particular system of review: [28]-[29].
[47] the Court made it clear that the ultimate issue is the effect of third
party fraud on the administrative decision-making
process. The effect in that
case was described as "stultifying the operation of the legislative scheme to
afford natural justice".
Their Honours were at pains to point out that the
appeal turned upon the particular importance of the legislative provisions which
provided for procedural fairness in being notified and heard before the
tribunal; the third party had subverted the legislative scheme
and "stultified"
the intention of affording procedural fairness.
Secretary does not seek to challenge the correctness of the Commissioner's
position that the review under
State Service Act
merits review. However, irrespective of the nature of review and leaving aside
for the moment the question of the relevance
of where the responsibility for the
fraud rests, I am prepared to assume for present purposes that the failure to
put before the
Commissioner all of the material that was considered by the
Secretary would disable the exercise of the jurisdiction. But there
critical question of the identity of those who were involved in the fraud.
law relating to third party fraud has subsequently been illuminated in cases
before the Full Court of the Federal Court. It is
now well established that for
a decision to be vitiated the third party fraud must be one "on" the tribunal as
such, not on a party
alone, and in particular, the decision will not be vitiated
if the aggrieved party was actively complicit in or recklessly indifferent
the fraud. See for instance:
SZLHP v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2008] FCAFC 152
172 FCR 170
Singh v Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection
[2016] FCAFC 141
, 247 FCR 554;
Gill v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2016] FCAFC 142
248 FCR 398
v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] FCAFC 213
Kaur v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2019] FCAFC 53
269 FCR 464
, [136]-[140]
and the useful summary in
Katragadda v Minister for Immigration Citizenship Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2020] FCAFC 143
In the present case, there is no evidence that the Secretary did not know that
Departmental officers had not disclosed the 1989
letter and his knowledge of it
to the Commissioner, nor was there any suggestion of this in argument. In
withholding the relevant
material the Secretary was not trying to gain an
advantage. The decision was motivated by a desire not to harm MC's interests in
relation to criminal proceedings. But does a 'proper' motive distinguish this
case from the application of the principle stated above?
Can the Secretary
nonetheless claim the benefit of a fraud on the Commission when, depending on
the view taken of the facts, he was
at least partly responsible for the fraud,
actively complicit in it, or recklessly indifferent to the fraudulent
The facts of this case might lend themselves to a different outcome, but I am
not persuaded that the present state of the law is
such that a party might
complain about the outcome of a decision where there was a fraud on a tribunal
and when that party deliberately
withheld information, albeit for benevolent or
what might be regarded as 'proper' motives, or at least when it did not stand to
And to the extent that MC was guilty of a fraud on the Commission, the
Secretary could have addressed the deficiency with information
possession, but did not. No advice was taken as to how the matter might have
been dealt with, without creating a risk for
MC's position in the criminal
investigation. To that extent, although no collusion or complicity, there was
intentional acquiescence.
those reasons, were it be necessary to decide the issue, I would refuse leave to
add ground 10; it has no reasonable prospects
of success.
ground involves a rather semantic argument by which it is sought to distinguish
the decision to end the ED4 suspension with
pay, from the decision to stop
paying. The point is that the decision to pay or not, was a purely contractual
one and one not amenable
Section 50(1)(a)
and (1)(b) respectively entitle an employee to make
application to the Commission for a review of the selection of a person or
to perform certain duties and – relevantly to this case –
of any other State Service action that relates to his or her
employment in the
State Service. "State Service action" is defined in
as meaning action by an
officer or an employee but does not include an action to make an appointment
under the Act. Clearly, the
Secretary's decision to terminate the period of
suspension on full pay falls within the definition and is liable to be reviewed
subs (1)(b). The ground has no merit.
Grounds 6 and
Ground 6 complains that the primary judge was wrong in holding that the
Commissioner did not fall into error by failing to take
into account evidence
which was not before the Secretary on 2 October 2020. The evidence referred to
is the Secretary's letter to
MC's lawyers of 3 December 2020 which in turn,
refers to the fact of MC having "now" been charged. The Commissioner took the
that her determination was on the material before the Secretary.
ground 7, the Secretary contends that for a number of reasons the Commissioner's
direction to the Secretary was not within the
powers conferred by
State Service Act
Section 51(6)
provides as
"(6) In the determination of an application for a review,
the Tasmanian Industrial Commission may –
(a) refuse to grant the application for a review and, if appropriate, direct
the Head of Agency to take such action as the Tasmanian
Industrial Commission
considers appropriate; or
(b) in the case of an application for a review under
section 50(1)(a)
, grant the application and direct the Head of Agency to
undertake again the selection in accordance with
and undertake
such other requirements as are imposed by the Tasmanian Industrial Commission;
(c) in the case of an application for a review under
section 50(1)(b)
the application and recommend or direct the Employer or the Head of Agency or
any person to whom the powers of the Employer
or the Head of Agency have been
delegated, to take such action as the Tasmanian Industrial Commission considers
appropriate."
grounds implicitly raise the nature of a review conducted by the Commission
State Service Act
, a matter on which counsel for the
Attorney-General made submissions, although the Secretary did not address the
point. It is not
necessary for me to resolve the issue but in deference to the
submissions made on behalf of the Attorney, I will say something about
will be recalled that the Commissioner said that a review is not undertaken
based on the merits and that she could only identify
errors into which the
Secretary fell: "I do not have the power to make the decision on behalf of the
Secretary, however, I am approaching
this review with a sense of 'looking it
over' with a view to correction, if required."
In taking that approach, the Commissioner adopted the view taken by the
Commission President in a case in 2020. The President said
that the role of the
Commission was not to undertake a review of the decision on the
He explained that the type
of review was neither a de novo process, nor a merit review based on the
material before the decision-maker,
but rather a review with an eye to
correction if the process miscarried. He added that the only review on the basis
of "merit" was
whether the decision-maker could not properly have reached the
decision it did on the basis of the material before it; that is,
effect, that approach could mean something akin to judicial review limited to
the detection of jurisdictional error or vitiating
error of statutory process;
alternatively, something akin to an appeal by way of re-hearing on the material
before the decision-maker
where error needs to be shown.
his reasons, the President referred to
Pervan v Frawley
[2011] TASSC 27
20 Tas R 185
, (a decision of mine). The passage cited is as follows
(omitting footnotes):
"64...As a result of these matters, I need to
say something about the proceedings both before the Commissioner, and in this
The application for judicial review seems to have proceeded on the
assumption that the Commissioner, in acting under s
, was conducting a review in the
sense of 'looking it over' with a view to correction, rather than in the sense
of carrying out a
de novo process. That would seem to be correct. The powers
available to the Commissioner under
on the determination of an
application for review, do not suggest a de novo process. Accordingly, the
Commissioner was not required
to re-determine the issue under cl 4.1 of the CD5
for himself. ... "
I should say something about
. CD5 is now effectively ED5. The
"issue" referred to was the formation of a belief on reasonable grounds that a
breach of the Code
of Conduct may have occurred. As noted by counsel for the
Attorney, the Commission President in his decision did not include reference
the next paragraph after the one cited
that paragraph, [65], I
added that there "seemed to be no dispute that the Commissioner could review the
merits of the Secretary's
decision; there was no argument that the Commissioner
was restricted to looking only at the question of whether the Secretary had
fact formed the requisite belief."
course the reference in those passages to "the Commissioner" is to the State
Service Commissioner, a position abolished in 2013.
At the same time,
was amended to provide for reviews by the Tasmanian Industrial Commission, a
body external to the State Service structures. In any
event, it can be seen that
the nature of a
review and what it meant in that case was
not the subject of any argument; the parties were agreed on those
the primary judge in this case both
were agreed that the
Commissioner's view was correct and the review was a limited one "to review
whether the process was appropriate
with an eye to correction if the process
miscarried". His Honour expressed some doubt about the correctness of that view,
that the Commissioner's view was based on my comments in
[64]. His Honour also noted that my comments were obiter and that the nature of
the review had not been authoritatively determined
in the Supreme Court.
Counsel for the Attorney-General submits that the narrow view taken by the
Commissioner is erroneous; that having regard to the
whole of the legislative
scheme, the relevant review is a "comprehensive" administrative review in that
while the Commission does
not stand in the shoes of the decision-maker in the
sense of directly substituting its own orders or directions, it is still
to conduct a review of the action with "an eye to correction". Counsel
submitted that this is not to be understood as solely concerned
with ensuring
the appropriate process was engaged in, but is directed to the action or
decision itself. Counsel also noted there
is no express statutory limit to the
material that is to be considered in such a review.
am prepared to accept there is some merit in the submissions made on behalf of
the Attorney. There is good reason to think that
review extends beyond
the scope given to it by the Commissioner. It is axiomatic that what is involved
in a particular scheme for
review depends on an examination of the particular
legislative provisions. Counsel noted the comment in
Brandy v Human Rights
and Equal Opportunity Commission
[1995] HCA 10
[1995] 183 CLR 245
at 261 that the word
"review" is commonly used in the context of comprehensive administrative review
by an administrative tribunal
of administrative decisions, or judicial control
of administrative action, and submitted the former applied in relation to a
Victoria Legal Aid v Kuek
[2010] VSCA 29
, 26 VR 700 at
Buchanan JA (Weinberg JA and Ross AJA agreeing) said the word "review" is
general and somewhat elastic; it "takes colour from
its context" and "is
appropriate to denote another body undertaking an inquiry as to whether the
original decision-maker came to
the correct conclusion"
does not enable the Commission to directly substitute its decision for
that of the decision-maker – an important attribute
of a merits review
function – it is empowered to grant an application and give directions to
the decision-maker to take such
"action" as it considers appropriate. Invariably
a direction to take an action would, in effect, amount to directing that a
decision be implemented. In addition to effecting a reversal or
change in the decision, in a
review, the Commission can make
recommendations. These things may denote more of a merits review than a process
involving the detection
of vitiating error.
Industrial Relations Act
governs the operation of the Commission.
The Commission has jurisdiction to hear and determine any matter relating to or
from an industrial matter
, the Commission is to review
a matter in respect of which an application for review has been made under
State Service Act
. Of note is that s 19AA(2) enables the
Commission to refer any such matter to the Ombudsman, the Integrity Commission
or the Anti-Discrimination
Commission or any other person or body that may be
prescribed in the regulations. That also does not support the proposition that
the Commission's task on review is limited in the way suggested by the
Commissioner.
Additionally,
relevant features are that the Commission is to act according to equity and good
without regard to technicalities or legal forms
, and is not
bound by the rules of evidence
It may regulate its own procedure and is
empowered to summons people and take evidence on oath or affirmation
Commission is a body well equipped to deal with a merits review function. It is
an external tribunal at the first level of review
above administrative
decision-making. On the face of things, it is not constituted as a body to
review decisions according to the
principles of judicial review, and may be more
happily regarded as "an instrument of government administration": see
Collector of Customs (NSW) v Brian Lawlor Automotive Pty Ltd
[1979] FCA 21
per Smithers J at 335, cited in
involves a merits review, the question for the Commission is whether a
decision is "the correct or preferable one" which should be
decided on the
material before the Commission:
Drake v Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1979] 46 FLR 409
Shi v Migration
Agents Registration Agents Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
235 CLR 286
per Kirby J at [41], per Kiefel J at [140]. Irrespective of the precise nature
of the review, the Commission undoubtedly has the
power to receive further
turn to the grounds, which can be briefly dealt with. As to ground 6, the
primary judge said that further material was irrelevant
having regard to the
view he had reached in relation to the construction of cl 7. It follows from my
view of the construction of
cl 7 that I would reach the same conclusion. If I am
wrong about the primary construction point, I would hold that the material could
be properly taken into account.
to ground 7, it seems on any view that it is necessary to make a decision about
it. The ground asserts that the primary judge
erred in determining that the
Commission's direction that the Secretary re-instate MC on full pay was within
the power conferred
when there is no such power. As argued in the
written submissions there are about nine points to this. My attempt at a
distillation
of the wide-ranging submissions produces two quite different
issues. One concerns the nature of the power itself. The other raises
sort of contractual considerations raised under ground 3; that is, it is said
the Commission has no power to direct the
Secretary to do anything which
involves the exercise of a private contractual right.
first 'power' issue relates to the primary judge's statement that the Commission
has the power to direct a decision-maker to
take action that would ordinarily
require a particular belief, the consequence being that the decision-maker is
obliged to take that
action whether or not he or she holds the particular belief
that would ordinarily be required. As best I can understand the arguments,
first relates to two subject matters.
relates to a "belief" about circumstances beyond an employee's control under cl
7 of the Award, the contention being that
does not enable a direction
that the Secretary make a particular finding of fact. The other relates to what
is said to be a subjective
belief required to be formed under ED4 to enable
suspension. The submission here is that there is no power to direct that a
subjective belief be held; a secondary aspect being that in such
circumstances it wrongly deems a jurisdictional fact to have been
Before going on, some clarity about the facts is needed. As set out in par [2]
of the Commissioner's reasons, the Secretary's determination
being reviewed was
that "invoking" cl 7 of the Award to cease MC's suspension with pay pursuant to
ED4; in simple terms, terminating
the status of suspension on full pay. The
underlying reason for that termination was the absence of registration. Assuming
not satisfied (or did not apply) the operation of the "no work, no pay"
principle was the only outcome. The direction by the Commissioner
to reinstate
MC on suspension with full pay implicitly set aside the termination of the ED4
suspension. That direction to reinstate
was not accompanied by any direction to
re-determine the clause 7 issue of fact after hearing from MC, and purportedly
to the matter. (Under
, the Commissioner could have
directed the Minister to have the matter determined by a different delegate.)
Although not directly put in this way, within the first aspect of complaint
the Commissioner made the
direction based on a finding of a lack of procedural fairness, but the
unqualified and unconditional direction
simply assumed that the cl 7 exception
applied. That is, the circumstances of MC's lack of current registration were
beyond his control.
Proceeding on that basis cannot be right. On either view of
the Commission's role on a
review, the Commissioner did not make any
findings of fact about whether or not the circumstances were beyond MC's
control. On one
view the Commissioner had no power to make such findings, but on
any view she simply did not address the issue.
The direction could only be lawfully made if the cl 7 exemption was found to
have been satisfied. Based on what the Commissioner
said about the lack of
procedural fairness, the only direction that could have been made was one to the
Secretary to re-determine
the matter given the finding of the lack of procedural
fairness, or alternatively to direct the Minister to have the matter
re-determined
by a different delegate. I would uphold ground 7 on the basis that
the Commissioner had no power in the circumstances of how the
resolved, to make the impugned direction.
will comment on what remains of ground 7. As to the belief necessary under ED4
in order for a suspension to be implemented, it
is not correct to simply call it
subjective. The belief must be formed on reasonable grounds, and so involves
objectivity in that
sense. On a practical level, the direction of the
Commissioner simply reversed the termination of the ED4 suspension on full pay,
and did not involve directing the Secretary to hold a particular state of mind.
In any case, the primary judge was correct. The Commission
was entitled to make
the direction under
as within the legislative scheme; it matters not
that a decision-maker might not hold the relevant belief, or not hold it at the
time of a direction.
the extent that the contractual issue has not already been covered, it can be
shortly dealt with. It was not addressed in oral
argument, but has some
connection to the ground 3 argument. The termination of the ED4 suspension on
full pay came about because
of the lack of registration and the Secretary's
views about the cl 7 circumstances. If the award applied MC was entitled to the
of it if he could bring himself within its terms. If not, application of
the "no work, no pay" principle followed. The direction
to reinstate MC on
suspension with full pay was within power and simply had the opposite effect. It
was not, in effect, a direction
to do anything of a contractual
Grounds 8 and 9
As I have noted, these grounds relate to the question of procedural fairness.
Ground 8 asserts that an error of law on the part
of the Commissioner in
determining that the Secretary owed MC procedural fairness in making the
decision of 2 October 2020. For the
reasons I have given in relation to cl 7,
there was no obligation to afford MC an opportunity to make representations
the circumstances were beyond his control. That question simply
did not arise. I should add that the Secretary's attempts to take
this argument
outside any statutory context solely into the realms of contractual
relationships are ill-fated. Put simply, if the
Award applied, it had to be
complied with:
Gapes v Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd
[1980] FCA 21
(1980) 41 FLR 27
Ground 9 complains of an error in law in determining that the Secretary denied
MC procedural fairness. The same argument is put
in support of this ground as
for ground 8. For the same reasons I have given in relation to ground 8, ground
9 should fail.
I add that if I am wrong about my primary construction of cl 7, and
considerations of MC's conduct giving rise to the cancellation
of registrations
are needed in order to determine whether they were within his control or not
– I would nonetheless refuse
relief on the asserted premise that MC was
not afforded procedural fairness. That is because I think this case clearly
falls within
that class of case in which the right to be heard, if exercised,
would clearly have had no effect on the outcome, or would have no
effect if the
Commissioner had effectively remitted the matter by directing the Minister to
have the matter re-determined by a different
breach was not a material one in the sense that there was no possibility of a
successful outcome:
Stead v State Government Insurance Commission
[1986] HCA 54
161 CLR 141
Nobarani v Mariconte
[2018] HCA 36
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v
[2019] HCA 3
264 CLR 421
Ground 1 is made out in the sense I have explained. Grounds 4 and 7 also
succeed (as does ground 5 if I am wrong about ground 1).
I would allow the
appeal, and I set out below the further orders I would make. Under
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act
this Court is effectively confined
to the powers exercisable by the primary judge. In light of my reasons, it would
appear an exercise
in futility to make an order under
Judicial Review Act
referring the matter back to the Commission "for
further consideration". However, the powers available to a court under that Act
do not include the power to deal with the original subject matter giving rise to
judicial review, except indirectly by way of a declaration
of the parties'
rights or directions to do, or refrain from doing, anything considered necessary
to do justice between the parties:
s 27(1)(c) and (d).
the absence of an order referring the matter of MC's application for review back
to the Commission, its jurisdiction in relation
to that application will remain
unexercised:
SZEPZ v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2006] FCAFC 107
, 158 FCR 291 at
. How it deals with matter on remitter is a
matter for it. As I doubt that the provisions of s 27(1)(c) or (d) can be
properly called
in aid, I will make an order under s 27(1)(b).
appeal is allowed.
orders of the primary judge made on 16 June 2022 are set aside.
originating application dated 5 May 2021 is allowed.
order and directions of the Commissioner made on 29 April 2021 are set
matter of MC's application for review is referred to the Tasmanian Industrial
Commission for further consideration.
State Service Act
the "Employer" is the Minister administering that
Act, but the Head of the State Service performs and exercises the functions and
powers of the Employer other than the power to issue Employment
Directions.
the Board may cancel a person's registration after inquiry.
Since 17 November 2020, under s 17BA the Board may suspend or cancel
registration without conducting an inquiry if satisfied that the teacher does
not hold vulnerable person registration, or that such
registration has been
suspended and the suspension has not been revoked.
The application in that case
was under s 50(1)(b), but the President did not distinguish between the two
It was agreed the Commissioner
on review did not decide for himself whether he would form the belief, but was
required to consider
the material to determine whether reasonable grounds
existed for the belief, as was the court on judicial review.
MC was represented at the
hearing before the primary judge
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (483 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter