URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMC/2023/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Purdon v Cameron [2023] TASMC 3 (14 December 2023)
[2023] TASMC 03
COURT: MAGISTRATES COURT OF TASMANIA
[2023] TASMC 03
PARTIES: PURDON, Scott
Janet Heather
FILE NO: 91069/2019 and 92055/2019.
DELIVERED ON: 14
December 2023
DELIVERED AT: Hobart
HEARING DATES: 19, 20, 25 26 October
2021, 8, 9 10, 11 November 2021
DECISION OF: Deputy Chief Magistrate M
CATCHWORDS:
Criminal law
Failure to give information about a substantial
holding in a listed company as required by
Corporations Act 2001
– Omitting a matter in a document lodged with ASIC without which the
document was misleading in a material respect contrary
Corporations Act
– ‘Substantial holding’ –
‘Relevant interest’ – ‘Relevant agreement’ –
‘Control’ – ‘In concert’ – ‘Affairs of
a company’ – ‘warehousing’
Corporations Act 2011
, s 12(2), 608,671B,
REPRESENTATION:
Prosecutor L
Crowley QC, A Macauley
Defendant: R Seiden SC, M Johnston
Solicitors:
Prosecutor: Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions
Defendant: Murdoch Clarke
Decision Number: [2023]
Number of paragraphs: 516
Serial No: 03/2023
File Nos. 91069/2019 and 92055/2019
SCOTT PURDON v JANET HEATHER CAMERON
REASONS FOR DECISION
14 December 2023
Introduction
the reasons that follow, I find the charges on complaint numbers 91069/2019 and
9205/2019 proved beyond reasonable doubt.
Heather Cameron (the defendant) pleaded not guilty to two charges. The first is
contained in complaint 91069/2019 and referred
to as charge 1. The second is
contained in complaint 92055/2019 and is referred to as charge 2.
relation to each charge, the prosecution must prove each element of each charge
beyond reasonable doubt. The defendant is presumed
to be innocent unless and
until the Court finds each element of a charge against her proved beyond
reasonable doubt. The onus of
proof rests with the prosecution alone and the
defendant bears no onus of proving anything (other than where there is an
statutory obligation to discharge an evidentiary onus). It is not
enough for the prosecution to show a suspicion of guilt, or even
to show that
the defendant is probably guilty.
charges were tried together and all the evidence was admissible on each of the
charges. During the course of the hearing of
the charges, I heard evidence from
a number of witnesses and received over 2100 pages of documentary evidence. The
defendant did
not give evidence. She was not obliged to do that and by electing
not to do so, no inference may be drawn against her on any issue
as a result.
of this case relies on circumstantial evidence. Before reaching a conclusion
that that guilt has been proven beyond reasonable
doubt, guilt should not only
be a rational inference but it must be the only rational inference that may be
drawn from the circumstances.
For an inference to be reasonable, it must rest
upon something more than mere conjecture. Equally, a bare possibility of
should not prevent the Court from reaching a conclusion that that
guilt has been proven beyond reasonable doubt. Given that this
circumstantial case, all of the circumstances established by the evidence are to
be considered and weighed in deciding whether
there is an inference consistent
with innocence which is reasonably open on the evidence. The evidence is not to
be looked at in
a piecemeal fashion. Wherever I have stated that I am
satisfied, or where I state that I have made a finding that a fact is proven
that a circumstance exists, I have expressed those conclusions beyond reasonable
issues in this case relate firstly whether the defendant had a ‘relevant
interest’ in certain shares which were held
by a separate legal entity:
secondly whether she failed to disclose that interest as required at the time
the shares were acquired;
and thirdly whether she omitted that information from
a document required by ASIC.
dismiss the defendant’s application for a stay of proceedings on the basis
that she has been subjected to double prosecution
in respect of the same or
substantially the same set of facts.
structure of these reasons is as follows:
Part 1 Charges
Part 2 Legislation
Part 3 Facts
Part 4 Objections to evidence
Part 5 Determination of issues
Part 6 Conclusions
PART 1 – the Charges
1 alleges that:
“On or about 5 August 2014 at Hobart in
Tasmania, the defendant, who, by herself and along with her associate the Black
Private Foundation, began holding a substantial holding in a listed
company, namely Bellamy's Australia Ltd (BAL), failed to give
the information
referred to in
section 671B(3)
Corporations Act
(Cth) to the
relevant market operator, being the ASX Ltd, within two business days of
becoming aware that she, along with her associate
the Black Prince Private
Foundation, had a relevant interest in Bellamy's Australia Ltd (BAL) amounting
to a substantial holding,
contrary to
section 671B(l)(a)
section 1311(1)
Corporations Act
relation to charge 1, the prosecution case against the defendant is that she had
‘substantial holding’
BAL constituted by Black
million shares in that company because she had a
‘relevant interest’
in those shares. The shares had been
acquired by the Black Prince Private Foundation (‘Black Prince’)
immediately prior
to BAL listing on the stock
The case is essentially
that the defendant had a
‘relevant interest’
Prince’s shares in BAL because she had power to exercise, or control the
exercise of, a right to vote attached to
the shares under
s 608(1)(b)
had power to dispose of, or control the exercise of a power to dispose of, them
s 608(1)(c).
It is alleged that the defendant arranged Black Prince to
‘warehouse’
the shares for her so that they were not held in
her name directly. It is alleged that in breach of
s 671B(1)(b)
Corporations Act
(‘the Act’), the defendant failed to
disclose her
‘relevant interest’
in BAL and the arrangements
which constituted her ‘association’ with Black Prince, within two
business days of Black Prince
becoming the registered holder of those shares as
required by
(1)(a) of the
Corporations Act
case on charge 1 alleges four distinct avenues through which it seeks to prove
that the defendant had a relevant interest in Black
Prince’s shareholding
in BAL (see the heading
“Four Avenues to a relevant interest”
below). The Prosecution case is that the defendant ‘procured and
arranged’ for Black Prince to acquire a substantial
shareholding in BAL so
as to keep her own involvement ‘private’ and
‘confidential.
2’ is contained in complaint 92055/2019, where it is alleged that the
defendant contravened s 1308(2) of the Act:
“On or about 15 February 2017 at Hobart in Tasmania, the defendant omitted
a matter from a document that was lodged with or
submitted to the Australian
Securities and Investments Commission, without which matter the document was, to
her knowledge, misleading
in a material respect, contrary to
section 1308(2)
Corporations Act
2 alleges that on 15 February 2017 the defendant lodged a Substantial Holder
(SHN) with ASIC which she
knew omitted something it should have contained; and that without that
information the defendant knew the
SHN was misleading. The omitted information
was that the defendant had a relevant interest in Black Prince’s
shareholding
in BAL from August 2014 and that Black Prince was an associate of
- Legislation
Charge 1: Legislative framework –
without oversimplification, I summarise the legislative scheme as follows. The
starting point for charge 1 is the allegation
that the Act, s 671B required the
defendant to provide information relating to her relevant interest in the BAL
shares, and her association
with Black Prince, to BAL and the ASX but failed to
Requirement to give information
at 5 August 2014, in certain circumstances, s 671B required the defendant to
provide information about a
‘substantial holding’
‘listed company’
to be provided to the company and to the
‘relevant market operator’
. That requirement was expressed
in the following
— Substantial holding information
671B Information about substantial holdings must be given to company,
responsible entity and relevant market operator
Requirement to give information
A person must give the information referred to in subsection (3) to a
listed company, or the responsible entity for a listed registered
investment scheme, if:
the person begins to have, or ceases to have, a substantial holding in
the company or scheme; or
the person has a substantial holding in the company or scheme and there
is a movement of at least 1% in their holding; or
the person makes a takeover bid for securities of the company or
The person must also give the information to each relevant market
information required to be disclosed pursuant to s 671B(3), both to the listed
company (Bellamy’s Australia Ltd in this
case) and the “relevant
market operator” (in this case, the ASX), was as follows (as at 5 August
Information that must be given
(3) The information to be given is:
(a) the person’s name and address; and
(b) details of their relevant interest in:
(i) voting shares in the company; or
(ii) interests in the scheme; and
(c) details of any relevant agreement through which they would have a
relevant interest in:
(i) voting shares in the company; or
(ii) interests in the scheme; and
(d) the name of each associate who has a relevant interest in voting shares
in the company or interests in the scheme, together with
details of:
(i) the nature of their association with the associate; and
(ii) the relevant interest of the associate; and
(iii) any relevant agreement through which the associate has the relevant
interest; and
(e) if the information is being given because of a movement in their
holding—the size and date of that movement; and
(f) if the information is being given because a person has ceased to be an
associate—the name of the person; and
(g) any other particulars that are prescribed.
Regulations did not prescribe any further matters for the purposes of s
671B(3)(g).
time for providing that information was set out in s
(6) The person must give the information:
(a) within 2 business days after they become aware of the information;
(b) by 9.30 am on the next trading day of the relevant financial market after
they become aware of the information if:
(i) a takeover bid is made for voting shares in the company or voting
interests in the scheme; and
(ii) the person becomes aware of the information during the bid
“Substantial holding”
“substantial holding”
, as it appears in s 671B(1)(a),
was defined in s 9 of the Act, as at 5 August 2014, as follows:
Substantial holding: A person has a substantial holding in a
body corporate, or listed registered managed investment scheme, if:
(a) the total votes attached to voting shares in the body, or voting
interests in the scheme, in which they or their associates:
(i) have relevant interests; and
(ii) would have a relevant interest but for subsection 609(6) (market
traded options) or 609(7) (conditional agreements);
is 5% or more of the total number of votes attached to voting shares in
the body, or interests in the scheme; or
(b) the person has made a takeover bid for voting shares in the body, or
voting interests in the scheme, and the bid period has started
and not yet
‘Listed company’
relation to the
‘listed company’
element of charge 1, it was
an agreed fact that on or around 1 August 2014 Bellamy’s Australia Limited
(BAL) was admitted to
the official list of the Australian Stock Exchange. A
company is a
company if it is “
included in
the official list of a prescribed financial
operated in
Australia. The ASX was, as at 5 August 2014, a
“prescribed financial
I am satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that as at 5 August 2014, BAL was
for the purposes of and that ASX Ltd was a
‘prescribed financial market’
prosecution case is that the defendant was a person who had a
‘substantial holding’
in BAL. The
‘substantial
is alleged to be the defendant’s
in the BAL shares. As at 5 August 2014, s 9 of the Act
operated so that a
‘substantial holding’
‘relevant interest’
of the defendant or her
‘associate’
. Within that definition, the expressions
“voting share”
“associate”
“relevant interest”
are defined.
‘Voting share’
is defined in s 9 as a share in the company that carries
‘voting rights’
. The calculation of
is governed by the Act s.610. For the purposes of charge 1,
there is no dispute that:
(a) Black Prince held 14,000,000 shares in BAL on or about 5 August 2014;
(b) the 14,000,000 shares in BAL which were held by Black Prince were
“voting shares”
‘voting rights’
attached to those shares amounted to
more than 5% of the total number of votes attached to voting shares in BAL
matters at (a)-(c) above are established beyond reasonable doubt.
‘Associate’
the purposes of the element of charge 1 relating to the
‘substantial
, it is necessary to consider who is an
‘associate’
, because a person (in this case, the defendant)
will have a
‘substantial holding’
in a body corporate (BAL)
if the total votes attached to voting shares in the company held by them or
their associates (Black Prince)
is 5% or more the total number of votes attached
to voting shares in the company (Black Prince had about 15% of BAL’s
shares at the relevant time): s 671B(1)(a). The prosecution case is that
the Act, s 671B(1)(a) required a person in the position
of the defendant to give
this information to BAL and the ASX but that she failed to meet this that
obligation.
“Associate”
was defined in the Act s 12(2)
(2) For the purposes of the application of the associate reference in
relation to the designated body, a person (the second person)
is an associate of
the primary person if, and only if, one or more of the following paragraphs
(b) the second person is a person with whom the primary person has, or
proposes to enter into, a relevant agreement for the purpose
of controlling or
influencing the composition of the designated body’s board or the conduct
of the designated body’s
(c) the second person is a person with whom the primary person is acting,
or proposing to act, in concert in relation to the designated
Act s12(b) provides that a person is an
‘associate’
second person is a person with whom the primary person is acting, or proposing
‘in concert’
in relation to a designated body’s
affairs (the ‘associate reference’). The ‘associate
created by s 12 is also to be read with s 15, which broadened
the scope of its application
(1) The associate reference includes a reference to:
(b) a person with whom the primary person is acting or proposes to act
‘in concert’; and
(c) a person with whom the primary person is, or proposes to become,
associated, whether formally or informally, in any other way
in respect of the matter to which the associate reference relates.
determination of
‘associate’
in this case requires the Court
to consider four related concepts referred to in s 12(2), this:
‘relevant agreement’
whether the
‘relevant agreement’
was for the
‘controlling’
the designated body’s
what is encompassed by the notion of persons acting
what comprises the
of a designated body.
I will deal with each of those concepts immediately below.
‘Relevant agreement’ (‘Associate
reference’ s 12(2)(b))
to the determination of
‘substantial holding’
and who is an
‘associate’
who may have a
‘relevant interest’
‘relevant agreement’
, s 9 defines the
‘relevant agreement’
as follows:
‘relevant agreement, means an agreement, arrangement or
understanding:
(a) whether formal or informal or partly formal and partly informal; and
(b) whether written or oral or partly written and partly oral; and
(c) whether or not having legal or equitable force and whether or not based
on legal or equitable rights.”
Relevantly,
the concept of a
“relevant agreement”
is further picked up in
s 608, which defines what constitutes a
“relevant interest”
in the securities of the company.
“Relevant interest”
dealt with further, below. This definition is of particular relevance to the
‘fourth way’
defendant had a relevant interest in Black Prince’s shares in BAL, being
her association with Black Prince. Prosecution
case that the defendant had a
“relevant agreement”
with Black Prince for the purposes of
controlling or influencing the composition of the BAL’s board or the
conduct of BAL’s
‘Control’ (Associate reference s 12 (2)(b))
to the definition of
“relevant agreement”
is the concept of
of a designated body’s affairs. This term (as
‘associate’
) also appears in s 12(2)(b).
was defined in s 50AA of the Act as follows
(relevantly):
(1) For the purposes of this Act, an entity controls a second entity if
the first entity has the capacity to determine the outcome
of decisions about
the second entity’s financial and operating policies.
(2) In determining whether the first entity has this capacity:
a) the practical influence the first entity can exert (rather than the rights
it can enforce) is the issue to be considered; and
b) any practice or pattern of behaviour affecting the second entity’s
financial or operating policies is to be taken into account
(even if it involves
a breach of an agreement or a breach of trust).
of control are also picked up in s 608 in considering the term
“relevant interest”
. The Act, s 608(3) and (4) provide that:
the purposes of paragraph (3)(b), a person controls a body corporate if the
person has the capacity to determine the outcome of
decisions about the body
corporate’s financial and operating policies.
determining whether a person has this capacity:
a) the practical influence the person can exert (rather than the rights they
can enforce) is the issue to be addressed; and
b) any practice or pattern of behaviour affecting the body corporate’s
financial or operating policies is to be taken into account
(even if it involves
a breach of an agreement or a breach of trust).
concerned with the ways or circumstances in which, unhindered, something like
disposition of a share could occur and the power
which another person has to
restrict or prevent the doing of
A power can be positive or
negative in quality.
stated above, if what is involved is an unenforceable arrangement or
understanding, whether a true measure of control exists
is determined on the
assumption that the parties act in accordance with, rather than contrary to,
their arrangement or
understanding.
While these are
broad terms, it is necessary to prove some true or actual measure of
, not merely a minor,
peripheral, or merely hypothetical, theoretical or notional
‘In concert’ (Associate reference s 12 (2) (c))
parties made submissions - which I accept - on the meaning of the expression
‘in concert’
. That expression is relevant to the question
‘associate’
through acting in concert in relation to a company’s
affairs. – That is, whether the defendant and Black Prince were associates
because they were acting
‘in concert’
in relation to
prosecution submits that the evidence supports and inference that the defendant
and others - including Bicheno, Lengkap and Black
Prince - were associates and
acted in concert in respect of Black Prince’s shareholding in BAL. In
that way, it was submitted,
the defendant had a
in Black Prince’s
‘substantial
‘in concert”
in s 12 (2)(c) is not defined in the
Act. The parties agreed that the principles in
Bank of Western Australia v
Ocean Trawlers Pty Ltd
- it involves at
least an understanding between the parties as to a common purpose or
understanding should be consensual and there should be some adoption of
- it is not
essential that the parties are committed to it or bound to support the
understanding;
- an arrangement
can be informal or even unenforceable, and the parties may be free to withdraw
from it or to act inconsistently with
it notwithstanding their adoption of
prosecutor also referred to
Re Boart Longyear Ltd (No.
. The element of acting
‘in concert’
directed to two persons separately and coincidentally acting in the same manner;
- will only be
established where there exists a real understanding, common purpose or
combination or aggregation;
established simply because parties have common views as to the merits of a
particular resolution proposed by another person.
reply, the defendant submitted that the following considerations were relevant
to whether parties acted
‘in concert’
- the fact of
the transaction or acquisition of shares is relevant in determining whether an
inference of association (
acting in concert) was justified when
considered in combination with other
provisions are of wide import and their meaning must be gleaned from their
context, scope and purpose:
- acting in
concert connotes knowing conduct the result of communication between parties and
not simultaneous actions occurring contemporaneously...including
a proposal to
- acting in
concert involves at least an understanding between parties as to a common
- a question is
whether there is something in the arrangement that will survive formal
completion of the sale and purchase of shares
such as to tie the fortunes of the
buyer and seller together in pursuit of a common object or purpose. An
arrangement to buy and
sell shares without more would not have the element of
continuity in relation to the fortunes of the parties which would survive
completion of the
transaction;
- the pejorative
element of the expression will most often (although not always) be found in a
common purpose to circumvent the letter,
or perhaps even the spirit, of some
other statutory obligation or
requirement.
‘Affairs of a company’ (Associate reference s
12(2)(b) and (c))
when considering the concept of whether the defendant has a relevant interest
through her association with Black Prince,
it is necessary to consider the
expressions
“affairs of a company”
“affairs of a
body corporate”
. This arises in the context of the question of who is
“associate”
which is in turn relevant to the issue of
“substantial holding”
– being an element of charge 1.
What constitutes the
‘affairs of a company’
was set out in
the Act s 53. Further, reg 1.0.18 stipulates that that definition was to apply
to s 12(2)(b) and (c) of the Act.
definition of
‘affairs of a body corporate’
in s 53 includes
(inter alia):
a) the promotion, formation, membership, control, business, trading,
transactions and dealings, property, liabilities, profits and
other income,
receipts, losses, outgoings and expenditure of the body – s 53(a);
b) the internal management and proceedings of the body – s 53(c);
power of persons to exercise, or to control the exercise of, the rights to vote
attached to shares in the body or to dispose of,
or to exercise control over the
disposal of, such shares – s 53(f); and
d) matters concerned with the ascertainment of the persons who are or have been
financially interested in the success or failure,
or apparent success or
failure, of the body or are or have been able to control or materially to
influence the policy of the body
‘Relevant interest”
Considering
whether a person has a
‘substantial holding’
disclosure under s 671B(1) involves the further concept of a
: s 671B(1)(a)(i).
‘Relevant interest’
was defined in s 9 in relation to
‘securities’
(which include
shares in a company) as having the meaning given by ss 608 and 609. What is set
out below under this heading is more
or less directly copied from the
prosecution closing submissions, section B.5. The content of these submissions
was not in dispute
in any way.
608 of the Act sets out a number of rules and prescriptions to determine whether
a person has a
‘relevant interest in securities’
. The basic
rule under s 608(1) is that a person has a relevant interest in securities if
(i) are the holder of the security;
(ii) have power to exercise, or control the exercise of, a right to vote
attached to the securities; or
(iii) have power to dispose of, or control the exercise of a power to dispose
of, the securities.
608(1) states that
“it does not matter how remote the relevant interest
is or how it arises”
. It further states that if two or more people
can jointly exercise one of the powers relating to voting or disposal referred
in the paragraph above, each of them is taken to have that power;
‘relevant interest in securities’
involves the further concept of
as set out in s 698, which includes
control that is indirect”
. Thus, s 608(2) states:
In this section, power or control includes:
(a) power or control that is indirect; and
(b) power or control that is, or can be, exercised as a result of, by means
of or by the revocation or breach of:
(i) a trust; or
(ii) an agreement; or
(iii) a practice; or
(iv) any combination of them;
whether or not they are enforceable; and
(c) power or control that is, or can be made, subject to restraint or
restriction.
It does not matter whether the power or control is express or implied,
formal or informal, exercisable alone or jointly with someone
else. It does not
matter that the power or control cannot be related to a particular
the purposes of s 608, an
“agreement”
was defined in s 9 as
“relevant agreement”
, the definition of which has
been set out above.
to have the same relevant interest in securities that a
body corporate has if that person:
(i) has a voting power in respect of that body corporate which exceeds 20%
– s 608(3)(a); or
(ii) controls
that body corporate – s 608(3)(b). (
deeming provision in s 608(3)(b) can be used successively through a chain of
corporations.
person does not control the body corporate merely because the person and an
entity that is not an associate jointly have the capacity
to determine the
outcome of decisions about the body corporate’s financial and operating
policies – s 608(6).
the remaining subsections, the prosecution case is that a
can arise via an arrangement to secure a loan and that is
supported by the text of both ss 608(8) and 609(1)(a). It was submitted
608(8) covers agreements, which if performed, would give a person a relevant
interest in shares in BAL. It was submitted
that s 608(8) covers, for instance,
a person with a relevant interest entering into an agreement or granting another
person a right
– e.g. an option – in relation to the relevant
securities, which agreement, if performed, would give that latter person
relevant interest. This submission is particularly relevant when considering
clause 3(a) of the Black Prince Loan Agreement, discussed
below, which the
prosecution says amounts to a relevant interest.
section B.6 of the Closing Submissions of the Prosecution, assistance was
provided in relation to the purpose and object of the
obligation to disclose a
“substantial holding”
in a company as required by s 671B(1),
including the disclosure of interests giving rise to actual control of companies
an informed market. These submissions mapped the genesis of the
obligation back to the
Second Interim Report of the Eggleston Committee
(1969) and the enactment of the
Companies (Amendment) Act 1971
The obligation is designed to safeguard prospective investors, shareholders and
employees in the company by requiring persons
who might have the capacity to
control the destiny of the company to give notice of that fact. The provisions
are to be construed
widely, to include arrangements, understandings and
practices bearing upon the obligation. For the most part, those submissions
were not the subject of any dispute. I have taken those submissions into
account but I do not repeat them here, other than as regards
‘warehousing’
‘Relevant interest’ includes
‘warehousing’
prosecution submitted that the definition of
is broad enough to encompass the concept of
‘warehousing’, which is explained in
Ford’s Principles of
Corporations Law
at [23.150.9] as follows:
“Warehousing” occurs where shares are
“stored” by a friendly shareholder for a person who wishes to
a controlling interest without detection. Sometimes the parties to such
actions in concert are referred to as “concert parties”.
Warehousing
is likely to involve entering into a “relevant agreement”, although
it will often be difficult to prove what
has happened. Additionally, as we shall
see, the parties to a warehousing arrangement may be associates of one another
for the purposes
mischief involved in
‘warehousing’
appears to involve the
market being uninformed of material information relating to arrangements,
understandings or practices between
parties which are in place to avoid
obligations imposed upon them under law. The prosecution referred to
Resources & Investment Ltd (In Liq.) Pty Ltd v Apex Securities
Unreported, Cole J, 12 March 1993 which dealt with a warehousing
arrangement. Other cases suggest that the general concept is well
understood by Courts and the Australian Takeovers
defendant took issue with the use of the expression, submitting that
‘warehousing’ was a
“term of art supplied by the Crown, but
which appears nowhere in the evidence or the
Corporations Act
Nothing turns
on the fact that the concept is not reflected in the Act. The term appears to
be useful shorthand.
evidence will show, Black Prince acquired the single largest shareholding in BAL
during the IPO and the allegation is that
a relevant agreement provided a
private and confidential means by which the defendant could control those shares
without the market
or BAL being
Elements of the offence created by s 671B – charge
of what follows in this section repeats the prosecution submissions which were
not the subject of any dispute.
prosecution submitted that in light of the foregoing, and in light of the
elements of the offence under s 671B(1), the requisite
facts that must be proven
beyond reasonable doubt here, are as
As at 5 August 2014:
(a) BAL was a
(b) the defendant - or any of her associates - had a
“voting shares”
“voting shares”
in BAL in which the defendant or any
of her associates had a
“relevant interest”
had voting rights
attached to them equal to or in excess of 5% of the total number of votes
attached to all voting shares in BAL;
(d) the defendant failed to give to BAL, or the ASX, the information set out in
s 671B(3) of Act, which included details of her
in the voting shares of BAL and the name of any associate of
hers having a
“relevant interest”
in the voting shares of
(e) the defendant’s failure occurred within two business days of her
becoming aware of the information in s 671B(3).
(f) defendant had become was aware, within 2 business days of,
, the details of her
“relevant interest”
voting shares of BAL and that of her associate(s) (i.e. the information set out
in s 671B(3) of the Act).
s 1311(1) of the Act indicates that a contravention of s 671B(1) of the Act is a
criminal offence. That section stated (as
at 5 August 2014),
relevantly:
(1) A person who:
(a) does an act or thing that the person is forbidden to do by or under a
provision of this Act; or
(b) does not do an act or thing that the person is required or directed to
do by or under a provision of this Act; or
(c) otherwise contravenes a provision of this Act;
is guilty of an offence by virtue of this subsection, unless that or
another provision of this Act provides that the person:
(d) is guilty of an offence; or
(e) is not guilty of an offence.
(1A) Paragraphs (1)(a), (b) and (c) only apply to a provision in the
following list if a penalty, pecuniary or otherwise, is set
out in Schedule 3
for that provision, or for a provision or provisions in which that provision is
(2) Subject to section 1312, a person who is guilty of an offence
against this Act, whether by virtue of subsection (1) or otherwise,
punishable, on conviction, by a penalty not exceeding the penalty applicable to
the offence.
(a) subsection (1) operates in relation to a provision of this Act so as to
make a person guilty of an offence; or
(b) a provision of this Act (other than this section) provides that a
person is, in circumstances referred to in the provision,
guilty of an
and a penalty, pecuniary or otherwise, is set out in Schedule 3 for that
provision, or for a provision or provisions in which that
provision is included,
the penalty applicable to the offence is the penalty so set out.
671B(1) was a provision listed in Sch 3 to the Act as at 5 August 2014. The
maximum penalty listed next to that provision
“25 penalty units or
imprisonment for 6 months, or both”
. As at 5 August 2014, the term
“penalty unit”
was defined in
) as $170, unless a contrary intention
appeared in the relevant Act (which is not the case here).
Strict Liability for charge 1
1, under s 671B(1A) is one of strict liability. As such, there are no fault
elements for any of the physical elements of the
offence: s 6.1 of the
Criminal Code 1995
(Cth) (‘the Code’). Chapter 2 of the
Criminal Code
dealing with the general principles of criminal
responsibility picked up and applied by reason of s 1308A of the Act.
defence of mistake of fact is available under s 9.2 of the
Criminal Code.
Under ss 13.3 and 13.4 of the
Criminal Code,
a defendant bears both
an evidential burden and a legal burden in respect of any factual matter
relevant to the strict liability offence
for a contravention of s 671B(1).
relation to what the prosecution must prove in relation to charge 1, the
defendant submits that the prosecution must prove details,
for example, that she
was aware that, on a particular date, she became aware (
actually knew) that Black Prince became the registered holder of 14 million
shares in BAL; that she was actually aware of
the terms of clause 3(a) of the
Black Prince Loan Agreement; and that it was ‘operable at the relevant
time’. The defendant
submitted that the prosecution must prove that she
had actual knowledge of the precise details of all of the circumstances relied
upon by the prosecution which combine to prove her relevant
The defendant makes
that submission because of the particular provisions of s671B, which provides
that the person must give the
relevant information
“within 2 business
days after they become aware of the information
. As stated above,
‘the information’
referred to in s 671B(1), is the
interest in voting shares of BAL: s 671B(3)(b);
agreement through which the defendant would have a relevant interest in voting
shares in BAL: s 671B(c);
associate who has a relevant interest in voting shares in BAL: s 671B(3)(d).
Code, s 6.1 provides what strict liability
(1) If a law that creates an offence provides that the offence is an
offence of strict liability:
(a) there are no fault elements for any of the physical elements of the
offence; and
(b) the defence of mistake of fact under section 9.2 is
5.1 of the Code defines what is a fault
(1) A fault element for a particular physical element may be intention,
knowledge, recklessness or negligence.
(2) Subsection (1) does not prevent a law that creates a particular
offence from specifying other fault elements for a physical element
defendant submitted that s 671B(6)(a), together with the definition of the
information in s 671B(3) required the prosecution to
prove beyond reasonable
doubt that the defendant became aware (actually knew) that Black Prince had
become the registered holder
of the shares. This was based on
information’
in s 671B(3) relating to relevant interests or agreements
“voting shares in the company”
. It was submitted that
this was necessary because the calculation of the 2 days required proof of the
occurrence of the awareness.
I reject this submission. The prosecution must
prove that the defendant was aware of the details of her relevant interest in
shares. It is sufficient if the prosecution proves that the relevant
interest was in voting shares. It is not necessary to prove
that the defendant
knew the details which qualified the shares as voting shares or the details
surrounding the process and timing
of the registration of the shares in the name
of Black Prince.
the ‘defence’ of mistake applies. The defendant will not be
criminally liable if (a) she considered whether
or not relevant facts existed,
and that she was under a mistaken but reasonable belief about those relevant
facts; and b) had those
facts existed, her conduct would not have constituted an
Elements of the offence created by s 1308(2) – charge
1308(2) of the Act was in the following terms as at 15 February 2017:
(2) A person who, in a document required by or for the purposes of this Act
or lodged with or submitted to ASIC, makes or authorises
the making of a
statement that to the person’s knowledge is false or misleading in a
material particular, or omits or authorises
the omission of any matter or thing
without which the document is to the person’s knowledge misleading in a
material respect,
is guilty of an offence.
the purposes of charge 2, the prosecution must prove beyond reasonable doubt
a) the defendant submitted a document to ASIC – a Substantial Holder
Notice date 15 August 2017 declaring a relevant interest
in Black Prince’s
14,000,000 shares in BAL . This physical element is a circumstance and, as such,
the default fault element
is recklessness: s 5.6(2) of the Criminal Code. No
dispute has been raised in relation to this element and it is proved beyond
b) in the document submitted to ASIC, the defendant omitted, or authorised the
omission of, a statement. This physical element of
the offence is conduct. The
fault element attached to this element is one of
“intention”
s 5.6(1) of the Criminal Code. The question here is: did the defendant
intentionally omit making a statement in a document; and
c) the omitted statement caused the document to be, to the defendant’s
knowledge, misleading in a material respect. The physical
element is a
circumstance. The fault element is specified to be knowledge in s 1308(2) of
the Act (and, therefore, the default rule
relating to recklessness does not
apply as set out in s 5.6 of the
Criminal Code
). Under s 5.3 of the
Criminal Code
, a person has knowledge of a circumstance if she is aware
that it exists or that it will exist in the ordinary course of events.
s 1311(1A) and Sch 3 to the Act (as it stood as at 15 February 2017), the
maximum penalty for a contravention of s 1308(2) was:
“200 penalty units
or imprisonment for 5 years, or both”. In relation to this penalty:
a) as at 15 February 2017,
defined a “penalty
unit” as $180, unless a contrary intention appeared in the relevant Act
(which is not the case here);
reason of s 4J(3)(a) of
, and the fact that the charges are
being tried summarily, the maximum fine imposable is 60 penalty units and the
maximum custodial
sentence imposable is 12 months (cf. 200 penalty units or
imprisonment for 5 years, as stated in Sch 3 to the Act).
Abuse of Process or Stay of Proceedings
defendant submitted
that she has
been charged twice for the same offence and that
“the 2014 charge is
wholly included in the 2017 charge”
. The defendant accepts that
different language is used to describe the elements of each of the 2 charges.
The defendant submitted
that the prosecution must elect which charge to proceed
on and that until that happens, the proceedings should be
There is no dispute as
to the applicable principles
I will not repeat them here. The defendant submits that the question
“...is the evidence necessary to convict on the 2017
charge in the way that charge is propounded, sufficient to convict on the
charge? The Defendant submits that the answer would be yes. Put another way:
would the defendant be convicted on the 2014 charge
on the facts necessary for
proof of the 2017 charge? The answer must be yes, given the way that the
prosecution propounds its case
on the 2017 charge: CS [273].”
reject the defendant’s submission that the gist or gravamen of each of the
two charges is substantially the same. The conduct
is certainly not the same.
The conduct which is the focus of charge 1 is her defendant’s failure, in
2014, to give BAL and
the ASX information about a substantial holding in
securities by virtue of a relevant interest within two business days of becoming
aware of the details of the relevant interest. The conduct which is the focus
of charge 2 is lodging a document in 2017 which intentionally
misled ASIC by an
intentional omission of information about the defendant’s substantial
holding in securities by virtue of
her relevant interest.
is not a case where the defendant is being prosecuted for two offences arising
out of a single episode. The episodes relating
to conduct are three years
apart. Each charge relates to different points in time, different acts and
different physical elements,
alleged to have been committed in different years
and in different circumstances. The fact that there is a common element or
of elements relating to the non-disclosure of a relevant interest is not
sufficient to support the defendant’s submission.
the defendant could not be convicted of charge 1 on the facts necessary for
proof of charge 2. Charge 1 alleges that in
2014 the defendant failed to notify
BAL and the ASX of a relevant interest within two business days, as required by
the positive
obligation imposed by s 671B(3). Charge 2 alleges that in 2017 the
defendant lodged a document which she knew was false or misleading
omitted to detail her relevant interest. Even though both charges involve proof
of a relevant interest and the defendant’s
failure to disclose it, proof
of charge 2 would not prove charge 1. There are two additional elements in
charge one which would
still require proof:
notification
to BAL and ASX; and
the notification be within two business days after the person becomes aware of
the information.
of charge 2 would not be sufficient to prove the allegation on charge 1 because
there would be no proof of either of the two
uncommon elements, above.
these reasons I reject the defendant’s submissions on abuse of process.
PART 3 – Facts
Facts giving rise to the
this Part, I set out the evidence in the case. There were some agreed facts, for
the purposes of the
Evidence Act 2001
Those are set out below.
The defendant objected to some parts of the evidence and they are dealt with in
Agreed facts
following 18 paragraphs are admitted as agreed facts for the purposes of these
proceedings under
Evidence Act 2001
General matters – BAL
14,000,000 shares issued to the Black Prince Private Foundation in the share
capital of Bellamy’s Australia Ltd were
“voting shares”
within the meaning of
Corporations Act 2001
or around 1 August 2014 Bellamy’s Australia Limited was admitted to the
official list of the Australian Stock Exchange.
General matters – Ms Cameron
2014 and 2017, one of the email addresses associated with Ms Cameron was
2014, Ms Cameron’s passport number was
records reflect that, in relation to Bicheno Investments Pty Ltd:
Ms Cameron was, and has been, the sole shareholder of that company
from, relevantly, 1 January 2014 onwards; and
Ms Cameron was the sole director of that company, relevantly, between
1 January 2014 and 30 June 2014 and after 5 November 2014.
Incorporation of Lengkap Ltd
or around 7 March 2014, Lengkap Ltd was incorporated in Labuan, a Federal
Territory of Malaysia.
incorporation, the sole shareholder of Lengkap was Wawasan Ltd, another company
incorporated in Labuan, a Federal Territory of
the time of incorporation, the sole director of Lengkap Ltd was CPA Partnership
Pte Ltd whose director was in turn Mr David Tong.
Payments for purchase of BAL shares by Black Prince and related
20 June 2014, the sum of $34,948,864.84 was deposited by Pershing Securities
Australia Pty Ltd into a trust account maintained
by HWL Ebsworth.
sum of $34,948,864.84 is the same amount as the net proceeds from the sale by
Bicheno Investments Pty Ltd of its shareholding
in Tasmanian Pure Foods Ltd,
prior to the initial public offering of shares in Tasmanian Pure Foods Ltd
(later renamed Bellamy’s
Australia Ltd).
around 19 and 21 June 2014, Bicheno Investments Pty Ltd as trustee of the Jan
Cameron Trust entered into an agreement captioned
“Convertible Note
Purchase Agreement” with Lengkap Ltd (
the Convertible Note
Convertible Note Agreement reflects that Ms Cameron executed the Convertible
Note Agreement on behalf of Bicheno Investments Pty
or about 21 June 2014, David Tong for and on behalf of CPA Partnership Pte Ltd,
on behalf of Lengkap Ltd, signed a convertible
note, a copy of which convertible
note commences at
BAU.0011.0001.0114.
at 23 June 2014, Lengkap Ltd had a bank account with Maybank International,
Labuan Branch.
or around 23 June 2014, HWL Ebsworth transferred the sum of $23,000,000 to
Lengkap Ltd by wiring the same to a bank account in
the name of Lengkap Ltd with
Maybank International, Labuan Branch
or around 25 June 2014, Lengkap Ltd and the Black Prince Private Foundation
entered into a loan agreement, a copy of which agreement
commences at
BAU.0011.0001.0152.
[See Ex P2, p347]
or around 25 June 2014, Lengkap Ltd transferred from its bank account with
Maybank International the sum of $14,000,000 to Pacific
Custodians Pty Ltd, who
were acting as agent for Bellamy’s Australia Ltd.
$14,000,000 transferred to Pacific Custodians Pty Ltd by Lengkap Ltd on or
around 25 June 2014 was transferred on behalf of the
Black Prince Private
Foundation.
Incorporation of the Black Prince Private Foundation –
February 2012
issue of whether the defendant controlled Black Prince is a central dispute in
this case. There was no significant dispute about
the nature of Black Prince as
an entity. The facts are well summarised at paras 55-59 of the Closing
Submissions of the Prosecutor
and paras 11-16 and 87-90 of the Closing
Submissions for the Defence.
accept the prosecution submissions, in section D.2 of its closing submissions as
to the findings which may be supported by the evidence.
It is established
beyond reasonable doubt that:
February 2012, Black Prince was established in
as a result of
instructions given by Mr Adgemis to Mr Rodd
an Australian solicitor,
who also acted for the defendant from time to
the time of its establishment, Black Prince was used by Mr Adgemis as an
investment vehicle for a technology-based venture which
As a result, between around 2012
until June 2014 Black Prince remained
until it became involved
in acquiring the 14 million shares in BAL;
is not in dispute that:
Prince is an entity of a kind not directly analogous to a corporation under
Australian law, having no shareholders, only beneficiaries.
It has a board of
directors and also a founder;
its deed of incorporation, Black Prince’s director is identified as
Trustmoore (Curacao) NV
(‘Trustmoore’),
company incorporated in Curacao on 7 January 2005, but whose statutory directors
reside in the Netherlands;
original Founder of Black Prince was Trusthouse Holding
however, Mr Adgemis became
Successor Founder shortly
thereafter.
purposes of Black Prince are confined to preserving and managing assets and to
make distributions in the sole discretion of the
Prince’s deed of incorporation, Article 4(1)
Foundation shall be managed by a Board consisting of at least one director under
the supervision of Supervisory Board
, in case the latter is
appointed in conformity with the provisions of Article 5, paragraph 1. Both
natural and legal persons may
be appointed as director.
Prince’s deed of incorporation stipulates that the initial board is
appointed by the Founder, with subsequent vacancies
to be chosen by the board
itself, subject to the approval of the Supervisory Board: Art 4(2). The
Supervisory Board also has the
power to dismiss any director. The existence and
structure of the Supervisory Board is set out in Art
and it is up to the Founder,
if it so choses, to establish the first Supervisory Board, which in turn
supervises the board (Art 5(1)).
The initial members of the Supervisory Board
are to be chosen by the Founder (Art 5(2)), although subsequent vacancies are to
chosen by the Supervisory Board itself (Art 5(4)), unless there are no
members of the Supervisory Board, at which time the Founder
has the power to
appoint new members to the Supervisory Board (Art 5(5)).
relation to the position of Founder, Art 8 of the Deed of Incorporation
a) The Founder may express his wishes to the Board in writing.
b) However, the wishes expressed in writing as referred to in the first
paragraph, shall on no account be binding and compliance with
the wishes cannot
be legally enforced by the Founder or any person. The Board decides on the time
of any distribution; a beneficiary
is only a beneficiary and has no right
whatsoever to claim any distribution from the Foundation.
paragraph 16 of the defendant’s final submissions, it was
16. The Articles supply some evidence of how BPPF
operates, however, given no expert evidence was adduced as to its nature and
(e.g. the legal and practical effect of a letter of wishes), it is
submitted that the Court could not draw any conclusions of law
rights or obligations which are inconsistent with a plain reading of the
Articles, as that is, necessarily, a matter
of Curacao law. And further, as no
sham case was put by the Crown, the Court would not draw any inferences that are
inconsistent
with the BPPF being operated according to its Articles.
reasons more fully explained later, the Court cannot be satisfied that Black
Prince would always act consistently with its Articles.
In a letter dated 30
January 2017, Black Prince’s lawyers Kemp Strang wrote that if Black
Prince receive an expression of
wishes from a Founder, it would take those
wishes into account and may comply, provided that such wishes could be lawfully
and properly
carried out.
that letter Kemp Strang also explained that in 2014 when Black Prince acquired
the shares, it regarded Lengkap as the founder,
at a time when the evidence more
strongly suggests that Mr Adgemis was the founder. If Kemp Strang’s
letter is to be accepted,
Black Prince acquired the 14m shares in BAL as a
response to wishes expressed not by its founder Mr Adgemis, but by Lengkap - a
party whose only connection to Black Prince was as a lender of the money
used for the purchase of the shares(as the defendant would
have it). Why Black
Prince would operate in that way at that time is not satisfactorily explained on
the evidence, except perhaps
if it is accepted that the defendant controlled
Black Prince through Lengkap (which she also controlled), as the ultimate
beneficiary
of these arrangements, to the knowledge or acceptance of the
trustees of Black Prince. The further analysis of this point is set
in Part 5 under the heading
“Second Avenue of Control - the defendant
as Founder of Black Prince”
Background to the incorporation of Lengkap Ltd
prosecution case is that, in the context of adverse publicity surrounding the
collapse of the defendant’s Retail Adventures
companies, the defendant
resigned as a director of BAL, sold her shares and distanced herself from the
company. Despite that, it
is alleged after selling her stake in BAL, the
defendant wanted to maintain a shareholding and successfully did so through
undisclosed
arrangements. It is alleged that through Lengkap Ltd (Lengkap), the
defendant procured and arranged for Black Prince to acquire
a substantial
holding of 14,000,000 shares in BAL so as to keep her involvement in BAL
7 March 2014, prior to BAL's initial public offering (IPO), Lengkap was
incorporated in Labuan, a Federal Territory of Malaysia
(agreed fact no.6). The
prosecution contends that Lengkap was incorporated at the defendant’s
instigation.
following paragraphs effectively set out the Closing Submissions of the
Prosecution, paras [55]-[59]. Subject to two particular
matters, the
submissions are not in dispute.
Those two matters are:
a) Mr Pearson’s exact role; and
b) whether the defendant had
of Lengkap Ltd for the
purposes of s 608.
way of relevant background, the defendant is the sole shareholder and sole
director of Bicheno Investments Pty Ltd (Bicheno),
which is trustee of the Jan Cameron
Trust (the JCT).
The defendant
was one of the original investors in a company called Tasmanian Pure Foods
which was set up as a
‘special investment company’ in around 2007 and later acquired the
business, ‘Bellamy’s
Australia’.
Immediately
prior to the IPO, Bicheno’s holding comprised more than 50% of the
ordinary shares issued by BAL.
The defendant, through Bicheno, was the largest shareholder in BAL prior to it
being floated on the ASX on 1 August
following the successful
to the IPO of BAL, the defendant had been involved in companies trading under
the name Retail Adventures:
Retail Adventures Holdings Pty Ltd and Retail Adventures Pty Ltd, both of which
ended up in external
administration.
In respect of
these companies BAL’s chairman Mr Woolley gave evidence about the
BAL’s commercial environment or context
in the lead up to the
Adventures’
the external administration) was
clearly in the press”
received information
“from the brokers”
, being Mr Hugh
Robertson (Mr Robertson) from Wilson HTM (Wilson), that some institutional
investors had
“expressed concern as to Jan’s involvement on the
success or otherwise of the
This was because
“ongoing disputes in the press...with Retail Adventures having
an impact on the likely success or otherwise of the
Board subsequently agreed to Bicheno selling its stake in BAL before the
At the time that the board
made that decision, Mr Woolley said he was aware of
the defendant wanting to
“retain an interest
which is not evidence of
the truth of that assertion, but circumstantial evidence relating to the
prosecution case.
evidence above was the subject to an objection which is dismissed, for the
reasons set out in Part 4 below.
The Incorporation of Lengkap Ltd
7 March 2014, Lengkap was incorporated in Labuan, a Federal Territory of
It is it not disputed
that (a) the sole shareholder of Lengkap's single issued share, was Wawasan
and (b) the sole corporate
director of Lengkap was CPA.
The prosecution case is, of course, that in truth the defendant controlled
Lengkap and that Lengkap controlled Black Prince and
through those arrangements
she had a substantial holding in BAL which she failed to disclose when required
Woolley gave evidence that BAL’s Board - which at this particular time
included the defendant - first considered listing
BAL on the ASX in
In March 2014, Lengkap
was incorporated. On 13 June 2014 the defendant resigned as a director of BAL.
BAL was listed on the ASX
in very early August 2014.
prosecution case is the evidence supports an inference that in early March 2014
the defendant instructed her lawyer Mr Pearson
to incorporate Lengkap in
Malaysia; that Mr Pearson involved Mr Tong in Singapore for that purpose; and
the defendant, Mr Pearson
and Mr Adgemis travelled to Singapore and met Mr Tong.
4 March 2014 at 2:27pm, Mr Don Pearson (a lawyer acting in an advisory role for
the defendant at the time
an email to Mr David Tong (managing
of a Singapore
domiciled company, CPA Partnership Pte Ltd (CPA)), in which he stated (emphasis
“I have just spoken to my client who has advised me that
she has had to change her travel plans. The plan now is that the client,
other adviser and myself will fly to Singapore arriving at 12:45pm on Sunday 9
March 2014.”
Prosecution case is that when Mr Pearson referred to
‘the client’
, he was referring to the defendant. If that
is the case, that strongly corroborates Mr Adgemis’ evidence that Mr
Pearson was
the defendant’s tax adviser and
Mr Adgemis gave
evidence that he was acting as an adviser to the defendant.
It is open to conclude that
‘her other adviser’
was Mr Adgemis, given that he, Mr Pearson
and the defendant all travelled together to Singapore on this particular
email of 4 March 2014 then sought to arrange a meeting, noting that
“the client”
had booked to fly out of Singapore at 6:45pm on
9 March 2014 and arrive in Kuala Lumpur at 7:40pm on 9 March 2014. Mr Pearson
“The plan is to visit the banks on Monday
in KL and for the client and myself to return to Sydney on Tuesday, 11 March
the same email of 4 March 2014 Mr Pearson then made a request on behalf of his
The second matter I wish to raise with you is that the
client has requested that we also incorporate a separate "ordinary Labuan
all the shares in which would be held by Wawasan Ltd.
Could you please ask Emily to action this as soon as she is able to do
The name of the company could be either Lengkap Ltd or Pedas Ltd. and I
would ask that you act as the sole director.
on 4 March 2014 at 2:52pm - Mr Tong responded to Mr Pearson’s email,
providing his comments at the end of each sentence
response, in respect of the proposal of incorporating a separate
“ordinary Labuan company”
, Mr Tong stated,
advise Emily accordingly”
4 March 2014 at 2:57pm, following this email response by Mr Tong, Mr Tong
emailed Ms Emily Liew, Managing Director of
“Kensington Trust Labuan
(‘Kensington
refer to Don’s latest mail to me and my comments below. Please incorporate
a third company in Labuan but this
company to be an ‘ordinary’
company limited by shares. The sole shareholder to be Wawason
and the sole director to be CPA Partners Pte Ltd.”
4 March 2014 at 3:35pm, in response to Mr Tong’s email, Ms Liew
“I will arrange to reserve the name Lengkap Ltd. and
prepare the documents for incorporation accordingly.
Meanwhile, I note the travel plans of Don
and the client. We will
make the necessary arrangement with Maybank International Labuan Branch for
Monday – 10 March 2014.
I will come back to you on the confirm date and
time for the meeting.”
5 March 2014 at 12:17pm, Ms Emily Liew sent to Mr Tong an email in which she
following documents are enclosed for your further actions:
1) Application Form;
2) Form 24;
3) M&A; and
4) CSA (include Lengkap)
We have helped to complete the application form per the earlier
information. Please arrange for Don’s confirmation on the information
highlighted in yellow and the relevant signed off.
For the incorporation of Lengkap Ltd., please arrange for CPA Partnership
to sign the Form 24 (1 copy) and the 2 sets of the M&A
(Page 5 &31).
Thereafter, please let us have the signed pages first with the original returned
to our office later.
We have included all 3 companies in our service agreement. We will arrange
for our CSA to be signed when all of you visit our office
“Corporate Services
5 March 2014 at 6:35pm, Mr Tong forwarded Mr Pearson the email he had received
from Ms Emily Liew, stating:
“Dear Don, Please attend to the
requirements to incorporate Lengkap
5 March 2014 at 5:43pm Mr Pearson responded to Mr Tong’s earlier
I accept that this time
appears to be in error or a result of differing time zones, since the email it
responds to is identified
as having been sent at 6:35pm. In that email, Mr
Pearson noted that Ms Emily Liew had not included in her email the application
5 March 2014 at 6:14pm Mr Tong contacted Ms Emily
and she emailed the
“application form”
This was forwarded to Mr
Pearson on the same day - 5 March 2014 at
7 March 2014, Lengkap was incorporated in Labuan,
The sole shareholder
of Lengkap’s single issued share was Wawasan
The sole corporate director
of Lengkap was CPA.
On 11 March 2014, Mr Pearson received an email from
Mr Tong notifying him that Lengkap was
incorporated.
Pearson produced to ASIC an unsigned document - the
“Corporate Services Agreement”
(CSA) undated except that it stated
, relating to
Wawasan Ltd, Utama Ltd and Lengkap. In an email dated 5 March 2014 at
Kensington Trust’s
Ms Liew attached a
“CSA (include Lengkap)”
. I am satisfied
that the content of the CSA and all the surrounding circumstances support the
inference that the CSA referred to
as being enclosed with Ms Liew’s email
to Mr Tong dated 5 March 2014 was this document or one very much like it. The
CSA referred
to Kensington Trust incorporating Lengkap which, of course,
actually happened. The parties to the CSA were the defendant, Mr Pearson
Under the undated,
unsigned CSA:
Trust would procure the incorporation of a
which term included Wawasan, Utama and Lengkap;
defendant was referred to as
‘the client’
, with Mr Pearson
and Mr David Tong as
‘authorised persons’
(see Sched.
address for service in respect of each of Wawasan, Utama and Lengkap was the
“31/1 Castray Esplanade Battery Point, Hobart, Tasmania 7004
(see Part 3 Sched.
That is the same address as
the defendant’s address on her resignation as director of Tasmanian Pure
Foods dated 13 June 2014;
the same address associated with the defendant in the ASIC historical company
extract for Bellamy’s;
it is the same one which is associated with the defendant by reference to the
ASIC Personal Name Extract dated 24 April 2018
in respect of certain Australian
companies including Bicheno.
That address is the same as the one given by the defendant as her own
residential address in her undated Trustmoore Client Compliance
unsigned CSA identified the defendant as the
‘ultimate beneficial
of Wawasan, Utama and Lengkap - which was defined in the
agreement to mean
“an individual(s) or corporation(s) specified in part
4 of Schedule 1 of the Agreement that has beneficial rights in the
defendant’s passport number of
recorded in the CSA was the
actual number of the defendant’s passport at the
though the CSA is unsigned, it is probative of the prosecution case that the
defendant had links to Lengkap as its ultimate beneficial
owner and that she was
the person who controlled Lengkap.
accept that the CSA was received by Mr Pearson, on behalf of the defendant, in
connection with his dealings with Mr Tong and Ms
Emily Liew in relation to the
establishment of Lengkap, as submitted by the prosecution.
Pearson produced a second document to ASIC: an unsigned Kensington Client
Application form for the incorporation of
Consistently with the
CSA, this form:
a) identified the defendant as the
“ultimate beneficial
of Lengkap;
b) listed the defendant’s passport number as
listed her address as 31/1 Castray Esplanade Battery Point, Hobart, Tasmania
7004 Australia);
d) records the defendant as the
“source of funds”
Lengkap (see cl 1(g)).
though this document is not signed, I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
this was an application form sent to Mr Pearson
by Ms Liew in response to Mr
Pearson’s instructions from the defendant around the incorporation of
Lengkap. Mr Pearson’s
email to Mr Tong of March 5, 2014 at 5:43
referred to the
application form he had prepared previously for Utama Ltd, with only certain
changes which did not appear to include
the ultimate beneficial owner. I find
that it is highly probative of the defendant’s connection with, and her
ultimate control
over Lengkap, especially in light of the description of the
defendant as the ultimate beneficial owner. These facts also provide
evidence of a link between the defendant and Utama Ltd.
relation to the two documents produced by Mr Pearson, I accept the prosecution
submission that those involved in the establishment
of Lengkap clearly acted on
an understanding that the defendant was (i) the client instructing the
incorporation of, (ii) the provider
of funds to and (iii) the ultimate
beneficial owner of Lengkap. I also accept that the probative force of these
documents is reinforced
by the circumstance that the defendant was the person
required to authorise the transfer of funds from Lengkap’s bank account
fund Black Prince’s acquisition of 14,000,000 shares in BAL.
4 March 204 at 2:27pm, Mr Pearson advised Mr Tong by
“the client, her other adviser and myself will fly to
Singapore arriving 12:45pm on 9 March 2014”
Mr Adgemis said that in
2014 (although he could
not recall the precise date), he travelled on the same flight to Singapore as Mr
Pearson and the defendant,
where he briefly met Mr Tong, who was there meeting
the defendant.
That evidence
was unchallenged and is entirely corroborative of the content of Mr
Pearson’s email of 4 March. Mr Adgemis’s
evidence strongly supports
the conclusions that (i) the
referred to in Mr
Pearson’s email, above was the defendant; and (ii) that Mr Adgemis was the
other adviser; and (iii) that
that the three of them flew to Singapore. Mr
Pearson’s email connects these circumstances with the incorporation of
11 March 2014, Mr Pearson was notified of the incorporation of Lengkap by
to the competing submissions about Mr Pearson’s role, I am satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that at all material times,
he was a solicitor/director
of Pearson Tax Lawyers. I am satisfied that his relationship with
was in that capacity. On the basis of the findings, above, I
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the defendant was the client.
of the facts and circumstances above are so highly probative of the prosecution
case that the defendant was the ultimate beneficial
owner of - and the person
who controlled – Lengkap as to exclude any alternative hypothesis. The
evidence establishes beyond
reasonable doubt that the defendant controlled
Lengkap as its ultimate beneficial owner. This is dealt with again under the
“The defendant controlled Lengkap as ultimate beneficial owner
(relevant interest as UBO of Lengkap)”
Start of BAL’s IPO and Bicheno’s pre-IPO sale of
stake – May/June 2014
following matters are not in dispute. In 2014, Mr Vaughan Webber was the
director of corporate finance for Wilson HTM, a stockbroking
firm that also
provided corporate finance services (i.e.
“raising money for both
listed and unlisted
and Mr Robertson were involved in making a presentation to the board of BAL for
Wilson HTM to conduct an initial public offering
(IPO) in respect of
That presentation was
successful and led to Wilson commenced BAL’s IPO in
the lead up to the IPO process, the BAL Board agreed to Bicheno selling its
entire stake in BAL.
Woolley gave evidence of what led to this decision. Mr Woolley said at the time
of this decision, there was also mention of the
defendant wanting to
“retain an interest in the company”
, however, the
“matter of ongoing interest was left open. We didn’t agree to any
and the board
“didn’t have any definitive
thing in the first
Webber said that in or around May or June 2014, Mr Robertson told him about a
proposal that before the IPO, Bicheno would sell
its entire interest in
Mr Woolley said that Mr
Robertson told him that Mr Adgemis had relayed a proposal to
MR WOOLLEY:
Having – following a discussion he had had with Adgemis. Adgemis, he told
me, had made this suggestion that Jan
would – Cameron would want to step
aside from the board and sell all her shares before the IPO. He said that they
she was – wanted to retain an interest in the company, and
– but a lesser interest. The first indication we had was –
the first conversation. We didn’t – hadn’t had any amount for
the ongoing interest or any details. I took
that to the board, and we agreed to
it. It wasn’t - - -
relation to the reference to
‘lesser interest’
it is to be
recalled that Bicheno’s holding in BAL prior to the IPO was more than 50%
of the ordinary issued shares.
Robertson confirmed he was informed of the proposal from Mr
CROWLEY: You said a moment ago your understanding was that Mr Adgemis was an
adviser with Cameron. Did you discuss that with him
when you met with him?
MR ROBERTSON: Well, he – my recollection is that he said he was an
adviser to Jan Cameron, and yes.
MR CROWLEY: And just tell us about the meeting? What was discussed during the
MR ROBERTSON: It was a very short meeting. From recollection, it was
somewhere between 12 and 15 minutes, and it centred around the
fact that the
entity in which the holding was held, would there be an appetite in the markets
for that holding to be acquired pre-IPO.
MR CROWLEY: Now, when you’re saying the entity and the holding, what
entity and holding are you talking about?
MR ROBERTSON: The holding being Bellamy’s stock. By that stage it was
Bellamy’s. And the holding company which –
I – I don’t
– my recollection is I was not made aware but – of what the name of
that entity was, but that
holding in Bellamy’s related to Jan Cameron.
Woolley took the proposal to board of BAL. Mr Woolley
MR WOOLLEY:
Having – following a discussion [Mr Robertson] had had with Adgemis.
Adgemis, he told me, had made this suggestion
that Jan would – Cameron
would want to step aside from the board and sell all her shares before the IPO.
He said that they
wanted – she was – wanted to retain an interest in
the company, and – but a lesser interest ...
defendant objected to the evidence given by Mr Woolley about what Mr Robertson
told him that Mr Adgemis had said: that the defendant
proposed stepping aside as
a director of BAL, selling all her shares before the IPO and then
‘retaining’ an interest
via the IPO
The defendant
submitted that the Court cannot admit this evidence as tending to prove the
truth of what Mr Adgemis is supposed to
have said to Mr Robertson. It was
submitted that the fact of the conversation between Mr Adgemis and Mr Robertson
is irrelevant
and that the danger of unfair prejudice outweighs any probative
value of the assertion that such a conversation occurred. In the
dealing with objections in Part 4 of these reasons, I have given fuller reasons
for dismissing the objection and admitting
the evidence as relevant and
admissible for the non-hearsay purpose of explaining the context of the
Board’s consideration
of the proposal for the defendant (via Bicheno) to
sell her BAL shares pre-IPO and to then retain an interest post-IPO.
prosecution adduced direct evidence relating to the defendant’s proposal
to sell her stake in BAL pre-IPO and to ‘retain’
a stake post-IPO.
Mr Adgemis said that in 2014, in the period leading up to the IPO of BAL, the
defendant sought his
“advice around her interest”
BAL’s viability.
Adgemis said the defendant told him that she wanted to look into the IPO, and to
look into whether she should sell an interest
or part of her interest in BAL.
Adgemis said he told the defendant about his concerns about the
long term business model”
of BAL because it was
business and it required significant
Adgemis told the defendant that he
“thought in relation to her
[holding in BAL]
that it was a lot of eggs in one
told her she should
“potentially think about divesting part or all of
her holding”
Subsequently,
Mr Adgemis said he had a conversation with either Mr Robertson or Mr Webber
“that Ms Cameron ought
“Ms Cameron wished to exit her
Webber’s evidence was that after he was told about this proposal - by Mr
Robertson - he ‘engaged with Bicheno’,
as well as with BAL, to
achieve this outcome. The sale of Bicheno’s shares prior to the IPO had
the additional benefit to
BAL of raising approximately $5m by way of
‘pre-IPO capital
Mr Webber confirmed
that the sale of Bicheno’s stake in BAL
documents tendered on the prosecution case corroborated the evidence outlined
above. On 12 June 2014,
Bicheno executed a Share Sale Agreement (‘the Share Sale
Agreement’),
on its behalf by the defendant as director, and Mr Norman Draper as company
The seller was
“Tasmanian Pure Foods Ltd (which proposes to change its name to
Bellamy’s Australia Ltd”
(it became BAL on 13 June
. The buyers were
“each person who delivered to Wilson, the Seller and the
Company a completed and duly executed Deed of Accession”
definition of
in the Share Sale
Agreement).
relation to the Share Sale Agreement, lawyers HWL Ebsworth acted on behalf of
There were agreed facts that:
[9] On 20 June 2014, the sum of $34,948,864.84 was
deposited by Pershing Securities Australia Pty Ltd into a trust account
[10] That sum of $34,948,864.84 is the same amount as the net proceeds from
the sale by Bicheno Investments Pty Ltd of its shareholding
in Tasmanian Pure
Foods Ltd, prior to the initial public offering of shares in [BAL].
is to be noted that the banking statement of HWL Ebsworth describes the deposit
of $34,948,864.84 as ‘Share
following terms of the Share Sale Agreement are relevant:
a) Bicheno had 5,604,898 shares in BAL which were to be split into 36,577,390
ordinary shares – see Recital
Bicheno received a share
certificate dated 10 June 2014 from BAL recording it as the holder of 36,577,390
ordinary shares in BAL;
b) Bicheno’s 36,577,390 ordinary shares were to be sold for $36,557,390
– see definition of ‘purchase
and see also cl
was to pay a ‘Broker Fee’ of 4% plus GST of the purchase price to
Wilson (being $1,462,295.60 plus GST, being,
in total, $1,608,525.16) –
see cl 2.3(e)(1)
definition of ‘Broker
d) Bicheno was to receive, net of the ‘Broker Fee’ the sum of
$34,948,864.84 (i.e. $36,557,390 less $1,608,525.16).
sum of $34,948,864.84 deposited into the HWL trust account on 20
is precisely the same
amount as Bicheno was to receive on account of the Share Sale Agreement.
13 June 2014, the defendant resigned as a director of BAL, with effect from that
I accept the
prosecution submission that the sum of $34,948,864.84 received is,
, the same amount payable under the Share Sale Agreement (see paragraph
than the unsuccessful objection, there were no submissions to the contrary in
relation to the submissions made by the prosecution
in relation to these facts.
I accept all of the above evidence under this heading beyond reasonable doubt.
Proposal for Black Prince to acquire 14,000,000 shares in
BAL’s IPO – June 2014
prior to the
IPO (at a late stage of the preparation for it), Mr Webber said that Mr Adgemis
told him that he (Mr Adgemis) had a
“potential cornerstone investor for
the Bellamy’s IPO”
Mr Adgemis gave similar evidence
– that he told either Mr Webber or Mr Robertson that
“a client of
was interested in acquiring some
Robertson said he heard about this prospect (i.e. a client purchasing a large
slice of BAL) either from Mr Adgemis or Mr
Robertson said that about in about May 2014 – or about 2 months before the
IPO - he went to Sydney to meet Mr Adgemis. He
went there because Mr Woolley
suggested to him that he should talk to Mr Adgemis in his capacity as the
defendant’s adviser.
During that meeting, Mr Adgemis told Mr Robertson he was an adviser to Jan
Cameron. Mr Woolley said that Mr Adgemis acted as the
defendant’s
alternate director on the BAL
until the defendant
resigned on 13 June 2014.
Robertson said that during the meeting, he and Mr Adgemis discussed that an
entity acquiring BAL shares prior to the
the basis of this evidence, the prosecution submitted that Mr Adgemis was an
advisor and representative of the
I accept that
submission. I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Mr Adgemis was the
defendant’s advisor at this time.
Consistently
with that evidence, Mr Adgemis gave evidence that, prior to the BAL
discussed with the defendant
“that there may be a parcel of stock
available in the IPO
reason he raised this with the defendant was that he
“thought she may
have some seller’s
defendant said she was interested in participating in the parcel of BAL
spoke to the defendant about the Black Prince Private
Foundation;
this same conversation with the defendant,
“she expressed an interest
in participating that parcel of stock but did want confidentiality at that
and that in this context the defendant
remain private”
Adgemis first discussed
Prince with the defendant during the discussion when the defendant expressed her
“remain private”
in relation to
‘participation’ in BAL stock. Mr Adgemis
said there was a structure which was set up for the purpose of a technology
investment for me which Rod Peters who was at
the time her lawyer who had set it
up and recommended that she talk to Rod in relation to that.”
advising the defendant about these matters, Mr Adgemis then
Trustmoore, who were the trustees of Black Prince, and informed them...there was
a transaction which
wanted to recommend to Black
speaking to the defendant about Black Prince, he communicated with either Mr
Webber or Mr Robertson that
“a client of
was interested in
acquiring some
Mr Adgemis told the defendant about Black Prince, he spoke to Mr
and told him about
“the conversation
had with Ms Cameron and the suggestion of
Black Prince given her request to remain
Consistently
with the above, Mr Woolley said that
“at the time of putting together
the final list of shareholders subscribing to the IPO”
, he received a
call from Mr Robertson, who asked him whether the board would agree to a 20%
holding in BAL to a group of investors
in Singapore - one of whom was the
Mr Woolley said
that Mr Robertson told him that this proposal had come from Mr Adgemis. Mr
Woolley said that he took that to the
board and it was agreed that 15% would be
sold to that group.
Woolley said that
“Robertson took that away”
and subsequently
came back and said that
“Adgemis had agreed to
said that he was not aware of Black Prince until after BAL was listed.
prosecution submitted that the evidence set out above was
unchallenged
and uncontradicted;
corroborated
by, and accords with contemporaneous documents and other
is the evidence that the prosecutions submits forms the genesis of the proposal
for Black Prince to acquire a holding in BAL
as a way for the defendant to
invest in BAL privately and confidentially.
defendant submitted that the Court should not draw the inference that Mr Adgemis
and the defendant discussed the sell-down of
the defendant’s pre-IPO
holding in BAL and for Black Prince to acquire shares in BAL prior to the IPO to
put into effect the
defendant’s interest in privately and confidentially
‘participating’ in the BAL IPO. At para [96] of the closing
submission for the defence, it was submitted that Mr Adgemis was
referring to Ms Cameron as the prospective participant in the BAL IPO, but
to Black Prince. That submission is entirely against the
weight of the evidence. When Mr Adgemis spoke about acquiring a parcel
stock, at page 167ff of the transcript, he is describing his conversation with
the defendant about that very topic. His evidence
(i) the defendant told him
she was interested in participating in a
parcel of stock in the upcoming BAL IPO;
(ii) the defendant told him
that when he was speaking to her
available stock”
(at T 167.45), she said
“she was interested in participating in
the defendant told him that
, he made some enquiries of either
Hugh Robertson or Vaughan Webber, saying that
“a client of mine was
interested in acquiring some stock”
(iv) Mr Adgemis said
“the investor”
to which he referred was
Black Prince interested in acquiring some stock (at T 168.46 – 169).
(v) after advising the defendant about the defendant about these matters, Mr
Adgemis then
“notified Trustmoore who were the trustees of Black Prince
and informed them...there was a transaction which
recommend to Black
(vi) he also spoke to Mr Peters after he informed the defendant about Black
“mentioned the conversation
had with Ms Cameron and the
suggestion of Black Prince given her request to remain
defendant’s counsel
that the reference
“seller’s remorse”
after her pre-IPO sell-down is
inconsistent with the notion that the defendant had any intention to participate
in the IPO. Firstly,
it is not relevant whether the defendant in fact had
“seller’s remorse”
because Mr Adgemis’s reference
to that idea was simply to explain his state of mind about why he spoke to the
defendant about
the stock which was available in the
Mr Adgemis did not say
that he told anybody else that he thought the defendant had seller’s
remorse; nor did he say that he
raised that specifically with the defendant. The
relevant matter is that after Mr Adgemis spoke to the defendant, he said she
him that she was in fact interested in participating in the available stock
privately and confidentially and as a result, Mr Adgemis
spoke to her about
Black Prince and he then spoke to Mr
conversation
had with Ms Cameron and the suggestion of Black Prince
given her request to remain
the above facts were challenged.
prosecution submitted that Mr Adgemis’ evidence on this point is
corroborated by six contemporaneous documents and the rest
of this section
analyses each of them.
4-6 June 2014 emails were exchanged between Mr Tong on behalf of Lengkap and HWL
Ebsworth contemplating a
‘Convertible Note Purchase Agreement and
Convertible Note’
. A draft document of that description is in
which records a
proposed advance of $23m from Bicheno to Lengkap.
first of the six documents is the email sent on 5 June 2014 by Mr Adgemis to
Trustmoore (Black Prince’s director)
Great speaking with you earlier.
Could you please contact Matthew baxter at wilson htm on +61414552949 to
arrange black prince 15% on a fully diluted basis of the
acquiring upcoming ipo
of tasmanian pure foods.”
defendant submitted that Mr Adgemis’s language in this email is consistent
with him doing that in his capacity as an informal
adviser to Black
As I understood that
submission, it was to the effect that the Court should conclude that Mr
Adgemis’s email to Black Prince’s
director, Trustmoore, had nothing
to do with his conversation with the defendant about Black Prince being a
vehicle for her to participate
in BAL stock ‘privately’. I do not
believe that it makes any difference at all whether Mr Adgemis was a formal or
adviser to Black Prince. Even so, I thought Mr Adgemis’s
evidence in chief about him being a formal adviser was convincing
concession in cross-examination that he was a formal adviser was less so.
Adgemis’s email is not consistent with the defendant’s submission.
It should be read in light of the clear evidence
that the defendant expressed
interest in private participation in the BAL IPO; and that Mr Adgemis acted on
that by ‘suggesting’
Black Prince, speaking to Mr Peters and
notifying Black Prince’s director, Trustmoore. That connected Black
Prince to the
proposal as described by Mr Adgemis, as does this email, which
should be read in that light. The reference to 15% is also is a circumstance
strongly supporting the evidence of the BAL Board’s agreement to a 15%
holding for an investment group which included the defendant,
which was put to
the BAL Board on behalf of – among others – the defendant. This
document strongly supports the prosecution
submission that arrangements were put
in place which disguised the defendant’s interest in BAL; and which were a
her desire for private and confidential participation in the BAL IPO.
second of the six documents is an email sent on 15 June 2014 by Ms van der Veen,
for Trustmoore, to Mr Adgemis and Mr Tong. She
asked questions about the
structure of the proposal for Black Prince’s acquisition of shares in the
BAL IPO (now set out
Dear Jon and David,
Thanks for the information provided so far. We still have some outstanding
issues. I would like to stress that before we can help
you with the transaction,
this information needs to be clear as we, as board, have the responsibility and
liability for the private
foundation. ...
The remaining questions we have are the following:
Structure and UBO:
Based on the information provided so far, we see that Ms C funds the
transaction and receives 50% of any benefits of the transaction.
Is that way we
qualify Ms. C, as UBO of Black Prince.
We would like to receive a complete structure chart of Lengkap up to Ms C
as UBO of that structure. Of all the intermediary companies
we would like to
receive proof of ownership, proof of directors and proof of existence. (in line
what is already provided for Lengkap)
Recent certified copy passports of the UBO's. Originals needed.
Proof of residential address/ Utility Bill of the UBO’s. No older
then 2 months
Loan Conditions:
Due to the repayment of the loan after 3 years, we assume that the idea is
to sell the shares of Bellamy’s during a three year
proposed handling of the repayment of the loan when the sale of the shares
of Bellamy's does not match the loan amount
If the shares are sold for more then the loan amount, 50% will be repaid
as interest to Lengkap. The other 50% remains in the Private
Foundation. Are
there any plans what this 50% would be used for?
Source of Funds:
As source of wealth of Lengkap is was mentioned: Investor subscription to
convertible loans. Can you please explain more exact what
this entails?
Can we assume that the wealth of Ms C is also the source of funds used in
this transaction?
I understand that Ms C sells her current shares in Bellamy's prior to the
IPO. Through this transaction she will indirectly profit
from any future sale of
the company. Can you please confirm that this is in line with local regulations
regarding an IPO?
Is the prospectus already available?
email serves a non-hearsay purpose: circumstantial evidence of the events
surrounding the allegation that the defendant ‘funded’
the purchase
of Black Prince’s shareholding in BAL. In that limited way, it supports
the inference contended for by the prosecution,
that that the defendant was the
ultimate beneficial owner of Black Prince’s BAL shareholding.
evidence was adduced which is relevant to this email. Mr Adgemis’s
evidence was that he understood the reference in Ms
van der Veen’s email
was a reference to the
The evidence is
supportive of Mr Adgemis’s evidence that the defendant told him that she
would make the money available to
fund the transaction.
defendant’s counsel conceded that the defendant could
‘loosely’ be described as the ultimate source of funds
purchase of the shares, via a loan from Bicheno to Lengkap of $23m, but
maintained that the governing legal arrangements
did not give rise to a relevant
Even so, the
defendant took issue with the idea that the defendant was the UBO of Black
Prince (the alleged vehicle through which
the defendant would participate in the
BAL float privately and confidentially). The defendant submitted that that Ms
van der Veen’s
“understanding as expressed in this email would be
incomplete”
and that the email could equally be interpreted as the
defendant’s UBO status was on the basis of profiting under loan
arrangements:
Nevertheless, as the email expressly indicates, the concept of UBO is here
being suggested to be satisfied through the profiting via
the loan arrangements,
not some other overarching
my view, that interpretation of this email is not a reasonable one, taking into
account the evidence discussed above, which supports
the inference that the
defendant is acting to bring about a private and confidential holding of BAL
shares through Black Prince.
third of the six documents is dated 18 June 2014, being an email from Mr Baxter
of Wilson to Mr Webber, which referred to a
“cornerstone
commitment”
, stating that
“Wilson HTM has been approached by
an offshore foundation to commit to $14m of the IPO as a
cornerstone”
email was part of a series of emails, stretching back to 11 June 2014, where
Wilson were seeking to progress the vetting and
finalisation of Black Prince as
“cornerstone”
Mr Webber said
in his evidence that Wilson’s compliance team undertook work in respect of
Black Prince for the purposes of
satisfying anti-money laundering legislation
and ‘know your client’
Mr Webber also gave
evidence that:
order for Black Prince to have a guaranteed allocation of 14,000,000 shares in
BAL, Wilson needed to receive both a signed guaranteed
allocation form and the
deposit of cleared funds in a nominated account for those shares (i.e. $14m,
given the proposed offering
of $1 for each share in
until such a milestone was reached, Wilson would not execute the underwriting
agreement with BAL, under which Wilson would financially
guarantee to pay BAL
the full amount in exchange for the shares to be issued in the IPO on a
particular date.
Adgemis gave evidence that after the defendant said she was interested in
participating in a parcel of BAL stock (when Mr Adgemis
thought she had
‘seller’s remorse’) he spoke either to Mr Webber or Mr
Robertson and he said that
“there was interest in a parcel of stock
being acquired”
“a client of mine”
. Mr Adgemis
said the investor he was talking about was Black
Mr Adgemis said that
either Mr Robertson or Mr Webber told him that
“there was stock
available, as, like, a cornerstone interest or
am satisfied that this document supports the conclusion contended by the
prosecution, that the defendant had a desire to have, through
private and
confidential means, a holding in BAL post IPO and that Black Prince was an
element of the arrangements through which
that holding was brought about.
fourth of the six documents is an email dated 18 June 2014 from
Trustmoore’s Ms van Dijk to Mr Pearson, Mr Peters and Mr
Adgemis. Ms van
Dijk raised issues relating to ‘the UBO’. She explained what that
expression meant: ultimate beneficial
owner – the person who will
ultimately benefit from the
transaction.
The prosecution
submitted that the ‘UBO’ referred to in the email was the defendant
because it assisted in identifying
the defendant as such when it referred to the
‘UBO of Lengkap’ and referred to the proceeds of the
“shares we are planning to buy”
“50% will go to
. The prosecution submitted that this actually happened by
looking at the agreement entered into between Lengkap and Black Prince.
relation to the reference in the email to the
as someone who
“owns shares (perhaps indirect) in
Tasmanian Foods at the moment”
I accept that this was a reference to
the defendant, given the defendant’s role as the person who instructed the
incorporation
of Lengkap and as its ultimate beneficial owner. The reference
“participation on an IPO if one had a fair amount of shares before
is supportive of the conclusion that this was a reference to
the defendant.
relation to this email, the defendant’s counsel submitted that it should
be inferred that Mr Peters and Mr Adgemis were included
as recipients because of
their respective roles at Black Prince. To my mind this is not a particularly
relevant matter. Each of
Mr Adgemis and Mr Peters were also engaged in this
particular transaction in various respects. For example Mr Adgemis spoke to Mr
Peters after informing the defendant about Black Prince – he mentioned the
conversation he had with the defendant and the suggestion
of Black Prince given
her request to remain
subsequently provided the initial instructions to Trustmoore in relation to the
acquisition of 15% of BAL in the IPO.
I find that Mr Peters and Mr Adgemis were
included in the email because they were connected to the transaction for the
to acquire BAL shares privately and confidentially through Black
am satisfied that this email is circumstantial evidence of activity directed at
realising the defendant’s desire to have,
through private and confidential
means, a holding in BAL post IPO and that Black Prince was an element of the
arrangements through
which that holding was brought about.
fifth of the six documents relied upon by the
prosecution
is the Trustmoore
“Client Compliance Form”
which was completed by the
It is suggested
that Trustmoore’s emails, discussed above, refer to the ultimate
beneficial owner as if it was the defendant,
without naming her. In this
document, the defendant
signed the document as “Ultimate
Beneficial Owner”. Even though it is undated, the document provides
strong support
for the inference that it was completed at around the time of the
events under consideration. It also strengthens the inference
Trustmoore emails were referring to the defendant.
relation to the client compliance form, the defendant submitted that there is
absolutely no indication that it was completed in
respect of Black
It was submitted
that it was open to conclude that the form relates to another matter entirely.
In reply, the prosecution
that such a
possibility is neither open nor rational. It was submitted that there is no
evidence that the defendant had any dealings
with Trustmoore other than in
respect of this matter involving Black Prince, and the evidence establishes that
the connection between
the defendant and Trustmoore was Black Prince.
defendant submitted that that the client compliance form could not have been
completed any earlier than 3 May 2016 because:
ASIC historical company extract for
and the Elsie Cameron
identified Logicca
Pty Ltd’s Macquarie St Sydney address as their respective principal places
of business starting on 3 May
2016 and as their registered office starting on 19
May 2016; and
ASIC historical company extract for Sankazjanwen Investments Pty Ltd (the
defendant is a director) records that Logicca’s
Sydney address became its
registered office on 19 May 2016 (its principal place of business being 31/1
Castray Esplanade, battery
Point Tas, the same address as the extract recorded
for the defendant.
defendant also submitted that the undated client compliance form was
“untethered to”
Black Prince and that it does not establish
that in around June 2014, Ms Cameron was the ultimate beneficial owner of Black
relevance of the defendant’s reference to Logicca is that here, the
defendant signed the undated form in her capacity as
ultimate beneficial owner
of an unnamed putative client of Trustmoore; and Logicca was described as the
firm of accountants to the
unnamed putative client. The fact that the ASIC
documents for other companies record that Logicca’s address was not
as their registered offices or place of business prior to May 2016
does not weaken support for the inference that the client referred
client compliance form, in respect of whom the defendant was the ultimate
beneficial owner, was Black Prince.
have regard to the defendant’s submissions relating to Justine Cameron and
Logicca but those matters do not, to my mind, bear
significantly on the
evaluation of the evidence on this point. Considering this document in light of
all the other evidence in the
case, I accept the prosecution submission on this
point. I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the client compliance form
was completed in respect of Black Prince. It is not possible to conclude beyond
reasonable doubt that the particular form was completed
prior to Black
Prince’s acquisition of the shares in BAL in 2014, but it is strongly
supportive of the inference that Trustmoore
regarded the defendant as the
ultimate beneficial owner at that time.
am satisfied that the client compliance form is circumstantial evidence of
activity directed at realising the defendant’s
desire to have, through
private and confidential means, a holding in BAL post-IPO and Black Prince was
an element of the arrangements
through which that holding was brought about.
last of the six documents relied upon by the prosecution on this issue is the
email dated 19 June 2014, sent at
by Mr Pearson, on
behalf of his client, to Mr Tong in relation to the proposed acquisition by
Black Prince of shares in
In that email, Mr
Pearson wrote that
“The client wants Black Prince Private
Foundation to participate in one of the transactions.
I confirm I telephoned Yocklin this morning and asked her to cease work on
establishing a new Singaporean company.
Trustmoore have agreed to “process” the transaction they are
involved with on the basis they receive from you:
(1) a certificate of incorporation;
(2) a declaration of source of funds signed by you. I understand
Trustmoore will prepare this document. I understand the document
will declare
that the funds come from Jan Cameron who sold a business for $300 million,
invested some of the funds in a trust, the
Jan Cameron Trust and that the trust
is now investing funds in Lenkap
. Lenkap, in turn proposes to lend
the funds to the Black Prince Foundation which is an entity associated with Mr
John Adgemis who
is a friend of Ms Cameron.
(3) A loan agreement which I have prepared and which is attached to this
Could you please contact Krista van der Veen and arrange with her to
provide her with what she needs to proceed.”
Adgemis subsequently received the email.
It appears as though Mr Tong
forwarded it to Ms van de Veen at Trustmoore, Ms van der Veen forwarded it to Ms
van Dijk and others,
and Ms van Dijk forwarded it to Mr Adgemis.
is to be recalled that Mr Adgemis had referred to the defendant
“participating in”
the IPO; that a meeting in Singapore had
taken place earlier in the month around the time of the incorporation of
Lengkap; and that
Mr Woolley had referred to Mr Webber’s assertion about a
group of investors in Singapore which included the defendant. Mr
Pearson’s earlier dealings with Mr Tong in March 2014 had related to the
incorporation of Lengkap on behalf of his client,
the defendant.
find beyond reasonable doubt that Mr Pearson’s client referred to in the
email was the defendant (either personally or through
some other entity she
controlled). To interpret the email in any other way is inconsistent with the
separate references to
Ms Cameron’
. It is not consistent to read ‘the client’ as
being Black Prince because of the words
“the client wants ... Black
Prince...to participate”
prosecution submits that the six contemporaneous documents considered, above
“point to, and reveal that, Black Prince’s acquisition of shares
in BAL was being done on behalf of, and being funded
. I accept that the six documents referred to above are
strongly supportive of activity in furtherance of the defendant’s desire
to have, through private and confidential means, a holding in BAL post-IPO and
Black Prince was an element of the arrangements through
which that holding was
brought about. These 6 documents also support the prosecution contention that
these arrangements were put
in place so as to
“disguise and
the defendant’s interest in the voting shares of BAL,
held by Black Prince.
find that the evidence establishes beyond reasonable doubt that the defendant
expressed and acted on her desire to participate privately
and confidentially in
the BAL IPO. The other events evidenced above, occurring between about 5 June
2014 and 19 June 2014, demonstrate
that the defendant’s wishes are being
given effect, through a proposal whereby the defendant’s money is to be
to Lengkap, and then to Black Prince via a loan agreement, in order to
acquire shares in BAL. In my view, the prosecution contention
is logical,
strongly supported by evidence which excludes any reasonably open alternative
view of things.
The Lengkap Convertible Note and Bicheno’s advance of
$23m – 19 to 23 June 2014
next aspect of the evidence relates to the prosecution case about how the
defendant provided the funds used for the purchase
of the 14 million shares in
BAL, consistently with the discussions and documents referred to above.
closing submissions made by the prosecution at section D.6 - paras [103]-[111]
were not disputed.
submissions in those paragraphs are in accordance with the evidence and I accept
them. My findings are as follows.
19 June 2014 at 7:26pm (some 5 hours after Mr Pearson’s email to Mr Tong,
above), Ms Emily Liew of Kensington Trust (the
firm involved in the Lengkap
incorporation) emailed Mr
receiving $23m, with $14m to be transferred out, being the same amount to be
paid by Black Prince for its 14,000,000
shares in BAL. The email
I have notified the Bank that Lengkap Ltd. is expecting incoming funds of
AUD23 million in its MILB
account tomorrow and upon receipt there will be an outward TT of
AUD14million. Please inform me once the incoming TT has been remitted
can monitor receipt with MILB.
For the TT of AUD14million, please refer to the template enclosed. As we
do not have the beneficiary’s name and bank details,
we have left these
blank for yours or Jan’s completion. Please let us have a pdf copy once
Jan has signed and faxed to the
bank. For huge amount, the bank may need to
perform a call back to confirm. Hence, you may wish to add Jan’s tel no.
space indicated.”
addition to this email supporting the inference that the defendant participated
in the BAL IPO privately and confidentially through
Lengkap and Black Prince, it
provides a further piece of circumstantial evidence linking the defendant with
Lengkap, as considered,
above under the section
‘The Incorporation of
Lengkap Ltd’
next day, on 20 June 2014, the sum of $34,948,864.84 was deposited by Pershing
Securities Australia Pty Ltd into a trust account
maintained by HWL Ebsworth,
who were the lawyers acting for Bicheno in the sale of those
The description of
the deposit was
was the proceeds from the sale of Bicheno’s pre-IPO stake in BAL.
on 20 June 2014, HWL Ebsworth emailed the
“convertible note purchase
That email was
sent and addressed to Mr Tong (the director of Lengkap). It was also copied to
Mr Peters’ email address and
the defendant’s email address.
prosecution case is that the CNA was one of the agreements through which the
defendant provided the money for the purchase of
the BAL shares – through
Bicheno, Lengkap and Black Prince in a way which involved her control of each of
those entities and
ultimately the exercise of the rights to dispose of and vote
the shares.
the means of two particular agreements, Bicheno loaned Lengkap $23m. On 21 June
2014 (although effective from 19 June
), Bicheno entered into
an agreement to purchase a Convertible Note from
Pursuant to the
Convertible Note Purchase Agreement (‘CNA’), signed by both the
defendant and Mr David Tong,
Lengkap agreed to issue to Bicheno a $23m convertible promissory note, which it
did on 21 June 2014.
14 of the CNA set out restrictive covenants which were binding upon Lengkap
until the principal amount under the CNA was repaid
That term is reproduced
14. NEGATIVE COVENANTS
Until the entire Principal Amount extended to the
hereunder and the
interest accrued thereon have been paid and repaid in full to the Holder and/or
been converted into Conversion
Shares, the Issuer shall not do any of the
following without Holder’s prior written consent:
14.1 convey, sell, lease, transfer, assign or otherwise dispose of
(collectively, “Transfer”), all or any part of its
property, assets or rights, except for Transfers: (a) of Issuers inventory in
the ordinary course of business; or (b) of
worn-out or obsolete equipment in the
ordinary course of
14.2 enter into any agreement with any person that restricts
Issuer’s ability to Transfer all or any part of its business, property,
assets or rights.
14.3 (a) engage in any business that is materially different from the
businesses currently engaged in by Issuer; (b) liquidate or
dissolve the Issuer;
or (c) have a change in management of the Issuer such that a key person in the
Issuer resigns, is terminated,
or is no longer actively involved in the
management of the Issuer in his/her current position and is not replaced with a
person reasonably
acceptable to Holder within ninety (90) days after departure
from Issuer.
14.4 Issue any shares or other securities (including any rights of
pre-emption or options in relation to those shares and securities)
Issuer, except as set forth in the Convertible Note Purchase Agreement or this
Convertible Note.
14.5 grant any material extension of the time for payment of any of the
Issuer’s receivables; or, compromise, compound or settle
the same for
materially less than the full amount; or release, wholly or partly, any person
liable for a material payment; or allow
any material credit or discount
whatsoever other than trade discounts granted to the Issuer in the ordinary
course of its
14.6 directly or indirectly enter into or permit to exist any transaction
(and any amendments or additions to any existing transactions)
with any of
Issuer’s officers, directors, shareholders and if a shareholder is a
corporate entity or a trust, the members,
shareholders, directors and officers
of such corporate entity and the beneficiaries (whether directly or indirectly)
and managers
of such trust(each of the above, “Related Party”), any
member of the immediate family of any Related Party, or any Issuer
corporate entity in which any Related Party or immediate family member of any
Related Party is an officer, director or shareholder
of more than 5% of the
issued share capital or interest of such Issuer or other corporate entity
22 June 2014, Mr Pearson sent an email to Ms Emily Liew of Kensington Trust,
referring to her email of 19 June
Thank you for your email of 20 June2014.
I understand that the funds will be remitted on Monday 23 June
I do not yet have bank account details of where outgoing funds are to be
remitted to so I cannot yet prepare fax instruction for client
Thank you for finding out about time deposits. I have sought instructions
from client who advises she does not wish to tie funds up
for a week at this
point in time.”
email is consistent with Ms van Dijk’s email to Mr Pearson and Mr Peters
on 18 June 2014, and with the one Mr Pearson sent
Mr Tong on 19 June at 1:58pm
referred to in the section, above, sketching out the broad structure of a
proposed transaction. I find
beyond reasonable doubt that the
referred to in the email of 22 June 2014 above is the
defendant. The defendant’s counsel did not submit otherwise.
accordance with what was outlined in Ms Liew’s email of 19 June 2014,
above, on 23 June 2014, Bicheno’s lawyers HWL
Ebsworth transferred
$23,000,000 to Lengkap’s bank account with Maybank International Bank in
The source of these
funds was an advance by Bicheno to Lengkap pursuant to the CNA.
on 23 June 2014, Mr Webber expressed his feelings of anxiety to Trustmoore about
Black Prince’s delay depositing clear
funds to Wilson thus finalising its
commitment as a
“cornerstone”
investor in the
In an email to
Trustmoore’s Ms van der Veen, Mr Webber said that he required
s agreed, we require cleared funds into the bank account on
Tuesday (tomorrow)”.
It is to be recalled that Mr Webber gave
evidence that he was concerned about the ability of this particular
‘cornerstone’
investor to deliver. This was in the context of
Wilson’s financial services licence and whether Wilsons would even execute
the underwriting agreement for Bellamy’s IPO unless there was such a
cornerstone investor. As will be seen below, Mr Webber
had a further 3 days to
wait, until after the Black Prince Loan Agreement between Lengkap and Black
Prince was in place and funds
could be transferred on 26 June 2024.
closing submissions for the defence accept that the funds flowed in this way. I
find that the proceeds of the sale of the defendant’s
pre-IPO sale of
Bicheno’s BAL shares went from Bicheno’s account with HWL Ebsworth,
to Lengkap’s Maybank account,
intended for use by Black Prince to purchase
the 14 million shares in BAL, in accordance with the CNA.
far, the evidence is in accordance with the prosecution submission that the
overriding objective of this transaction was the
defendant’s desire to
participate in the BAL IPO privately and confidentially through Lengkap and
Black Prince.
Entry into the Black Prince Loan Agreement – 23 to 25
prosecution submitted that the loan agreement between Lengkap and Black Prince
(‘BPLA’) was further evidence in support
of this and of the
defendant’s association with Lengkap and Black Prince.
is an agreed fact
The facts relevant to
the BPLA are not in dispute and I therefore adopt, as my findings, the summary
of those facts (ignoring the
submissions in those paragraphs for the moment) at
section D.7 of the Closing Submissions of the Prosecution, paras [112]-[116].
reproduce those now:
On 23 June 2014, Mr Adgemis
emailed Ms Tessa van Dijk (an employee of Trustmoore) in relation to a draft
loan agreement between
Lengkap and Black
In that email, Mr
Adgemis stated that he was comfortable with the terms of the draft loan
agreement between Lengkap and Black Prince
and was not
“not concerned
with the agreement not being comprehensive enough”
. Responding to that
email, Ms van der Veen emailed Mr Adgemis,
“I just received the following comments from Lengkap to the loan
Updating you! Based on my comments, our Malaysia lawyers says no need to
spend money for their review as obviously the draft Loan
Agreement in its
present form cannot be agreed to by Lengkap Ltd. There must be adequate
security. The security in the form of shares
in Bellamy’s Australia (to be
publicly listed) must be real and identifiable, must have a value of at least
AUD14 million or
such unpaid amount at all times until full payment. Lengkap
must place a lien over the said shares to secure any unpaid
On 24 June 2014, Ms van der Veen provided to Mr Webber an
“commitment letter”
on behalf of Black
That letter was, in
fact, an executed
“Guaranteed Allocation”
form executed on
behalf of Black Prince and committing to purchase 14,000,000 shares in
covering email, Ms van der Veen further provided an indication of when Wilson
could expect the deposit of cleared funds accompanying
the executed
“Guaranteed Allocation”
On 24 June 2014, Mr Webber sent an email to Mr Adgemis, noting
that another 24 hours had passed, with no correspondence and that
Wilson would
not be signing the
“underwriting agreement without both documentation
executed as provided and cleared funds or proof of
On or around 25 June 2014, Lengkap entered into
This is an agreed
Pursuant to cl 2.1 of
that agreement, Black Prince acknowledged and agreed that Lengkap had advanced
“Principal Amount”
, being the sum of $14,020,000.
Further, the
that it was governed by the laws of Labuan (cl
Black Prince from granting any security interest over
Black Prince to execute in favour of Lengkap a security deed or mortgage over
“the Shares”
if requested to do so by Lengkap (see cl 3(a)).
The meaning and operation of this clause is returned to below;
that Black Prince’s repayment obligation could be discharged only from
(and therein Lengkap’s rights of recourse
were limited to) the value of
“the Shares”
, defined as the 14,000,000 shares in BAL (cl
regime for the payment of interest (see cl 5). No interest on the
loaned amount of $14,000,000 accrued from day to day. Instead, if
Black Prince
sold the shares, 50% of the increase in value of the shares had to be paid to
Lengkap. If the shares remained unsold
after three years, the shares had to be
independently valued, with Lengkap, again, to receive, 50% of the increase in
the price of
the shares. ... ...
In respect of the
execution of the BPLA, a copy executed on behalf of Lengkap (by Mr David Tong as
sole director of CPA, the director
of Lengkap) was sent by email on 24 June 2014
(4:38pm) to Mr Pearson (copying in Ms Emily Liew of Kensington
Importantly, Mr Tong
forwarded that email (on the same day at 7:50pm) to
‘whitedog’ email address
], being an email address associated
[the defendant]
defendant submitted (at the quoted para
, above) that clause 5
was unconventional and was more akin to an equity
investment as opposed to a debt facility. Under this clause, Lengkap only
its loaned money (given the limited recourse of the lending), and any
additional sum, if the shares acquired by Black Prince appreciated
beyond the purchase price. In the event of default, there was the default
interest rate applying from the date of default.
If the BPLA was merely a loan
on ordinary commercial terms. as the defendant submits, it had a very
uncommercial aspect in that
interest on the loan funds did not accrue
periodically; and that the lender’s return on the loan funds was tied to
the success
of the borrower’s
investment.
stated above, the BPLA was executed on behalf of Lengkap (by Mr David Tong as
sole director of CPA, the director of Lengkap).
A copy of that document was
sent by email on 24 June 2014 (4:38pm) to Mr Pearson (copying in Ms Emily Liew
of Kensington Trust).
that same day at 7:50pm, Mr Tong forwarded that email to an email address
associated with the defendant – the
The prosecution
submitted that the sharing of information with the defendant at her
email address was
“...telling, given, at least on
their face, neither Lengkap or Black Prince were associated with
. The Prosecution case, of course, is that
[the defendant]
through Lengkap, was providing the $14m to Black Prince for the acquisition by
it of the 14 million BAL shares.
find that this circumstance supports the inference that all of these
arrangements were being done at the initiative of the defendant
documents relating to key events were provided to her.
evidence establishes that the defendant, through Lengkap, provided the $14m for
the purpose of Black Prince acquiring its 14 million
BAL shares. In relation to
the security for that advance, clause 3(a) of the BPLA, (subsequently deleted,
‘Amendment to the BPLA’
below) was in the following
3 Limited recourse
If requested by Lengkap Ltd the Borrower agrees forthwith to enter into a
specific security deed or mortgage over the Shares and sign
such other documents
as required for registration of the Shares.
prosecution submitted that clause 3(a) required Black Prince, upon request by
Lengkap, to execute a mortgage over those shares
and thereafter that would
‘a power to dispose of, or control the exercise of a power to
dispose of the securities’
under s608(1)(c). The prosecution
submitted that was a
‘relevant interest’
under the basic rule
in s608(1)(c) which was information the defendant was required give to BAL and
the ASX under s671B because she
controlled Lengkap.
was also submitted that these facts support a finding that Black Prince was the
defendant’s
‘associate’
for the purposes of the
question whether she had a
‘relevant interest’
amounting to a
‘substantial holding’
, for the purposes of
charge 1 and that she had an obligation to give that information to BAL and ASX
Ltd. That will be more fully
explored below.
this evidence strongly supports the inference that the defendant had the
relationship or association with both Lengkap and
Black Prince contended for by
the prosecution: see the section below dealing with the first avenue by which
the prosecution submitted
that the defendant had a relevant interest in Black
Prince’s BAL shares
‘Black Prince Loan Agreement (relevant
interest as UBO of Lengkap)’
Advance of monies pursuant to the Black Prince Loan Agreement
– 25 June 2014
order for Black Prince to complete the purchase of the shares in BAL, the $14m
had to be transferred from Lengkap’s Maybank
account. The prosecution
case is that the defendant personally authorised that transfer and that it was
not something that Lengkap
did independently of her. The prosecution submitted
that the evidence shows that the defendant instructed Maybank International
to transfer the sum of $14m to Pacific Custodians Pty Ltd (an entity acting as
agent for BAL) which effected Black Prince’s
purchase of the 14m BAL
shares. The chronological flow of correspondence and activity strongly supports
that contention. The prosecution
submissions at paragraphs 134-141 set out
below accurately state the evidence, which is not seriously disputed (the
defendant disputes
the complexion to be placed on those facts):
On 25 June 2014 (12:01pm), Ms van der Veen of
Trustmoore (director of Black Prince) emailed Mr Tong (director of CPA, being
the director of Lengkap) stating (
“Dear David,
According to the loan agreement, Lengkap has agreed to fund Black Prince
Private Foundation with AUD 14,020,000. Since the bank account
of Black Prince
is not yet open, would you please transfer 14 million on our behalf? Attached
you can find the transfer instructions.”
After receipt of Ms van der
Veen’s email, but still on 25 June 2014 (at 12:41pm), Mr Tong emailed
(on top of Ms van der Veen’s
email) Ms Cameron at the email address
(copying in,
inter alios
Pearson and Ms Emily Liew) and
On an immediate basis please instruct MayBank of Lengkap Ltd to transfer
AUD14 million directly to Pacific Custodians for the credit
of the Black Prince
Foundation. Bank details provided by Krista above.
Separately please transfer AUD20,000.00 to the account of The Black Prince
Foundation.”
On the same day (25 June 2014 at
3:19pm), Mr Tong emailed Ms van der Veen of Trustmoore
“Hi Krista,
The only person who can instruct the bank is Jan Cameron. I have not
received any advice from her or Emily as to the status. As you
know I have
copied everybody, including her advisors.”
At 3:35pm on 25 June 2014, Mr Tong emailed Ms van der Veen of
Trustmoore, and stated:
“Hi Krista,
Emily said that May Bank informed her that the money has been transferred
to Pacific Custodians to the credit of Black Prince. Could
you kindly check this
with the relevant persons.”
It is apparent that at this time, Ms Cameron executed a letter
dated 24 June 2014,
on behalf of Lengkap
, to Maybank International Bank,
“I understand the sum of AUD$23 million is expected to arrive into
the Labuan bank account today.
Upon receipt please remit urgently the sum of AUD 14,000,000 from Lengkap
Ltd account to the following account:
Beneficiary Name: The Black Prince Private Foundation of Groot
Kwartlerwag, 12 Willemstad Curacao
Account number:
Beneficiary bank:
It would appear that this document was executed on the date it
bears, before the change of plans – i.e. for Lengkap to transfer
$14,000,000 directly to Pacific Custodians, rather than to a bank account for
Black Prince...
On 26 June 2014, Lengkap transferred $14,000,000 from its bank
account with the Labuan Branch of Maybank International Bank in Malaysia
Pacific Custodians Pty Ltd (via wiring the same to a bank account maintained
with the CBA), who was acting on behalf of
During this time, emails
were exchanged, confirming this action, with Mr Pearson copying in the
email address to these
communications.
agreed facts that:
or around 25 June 2014, Lengkap Ltd transferred from its bank account with
Maybank International the sum of $14,000,000 to Pacific
Custodians Pty Ltd, who
were acting as agent for Bellamy’s Australia Ltd.
$14,000,000 transferred to Pacific Custodians Pty Ltd by Lengkap Ltd on or
around 25 June 2014 was transferred on behalf of the
Black Prince Private
Foundation.
letter dated 24 June 2014,
on behalf of Lengkap
, to Maybank International
Bank is set out at Annexure A to these reasons.
was submitted by the prosecution that even though there is no signed document in
respect of the transfer of the $14m on 26 June
2014 from Maybank to Pacific
Custodians, the Court could infer that the defendant instructed Maybank
International Bank to transfer
the sum of $14,000,000 to Pacific Custodians Pty
defendant submitted that the emails referred to above do not support any
inference that the defendant controlled Lengkap or Black
Prince nor that she
held a relevant interest in Black Prince’s BAL shares. The defendant
submits that:
“Lengkap was proposing to transfer a
significant sum to someone who was not the borrower under the Loan Agreement.
The circumstances
that the transfer was not to
[Black Prince]
Bicheno had a CNA with Lengkap, give context to these
communications.”.
defendant’s counsel submitted that the defendant was simply copied in to
the emails by others and it was to be expected
that, as sole director and
shareholder of Bicheno, she would be copied in to these emails. Further, the
defendant submitted that
there were ‘anomalies’ in the Lengkap
letter signed by the defendant (above and at Annexure A), being
pre-dates the email referring to the defendant being the only person who can
instruct the bank to transfer the funds;
funds are to be transferred an unspecified bank account in the name of Black
Prince; and
appears to have been sent (or possibly received) by facsimile on 23 June 2014
from the Edgewater Hotel.
accept the prosecution submission that even though the letter that the defendant
wrote to Maybank on behalf of Lengkap dated 24
June 2014 was executed prior to
the change of plans (to transfer $14 million directly to Pacific Custodians
rather than to Black
Prince’s bank account), the fact that the defendant
executed it on Lengkap’s letterhead provides highly cogent evidence
strongly supports the inference that she had control over Lengkap. The letter
suggests that, contrary to the defence submissions,
the defendant was not at
arms length from the commercial activities the subject of this evidence.
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that in a practical sense for the purposes
of these arrangements to transfer the funds under
the BPLA, the defendant was
“the only person who [could] instruct the bank”. That is the only
reasonable inference to
draw, having regard to the evidence. It is reasonable
to infer that not only that the defendant’s approval was sought in
to the release of finds from Lengkap’s Maybank account but that
also, that approval was given, in light of Mr Tong’s
specific request that
she do so. The fact that the money is transferred to Pacific Custodians instead
of an account in the name
of Black Prince does not weaken the inference.
considered the parties’ submissions carefully, there is strong logical
force in the prosecution submission: that the
defendant personally instructed
Lengkap’s bank, Maybank International Bank, to transfer the sum of
$14,000,000 from Lengkap
to Pacific Custodians Pty Ltd. I am satisfied that the
evidence supports that conclusion and I make that finding beyond reasonable
Completion of the BAL IPO and Black Prince’s Initial
Notice of Substantial Holder
31 July 2014, before being admitted to the ASX, BAL issued 25,000,000 shares at
$1 per share,
increasing the
total number of issued shares to
95,000,392.
On 31 July 2014,
Black Prince received 14,000,000 fully paid ordinary shares in BAL, being
“voting shares”
within the meaning of the
was admitted to the ASX on 1 August
On being admitted to
, Black Prince’s
shareholding comprised 14.74% of the 95,000,392 ordinary shares on
Under cl 7.8(a)(2) of
BAL’s Constitution at the
each share carried one
vote on any poll at any general meeting and, as such, Black Prince’s
voting power was also equal to
14.74%. It is not disputed that Black Prince had
‘substantial holding’
in BAL within the meaning of s
671B(1) of the Act.
admission to the ASX on 1 August 2014, the official ASX quotation of BAL shares
commenced on 5 August 2014.
The defendant submitted that there is no evidence to suggest that either Black
Prince or the defendant were actually aware that Black
Prince was a substantial
shareholder at any earlier date. The prosecution response to that submission
was that this is ‘largely’
irrelevant as the obligations under s
671B(1) arose upon inclusion to the official list of the ASX no occasion arises
on either charge
with the prosecution is required to prove that the defendant
knew anything specific in relation to that.
6 August 2014, Black Prince lodged a Form 603 – ‘
Initial Substantial Holder’
(SHN). In the SHN, Black Prince declared
that it had a substantial holding in
The SHN was sent to the
ASX by fax under a Trustmoore coversheet on 6 August
and also by email to
Matthew Baxter (an employee of Wilson – who conducted the
The SHN made no
mention of the defendant as either a person having a relevant interest in Black
Prince’s shareholding in BAL
or as being an associate to Black Prince.
The defendant did not submit a SHN at this time.
relation to the proposition that the defendant did not submit a SHN at this
time, the defendant submitted
that the evidence supported inferences that:
was reasonably possible that Black Prince had legal advice in relation to the
preparation of the notice of initial substantial
holder. There is no reason to
assume that Black Prince’s advisers were not fully briefed;
Black Prince, through Trustmoore, knew the full circumstances of its own
operation, including the regime of letters of wishes.
Black Prince did not
mention the Founder, because it knew “all the circumstances concerning a
Founder’s rights and how
they operated in practice and after taking
advice, formed the view it was not necessary to declare the Founder as having a
the emails of 5 and 6 August and the ultimate agreement to delete clause 3(a)
which in principle occurred on 5 August)
it may also be assumed that knowing the
circumstances and after taking advice, Black Prince was not required to mention
party in the SHN. The final SHN was settled and emailed to Trustmoore
by Addisons on 6 August
reason that the SHN made no reference to the founder of Black Prince was that
the legal adviser knew all the circumstances concerning
a Founder’s rights
and how they operated in practice;
address each of those propositions set out in the paragraph 181 above, in
accept there is a reasonable possibility that Black Prince had legal advice in
relation to the preparation of the SHN. Even so,
the evidence does not
reasonably support any reliable inference to be drawn about (a) what was
contained in the brief to the adviser;
or (b) what was contained in the advice
from the adviser (other than what was ‘mentioned’ as referred to in
above); or (c) the extent to which the advice was followed.
is no difficulty accepting the first proposition: that Black Prince and
Trustmoore knew the relevant circumstances. I might
also be accepted as
reasonably possible that Black Prince
“after taking advice, formed the
view that it was not necessary to declare the Founder as a relevant
not possible for the Court to draw the inference urged by the defendant because
it invites the Court to speculate about too
much. While it is open to conclude
that (a) advice was received and (b) the SHN was provided, the Court is unable
to draw this particular
inference relating to Black Prince’s corporate
state of mind.
view there is no evidence that would permit any reasonable inference to be drawn
Founder of Black Prince; and what
Black Prince’s legal adviser knew of the circumstances about a
Founder’s rights and
how they operated in practice.
Amendment to the Black Prince Loan Agreement – 5 to 6
August 2014
3(a) of the BPLA as originally drafted was a mechanism by which Lengkap could
request Black Prince to execute a mortgage over
its shareholding in BAL to
secure the $14m which Lengkap had advanced to it. Lengkap’s right under
cl.3(a), to request a mortgage
was relied upon by the prosecution as something
which amounted to a
‘relevant interest’
amounting to a
‘substantial holding’
was common ground
The evidence compels
the conclusion that the agreement to amend the BPLA was not executed until - at
the earliest - on 6 August 2014.
That is because at 11.26pm on 5 August 2014 Mr
Tong communicated to Ms van der Veen that he was waiting for the lawyers to
the text of the proposed
and on 6 August
2014 at 10:55 Mr Tong emailed Ms van der
confirming with her that
he agreed to have Article 3(a) deleted.
background events to the amendment were as follows. It was not disputed that on
5 August 2014, Ms van der Veen (of Trustmoore,
Black Prince’s director)
emailed Mr Tong in relation to the BPLA,
Today the shares of Bellamy’s are listed on the stock
exchange...
We were contacted by the stock broker to enter a form for the registration
of substantial shareholder, which the Black Prince is.
We asked a lawyer to help
us with the registration form and he mentioned that Lengkap might want to amend
article 3.a. of the loan
agreement in order to avoid filing Lengkap at the
Australian Stock Exchange as a substantial shareholder. Article 3.a.
(a) If requested by Lengkap Ltd the Borrower agrees forthwith to enter
into a specific security deed or mortgage over the Shares and
sign such other
documents as required for registration of the Shares.
This article implies that Lengkap has ‘direct or indirect,
conditional or unconditional power to control or restrict the disposal
shares’ and therefore should be seen as a substantial shareholder and
hence should file at the ASX.
I believe that this was never the intention of Lengkap, so I recommend
amending the agreement.”
Adgemis gave evidence about his understanding about the background to the
was asked about the email set out above. He said that before that email, a
representative of Trustmoore spoke to Mr Tong and informed
him that Lengkap
“required to be disclosed”
in relation to Black
Prince’s shareholding in BAL, and that the amendment was agreed because
“Lengkap did not want to be
prosecution submitted that Mr Adgemis’s evidence of his understanding that
“Lengkap did not want to be disclosed”
was relevant as
circumstantial evidence of the background to the deletion of clause 3(a). The
prosecution submitted that the evidence
is relevant and admissible as evidence
of Mr Adgemis’ knowledge of, and involvement in, the amendment to the
BPLA. It was
submitted (and I accept) that no issue of legal professional
privilege arises, as submitted by the defendant. I have dealt with
fully in the section dealing with the
‘Objection to Mr Adgemis’s
oral evidence’
It was submitted that the fact of the
amendment is uncontroversial and that it is the subject of unchallenged
evidence. I accept that
submission. It was further submitted that the amended
loan agreement, and the reasons why such an amendment was sought, are relied
upon by the defendant in her defence to each of the charges.
defendant objected to the evidence on the basis that:
was no direct evidence from either Lengkap or Trustmoore about whether Lengkap
“to be disclosed”
basis for Mr Adgemis’s understanding was not stated;
‘source material’ email to which Mr Adgemis’s evidence relates
is in evidence.
admitting Mr Adgemis’s understanding about why the BPLA was being amended,
I accept the oral submissions of the prosecution
at pages 219-220 of the
transcript. Mr Adgemis’s evidence relates to his understanding of the
arrangement surrounding the amendment
of the agreement. The evidence is
admitted, on the basis contended for by the prosecution.
defendant submitted that the legal effect of the deletion, by application of the
law of the contract – the law of Labuan
in Malaysia - was that that clause
3(a) was void from the start and therefore cannot sustain a relevant
My rejection of
these submissions is dealt with in Part 4 of these reasons.
defendant contended that the loan agreement was rectified to remove the clause
; and rectification even by court order, does not alter the
past, it merely recognises what has always been the case:
Smeaton Grange
Holdings Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2017] NSWCA 184
(2017) 106 ATR 151
Davis v FCT
[2000] FCA 44
(2000) 44 ATR 140
. The following
specific propositions were in para [122] of the defendant’s closing
submissions:
clause 3(a) is void and therefore cannot sustain a relevant interest; and
further or in the alternative,
the BPLA was rectified to remove the clause ab initio;
any event, by no later than 6 August clause 3(a0 had been deleted (in principle
on the 5th);
Black Prince ‘plainly considered’ it had become a substantial
shareholder on 5 August, clause 3(a) was deleted to
rectify the agreement,
before the commencement of the 2 day notice period for the purposes of charge
is no evidence to suggest that Ms Cameron could have known any differently as to
the date that the Black prince became a substantial
shareholder;
before the time for the offence arose, the clause had been deleted
, and accordingly it cannot be an offence to have failed to provide
the information that once existed on paper.
prosecution submitted that the defendant’s submissions (specifically those
within Exhibit D1 (the folders which included
Ms Kannaperan’s report on
Labuan law)
ignored because, for the purposes of considering the application of an
Australian criminal offence provision:
might have been agreed between the parties, it is not open to individuals, via a
private agreement, to alter,
ex post facto
, the facts as they prevailed
on a specified date. Questions as to the effect of backdating under Malaysian
contract law are entirely
beside the point; and
relevant offence occurred on 5 August 2014 and, as at that date, cl 3(a) had not
been deleted from the BPLA.
though no authority was cited for the proposition, I would accept that it is not
open to individuals, via a private agreement,
to alter, after the fact, the
circumstances that prevailed on a specified date, for the purposes of
considering the application of
an Australian criminal offence provision. I
accept the prosecution submissions in this regard.
Events in July 2015 – proposal to sell BAL shares and
letters of wishes D11
prosecution submitted that certain events which occurred during 2015 supported
the inferences that the defendant had a relevant
interest in the BAL shares held
by Black Prince; and that she was an associate of Black Prince.
6 July 2015 at 10:06am AEST, Mr Peters sent an email to Mr Webber. At 10:07am
AEST he forwarded that same email to the defendant
and Mr Adgemis (
– I will keep you
to our conversation this morning I confirm I act for the Black Prince Private
Foundation (TBPPF). TBPPF wishes to
sell its shares and I await your advices as
to what documents you need to authorise you to sell the shares and pay the
proceeds to
the Seller’s nominated account on an irrevocable basis. As
advised I will be going to visit TBPPF later this
to assist them in
the sale process and to ensure you have proper instructions in wiring
by hopefully Friday Morning.”
prosecution submitted – and I accept – that the fact that the
defendant was sent this correspondence ‘underscored’
her association
with Black Prince and strongly supported the inference that the defendant
controlled Black Prince in one of the ways
submitted by the prosecution, as
considered in Part 4 of these reasons.
Adgemis said that the email had been prompted because
“the value of the
shares had increased materially and that it was contemplated to potentially
divest of those
not disputed that the value of the shares had increased materially in the 11
months or so since Black Prince had acquired
defendant submitted that when Mr Peters wrote
“FYI - I will keep you
he was doing so as Black Prince’s authorised
Australian representative, merely to keep the defendant (as director of Bicheno
and holder of a convertible note from Black Prince’s lender, Lengkap)
informed of a possible sale of Black Prince’s BAL
shares. While Mr Peters
may have had a role as Black Prince’s ‘authorised Australian
representative’,
also involved in the defendant’s alleged private and confidential
participation in the BAL float from an early stage.
Mr Adgemis said that in
2014 he spoke to Mr Peters about Black Prince as a vehicle for her
participation; Mr Peters is involved
in the emails around the transaction in
he is copied in on an email about the defendant’s
resignation as a director of BAL and sale of her
he is copied in on an
email about the convertible loan agreement between Bicheno and Lengkap. I
reject the defence submission as
implausible on the evidence. There is no
evidence sufficient to draw any inference as to Mr Peters’ actual state of
However, it is a compelling proposition that Mr Peters informed the
defendant about this because there was a far more direct relationship
the defendant and Black Prince – one of control - as contended by the
prosecution.
to the proposed sale of Black Prince’s BAL shares, on 8 July 2015, Mr
Peters sent an email to the defendant and Mr Adgemis
enclosing a draft mandate
letter from Wilson.
mandate was not ultimately
progressed.
Even so, Mr
Peters sent it to the defendant and Mr Adgemis asking them
“can you let
me know whether you agree asap”
. The defendant’s agreement was
sought to the minimum price at which Black Prince’s shares may be sold
they were purchased a year earlier for $1), and that
Wilson’s transaction fee should not include an ‘incentive
This strongly supports the inference that the defendant had either
formal or informal power in relation to the sale of Black Prince’s
in BAL. That is a compelling conclusion. This email is further evidence which
underscored the defendant’s association
with Black Prince; and it supports
the inference that the defendant controlled Black Prince. These circumstances
strengthen the inference
that Black Prince’s acquisition of shares in BAL
was done on behalf of, and funded by, the defendant. There appear to be no
reasonable alternative hypotheses.
Lunch at the Mandarin Oriental
were further circumstances relied upon by the prosecution to support the
contention that the defendant was involved in a private
and confidential
participation in BAL shares through Black Prince’s acquisition. This
evidence concerned the defendant expressing
a desire for ‘
comfort’ (my emphasis) over Black Prince’s proposed sale of its BAL
shares as outlined above; and a lunch at the Mandarin
Oriental in London which
was convened to bring people together who could advance that purpose.
Adgemis said that he had agreed for the defendant to be a person able to express
wishes to Trustmoore in relation to the benefits
and assets of Black
Mr Adgemis said that
prior to the lunch in London, Trustmoore had sent him a
which would give
effect to that arrangement.
Adgemis said that the lunch was arranged as a way for the defendant could be
introduced to a representative of Black Prince’s
Trustmoore.
I infer that
this was in early July 2015, given the date of the correspondence sent in the
lead up to the lunch. Mr Adgemis said
that he understood that the context for
that meeting was that the defendant wanted
“more control”
over the sale of Black Prince’s BAL shares. While Mr Adgemis subsequently
conceded that the defendant wanted more comfort
rather than more control, he
said that what she wanted comfort about was being able to provide instructions
to Black Prince or express
a wish. In the context, I am not satisfied that there
is any difference in effect. Mr Adgemis said:
had said that Ms Cameron, given the value appreciation in the Bellamy’s
shares, wanted to have more control
in a similar context to the contemplation of
divesting the shares. And so a lunch was arranged so that an introduction could
with Trustmoore’s and she could understand a bit more about
Trustmoore’s and Mr Melkman”
“The purpose of the lunch was to introduce, as I said earlier, Ms
Cameron to Mr Melkman, and from that point on for –
for Ms Cameron to be
in a position to be able to express wishes and – and liaise on the
day-to-day running of Black Prince
Foundation.”
7 July 2015, Ms Tessa van Dijk (of Trustmoore, Black Prince’s director)
emailed to Mr Adgemis two documents for his
The covering email
“Please find attached a draft letter for the
revocation of your Letter of Wishes and a draft Letter of Wishes for
draft letter for the revocation of letter of wishes which was sent by Ms van
Dijk to Mr Adgemis read as
incorporation of The Black Prince Private Foundation I send you a letter
concerning my wishes regarding the benefits and
assets of the Black Prince
Private Foundation. Please find it attached for your reference.
I now wish to revoke this letter and express my wish that should Mrs
__________ send you a letter concerning her wishes regarding
the benefits and
the assets of The Black Prince Private Foundation you would consider these
Yours sincerely
Jon Adgemis”
Adgemis said that he printed the document and he signed it in a form without any
of the handwriting which is now visible on it
(see the image copied below). He
“handed it to Mr Peters because I agreed for [the defendant] to
replace me...”
Adgemis said that that when he signed the document there were no handwritten
amendments,
handwritten date appearing on this version, an image of which is now
reproduced:
document in its amended form
purported to effect (i) Mr Adgemis’s resignation as Founder of Black
Prince; and (ii) Lengkap’s appointment as Successor
Founder. Mr Adgemis
said that he never executed the document in that form and that the handriting
was added later and without his
knowledge or consent. The parties both say that
the Court does not need to resolve the controversies surrounding these events
so I will not attempt to do so.
Mr Adgemis agreed or did not agree to, from at least July 2015 onwards, Lengkap
was the successor founder of Black Prince,
capable of exercising the attendant
powers of the founder. There is no dispute about
prosecution submitted that this circumstance “merely reinforces the
control exercised by Ms Cameron over both Lengkap and
the BAL shareholding of
Black Prince”.
defendant submits that this occurred significantly after the date of the alleged
offence and it cannot be inferred that it is
a manifestation of some earlier
overarching scheme.
is that it is cogent evidence which strongly supports the clear inference that
the parties acted in accordance with the
arrangements that commenced in June
2014 for the purpose of the defendant having control over the BAL shares through
Lengkap and
Black Prince.
relation to the reference to Lengkap being appointed Founder from July 2015, the
prosecution submitted that the evidence suggests
that Lengkap may have been
appointed Founder of Black Prince
to this time – or at least
that that Black Prince
Lengkap as Founder prior to that time.
The prosecution referred to the evidence in a disclosure statement made by Black
BAL on 18 January 2017, in response to BAL’s request for Black
Prince to disclose all relevant interests in its shareholding
Black Prince’s
disclosure statement is also referred to in the evidence as a ‘Tracing
Notice Response’. It
“Lengkap as founder expressed a wish to BPPF to acquire
the shares in June 2014 and to enter into a related funding arrangement
finance the acquisition of the shares.”
was submitted that this suggests that Lengkap was the Founder of Black Prince at
the time it acquired 14,000,000 shares in BAL
- or at least that Lengkap was
perceived in that role by Black Prince. For reasons that are explained below,
there is doubt about
whether Lengkap was truly the founder of Black Prince in
2014; but I accept that this evidence is strongly supports the prosecution
Even so, in accordance with the finding I make elsewhere in these reasons, Black
Prince regarded Lengkap as its founder and
explained that it acquired the 14
million shares in BAL because Lengkap expressed the wish that do so. That was
the case even though
Lengkap was probably not validly appointed as founder at
that point in time. Notwithstanding that, the evidence is that Lengkap was
formally (if not validly) appointed as Founder in July 2015.
Changes of Black Prince contact details – July and
December 2015
further link between Black Prince and the defendant is that on about 16 July
2015 Black Prince’s HIN details and address for
holding statements was
changed to PO Box 3354 St Pauls, NSW Australia
That post office box was leased by Wendy
who had been an
authorised signatory to Bicheno’s bank accounts since 19 July
December 2015, the
email address which was associated with the
defendant was registered with Link Market Services as the email address for
Black Prince.
The defendant’s submissions at para [131] were entirely
speculative and did nothing to undermine the logic of the submitted
to the defendant. I find that this is a circumstance supporting the inference
that the defendant and Black Prince had
an association.
Dividends received by Black Prince from BAL – September
2015 to April 2017
prosecution submitted that a further link between Black Prince and the defendant
was that after the IPO, three dividends were
declared by BAL and paid by cheque
to Black Prince at the same post box address as above, leased by Ms Assinder -
PO Box 3354 St
Pauls, NSW Australia 2031. These dividends were ultimately paid
into trust accounts in the names of Australian lawyers connected
defendant. The first two dividends were paid by
(30 September 2015 for $401,100
and 23 March 2016 for 574,000 respectively). The first and second dividends
were received into a
trust account maintained by Peters Linnette Lawyers Pty Ltd
with the ANZ (with Mr Peters depositing the cheque for the September
third dividend of $1,092,000 was paid to Black Prince on 26 September
That dividend was
received by Pearson Tax Lawyers Pty Ltd, albeit in April
It was submitted that
Mr Pearson was a person with connections only with Ms Cameron – contrasted
with Mr Peters, who had prior
connections with Mr Adgemis. While this is so, it
is also the fact that since about 29 March 2017, Mr Pearson had been designated
by Black Prince as an authorised
representative.
prosecution submitted that Mr Pearson is a person with connections only with Ms
Cameron whereas Mr Peters had prior connections
with Mr Adgemis. These are
circumstances which may be taken into account in considering the
defendant’s relationship with
Black Prince, especially after the events of
2015 when the defendant sought more comfort relating to her ability to instruct
Prince or express her wish in relation to distributions from Black
Substantial holder notices – February 2017
prosecution adduced further evidence which, it was submitted, suggested that
Lengkap was the Founder of Black Prince in 2014 when
it acquired the BAL shares;
or at least was perceived in that role by Black Prince. My finding on the
matter is mentioned, above
and is further explored below, but is to the effect
that while Lengkap might not have been validly appointed as the founder in a
legal sense, Black Prince
that Lengkap exercised
the role of founder and Black Prince
that it acquired the 14 million
shares on BAL in response to a wish expressed by Lengkap for it to do so. This
is a circumstance
strongly supporting the inference that all of the arrangements
considered thus far were for the purpose of advancing the defendant’s
private and confidential shareholding in BAL through arrangements involving
Lengkap and Black Prince.
Black Prince’s disclosure
December 2016, BAL’s financial performance was very bad; its share price
‘cataclysmically’
and it had applied for a trading
On 30 December 2016,
Black Prince was involved in an attack on Bellamy’s Board. Black Prince
requested that a general meeting
of BAL be held, under s 249D of the
The requisition gave
notice that Black Prince sought the removal of certain existing directors and
the election of the defendant,
Mr Peters, Mr Webber and Mr Chan Wai-Chan. The
requisition asserted that the defendant was independent of Black
13 January 2017, BAL replied to Black Prince’s requisition by issuing a
direction to it under Part 6C.2, s 672A of the Act.
This document directed
Black Prince to disclose information concerning any person with a relevant
interest in its shareholding.
BAL informed the market about that notice on 18 January
13 January 2017 BAL also wrote to the defendant
further information from you in respect of your ownership in the Company and the
entities through which you hold your
This letter asked specific questions of the defendant about her - or her
associates’ - association with Black Prince.
17 January 2017, Black Prince responded to BAL’s direction under s672A, in
a document styled as a ‘Disclosure Statement’
to Bellamy’s
which stated that:
Black Prince Private Foundation ... has a relevant interest ... in 14 million
shares in Bellamy’s Ltd ... It acquired the
shares in or about June 2014
in the initial public offering of the company.
[explaining
Trustmoore as the corporate director]
Ltd ... may have indirect control of the exercise of a right to vote attached to
the shares. That indirect control arises
from Lengkap’s position as
founder of BPPF.
While there has been no practice of such there is an
expectation that BPPF will act in accordance with a lawful and proper expression
of wishes (as provided for in BPPF’s articles) made by Lengkap to BPPF in
respect to the shares.
Partnership Pte Ltd of 146 Robinson Road, 07#-01, Singapore is the sole director
of Lengkap which has indirect control over the
shares for the reasons identified
in the previous paragraph in the previous paragraph. Tong How Zheng of 146
Robinson Road. 07#-01,
Singapore is the sole director of CPA Partnership Pte
Cameron of 31/1 Castray Esplanade, Battery Point, Hobart Tasmania 7004 and Rodd
Peters of Level 17, 175 Pitt Street Sydney 2000
are directors and shareholders
of Elsie Cameron Foundation Pty Limited as trustee for the Elsie Cameron
Foundation as trustee for
the Elsie Cameron Foundation, as Australian Registered
Charity with registered address at Level 6 151 Macquarie Street Sydney 2000.
While there has been no practice of such, there is an expectation that Lengkap
or Black Prince would act (with respect to the shares)
in accordance with the
wishes of the Elsie Cameron Foundation as expressed by the directors of Elsie
Cameron Foundation Pty Limited,
namely to distribute the shares or proceeds of
sale of shares to the Elsie Cameron Foundation only.
instructions have been issued to BPPF in relation to the matters set out in
paragraph (e) of the notice. However,
Lengkap as founder expressed a
wish to BPPF to acquire the shares in June 2014 and to enter into a related
funding arrangement to
finance the acquisition of the shares. No other wish, in
relation to the shares, has been expressed to BPPF
(my emphasis)
parties agreed that the reference in Black Prince’s disclosure statement,
to the Elsie Cameron Foundation (ECF) was ‘nonsensical’
because that
foundation had not issued any direction to Black Prince, nor did it have any
power to do so.
3 of the discloses that as at 17 January 2017, Black Prince, writing in the
present tense, says Lengkap
its founder and may
control of Black Prince. But paragraph 6 narrates things historically: Black
Prince says what happened in June 2014 was
that Lengkap expressed its wish for
Black Prince to acquire the BAL shares; and did so in its capacity as Founder
at that time
. Even so, Black Prince stated that it had not been given
‘instructions’
in relation to the acquisition, disposal
etc. of those shares (as distinct, I infer, from
Black Prince made these disclosures to BAL, ASIC wrote to Black Prince. That
letter is not in evidence, but Black Prince’s
response is. Through its
lawyers Kemp Strang (who acted for both the defendant and Black Prince; and
where Mr Peters then worked
after his firm’s merger), Black Prince told
‘expectation’
referred to in its initial ‘disclosure
statement’, being that:
“...BPPF will act in
accordance with a lawful and proper expression of wishes (as provided for in
BPPF’s articles) made
by Lengkap to BPPF in respect to the
30 January 2017 Black Prince’s lawyers Kemp Strang explained the
expectation of acting on wishes:
“...the expectation arises
from the circumstances of the acquisition of the Bellamy’s shares it owns,
as follows:
various discussions between the corporate advisor to the Elsie Cameron
Foundation, representative of Wilson HTM Stockbroking, Mr
Tong on behalf of
Lengkap Limited and Mr Melkman a Director of Trustmoore, the Foundation
purchased the Shares. Lengkap supplied,
by way of loan (recourse limited to the
proceeds of the shares purchased), the funds to purchase the shares.
client considers it entered into the transaction on the basis that should it
receive an expression of wishes from Lengkap as Founder,
it would take into
account and may comply with an expression of wishes, provided that such wishes
could be lawfully and properly
carried out. Our client instructs us that Lengkap
has expressed its wishes that distributions from the assets of the Foundation
be made only to the Elsie Cameron Foundation. Our clients believe that,
in those circumstances, Lengkap as Founder reasonably has
an expectation that
our client would take into account and may comply with an expression of wishes
given albeit under the Incorporation
Document and under Curacao law the
directors are in no way obliged to act in accordance with any wishes expressed
wished by the Founder
and the directors must form their own views with an
independent mind on all the affairs of the Foundation including acting upon an
expression of wishes.”
The Defendant’s SHN – the basis of charge 2
25 January 2017, ASIC wrote to the defendant ASIC about its concern that the
market may be misinformed about the identity of the
members of a dissenting
shareholders’ group and the relationship
“between yourself and
Black Prince”
ASIC noted that there had been no formal disclosure under the substantial
holding provisions of the
Corporations Act
. The ASIC letter
It is important that this uncertainty is clarified as a
matter of urgency, so that shareholders who are contemplating the manner in
which they are to vote at the Extraordinary General Meeting on 28 February
("EGM") are able to do so on a fully informed basis. Full
disclosure is
essential for market transparency and the integrity of the market for BAL' s
securities.
letter then set out the regulatory framework including the concepts of
‘associate’
‘relevant interest’,
‘relevant agreement’
. The letter requested:
Accordingly, could you please provide us with the following
information:
(1) Copies of any agreements or details of any arrangements which created
the expectation that Lengkap or BPPF would act in the manner
stated in the
Tracing Notice Response;
(2) Details of the nature of the relationship between yourself (or your
associates) and Black Prince, Lengkap or BPPF;
(3) An explanation as to why you have not lodged a substantial holding
notice regarding your (or your associates') relationship with
January 2017, the defendant’s lawyer, Mr Hurley
from HWL Ebsworth contacted ASIC by email, seeking an extension of time to
provide the information. On 1 February 2017, the defendant answered
ASIC’s request for information about the nature of her,
associates’ relationship with Black Prince and
She said that she
had no relationship with Black Prince and that she was the sole director and
shareholder of Bicheno, which entity
had entered into the CNA with
client has no relationship with Black Prince or BPPF; and
client is director and shareholder of the
is sole shareholder and
director Bicheno Investments Pty Limited (the trustee of The Jan Cameron Trust)
which, on or about 19 June
2014, entered into a Convertible Note Agreement with
...our client is largely unfamiliar with the structure of BPPF. Our client
did not lodge a substantial holding notice regarding Black
Prince as she did not
believe that one was required.”
The defendant submitted that this statement should speak for itself and that
it is a completely plausible
Given the conclusions
which I express in Part 4 of these reasons, this submission is rejected.
14 February 2017, the defendant, Mr Peters and Chan Wai-Chan sent a joint letter
to all BAL shareholders titled
‘Let’s Save
disclosing that Black Prince had a relationship with the Elsie Cameron
Foundation under which
“returns from and proceeds from its holding
are returned”
to ECF. The defendant submitted that
this reference to
“returns from and proceeds”
reference to be equated with control of the shares in
15 February 2015 the defendant lodged the
‘Notice of initial
substantial holder’
which is the basis
of charge 2. This notice stated that the defendant, Brightside, the JCT and the
ECF had a relevant interest in
the 14,000,000 shares held by Black Prince. The
‘nature of association’
the Substantial Holders and Jan Cameron may be considered an associate of BPPF
under section 12(2)(c) of the Act in light
of their concurrence in the signature
and distribution of the annexed letter.
this SHN, the defendant did not disclose any other relevant interest in Black
Prince’s shareholding. None of the arrangements
put in place in 2014 was
referred to. The defendant did not disclose that Black Prince was her associate
by reason of the matters
alleged surrounding the private and confidential
shareholding through the arrangements including Bicheno, Lengkap, the CNA, Black
Prince or the BPLA. The omission of this information is the basis of Charge 2.
The defendant submitted that there was nothing misleading
Further Substantial Holder Notices by the defendant, Peters and
Black Prince
‘Let’s Save Bellamy’s’
activity continued, in
advance of the EGM requested for 28 February 2017, further ASIC forms relating
to who held what relevant interests
in the Black Prince’s 14 million
shares in BAL were lodged.
15 February 2017, Mr Rodd Peters lodged a ‘Notice of change of interests
of substantial holder’
That document notified
BAL that Black Prince and the
‘Cameron Entities’
"associates"
under s 12(2)(c) of the Act in light of their
concurrence in the signature and distribution” of the
‘Let’s Save Bellamy’s’
letter. The Cameron
Entities were defined as: Bicheno Investments Pty Ltd as trustee for the Jan
Cameron Trust; Bollinger Investments
Ltd as trustee for the Brightside Trust;
and Elsie Cameron Foundation Pty Ltd as trustee for the Elsie Cameron
Foundation.
Prince (on 17 February 2017) and the defendant (on 20 February 2017) each lodged
notices to similar effect;
and on 17 February 2017 Black Prince did likewise, on the basis that they could
be considered associates by reason of
“the concurrence in
formulating 4 Board nominees and their decision to requisition a meeting and
vote in favour of the resolution
put before the
These SHNs stated that the association could have existed as early as the
requisition for the EGM, dated 14 February
email dated 20 February 2017 from Joe Hurley of HWL Ebsworth (which firm was
acting for the defendant at the
to representatives of
ASIC, it was stated on the defendant’s
Cameron does not agree with your assertions about her relationship with the
Black Prince Private Foundation (BPPF) and further
that she was acting in
concert with BPPF in respect of the nomination of 4 new directors for the board
of BAL, requisitioning of
the EGM and voting at the EGM.
Nonetheless it is in the interests of BAL and its shareholders that the
EGM goes ahead on 28 February 2017, Ms Cameron has decided
to comply with your
direction and a revised Substantial Holding Notice will be provided to the
Company and yourselves as soon as
prosecution submitted that the content of these various SHNs indicated an
expanded period of time during which the relationship
as associates could have
existed - as early as the requisition for the EGM, and not merely following the
issuance of the
“Let’s Save Bellamy’s”
defendant submitted that:
lodged the further SHN because ASIC threatened imprisonment;
disagreed with ASIC’s
assertions;
SHN she lodged on 20 February 2017 was lodged ‘under protest’; and
was ‘influenced by ASIC’s emails at Exhibit P2, p. 1018-1026.
It was submitted that the defendant’s second SHN should
either be excluded or given no weight, citing the
Evidence Act 2001
submissions are entirely without merit. The only reference to imprisonment is Mr
Hurley’s email of 17 February 2017 (Ex
P2 1018) is where he says ASIC
“previously referenced” imprisonment. It cannot be inferred that
any particular threat
or suggestion was made that ASIC represented that it
possessed the power to imprison the defendant (nor that any such assertion
on the mind of the defendant or her legal advisers). I note 2
the defendant was legally represented throughout these communications and the
reference to imprisonment was made in the context
of the defendant wanting more
time (Mr Hurley’s email gave no support to the defendant’s
submission that the reference
to imprisonment overwhelmed the defendant); and
has no power to imprison anyone (no one could reasonably submit that the
defendant or her lawyers believed otherwise).
defendant’s submissions did not elaborate upon what the danger of unfair
prejudice was; or how the fact (if it is a fact)
that the SHN resulted from
ASIC’s emails warranted exclusion or use limitation. There is no danger
of unfair prejudice to
the defendant by the admission or use of her SHNs. The
defendant’s submissions generally on this point and as articulated
7 of Annexure A to her submissions are rejected.
have taken into account the defendant’s submission, at paragraph [150] of
her closing submissions that the substantial holder
notices can only be said to
relate to the requisitioning of the EGM many years after the relevant interest
the subject of the charges
is alleged to have arisen.
Black Prince acquires an additional 1,840,000 shares in BAL -
June 2017, Black Prince subscribed for a further 1,842,106 million shares in
BAL. That was done via a form executed on behalf of
Black Prince by Mr Pearson
and a transfer of $8,750,003.
Since March 2017 Mr Pearson had been designated by Black Prince as an authorised
representative.
$8,750,003.50 for the BAL shares came from money held on trust by Pearson Tax
Lawyers Pty Ltd trust account. A helpful summary
of the source of those funds
appears at page 1107 of The Tender Bundle (Ex P2). Those funds had several
(a) $1,092.000 from a BAL dividend of $1,092,000 received into Pearson Tax
Lawyers’ trust account in April 2017 – see
para [214], above ;
(b) about $8.5m deposited primarily by Bicheno; and
(c) $350,000 from the defendant.
the further subscription, $1,414,748.45 remained in Mr Pearson’s trust
As part of this
purchase of the additional shares, Bicheno agreed to loan Black Prince the sum
of $8,750,003.50.
Deed of settlement – December 2017
19 December 2017, Bicheno, Black Prince, Lengkap and Bollinger entered into a
deed of settlement that resolved and settled all
outstanding obligations between
20 December 2017, Black Prince submitted a form to Link Market Services
recording the transfer of 2,525,000 shares in BAL (worth
$25,250,000) to Bicheno
in an off-market transaction.
It was submitted that while this transfer does not quite correspond with the
terms of the deed of settlement, pursuant to which Bicheno
was only to receive
1,650,000 BAL shares plus $12m in cash, that discrepancy was not material for
present purposes.
defendant did not dispute that the settlement occurred, but observed that nearly
3.5 years had passed since Black Prince’s
acquisition of the 14 million
shares in 2014. It was submitted that by December 2017, BPPF actually held over
15,000,000 shares
in BAL and the 2,525,000 shares transferred under the deed of
settlement comprised only a relatively small fraction of its total
shareholding
at that time.
concludes the evidence in the case.
– Objections to Evidence
Legal principles
applied to the objections to evidence.
ruling on the objections raised by the defendant, I applied the following
principles:
the hearsay rule, evidence of a previous representation made by a person is not
admissible to prove the existence of a fact
that it can reasonably be supposed
that the person intended to assert by the representation, unless an exception
applies (‘the
hearsay rule’):
Evidence Act 2001
hearsay rule does not preclude evidence being admitted for other relevant
non-hearsay purposes:
Evidence Act 2001
of out-of-court conduct or statements may constitute original evidence of the
event that something was said, or for example
as direct testimonial evidence of
the speaker or author’s intentions:
[1989] HCA 9
(1989-99) 166 CLR
at 288-89 and 292,
[1989] HCA 9
and [21] per Mason
evidence may be circumstantial evidence which, along with other evidence, is
relevant to the Crown or defence case:
Tsang v DPP (Cth)
[2011] VSCA 336
(2011) 35 VR 240
of an out-of-court statement or conduct may be admitted as original evidence to
support a Crown case that the accused entered
into an agreement with others to
do the unlawful act with which he or she is charged:
Tsang v DPP (Cth)
[2011] VSCA 336
(2011) 35 VR 240
Uniform Evidence Law
Ed. Odgers [EA.60.60] (online) where the author provides an
example where hearsay representations forming part of conversations relevant
prove the making of an agreement may be admitted on that basis -
R v Macraild
(BC 9707215) unreported, NSW CCA, Sully, Dunford, Simpson JJ, 18 December
of an out-of-court conduct or statement may be admitted under the
co-conspirators’ principle, which permits their admission
as evidence of
truth of the statements made in the absence of the accused, that is as an
exception to the hearsay rule. In conspiracy
cases, such evidence may be
admitted to prove the accused person’s participation in conspiracy to do
an unlawful
Objection to Mr Woolley’s evidence (raised by the
defendant at para [84] of Closing Submissions for the Defence)
defendant objected - on various bases - to the evidence given by Mr Woolley to
the effect that “the brokers” told
him they had been approached by
investors who said they were concerned about the defendant’s involvement
in the success or
otherwise of the IPO. Those objections, and the references to
the evidence to which they relate, are set out in items 1-7 of
Annexure A to the Closing Submissions for the Defence. I applied the legal
principles set out below. For the reasons that are
also set out below, the
objections are dismissed.
Objections to certain documents in the Tender Bundle
relation to certain of the documents contained in the Tender Bundle (Ex. P2),
objections were raised by the defendant which relate
to the application of the
hearsay rule. Those objections are set out at items 1-13 of Annexure A to the
Closing Submissions for
the Defence. The prosecution replies to the objections
are at para [202] of the Closing Submissions of the Prosecution. My rulings
as follows, following the numbering in the defendant’s Annexure A:
1, 4, 8, 9, 10 (p.1038), 11 and 12
: The documents were not tendered.
I accept the prosecution submissions, including as to
. The documents are relevant and admissible for the non-hearsay purposes as
submitted by the prosecution.
: I note the defendant’s submissions about the press article but I
accept the prosecution submissions relating to the limited
use of the email
chain, including as to
. The documents comprising the email chain
are circumstantially relevant to proof of:
(i) the relationship between the defendant, Black Prince and the shareholding;
(ii) the relationship between the defendant and Mr Peters.
7: this item was the subject of comment above under the heading ‘Further
SHNs by Peters, Black Prince and the defendant’.
The defendant’s
counsel did not explain what was meant by ‘characterisations’ which
are the subject of this objection.
I am not prepared to speculate. I accept
the prosecution submissions as to relevance, admissibility and use.
13: unspecified, non-admitted ‘characterisations’ are not a proper
ground of objection. I dismiss the objection.
Objection to Mr Woolley’s evidence
defendant objected - on various bases - to the evidence given by Mr Woolley to
the effect that
“the brokers”
said they had been approached
by investors with concerns about the defendant’s involvement in the
success or otherwise of the
IPO: items 1-7 in Annexure A to the Closing
Submissions for the Defence. The objections were on the basis that the
assertions by
Mr Woolley are hearsay: see the evidence at transcript page 81.12
and the Defendant’s list of objections at pages 5-8 of Annexure
Closing Submissions for the Defence. For the reasons that follow, I dismiss
that objection.
addition to what was in the press and what Mr Woolley said he was told the by
the brokers, he gave some further evidence in response
to questions about
whether Retail Adventures Australia - and the defendant’s involvement with
that company - was discussed
with the Board in the lead-up to the IPO. He
“were certainly discussed informally. They were very clearly
in the press”;
the reason that
[those matters]
were formally raised with me was through
the brokers who said they had been approached by one or two of the investors who
had expressed
concern as to Jan’s involvement on the success or otherwise
of the IPO”; and
he (Robertson) said that he had been approached by, I think, two, if I remember
correctly, at least two of the potential
investors – large institutions
that were being put forward to invest in Bellamy’s. And they had expressed
to the ongoing disputes in the press, because none of us knew
anything other than that, with Retail Adventures having an impact on
success or otherwise of the IPO”.
context for this evidence is that ultimately the BAL board agreed to Bicheno
selling its stake in BAL before the
and that at that same
time, there was talk of the defendant wanting to
Woolley said the Board considered the matter and that one of the sources of the
Board’s information was what was
“very clearly in the
evidence which is the subject of the objection is not hearsay. It is evidence
that the Board considered matters relating to the
defendant and Retail
Adventures in the context of floating Tasmanian Pure Foods. It is evidence
the Board did and some explanation
it did so. I
accept Mr Woolley’s evidence (or I infer it if he did not go that far)
that “the brokers” also raised
those concerns (at least Mr Robertson
did) and that Mr Woolley raised the concerns with the Board in the context of
the Board considering
proposals (a) for the defendant, via Bicheno, to sell her
shares pre-IPO; (b) for the defendant to retain an interest in BAL post
The evidence of what Mr Woolley said he was told by Mr Robertson is one source
of the concerns considered by the Board –
including the impact the
defendant’s association with Retail Adventures might have on the likely
success of the BAL IPO. The
evidence is circumstantial evidence relating to the
sale of the defendant’s shareholding in BAL prior to the IPO, which is
itself a circumstance relevant to the charges against the defendant.
accept the submissions at paragraphs 203-211 of the Closing Submissions of the
Prosecution - particularly at para 211. I accept
that the relevance and
admissibility of the evidence does not depend upon acceptance of the truth of
any facts intended to be asserted
by the maker of the statement (i.e. either Mr
Robertson or Mr Adgemis). I accept that Mr Woolley’s evidence of what he
told is original evidence of a conversation with Mr Robertson in which a
proposal, put on behalf of the defendant, was outlined for
his and the
Board’s consideration. It is circumstantial evidence from which
inferences may from which inferences may ultimately
be drawn with respect to the
arrangements under consideration and what they show as to the defendant’s
intention, knowledge
and subsequent conduct with respect to Black Prince’s
BAL shareholding and her relevant interest in that shareholding. I reject
submissions by the defence in relation to items 1-7 at pages 5-8 of Annexure A
to the Closing Submissions for the Defence. I
am satisfied that the probative
value of this evidence is outweighed by any danger of unfair prejudice to the
Objection to Mr Robertson’s oral evidence
A, items 8 and 9:
Objection was taken to Evidence given by Mr Robertson
out of Singapore that wanted to take a 14% stake in Bellamy’s as an anchor
shareholder. This evidence is admissible.
At pages 147- 149 Mr Robinson gave
evidence which is capable of being accepted as Mr Robertson having a
conversation with Mr Adgemis
statutory declaration. I accept that Mr Robertson had a discussion with Mr
Woolley about
that. It is relevant to the decision of Bellamy’s board in
relation to the cornerstone investor. The objection is dismissed.
Objection to Mr Adgemis’s oral evidence
A, item 10:
Objection to Mr Adgemis’s evidence about the background
to the amendment to the BPLA – that a representative of Trustmoore
trustee of the entity of which Mr Adgemis was Founder) spoke to David Tong and
said Lengkap was required to be disclosed as
the funder of Black Prince and
Lengkap did not want to be disclosed and so the BPLA was amended: TR 221. The
objection was on grounds
of hearsay and
. I admit the evidence.
Mr Adgemis was copied into emails on this topic. I accept that this was his
understanding at the time,
based on what he was informed about by others. It is
open to infer that, although Mr Adgemis said ‘spoke’ he was
to Ms van der Veen’s email to Mr Tong of 5 August 2014. He was
copied into that correspondence on 6 August 2014. I admit
the evidence.
The defendant objected to Mr Adgemis telling the Court that he spoke
to Mr Peters, who told him that the defendant wanting more
comfort or control
value of the shares, given that
they had significantly appreciated in value. The
defendant also objected to the evidence that the Mandarin Oriental lunch was
because Mr Peters told him the defendant wanted more comfort in her
ability to provide instructions and wishes to Black Prince, and
Melkman so as to be in a position to express wishes and liaise on the day to day
running of Black Prince. The objections
are dismissed.
Adgemis’s evidence of Mr Peters’ representation is circumstantial
evidence relevant to the issue of whether the defendant
and Black Prince were
associates. It does not prove that the defendant wanted more comfort, but the
conversation about why the lunch
was arranged – given that a lunch
arranged – and that Mr Adgemis took a copy of the letter intended to
replace the defendant with him as the person who could
express wishes to Black
Prince - are circumstances supporting the inferences contended for by the
prosecution at para [223] of the
closing submissions of the prosecution.
217-218 of the transcript records the defendant’s objection to Mr
Adgemis’s evidence about his involvement in the
amendment to the BPLA on
the bases of the
Evidence Act 2001
: see TR p.217. There
was no objection by a client, and so
was not engaged. The defendant is not
an unrepresented party for the purposes of
There is no merit in this
– analysis and consideration of Charge 1
1 – The real Questions in the case
parties have approached the case on the basis that the real questions in the
whether Ms Cameron had a
“relevant interest”
in Black Prince’s shareholdings in
BAL, or was an
“associate”
of Black Prince’s; and
by about 5 August 2014, Ms Cameron was aware of the
matters set out in s 671B(3) of the Act for two business days (i.e. since 1
2014, when BAL was included in the official list of the ASX).
prosecution submits at para [230] of its closing submissions, that it is
established beyond reasonable doubt that
(a) since 31 July 2014, Black Prince held 14,000,000
(b) since 1 August 2014 BAL has been a “listed company”;
(c) Black Prince’s shareholding in BAL comprised a “substantial
holding” for the purposes of s 671B(1) of the Act;
(d) the defendant did not, on or before 5 August 2014, disclose her or her
associate’s relevant interest in a substantial holding
in BAL (i.e. that
of Black Prince);
(e) Black Prince disclosed its substantial holding in BAL;
(f) Neither the defendant, Black Prince, Bicheno or Lengkap
relevant interest of the defendant in Black Prince’s substantial holding;
the defendant was an associate of Black Prince.
I agree with this submission. None of these matters is in dispute. They are
established beyond reasonable doubt.
Subsidiary Issue: Black Prince became a holder of the
securities on 1 August 2014
subsidiary issue relevant to the first question, above was raised by the
defendant. The defendant submitted that it was necessary
for the prosecution to
prove that the defendant knew when Black Prince became a holder of the shares.
The defendant submitted that
because the deadline for giving the information
required by s671B one was within 2 business days after she became aware of it,
prosecution must prove that she actually became aware that Black Prince
became a registered holder of shares and the date upon which
the defendant
became aware. It was submitted that the prosecution could not prove either of
those things and charge one must therefore
fail as a result.
have largely dealt with this issue in the section
‘Strict Liability for
, above where I rejected reject this submission about what
the prosecution must prove in relation to the defendant’s awareness..
prosecution must prove that the defendant was aware of the details of her
relevant interest in voting shares. It is sufficient
if the prosecution proves
that the relevant interest was in voting shares. It is not necessary to prove
that the defendant knew
the details which qualified the shares as voting shares
or the details surrounding the process and timing of the actual registration
the shares in the name of Black Prince. Further, I stated that the
‘defence’ of mistake applies and that the defendant
will not be
criminally liable if (a) she considered whether or not relevant facts existed,
and that she was under a mistaken but
reasonable belief about those relevant
facts; and b) had those facts existed, her conduct would not have constituted an
will now give my reasons for finding that Black Prince became the registered
holder of the 14 million shares in BAL by Friday 1
August 2014.
is common ground that a person does not
shares until
they become a registered holder;
that their interest in the shares
is entered into the share register of the company as a matter of
In this case, the BAL
share register is not in evidence. The prosecution submits that the document at
page 1137 of the Tender Bundle
(pdf page 1154) -
‘Link Market Services
Holding Information as at 6 September 2017’
- is definitive proof that
Black Prince was recorded in the share register as holding 14 million BAL shares
on 1 August 2014; or that
it permits the inference to be drawn that as at that
date, Black Prince was the registered holder of the shares.
‘Link Market Services Holding Information as at 6 September 2017’
is a document was issued
the share registry: Link Market Services.
In the BAL prospectus
Market Services was referred to as the Share Registry to
(see also the definition
‘share registry’
as meaning Link Market Services - and
also in the Corporate Directory of the prospectus). The ‘guaranteed
allocation’
letter at TB 199 indicates that Link Market Services would be
responsible for allocation of the shares upon receipt of monies. The
at TB 562, effective at 1 August 2014, is to the effect that Bellamy’s
Australia Ltd was admitted to the Official
List of ASX Ltd on Friday, 1 August
2014 (consistent with Agreed Fact 2), with the share registry noted as being
Link Market Services.
the first page of the
‘Link Market Services Holding Information as at 6
September 2017’
, under the heading
‘Transaction History
section, it states
‘31/07/2014’
. The number
of shares is recorded as
. The details of the
transaction are recorded as
. At the foot of the
document, there is a part which states (this underlining is mine for
Please note that the above information represents
transactions
and payments
processed onto the register held by
Link Market Services Limited at the time of request of the statement
does not include any transactions pending processing by us or pending
communication to us by the Australian Securities Exchange's
Clearing House
Electronic Settlement System, CHESS. Queries regarding market transactions
should be referred to the Sponsoring Broker.
The time of the request of the statement was 6 September 2017.
defendant points to two things which she says are capable of raising a
reasonable doubt about this. The first is that the share
register itself is not
in evidence. That is so. But the
‘Holding Information as at 6
September 2017’
supports an inference that the information is sourced
the Share Register. It is true that the document does not define
the expression
“transaction”
. It also is true that the
document does not state that ‘Black Prince was entered on the register as
the holder of 14000000
shares’ on any particular date in those exact
terms. This submission does not, in my view, undermine the observations made,
below, as to the apparent reliability of the information in the document
produced by the entity apparently maintaining the BAL share
registry: Link
Market Services.
second point raised by the defendant is that Black Prince issued a SHN to BAL
and ASX, dated 5 August 2014.
That SHN was lodged by Black Prince on 6 August 2014 and represented that the
date that Black Prince became a substantial holder
was 5 August 2014. The
defendant submitted that this document created by Black Prince should be
regarded as the best evidence of
when Black Prince became registered as the
holder of the 14 million shares; because it is when Black Prince accepts it was
as such. This submission does not have merit, because it directly
conflicts with a document issued by the entity maintaining the
registry. I note that there is evidence that 5 August 2014 was the date upon
which official
(trading – as I understood it) of
BAL’s shares was to
understand the evidence, Black Prince’s shares were allocated prior to the
date that trading commenced.
refer to 2 particular documents which support the prosecution
submission:
Notice reference number 0839.14.08, dated 1 August 2014 (At Ex P2 p562); and
Market Release Notice dated 1 August 2014 (Ex P2, P
Both these documents state that:
“Bellamy's Australia Limited (Company) was admitted to the Official
List of ASX Limited (ASX) on Friday, 1 August 2014”
defendant also submitted that the
‘Holding Information as at 6
September 2017’
document tells the Court nothing more than there was a
transaction, being a float, which occurred on 31 July 2014. The defendant
not accept that the document
proved that the
transaction ... processed
onto the register held by Link Market Services Limited
(using the language
of the document) was 14 million shares registered to Black Prince (see
Transcript pages 422-423). I reject that
submission. Reading the
‘Holding Information as at 6 September 2017
together with the other
documents referred to in the paragraph above, I cannot accept that to be a
reasonable interpretation.
my view, the evidence which includes the
‘Holding Information as at 6
September 2017’
document strongly supports the inference that on 31
July 2014, 14 million shares in BAL were processed onto the register maintained
by Link Market Services Limited; and that on that date, Black Prince thereby
of those shares. I would accept that by
1 August 2014 Black Prince was recorded as the holder of 14 million shares.
not appear to be any sound reason to regard the documents above as
being in any way unreliable or open to doubt.
relation to the cases in the defendant’s closing submissions at para
[156], which were the subject of an oral submission
by prosecution counsel at
Transcript reference p 575-577, I do not believe that it is necessary to have
recourse to the principles
and considerations in those cases given that my
findings on this point are resolved on the facts.
accept the defendant’s submission that that Black Prince’s SHN
strongly suggests that its state of mind on 6 August
2014 was that it became a
substantial holder on 5 August 2014. But Black Prince’s subjective view
is not conclusive on the
question of the date upon which it became the
registered holder of the shares.
Acknowledging
that the share register is not in evidence, but for the reasons above, I accept
the submissions made by the prosecution
on this point. I am satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that for the purposes of these charges, Black Prince had become
the registered
holder of 14 million BAL shares by 1 August 2014 and its
substantial holding commenced on that date.
Four Avenues to a relevant interest amounting to a substantial
now return to the first question arising on charge 1 - whether Ms Cameron had a
‘substantial holding’
in BAL through either a
‘relevant interest’
under s 608 in Black Prince’s
shareholding, or by being an
“associate”
Prince’s. Briefly restating the prosecution case: it is alleged that the
evidence proves beyond reasonable doubt that
the defendant had a relevant
interest in the BAL shares held by Black Prince either by herself or along with
an associate or associates.
It is submitted there are four distinct ways the
defendant had the relevant
avenue: control of Bicheno and Lengkap: she has the same relevant interest in
any securities as Lengkap does;
Second avenue: Lengkap’s relevant interest in the shares as the
perceived founder of Black Prince;
Third avenue: practical control and power over the shares in all the
circumstances;
Fourth avenue: Black Prince was an associate of the defendant’s as well
as being an associate of Bicheno and Lengkap - which
were also associates of the
is not disputed that the defendant controlled
Nor is it disputed
that the defendant would be deemed to have the same relevant interest in any
securities in which Bicheno had
a relevant interest, under s 608(3)(b).
First avenue by which the defendant had a relevant interest in
the BAL shares - control of Lengkap
the defendant controlled Bicheno, the next issue is whether the defendant
controlled Lengkap in either or both of two ways:
through Bicheno’s control of Lengkap under the Convertible Note Agreement
in her own right as
‘ultimate beneficial owner’
of Lengkap.
either basis, the prosecution must prove beyond reasonable doubt that the
defendant had
“the capacity to determine the outcome of decisions about
[Lengkap’s]
corporate financial and operating policies”
under s 608(4) and s 608(5).
The defendant controlled Lengkap through the Convertible Note
Agreement (CNA) (relevant interest via the CNA)
the heading above
‘Incorporation of Lengkap’
in Part 3 above,
I found that I was satisfied that the defendant controlled Lengkap and that she
was the ultimate beneficial owner
of that company. This section deals
specifically with whether, the defendant controlled Lengkap through Bicheno and
the CAN with
first way that the prosecution sought to prove the defendant’s
‘relevant interest’
in the shares is through the negative
covenants in the CNA. I accept that the facts were accurately stated in the
prosecution submissions
at para [107], that:
agreed to purchase a Convertible Note (the CNA) from Lengkap;
a convertible note purchase agreement (signed by Ms Cameron and CPA’s Mr
Lengkap agreed to issue
Bicheno with a $23m convertible promissory note, which it did on 21 June
evidence establishes beyond reasonable doubt that the defendant controlled
Bicheno for the purposes of s 608(3)(b). The defendant
is deemed, under s
608(3)(b), to have the same relevant interest in any securities in which Bicheno
had a relevant interest. The
defendant had the capacity to determine the
outcome of decisions about Bicheno’s corporate financial and operating
for the purposes of s 608(4). The defendant’s control of
Bicheno is also established under s 608(3)(a), because the defendant
Bicheno’s sole shareholder who owned more than 20% of Bicheno’s
shares, with a corresponding voting power above 20%.
terms of Bicheno’s CNA with Lengkap were annexed to the convertible note
purchase agreement. It was submitted through these
means, Bicheno loaned Lengkap
$23m; some $14m of which was later lent by Lengkap to Black Prince which was
then used to fund the
acquisition of the 14 million shares in BAL. The advance
of that $14 million was authorised by the defendant
the negative covenants in clause 14 of the CNA, unless Bicheno gave its prior
written consent, Lengkap was unable to:
(a) convey, sell, lease, transfer, assign or otherwise dispose of all or any
part of its business, property, assets or rights, except
for transfers of
inventory in the ordinary course of business or of worn-out or obsolete
equipment in the ordinary course of business
(b) engage in any business that was materially different from the businesses
currently engaged in by Lengkap – cl 14.3;
(c) issue any shares or other securities (including any rights of pre-emption or
options in relation to those shares and securities)
(d) grant any material extension of the time for payment of any of
Lengkap’s receivables; or, compromise, compound or settle
the same for
materially less than the full amount; or release, wholly or partly, any person
liable for a material payment; or allow
any material credit or discount
whatsoever other than trade discounts granted to the Issuer in the ordinary
course of its business
– cl 14.5; and
(e) enter into related party transactions – cl 14.6.
prosecution submitted that these rights under the CNA mean that Bicheno
“has the capacity to determine the outcome of decisions about
[Lengkap’s]
corporate financial and operating policies”
the purposes of the definition of
in s 608(4). The
“corporate financial and operating policies”
not defined in s68 or anywhere else in the Act. I agree with the
prosecution
that on its
natural and ordinary meaning, that expression will would include the high-level
and broad procedures, objectives and
strategy employed by a corporation in
relation to matters financial and operational.
expression was discussed in
Multinet Gas v Alinta and Anor
[2009] VSC 18.
In that case, Kyrou J held that the phrase was not confined to formal written
policies and formal resolutions of the board and shareholders
but includes
decisions of the company which set the framework for the operation of its
business and for meeting its legal obligations.
At [1275] Kyrou J referred to
Hancock v Rinehart
[2015] NSWSC 646
(2015) 106 ACSR 207
where Brereton J referred
to some broad propositions which are currently relevant:
Control is concerned with decision-making rather than proprietorship, and
control, like ownership can be indirect: there are
circumstances in which those
who have the ability to carry a resolution may become bound to act on the
direction of another (for
example, mortgagee). The “control”
requirement is directed to the ultimate power to decide how an entity acts, as
from the beneficial ownership, and also as distinct from the delegated
power of directors or officers.
to the meaning of the expression
, I am content to
interpret that consistently with what Kyrou J stated in
“power that is presently exercisable as a result of, by means
of, in breach of, or by revocation of, any of or any combination
(a) trusts;
(b) relevant agreements; and
(c) practices;
whether or not enforceable.”
prosecution submits that the evidence establishes beyond reasonable doubt that
Bicheno had that capacity, in a real and practical
. The concept of
control can vary from case to case and by reference to the particular criteria
at 1274. Control is concerned with decision-making,
rather than proprietorship, and control, like ownership, can be indirect: there
are circumstances in which those who have the ability to carry a resolution may
become bound to act on the direction of another (for
example, a mortgagee):
at [1275]. It is open to find that the facts in this case fall
well within these concepts.
defendant submitted that Bicheno did not control Lengkap under the terms of the
CNA because the agreement is not caught by s.608;
or alternatively, the
relationship is exempted by s.609.
defendant submitted that Mr Adgemis confirmed Bicheno’s status as a
commercial lender at around the time it entered into
the CNA with Lengkap on
submission. That is not what
Mr Adgemis said. He answered ‘yes’ to
a question about the defendant, or entities associated with her, having provided
loans or other financial accommodation to entities associated with him over the
years starting from about 2010 (at Transcript p243).
He also said that he was
aware that Bicheno
“participated as a lender in some of the
arrangements with you or your entities”
, whatever that meant.
defendant submitted that the CNA
“is anything other than an ordinary
convertible note purchase agreement”
. I reject that submission. The
Court is not in a position to assume what the terms of ordinary convertible note
purchase agreements
may be. I reject the submission that those matters referred
to in para [163] of the closing submissions for the defendant engage
exemption in s 609.
negative covenants conferred power on Bicheno to grant or withhold consent to
activity by Lengkap in the areas covered by the
broad scope of those covenants,
which correspondingly imposed a legal obligation on the part of Lengkap not to
conduct activities
in those areas without Bicheno’s consent. These
considerations satisfy the description by Kyrou J in
Multinet Gas v Alinta
as the ‘ultimate power to decide how an entity acts’
– at least insofar as the broad-ranging subject matter of
the negative
covenants is concerned. I accept the prosecution submission, in part, to the
effect that because of the cumulative
breadth and scope of the negative
covenants, most decisions about Lengkap’s corporate financial and
operating policies require
Bicheno’s consent. In this way, the negative
covenants governed decisions which set the framework for the operation of
business, as referred to in
Multinet Gas v Alinta.
reject the defendant’s submission that the relationship between Lengkap
and Bicheno was merely one of lender and borrower
and that therefore the
relationship is within the scope of the exemption in s.609. This was a
relationship of a quite a different
nature. I reject the defendant’s
submissions about what the Court may conclude about whether the terms of the CNA
are ‘ordinary
commercial terms’. There is no material upon which I
could regard it as a reasonable possibility that the terms of the CNA
‘ordinary commercial terms’.
also reject the defendant’s submission that the negative covenants in the
CNA do not give rise to the requisite control because
the Court should imply a
term into the CNA to the effect that Bicheno’s consent could not be
unreasonably withheld. That decision
is without merit. There is no basis upon
which to imply such a term into the CNA. I also reject the defendant’s
that practical influence can only be established in this case if
there is evidence of her actually wielding it.
determining whether the defendant had the capacity to determine the outcome of
decisions about Lengkap’s financial and operating
policies, I have taken
into account the defendant’s submission that there does not appear to be
any direct evidence of any
practice or pattern of behaviour affecting those
financial or operating policies: s608(4) and (5)(a) and (b). However, that does
not appear to me to be determinative. In any event, the fact that the defendant
was the only person who could instruct Lengkap’s
bank to release funds
under the BPLA between Lengkap and Black Prince, is a circumstance –
although a single and important
circumstance - affecting Lengkap’s
financial or operating policy.
Principles of Corporations Law
Ed at para [23.150] provides
commentary on what is a
‘relevant interest’
. The authors
note that obligations arising under a
‘relevant agreement;
only be unenforceable but may also be such that the parties are free to withdraw
from acting consistently with them, provided
there is a meeting of the minds and
not merely the coexistence of mutual intentions:
Asic v Yandal Gold Pty Ltd
(2002) ACSR 317;
[1999] FCA 799
(affirmed (2002) 41 ACSR 325). The authors
comment that the definition embraces a broad range of relationships that need
not necessarily
be legal relationships, and accordingly, a person may have a
relevant interest in securities on the basis of indirect power arising
informal practice or understanding that is unenforceable, citing
Yandal Gold
at [73]. In
Yandal Gold
at [74], there is a reference to
Enterprises Ltd v Queensland Press Ltd
[1983] 2 VR at 529 at 536 in which an
exchange of letters evidencing an agreement that a party would not dispose of
its shares without
affording the other an opportunity to acquire the shares was
sufficient to satisfy the criterion of power to exercise control over
disposal of shares. In my view, the approach urged by the prosecution is
consistent with these cases.
the preceding analysis, I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the negative
covenants in the CNA provided Bicheno with practical
control over Lengkap.
Since the defendant controlled Bicheno; and since Bicheno controlled Lengkap in
this particular way, for the
purposes of s.608(4), I accept that it follows that
the defendant would be deemed to have the same
“relevant interest in
any securities”
as Lengkap, under s 608(3)b).
these reasons, I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Bicheno controlled
Lengkap under the CNA.
will deal now with the further and related proposition that the defendant
controlled Lengkap in her own right as ultimate beneficial
The defendant controlled Lengkap as ultimate beneficial owner
(relevant interest as UBO of Lengkap)
recap: One way the prosecution puts its case is that the defendant controlled
Lengkap (either personally or through Bicheno) and
that Lengkap had a relevant
interest in Black Prince’s shareholding in in BAL under the rule in s
608(3)(b) because Lengkap
controlled Black Prince because it had the capacity to
determine the outcome of decisions about Black Prince’s financial and
operating policies. The defendant’s criminal liability is put on the
basis that she is deemed to have the same relevant interest
as Lengkap. In the
section above, I have just dealt with the defendant’s control of Lengkap
through Bicheno. This particular
section of the reasons deals with the
defendant’s direct avenue of control of Lengkap
independently
of Bicheno.
the section above under the heading
‘The Incorporation of
above, I found that the defendant controlled Lengkap as
ultimate beneficial owner. I will now deal with the precise submission made
the prosecution as it relates to s 608(3)(b).
evidence supporting the finding that the defendant was the ultimate beneficial
owner of Lengkap is:
(a) the defendant was described as
“ultimate beneficial owner”
in the Client Services Agreement with Kensington Trust concerning the
incorporation of Lengkap:
see the details under the heading
‘The Incorporation of
(b) the defendant was described as
“ultimate beneficial owner”
in the unsigned application form for the incorporation of Lengkap, prepared
by Kensington Trust, for Mr Tong, who was instructed by
Mr Pearson, who was in
turn instructed by the
- see the details
under the heading
‘The Incorporation of Lengkap’
, above; and
(c) the defendant was identified as such in various pieces of email
correspondence, by persons involved with Lengkap and/or Black
acquisition of shares in BAL:
van der Veen’s (Trustmoore) email of 15 June
see paragraph 121 above
the information provided so far, we see that Ms C funds the transaction and
receives 50% of any benefits of the transaction.
that way we qualify
Ms C as UBO of Black Prince;
like to receive a complete structure chart of Lengkap up to Ms C as UBO of that
structure. Of all the intermediary companies
we would like to receive proof of
ownership, proof of directors and proof of existence. (in line what is already
provided for Lengkap)
Tessa van Dijk’s email of 18June
see paragraph
structure as explained to us the UBO of Lengkap will also benefit from the
proceeds of the shares we are planning to buy. 50
% will go to Lengkap and 50 %
will remain at BPPF.
understood that the UBO of Lengkap owns shares (perhaps indirect) in Tasmanian
Pure Foods at the moment.
refer again to the evidence and the findings set out under the heading
‘The Incorporation of Lengkap’
, above at establishing that
the defendant was the ultimate beneficial owner of Lengkap and controlled
Lengkap in that way. The defendant
was the person who instructed Mr Pearson to
bring about the incorporation of Lengkap. Lengkap’s sole shareholder and
Wawasan Ltd is a company connected to the
She was its
ultimate beneficial owner. As such, I am satisfied that the defendant could
exert practical influence of a kind that
could determine the outcome of
decisions about its financial and operating policies, for the purposes of
s608(4) and s608(5). In
determining that the defendant had practical influence
to determine the outcome of decisions about Black Prince’s financial
operating policies, I have in mind the fact that the defendant was the only
person who could instruct Lengkap’s bank to
release funds under the BPLA
is highly probative on that point.
the reasons set out above, I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that find that
the defendant controlled Lengkap in the sense
contemplated by s 608(3)(b).
Black Prince Loan Agreement (‘relevant interest’ as
UBO of Lengkap)
established beyond reasonable doubt that the defendant controlled Lengkap, both
personally and through her control of Bicheno,
the next issue is to determine
whether Lengkap had the relevant interest contended for: through
power to dispose of or control the exercise of a power of sale to dispose of the
securities”
as provided by s 608(1)(c). The prosecution case is that
this power is found in clause 3(a) of the BPLA between Lengkap and Black
3(a) of the BPLA was in the following terms
If requested by Lengkap Ltd the Borrower agrees forthwith to enter into a
security deed or mortgage over the Shares and sign such other documents as
required for registration of the Shares.
relates to demand for repayment. The
prosecution submitted that cl 3(a) of the BPLA provided Lengkap with a relevant
interest in
Black Prince’s BAL shares because it gave Lengkap to
“power to dispose of, or control the exercise of a power to dispose of
the securities”
as contemplated by the basic rule in s 608(1)(c). It
was submitted that clause 3(a) gave Lengkap the power to compel Black Prince,
upon request being made, to execute a mortgage over its shareholding in BAL to
secure the money it lent to Black Prince.
prosecution case is that under the BPLA clause 3(a), at least as at 5 August
2014 (the date for disclosure), Lengkap could make
a request of Black Prince and
thereafter contractually compel that entity execute a mortgage over its
shareholding in BAL to secure
the monies lent. It was submitted that in this
way, clause 3(a) gave Lengkap the
“power to dispose of, or control the
exercise of a power to dispose of, the securities”
for the purposes of
s 608(1)(c) – the basic rule governing what is a relevant interest.
prosecution urged a construction of clause 3(a) that Lengkap could insist on the
execution or a mortgage (it having the option
to do so). It was submitted that
if a mortgage came into existence in this way it would amount to power or
control through an agreement
falling within s 608(2). It was submitted that the
agreement provided for Lengkap to exercise a power of sale once enlivened by
a request (i.e., upon repayment default by Black Prince). It was
submitted that the fact that such a power would be subject to restraint
restriction (i.e., upon repayment default by Black Prince) would not matter
because of s 608(2)(c).
defendant contends that clause 3(a) is void and cannot sustain a relevant
interest; and alternatively, that the BPLA was amended
to remove clause 3(a) ab
clause 3(a) is void or removed ab initio, there is evidence to satisfy the court
beyond reasonable doubt that clause 3(a) does
amount to a security interest over
Black Prince’s 14 million BAL shares in order to secure the money lent to
it by Lengkap.
Clause 3(a) provides a mechanism for Lengkap to make a request
that the borrower to enter into a
“specific security deed or mortgage
over the Shares and sign such other documents as required for registration of
the Shares”
. The clause sufficiently clearly obliges the borrower to
enter the agreement and sign documents as required for registration of
shares to Lengkap. I am satisfied that the clause could be enforced in the way
suggested by the prosecution.
clause 3(a) is void or removed ab initio, I am satisfied that the text of both s
608(8) and 609(1)(a) support the proposition
may arise via a security arrangement. Section 608(8) is
satisfied here because Black Prince owns the shares (s608(8)(a); Black Prince
entered the BPLA with Lengkap (s608(b)(1)(i)); the BPLA gives Lengkap an
enforceable right (whether the right is enforceable presently
or in the future
and whether or not on the fulfilment of a condition) (s608(b)(ii)); and if the
agreement were performed, Lengkap
would have a relevant interest if clause 3(a)
were enforced and the shares registered in its name (clause 608(c)).
clause 3(a) is void or removed ab initio for the purposes of the offence
provision, I would accept the prosecution submission
that if the BPLA was
performed by Black Prince entering into ‘a specific security deed or
mortgage’, this would bestow
a power on Lengkap in relation to the
disposition of Black Prince’s shareholding in BAL (noting that the shares
could not be
disposed of without Lengkap’s consent if a mortgage was
granted). I am satisfied that in such circumstances, the grant of
the mortgage
would have been subject to (and dependent upon) Lengkap making a request under
clause 3(a) and that not undermine the
effect of clause 3(a) as I interpret it.
I accept that this position is indistinguishable from the call option
specifically mentioned
in s 608(8), where, upon the exercise of that option, the
agreement (if performed) results in the holder of the option having a relevant
interest in shares (namely as holder of those securities: s 608(1)(a)).
also accept the prosecution submission that there is no evidence that clause
3(a) (unless void or removed ab initio for the purposes
of the offence
provision) could fall within the exception in s 609(1)(a) which relates to a
security interest taken in the ordinary
course of business of money lending and
financial accommodation. I accept that there is no evidence which could
reasonably raise
a doubt on the basis that Lengkap was ordinarily in the
business of providing financial accommodation on ordinary commercial terms.
also accept that unless clause 3(a) is void or removed ab initio for the
purposes of the offence provision in s 671B, Lengkap could
insist on the
execution of a mortgage (it having the option to do so), which would be an
agreement falling within s 608(2), and could
thereafter exercise a power of sale
if that power was enlivened (i.e. upon repayment default by Black Prince). The
fact that such
a power would be subject to restraint or restriction (i.e.,
repayment default by Black Prince) would not negative the foregoing conclusion:
see s 608(2)(c).
effect of the foregoing reasons is that unless clause 3(a) is void or removed
from the BPLA an initio, the evidence is capable
of establishing that Lengkap
had a relevant interest in Black Prince’s shareholding in BAL under s
608(1) and that the defendant
is deemed to have the same relevant interest as
turn now to deal with the dispute about whether clause 3(a) is void or removed
ab initio. This involves questions of Malaysian
law and its application to
clause 3(a).
Foreign Law: the laws of Labuan, Malaysia (relevant interest
as UBO of Lengkap)
defendant says that the result of the application of Malaysian law would be that
cl 3(a) is void and therefore cannot be regarded
as an avenue through which the
defendant had a relevant interest in Black Prince’s shares in BAL. The
prosecution position
is that even if cl 3(a) is unenforceable, that would have
no impact: cl 3(a) would still fall within the scope of the basic rule
608(1)(c) because that provision provides that it does not matter whether or not
clause 3(a) is enforceable.
the reasons that follow, I have preferred the analysis submitted by the
prosecution on these questions as to the enforceability
of cl 3(a). I have also
accepted the submission that even if wrong about that, the power to request
security in clause 3(a) is one
which, even if unenforceable, represented a true
measure of control in favour of Lengkap, on the assumption that the parties to
BPLA acted in accordance with, rather than contrary to, their arrangement or
understanding: see Closing Submissions for the Prosecution
para [40], citing
Re MYOB Ltd
[2008] ATP 27 at [17] per Ashforth P;
Edensor Nominees Pty
(2002) 120 FCR 78 at [33] per Hill, Sundberg and Mansfield JJ.
BPLA, cl 10.7 provided that the agreement is governed by and construed in
accordance with the laws in force in Labuan, Malaysia;
with the Courts of
Australia having exclusive jurisdiction to settle any disputes.
existence, nature and the scope of the laws of Labuan are issues of fact to be
decided by this Court. The application of that
law, as ascertained, is for this
Court; and that is a matter about which evidence is not receivable:
Cross on Evidence
the defence case, a report was tendered which was prepared by Ms Datin
Jeyanthini Kannaperan whose considerable legal expertise
was not in dispute:
Exhibit D1. The defendant submitted that the report contained all the laws of
Labuan necessary to construe cl
defendant submitted at para [169] that, having regard to the questions Ms
Kannaperan was asked and the way she addressed her report,
it is apparent that
she intended to give a comprehensive summary of the applicable laws. The
problem with this submission is that
Ms Kannaperan was
asked to give
a comprehensive summary of the applicable laws. Ms Kannaperan was asked to
“prepare a report setting out your expert opinion in respect of the
Questions below,
by reference to
[laws of Labuan
(my underlining). The letter of instruction to Ms
Kannaperan sets out what she was asked to do, which is appended to the report,
Ex P1, Appendix B:
Opinion sought
We request that you prepare a report setting out your expert opinion in
respect of the Questions
below, by reference to the
Labuan, Malaysia
Loan Agreement
1. Without taking into account any later amendment of the Loan Agreement,
please provide your opinion as to whether clause 3(a) of
the Loan Agreement is
not enforceable and state your reasons in support of your conclusion.
2. If not already addressed in answer to Question 1, please consider if the
clause is void (unenforceable) due to uncertainty and
state your reasons in
support of your conclusion.
Amendment to the Loan Agreement
3. Is the document captioned “Amendment to this Loan Agreement”
effective to amend the Loan Agreement as set out in Article
4. If so, from what date is the amendment effective?
Agreement to delete clause 3(a)
5. Are the emails of 8 August 2014 between Krista van der Veen of Trustmoore
on behalf of the Black Prince and David Tong of CPA Partnership
on behalf of
Lengkap Ltd, of themselves, effective to delete or render inoperative clause
3(a) of the Loan Agreement from 6 August
can be immediately appreciated that the legal expert was asked to provide an
opinion of the
of the application
of the law of Labuan to
facts and circumstances raised by the defendant, in relation to the construction
of cl 3(a): the enforceability
of clause 3(a), whether it is void for
uncertainty, and the effectiveness of the amendment to the BPLA. The
prosecution objected
to those parts of the report which purported to give
evidence as to the application of the Labuan law and as a result the defendant
did not rely on the inadmissible opinion contained in the report, but relies on
that material as submissions.
is clear that Ms Kannaperan was not asked to provide ‘comprehensive’
evidence of what law was applicable to these questions.
She was asked to
provide her opinion on the answers to the questions
“by reference to
the laws of Labuan. The prosecution made submissions as to the cogency of
Ms Kannaperan’s report in light of what she was asked
to do and in light
of the content of her report.
The defence replied
“challenge”
to the cogency of the report
because it is apparent that Ms Kannaperan intended to give a
comprehensive summary of the applicable laws. I disagree for the reasons
above: the defendant did not ever ask Ms Kannaperan to give such a summary and
it is not apparent she intended to do so.
As a result, the prosecution
submissions as to cogency are properly made.
Kannaperan’s expert states that, as a commonwealth nation, the Malaysian
legal system is based on common law of England which
applies to all its federal
territories, including Labuan, as supplemented by legislation: Ex D1 para 3.1.2.
The report referred
Civil Law Act of Malaysia, s,3 which provided as
Application of U.K. common law, rules of equity and
(1) Save so far as other provision has been made or may
hereafter be made by any written law in force in Malaysia, the Court
in Peninsular Malaysia or any part thereof, apply the common law
of England and the rules of equity as administered in England on
the 7 April
Provided always that the said common law, rules of equity and statutes of
general application shall be applied so far only as the
circumstances of the
States of Malaysia and their respective inhabitants permit and subject to such
qualifications as local circumstances
render necessary.
to the application of the common law of England, Ms Kannaperan annexed the case
Labuan Ferry Corp Sdn Bhd v Chin Mui Kien
in which the
Court of Appeal (the penultimate appeal court in Malaysia) set out section 3(1)
of the Civil Law Act and held that:
mandatory to apply the common law and the rules of equity (of England) as
administered or in force on 7 April 1956 where no
provision ‘has been made
or may hereafter be made by any written law in force in Malaysia’ (at
- the intention
behind s 3(1) of the
Civil Law Act
is to allow the reception of the
common law of England only where there is no statutory provision that governs
the matter in dispute,
subject to such qualifications as local circumstances
render necessary (at [35]);
development of the common law in Malaysia after the 7 April 1956 is entirely in
the hands of the courts of Malaysia (at 36]).
Kannaperan said, at Ex D1 para 3.1.4 that because there is no other provision
made by any written law in force in Malaysia, the
common law, the rules of
equity and the
Contracts Act
1950 of Malaysia therefore apply to the
construction of clause 3(a). In this particular respect, Ms Kannaperan’s
can be accepted.
Kannaperan’s evidence is that prior to 7 April 1956 the common law and
rules of equity as decided by the UK courts was the
applicable law in Malaysia;
and thereafter, it is a matter for the courts applying the law of Labuan,
Malaysia to decide which aspects
of the common law and the rules of equity are
Civil Law Act
1956, s3(1).
this Court is applying the law of Labuan, Malaysia, it is therefore a matter for
this Court to determine which aspects of
the common law and the rules of equity
are to apply to the construction of cl 3(a). As to how that is done, guidance
is provided
by the Court of Appeal in
Labuan Ferry Corp
(above), where
the court firstly determined that the relevant English common law doctrine under
consideration in that case was part
of the common law or rules of equity as
administered or in force in England on 7 April 1956; then, as no other provision
made, the court held that, consistently with the
Civil Law Act
there was no reason why the English common law doctrine should not apply as part
of the common law of Malaysia.
Foreign Law: the defendant’s submissions that the
Contracts Act applies (relevant interest as UBO of Lengkap)
defendant submitted that BPLA is be construed in accordance with the
Contracts Act
of Malaysia, there being is no Labuan specific
legislation on contracts. The prosecution disputes that the
Contracts Act
1950 is engaged on the facts in this case. I have set out the
defendant’s submissions at paras [170]-[171]
21 of the Contracts Act (Tab 29 Pg 500 Appendix)
(sic – in Appendix D
each page has two different numbers)
provides that a mutual/common mistake
as to fact essential
to the agreement causes the agreement to be
22 of the Contracts Act (Tab 29 Pg 500 Appendix)
(sic – Appendix D)
provides that a contract is not voidable because it was caused by a mistake
as to any law in force in Malaysia, but that a mistake
as to a law not in force
in Malaysia applies as would a mistake of fact.
30 of the Contracts Act (Tab 29 Pg 501 Appendix)
(sic – Appendix D)
provides agreements, the meaning of which is not certain, or capable of
being made certain, are void.
32 of the Contracts Act (Tab 82 Pg 169 ) recognises that contracts to do or not
do something, if some event, collateral to
the contract, does or does not happen
is a contingent contract which s 33 of the Act provides need not be performed
until the condition
contracted for is satisfied.
may be permitted:
Heng Song Khoo & Anor v BJS Industries Berhad & Ors
(2020) 1 LNS 1838.
As identified in the Report, the
law to determine whether parties have made an enforceable agreement when
something appears to need
to be done in the future requires that parties be
shown to have agreed to accept pre-determined terms, have agreed on all
terms or have agreed to accept all terms as determined by one party,
as can be seen in the following cases:
(Tab 9 Issue Pg 131 Para d-f ,Ratio of FC Pg 133 Para d-e and
Conclusion, pg 134 Para d-e )
(Tab 10 Issue Pg 145 Para 2, Pg145 Para 3/Para 5, Ratio of FC Pg
155,Para 20 Pg 169 Para 47, Pg 170 Para 49 and Pg183, para 80 applying
Pg 160 and Pg 184/185 para 81 and 82)
: (Tab11 Issue Pg 195/196 Para 24,25 and 26 Ratio of FC Pg 194 para 22
and 23 and Pg 197/198 Para 27-31)
(Tab 12 Issue Pg 213 Para 26 , Pg 219 Para 30 and Ratio Pg 225 / 226 Para 34 and
35 - read pg 204 /205
for terms of LO
There is also authority for the
proposition that if the obligation is merely one agreeing to a future contract,
then in the absence
of evidence sufficient to determine what the putative terms
would have been, such obligation is insufficiently certain and therefore
enforceable:
: (Tab 15 Issue Pg 258 para d-e and Pg 259 para c-f and Ratio Pg
268 para b-f)
: (Tab 31 Issue Pg 520 para 24 Ratio Pg 522/523 para 29-32 and Pg
526 Para 45 )”
Foreign Law: issue - is clause 3(a) void for uncertainty?
(relevant interest as UBO of Lengkap)
defendant submitted that there were various ways in which it can be shown that
clause 3(a) of the BPLA was void and that it should
be severed from the
agreement and the issues on the hearing as if it never existed.
defendant submits that clause 3(a) does not impose any obligation on the Black
Prince, as the borrower, to enter into a specific
security deed or mortgage,
unless and until the terms of such a security deed or mortgage are agreed. It
is submitted that clause
3(a) on its own does not meet the level of certainty
required to create a legally enforceable obligation. It was
conclusion followed from the facts that:
is no common form of security deed in Malaysia (nor in Australia);
is no document annexed to the loan agreement to remove the need for future
negotiation / agreement on terms (such as timing,
or whether and how much notice
is required, or whether there would be a power of sale or whether the security
deed would be by way
of priority only);
is no clear express wording in the contract to suggest that Lengkap is vested
with the level of control to unilaterally decide
the remaining terms to be
negotiated. Clause 3(a) does not specify that the form and substance of the
security deed of mortgage is
to be determined by Lengkap in its absolute
discretion (contrary, for instance, to the clause extracted in
Investwell Pty
Ltd (in liq) v Roberts
[2011] NSWSC 1152
[2012] NSWCA 134
(2012) 88 ACSR 689
), as set out in the Closing Submissions for the Prosecution, para]
terms in the Loan Agreement which reference a right for the borrower to continue
to freely deal and sell the shares e.g. Clause
5(a) and 6(ii) without
restriction support the proposition that the 3(a) obligation does not crystalise
unless and until the security
deed or mortgage is negotiated;
mere fact that the amount and the securities the subject of the proposed
security deed or mortgage are apparent from the Loan
Agreement itself is not
sufficient.
reject the defendant’s submission in sub-para (d) above. The BPLA cl 5(a)
does not give Black Prince a right to freely deal
and sell the shares. It
simply provides a formula for distribution of proceeds of sale. Clause 6(ii)
merely provides a date by which
the borrower must repay the outstanding
defendant submitted
only is clause 3(a) unenforceable until a further contract is executed; but that
it is unenforceable until that time because
there is an expectation for
additional terms to be negotiated. The defendant relied on para 4.2.1(a) of the
expert report D1, and
the example cases at 4.2.1(b) relating to where
“the presumption of
“subject to contract” was displaced because an unsigned document to
be executed was actually
appended to the agreement in question, unlike here,
where there is no such guidance as to the terms of the contingent future
agreement.”
prosecution submitted that the following propositions are all in dispute:
clause 3(a) is a
“contingent contract”
within the meaning of
s 32 of the Contracts Act 1950
“to do or not to do something, if some
event, collateral to the contract, does or does not happen”
referred to by Ms Kannaperan at Ex D1 para 4.1.1;
cl 3(a) is a type of contract considered in
Masters v Cameron
[1954] HCA 72
as suggested by Ms Kannaperan at Ex D1 para 4.1.3(i).
cl 3(a) evinces an intention to be immediately bound, subject to a requirement
from the lender for a specific security deed or
mortgage to be entered into;
“the clause is in itself therefore unenforceable until
the further contract is executed”
(emphasis added) as suggested by Ms
Kannaperan at Ex D1 para 4.2.1;
cl 3(a) is void for uncertainty and, would therefore be severed from the BPLA by
any Malaysian court; and that the obligation
under cl 3(a) is subject to a
further contract to be negotiated by the parties as suggested by Ms Kannaperan
at Ex D1 para 4.2.1(c),
4.2.5 and 7.1(a); and
cl 3(a) suffers from an instance of common mistake, which further opens the
clause to being void as suggested by Ms Kannaperan
at Ex D1 para
prosecution submitted further that cl 3(a) of the BPLA is not a
“contingent contract”
within the meaning of s 32 of the
Contracts Act
1950. This is because the obligation to
into a specific security deed or mortgage over the Shares”
“collateral”
to the contract: it arises under the Contract.
Foreign Law: consideration of whether cl 3(a) is void for
uncertainty (relevant interest as UBO of Lengkap)
central part of the dispute between the parties is that part of the expert
report dealing with the case of
Masters v Cameron
[1954] HCA 72
(1954) 91 CLR 353
(incorrectly described by Ms Kannaperan as an
decision), para 4.2.1, where she wrote, by way of
submission:
4.2.1 In consonance with the above and the Federal Court
decision in
Deutsche Bank
, it is my opinion that clause 3 (a) of the Loan
Agreement is indicative of the third or fourth category of cases recognised in
where parties intend to be bound as in the first and second category
of cases, but there is a requirement from the Lender for a specific
deed or mortgage to be entered over the Shares (implying the expectation for
additional terms to be negotiated upon a further
contract to document the
intended security) the clause is in itself therefore unenforceable until the
further contract is executed.
In this regard I have also taken into
consideration that:
(a) in Malaysia there is no one common form for a specific security deed or
mortgage over shares. Instead, security interests taken
over shares may be taken
in a variety of forms including a mortgage over shares, share charge, a deposit
over shares, or a share
pledge. For present purposes the remainder of this
opinion will refer to such instruments as 'securities over shares'.
follows is a brief analysis of the main cases in respect of which Ms Kannaperan
gave evidence, relevant to her submission about
Masters v Cameron
632 (Ex D1 p 219 / p 132) is a land transaction case holding that an
exchange of letters (“subject to execution of the
) amounted to a contract for the sale of land. The
Federal Court (the apex court in Malaysia)
cited with approval
‘correct test’ in
Von Hatzfeldt-Wildenburg v. Alexander
[1911] UKLawRpCh 90
[1912] 1 Ch. 284
at pp. 288, 289
“...it is a question of
construction whether the execution of the further contract is a condition or
term of the bargain or
whether it is a mere expression of the desire of the
parties as to the manner in which the transaction already agreed to will in
go through. In the former case there is no enforceable contract either because
the condition is unfulfilled or because the law
does not recognize a contract to
enter into a contract. In the latter case there is a binding contract and
reference to the more
formal document may be ignored.
Charles Grenier
the head note accurately reflects the reasons of the
Court (Ex D1 p. 125/212/626 of the report):
[4] In the instant
appeal, the correspondence between the parties did not evince that they intended
no concluded contract until a
formal sale and purchase agreement had been
executed by them. The phrase “subject to the sale and purchase
did not point to an intention that no contract was to come into
existence until a formal sale and purchase agreement had been prepared
executed. Rather, the phrase was indicative of an intention to merely formalise
the agreement already concluded between the parties.
[5] The parties to the transaction, the property, the price, and the
essential terms have all been identified with sufficient clarity.
agreement is commonly termed as an ‘open contract.’ It is
enforceable as if it was embodied in a document with
all the attendant
solemnity. And in order to give it effect, the law will, acting out of
necessity, imply terms into the contract
for sale in order to make it work.
remind myself that the quote, above, effectively encapsulates the dispute here:
the defence asserts that this case involves the
proposition in [4], whereas the
prosecution submits that it involves the proposition in [5].
involved parties who were
as to terms of an advisory
services agreement but only one party had signed a mandate letter which referred
in turn to the need to
negotiate a subscription agreement. The issue was whether
the parties intended to create legal relations when agreeing the contents
mandate letter (they did not).
concerned a dispute whether a letter amounted to an agreement to manage
all the billboards in the city of Petaling Jaya for a particular
Court ruled that it did not, because it left out important terms and conditions.
concerned whether a letter of offer relating to an architect’s
consultancy agreement - said to be ‘subject to contract’
a concluded agreement (it was not).
Mah Theatre Sdn Bhd v Tan Lay Soon
[1994] 1 MLJ 108
was a land transaction
case about whether a letter relating to the sale of land amounted to a contract
where it contemplated a sale
and purchase agreement still to be signed. The
Court held there was no contract at all, dealing with the case
“one of those frequent transactions in which parties
have negotiated with each other and where one party alleges they have reached
definite binding agreement while the other alleges to the contrary, viz that
they were still negotiating with each other”
Chin Kok v Jasmin Arunthuthu Allegakoen & Ors
[2000] 4 MLJ 481
another land transaction case where a party put up properties for sale through
an estate agent who wrote a letter of offer ‘without
prejudice and subject
to contract’. The letter of acceptance did not meet the terms of the
offer and the property sold to
a higher bidder. The Court held that the parties
were still in a state of negotiation. The Supreme Court referred to the Federal
Court’s decision in
Charles Grenier
to the effect that each case
must turn on its own facts, but on these facts, there was no concluded contract.
The Supreme Court distinguished
Charles Grenier
on the facts and in so
doing cited the description of an ‘open contract’ from the land law
text Cheshire’s
The Modern Law of Real Property
10th Ed. at 336.
The Supreme Court also referred to
Charles Grenier
at 335 where the
Federal court held that:
Court leans in favour of upholding bargains and not striking them down
willy-nilly, referring to
Hillas & Co v Arcos
the duty of the court to construe business documents fairly and broadly without
being too astute or subtle in finding defects;
court will attempt to clarify rather than confuse, especially where contractual
intention is clear but the contract is silent
on some detail (citing
Australian Broadcasting Commission v Australian Performing Right Association
[1973] HCA 36
(1973) 129 CLR 99).
concerned a tenant who exercised an option and argued that it
amounted to a concluded tenancy agreement for a further period “at
to be agreed”, but the Court ruled that there was no contractual mechanism
or formula to determine the rent in the absence
of agreement.
v Peri Formwork
was a case decided on its own facts. The Court referred
(above) and to the issue of incomplete agreements. The
court held that terms of the supplementary agreement were such that it was
impossible to discern or ascertain the meaning of those terms and thereby give
effect to the intention of the parties.
Foreign Law: determination that cl 3(a) is not void for
uncertainty (relevant interest as UBO of Lengkap)
of the cases evidenced in Ex D1 referred to above, in support of the
defendant’s submission that clause 3(a) was void for
uncertainty,
concerned terms within concluded contracts: the issue in each one was whether an
agreement had ever been reached. That
is not the issue this Court is dealing
with. The defendant does not dispute that the BPLA is a concluded and binding
but she disputes whether cl 3(a) is operative. None of the
defendant’s cases concerned whether a term similar to clause 3(a)
Kannaperan’s evidence referred to the cases applying the principles in
Masters v Cameron
[1954] HCA 72
(1954) 91 CLR 353.
The defendant submits that the
point of these cases is that clause 3(a) is unenforceable until a further
contract is executed because
there is an expectation for “additional terms
to be negotiated”. That submission does not find any expression in the
terms of the BPLA. The defendant submits that clause 3(a) speaks of a
“specific security deed or a mortgage” and that
it is not capable of
being known what rights might arise if and when the parties got around to
negotiating the terms. On a fair
reading of cl 3(a), it is not analogous to any
of the scenarios in the cases referred to in Ex D1 and cannot reasonably be
interpreted
in the way submitted by the defendant. Clause 3(a) is not an
agreement to agree. I it should not be construed as a clause which
further contract to be negotiated by the parties. Such an interpretation would
be inconsistent with the clear terms and
natural meaning of the words of the
clause. The practical effect of the clause as contended by the defendant would
lead to an entirely
uncommercial result. If Lengkap thought that it needed to
secure its debt by a mortgage, it could not do so until and unless Black
agreed with the terms of the mortgage. That seemed to be a commercially absurd
proposition and certainly not one that I would
accept as an interpretation
reasonably open on any view of the facts.
accept the prosecution submissions on this topic. The first prosecution
submission is that cl 3(a) is not a
‘contingent contract’
within the meaning of s 32 of the
Contracts Act
1950, on the basis that
the obligation to
“enter into a specific security deed or mortgage over
the Shares”
“some event, collateral to the
. The example in the note to s 32 in the Contracts Act 1950
contracts to pay
RM10,000 if
house is burnt. This is a contingent contract.”
use of the expression
“event, collateral to the contract”
s32 refers to something contemplated by the contract. For the purposes of
considering whether this provision applies to clause
for the purposes of the
Contracts Act 1950
is the request for security - which both parties
agreed to. The
of Lengkap making a request for Black Prince to
execute a mortgage security cannot be equated with B’s house burning,
whether and in what circumstances the house in the example actually
burns is not the subject of terms granting any right to burn
the house nor any
term imposing any obligation to suffer the house being burnt. By contrast,
clause 3(a) expressly records the agreement
for Lengkap to request security and
for Black Prince to provide it. That arises under the contract. The event
contemplated by clause
3(a) is not
‘collateral’
accept the second submission made by the prosecution on this point, to the
effect that the principles in
Masters v Cameron
are not applicable to
clause 3(a). The BPLA makes it clear that all its terms were intended to be
immediately binding, having regard
to the clauses referred to by the
prosecution: cl 10.1 (entire agreement clause), 10.2 (paramountcy of document),
10.5 (further assurances)
and 10.7 (governing law and jurisdiction). Clause
3(a) is not to be equated with the factual scenarios in the cases referred to
Ms Kannaperan in Ex D1 which relate to the question of whether something less
than a concluded agreement ought to be regarded
as immediately binding or
whether the parties were still negotiating, for example.
accept the prosecution submissions relating to the cases to which it referred,
showing that the common law will uphold clauses such
as cl 3(a), with the
question being not whether such a clause is enforceable, but that a mortgage or
charge arises upon a request
being made. The prosecution submitted that the
cases are to the effect that in relation to clause 3(a), no immediate security
is conferred; but a request is required for a security interest to come
into existence, which amounts to an enforceable contract.
It was submitted that
as such, clause 3(a) represented a means by which the defendant had power to
dispose of, or control the exercise
of a power to dispose of, the securities.
[1862] EngR 933
(1862) 31 Beav 423
, concerned a promise to execute,
whenever required, a legal mortgage over an interest in a leasehold estate to
secure a debt. The
promise was effective. Sir John Romilly MR stated (at 424;
“I am of opinion that this is a perfectly good
mortgage. The intestate had no deeds to deposit, and he gave the best security
he could by giving a memorandum in writing by which he promised the solicitors
of his creditors to execute a legal mortgage. Well
that is an equitable
Dighton v Withers
are analogous to the facts in this case as
they relate to clause 3(a). The approach in
Dighton v Withers
application here.
v Burlington Investments Ltd
(1977) 121 SJ 424 is a case where the House of
Lords dealt with an agreement where, upon request by a vendor, a
developer/purchaser
would enter into a legal charge over the subject land to
secure any monies due and payable by the developer/purchaser to the vendor.
Russell (writing for the House of Lords) stated:
special conditions amounted to a contract by the developer entitled to have the
fee simple of the land conveyed to him
to create, in a particular event, a legal
charge in so much of the land as should remain in his ownership at the
occurrence of that
event. The conduct did not, even on completion of the sale,
constitute a charge requiring registration...It was not so expressed
create a present equitable right to a security; it was merely an agreement that
in some future circumstances a security should
in the future be created....When
legal charge was executed, it was not because such
an equitable charge compelled it but because the 1971 contract required
Kilmartin v Monk
[2005] NZHC
the High Court of New
Zealand stated (emphasis added):
“An equitable mortgage of
land confers on the mortgagee an equitable interest that will support a caveat.
An equitable mortgage
may be created by an agreement to mortgage
security agreement in which the debtor merely agrees to grant a mortgage if
requested to do so by the creditor will not by itself
create an equitable
mortgage. In order for an equitable mortgage to come into existence, an
effective request to grant a mortgage
over the property must be made by the
: Philpott v NZI Bank Ltd
[1989] NZCA 155
(1989) 1 NZ Conv C 190,246 (CA).
(my emphasis)
Pty Ltd (in liq) v Roberts
[2011] NSWSC 1152
concerned whether a payment by
an allegedly insolvent company to the defendant was payment of an unsecured
debt, having regard to
cl 21 of the agreement, which the defendant said
conferred security upon him for its payment, in the following terms:
The parties agree that if requested by Roberts at any time
Investwell must at its own expense immediately grant to Roberts a mortgage
the Land, an equitable mortgage or charge over Investwell's assets and
undertakings, and/or such other security as Roberts may
consider necessary. Any
such securities must be in a form acceptable to Roberts' legal advisers.
relation to
, the prosecution written submission stated:
[128] There was no suggestion that such a clause was unenforceable
or void for uncertainty. Instead, the question was whether, properly
that clause gave rise to a security interest absent a request being made (so as
to make the creditor a secured creditor).
In determining the arguability of this
question for appeal, Hammerschlag J conducted an extensive review of authorities
across England (
Dighton v Withers
), New Zealand (
Kilmartin v
Philpott v NZI Bank Ltd
), Canada (
Canadian Imperial Bank
of Commerce v Rehnby
(1992) 22 RPC (2d) 93) and Australia: see at [37]-[52].
His Honour also referred to leading common law textbooks on this area. Thus,
learned authors of
Fisher & Lightwood’s Law of Mortgage
ed Australian edition, 2014) p 108 [3.45] state:
“It is not an infrequent occurrence for banks to include a clause in
a loan agreement that the borrower will execute a mortgage
requested’. This will ordinarily be sufficient to create an equitable
mortgage...However the mortgage will only
come into being on the request for it
being made.”
[129] The same view is expressed by Professor Gullifer in editing the
leading English textbook,
Goode on Legal Problems of Credit and Security
ed, 2011) p 76 [2.15]:
“An agreement to give security on any other contingency, whether the
contingency be a demand by the creditor to do so, default
by the debtor or the
occurrence of some other uncertain event, is a mere contract, not an equitable
Hammerschlag
J’s analysis of this area of the law in
criticised on appeal.
content to take the view that cl 3(a) should be interpreted as a valid and
enforceable stipulation whereby the borrower will,
on request, execute a
mortgage over certain property to secure the monies advanced. There is no issue
as to the enforceability of
the clause. No immediate security interest is
conferred; but a request is required for a security interest to come into
but once a request is made, an equitable mortgage will come into
reject the defendant’s submission that is void for uncertainty as
submitted in the Closing Submissions for the Defence paras
[173]-[180].
Lengkap could ‘control’ Black Prince through clause
prosecution submissions accept, at [130]-[131] that no security interest arises
until such a request is made; but the prosecution
submitted that the agreement
to provide security on request is enforceable even so. Applying the common law
and rules of equity,
having regard to the reasons in
that that cl 3(a) was enforceable as an equitable mortgage over Black
Prince’s shares in BAL, which would come into
existence upon an effective
request being made by Lengkap.
remaining issue is what relevant rights and interests arose prior to any request
being made, for the purposes of the requirement
in s671B that the prosecution
must prove that the defendant had a substantial holding in Black Prince’s
shareholding in BAL,
through the her relevant interest in Lengkap and via
Lengkap’s relevant interest in Black Prince through clause 3(a).
if the above approach is wrong, the prosecution submits that it does not matter
(see Transcript p363):
Your Honour is
determining whether, by the agreement that was in place by its terms, there is a
relevant interest arising because
it provides for a power or the control of the
exercise of the power to dispose of the securities, Lengkap has that power via
and it doesn’t matter how remote, and it doesn’t matter if
it’s unenforceable, and it doesn’t matter if it’s
on some other thing that might be done according to the clause 3(a). So for
example, a request.
accept the prosecution submission that even if the power in cl 3(a) was
unenforceable, it still represented a true measure of control
because the
parties to the agreement would act in accordance with, rather than contrary to,
the terms of the agreement. The evidence
is that on 23 June 2014 in the
negotiation of the BPLA, Black Prince was informed by Lengkap that Lengkap
required adequate security,
in the form of shares in Bellamy’s Australia
with a value of at least AUD 14 million or such unpaid amount at all times until
full payment. Lengkap required
“a lien over the said shares to secure
3(a) is consistent with Ms van de Veen’s email of 23 June 2014. I accept
that the parties would act in accordance
with clause 3(a).
the parties would act in accordance with clause 3(a) is supported by the fact
that the only matter giving rise the amendment
of cl 3(a) was a lawyer bringing
Black Prince’s
attention that it should be amended to avoid
Lengkap being disclosed as a substantial shareholder. Otherwise, I would take
the approach
that the security objective of clause 3(1) was one which the
parties would act in accordance with. I find that even if the clause
was unenforceable or void, that did not negative control for the purposes of
considering questions under s 671B of the Act.
also accept the prosecution submission that it is not necessary to determine the
legality of cl 3(a) as if determining those issues
as between Lengkap and Black
Prince. It is necessary only to determine whether clause 3(a) may be regarded
as a means by with the
defendant had power to dispose of, or control the
exercise of a power to dispose of, Black Prince’s shares in BAL. That
is to be analysed in light of s 608(1), which provides that it does not
matter how remote the relevant interest is or how it arises.
Section 608 also
provides that power or control can be indirect, exercised through an agreement
– whether the power or control
is enforceable or not – whether
subject to restraint or whether express, implied, formal or informal.
I find beyond reasonable doubt that clause 3(a) was a means by
which the defendant had power to dispose of, or control the exercise
to dispose of Black Prince’s shares in BAL. I am satisfied that the
parties would have acted in accordance with
that agreement, had clause 3(a) not
conflicted with the overriding objective of the entire undertaking, being the
defendant holding
14 million shares in BAL privately and confidentially. It was
only at that point that the security clause was deleted.
Foreign Law: Issue – is clause 3(a) void due to common
mistake (relevant interest as UBO of Lengkap)
next submission by the defendant in relation to clause 3(a) is set out at paras
[181]-[187] of the Closing Submissions for the
Defence. Clause 3(a) is void
because of a “common mistake” as to a fact, being the application of
a foreign law (
foreign from a Malaysian perspective), being s 22 of
the Contracts Act. The defendant submits the mistake is either:
clause 3(a), properly construed under Labuan Law, did not have an effect or
operation under Australian law to vest control in
the lender for the purposes of
clause 3(a) properly construed under Labuan Law, did not give rise under
Australian Law to a reporting/disclosure requirement.
the reasons that follow I am satisfied that clause 3(a) is not void for the
reason contended by the defendant. The email chain
of 5-6 August 2014 (relating
to the deletion of clause 3(a)) does not support the suggestion of common
that Lengkap and Black Prince were mistaken - that
neither of them considered clause 3(a) being “tantamount to
nor did they consider that clause 3(a) gave rise to a relevant
interest. I am satisfied that the change of position as to clause
3(a) was done
to avoid the reporting requirement.
defendant submits that cl 3(a) is void because of a ‘common mistake’
as to a fact essential to the agreement, being
the operation of an Australian
law. It was submitted that the mistake in this case is as to the operation of
cl 3(a) as it affects
Corporations Act 2001
, being a mistake as to
foreign law, which under Malaysian law is a mistake of
It was submitted that
the mistake was either:
cl 3(a) properly construed under Labuan Law, did not have an effect or operation
under Australian law to vest control in the
lender for the purposes of
cl 3(a) properly construed under Labuan Law, did not give rise under Australian
Law to a reporting/disclosure
requirement.
defendant submitted
mistake as to the operation of an Australian Law was a mistake of fact and not a
mistake of law, as it did not relate to the
law of the agreement and therefore
the clause was void: see Contracts Act s 22, below.
defendant referred to certain Malaysian statutes supporting her submissions:
- the Contracts
Act 1950, s 21 which provides that:
21. Where both
parties to an agreement are under a mistake as to a matter of fact essential to
the agreement, the agreement is void.
- the Contracts
Act 1950, s 22 which provides that:
22. A contract is not voidable
because it was caused by a mistake as to any law in force in Malaysia; but a
mistake as to a law not
in force in Malaysia has the same effect as a mistake of
- the Specific
Relief Act 1950, s30 which provides that:
When instrument may be
30. When, through fraud or a mutual mistake of the parties, a contract or
other instrument in writing does not truly express their
intention, either
party, or his representative in interest, may institute a suit to have the
instrument rectified: and if the court
find it clearly proved that there has
been fraud or mistake in framing the instrument, and ascertain the real
intention of the parties
in executing the same, the court may in its discretion
rectify the instrument so as to express that intention, so far as this can
done without prejudice to rights acquired by third persons in good faith and for
Contracts Act
s 20 deals with the state of mind of the parties to the
The defendant
submitted that the evidence of the mistaken states of the minds of Lengkap and
Black Prince consists of an exchange
of four emails at Ex. P2, pages 573-576.
first email relied upon by the defendant was from Ms van der Veen (from
Trustmoore, on behalf of Black Prince) to Mr Tong (for
Lengkap) dated August 5,
2014 5:04 PM.
She stated:
We were contacted by the stock broker to enter a form for the
registration of substantial shareholder, which the Black Prince is.
lawyer to help us with the registration form and he mentioned that Lengkap might
want to amend article 3.a. of the loan
agreement in order to avoid filing
Lengkap at the Australian Stock Exchange as a substantial shareholder.
(clause 3(a) is set out)
This article implies that Lengkap has "direct or indirect, conditional or
unconditional power to control or restrict the disposal
of the shares" and
therefore should be seen as a substantial shareholder and hence should file at
I believe that this was never the intention of Lengkap, so I recommend
amending the agreement. I understand that you need to talk
to your4 people as
well about this. Please bear in mind that officially all substantial
shareholders should have filed their interest
in Bellamy's before the close of
business on Thursday. I will give you a call tomorrow to further
the second email, on the same day at 11:26 PM Mr Tong
I have consulted the lawyers and advisors. We will be agreeable to amend
the relevant page of the agreement and are awaiting for the
lawyers to propose
the text of the proposed amendment.
the third email, on August 6, 2014 at 10:50 AM, Ms van der Veen
I just spoke to Jon...He just spoke to Don and it was
his understanding that Lengkap will agree to delete clause 3(a) from the loan
agreement. Can you please confirm per email that this is correct? We can then
make the final adjustments when you are back in Singapore.
the fourth email, on Wednesday, 6 August 2014 at 10:55 AM
agree to have Article 3 deleted
Lee v Stable-Win
authority for the proposition that in Malaysia, as far as a mistake of fact is
concerned, Malaysian courts will follow the common
law principles set out in
Sheikh Bros Ltd v Ochsner
[1957] AC 136
M Pakiam v. YP
Devathanjam
[1952] 1 LNS 60
[1952] MLJ 58 (CA).
Pakiam v Devathanjam
was not included in the defendant’s materials, but
Sheikh Bros
is readily accessible.
Soon Lee v Stable-Win
relevant principles at paras [14]-[17].
was submitted that
authority for the proposition that in Malaysia, as far as a mistake of fact is
concerned, Malaysian courts will follow the common
law principles set out in
Sheikh Bros Ltd v Ochsner
[1957] AC 136 (PC)
M Pakiam v. YP
Devathanjam
[1952] 1 LNS 60
[1952] MLJ 58 (CA).
Pakiam v Devathanjam
was not included in the defendant’s materials, but
Sheikh Bros
is readily accessible.
Soon Lee v Stable-Win
relevant principles at paras [14]-[17]. The question is whether the mistake, if
there is one, is “essential to the agreement”.
Usually, such
mistake goes to the non-existence of the subject matter of the contract (at
Soon Lee v Stable-Win
at [15], the Court of Appeal approved a
Understanding Contract Law
, 6 Ed. Khoury and Yamouni 2007 at
“The courts will not render a contract void on the
ground of common mistake unless the common mistake involves a matter which
fundamental to the contract that both parties regard it as a condition precedent
to the existence of binding contract. Whether
a common mistake is of that nature
will, of course, depend upon the facts of the case. However, decided cases,
suggest that to be
fundamental, the common mistake must either:
- Relate to the very existence of the subject matter of the contract,
- Involve the sale of property to a person who already owns it.
By way of contrast, a common mistake as to the quality, nature or value of
the subject matter is not sufficient.”
Sheikh Bros v Ochsner & Anor
[1957] AC 136
the Judicial Committee of
the Privy Council applied what Lord Atkin said in
Bell v Lever Bros
[1931] UKHL 2
[1932] AC 161:
that a mistake
“will not affect assent unless it is the
mistake of both parties, and is as to the existence of some quality which makes
thing without the quality essentially different from the thing as it was
believed to be.”
prosecution submitted
the emails do not support a finding that the parties are mistaken about any
matter of fact essential to the BPLA; nor that the
parties made a common mistake
as to the terms of the contract. It was submitted that what the parties were
mistaken about, if anything,
is that having concluded their agreement, there was
a requirement under the Australian law to disclose that Lengkap had a relevant
interest in Black Prince’s 14m shares in BAL.
my view, there is insufficient evidence to satisfy the Court that the
‘very basis’
the loan agreement was either (as submitted by the defendant):
cl 3(a) properly construed under Labuan Law, did not have an effect or operation
under Australian law to vest control in the
lender for the purposes of s.608;
cl 3(a) properly construed under Labuan Law, did not give rise under Australian
Law to a reporting/disclosure
requirement.
accept the prosecution submission that the BPLA did not pertain to whether there
should be any disclosure to the ASX or not; that
was merely a peripheral issue
which arose as a result of the concluded agreement, which the parties then
sought to avoid by the amendment.
find that even if I am wrong about that and that the evidence does support that
Black Prince and Lengkap were mistaken, I am unable
to accept that it is
reasonably possible that the mistake was essential to the subject matter of the
loan agreement.
is no direct or documentary evidence from either Black Prince or from Lengkap in
relation to their corporate states of mind
at the date of the BPLA for the
purposes of s20 of the Contracts Act 1950. That weakens the defendant’s
submission. Nor do
the emails of August 5-6 provide cogent support for that
position. In my view, the defendant seeks to convert the ex post facto
between Lengkap and Black Prince about amending the loan agreement so as to
avoid an unintended outcome, as reflecting the
intentions of the parties at the
time they entered the agreement.
find that the following circumstances justify the rejection of the
defendant’s submission as to common mistake. Immediately
prior to the
agreement, Trustmoore’s email to Mr Adgemis of 23 June 2014 informed him
that Lengkap required adequate,
“real and identifiable”
“in the form of shares in Bellamy’s which must have
a value of at least AUD14 million...”
. That provides no support for
the possibility that there was a common mistake. Trustmoore’s email does
not say that Black
Prince was under any mistaken belief. There is merit in the
prosecution submission that there is no evidence from which it could
reasonably inferred that Black Prince was acting under the same (common) mistake
as Lengkap (if there was one) unless, as the
prosecution submits, the same mind
was behind both Lengkap and Black Prince. The prosecution submitted that the
real reason behind
the deletion of clause 3(a) was not mistake, but – as
Mr Adgemis said in his evidence -
“Lengkap did not want to be
do not accept the submission that clause 3(a) is void because of a “common
mistake” as to a fact, being the application
of a foreign law (
foreign from a Malaysian perspective) –s.22 Contracts Act. This is
not a submission which supports a reasonable doubt as to
whether clause 3(a)
amounts to a relevant interest as discussed, above.
I indicated, above, I am satisfied that the evidence is capable of supporting a
finding that Lengkap’s power under cl.3(a),
to request a mortgage amounts
to a ‘relevant interest’ for the purposes of s608(1)(c) unless
3 was void ab initio for the purposes of section 671B, by virtue of the
amendment to the BPLA which deleted it; or
3 is void by virtue of the defendant’s submissions relating to the law of
Malaysia are upheld,
of those defence submissions can succeed. Under the BPLA as at 5 August 2014 -
Lengkap could contractually request Black Prince
to execute a mortgage over its
shareholding in BAL to secure the loan amount: see clause 3(a). That power gave
Lengkap the
“power to dispose of, or control the exercise of a power to
dispose of, the securities”
for the purposes of s 608(1)(c). Upon
request being made, Lengkap could seek to enforce the execution of a mortgage,
which was a
‘relevant agreement’
falling within the scope of
s 608(2). Thereafter, Lengkap could exercise a power of sale if that power was
enlivened (i.e. upon repayment
default by Black Prince). The fact that such a
power would be subject to restraint or restriction (i.e. repayment default by
Prince) does not negative that conclusion: s 608(2)(c). I am satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that Lengkap’s power under
clause 3(a) amounts to
a relevant interest.
Defendant’s awareness of clause 3(a)
next defence submission in sequence is that even if (which she did not accept)
clause 3(a) is enforceable and leads to the consequences
asserted by the
prosecution, there is no sufficient evidence for the Court to conclude that she
was aware of “the necessary
details” from which such a relevant
interest arose. As stated earlier, there are no fault elements to charge 1, but
required that circumstances existed which engaged the defendant’s
obligation to provide the information.
have found, above, established beyond reasonable doubt:
defendant expressed and acted on a desire to participate privately and
confidentially in the BAL IPO and the following steps were
taken in furtherance
of that desire;
was set up at the defendant’s request;
loaned money to Lengkap;
defendant was aware that the loan was being made from Lengkap to Black Prince.
She had been provided a draft of the BPLA and it
was anticipated that the
purpose of the BPLA was the purchase of 14 million shares in BAL for $14m;
controlled by the defendant, expressed a desire for security over the shares to
secure the loan to Black Prince;
3(a) of the BPLA provided (or purported to provide) security over the shares to
secure the loan to Black Prince;
funds in relation to the above loans came originally from the sale of the
defendant’s shares in BAL (or Tas Pure Foods as
it then was) which were
then, in part, transferred through to Lengkap and then to BAL’s agent -
Pacific Custodians (authorised
by the defendant) to the credit of Black Prince
on 26 June 2014;
Prince was introduced to the defendant for the purpose of enabling her to pursue
the private and confidential interest in BAL
that she wished to acquire in the
defendant was aware of each of those arrangements and she was aware that her
money, which she approved at each stage, flowed from
Bicheno to Lengkap, and
then Lengkap to Black Prince.
prosecution submitted that the evidence proved beyond reasonable doubt
defendant was aware of each of those circumstances; and
those circumstances supported a finding that she had a relevant interest in
Black Prince’s BAL shares for the purposes
of s671B(1), upon BAL being
registered;
it was incumbent upon the defendant to give the information about those
circumstances to the company and the relevant market
addition, I infer that the defendant knew of the existence of the BPLA . An its
an executed copy of it was sent to her email address
on 24 June 2014 at 7:50 PM.
Prior to its execution, was drafted to reflect adequate security for the loan
amount to be provided by
Lengkap. I am satisfied that clause 3(a) had that
purpose. Lengkap was a manifestation of the defendant and nobody else. I am
beyond reasonable doubt that the defendant was aware of the BPLA and
that it provided security for Lengkap (as a vehicle through
which she provided
the money for the purchase of the shares) via control over those shares. It is
not necessary for the prosecution
to prove that the defendant actually knew the
precise way in which the BPLA did that.
circumstances permit the inference to be drawn that the defendant was not only
provided with sufficient information about the
key events, but also that the key
events as set out above occurred with the defendant’s instructions and/or
approval. The
purpose of the key events was that the defendant could
participate in the BAL IPO privately and confidentially after she had sold
shares prior to the IPO. The means by which that was to be done was that Black
Prince would be the registered holder of the
shares and that the defendant would
have sufficient control over those shares by the security clause in the BLPA.
At the last stages
prior to the acquisition of the shares, the defendant herself
authorised the release of funds to BAL’s agent Pacific Custodians.
view the combination of all these circumstances exclude any reasonable
hypothesis other than that the defendant knew that
all the relevant details of
the relevant interest or agreement in voting shares in the company, including
that there was a loan agreement.
I am not satisfied that the defendant needed
to know how the terms of the loan agreement operated legally.
stated above, the defendant will not be criminally liable if (a) she considered
whether or not relevant facts existed, and that
she was under a mistaken but
reasonable belief about those relevant facts; and b) had those facts existed,
her conduct would not
have constituted an offence:
s.9.2. There is
no evidence before the Court form which it could be inferred that the defendant
considered whether or not any particular
facts existed, nor that she was under a
mistaken but reasonable belief about those facts, for the purposes of any
physical element
of charge 1. Therefore no question arises as to whether, had
those facts existed, the defendant’s conduct would not have constituted
Foreign Law: amendment of the Black Prince Loan Agreement
(‘relevant interest’ as UBO of Lengkap)
defendant submits that the exchange of the 4 emails referred to, above:
- amounted to an
in-principle agreement between the parties on 5
August 2014;
- amounted to a
certain agreement from 6 August 2014;
- effectively
deleted cl 3(a) effective 25 June 2014; and
- complied with
the requirement that any amendment of agreement be in writing signed by all
stated above, I find that it is not open to individuals, via a private
agreement, to alter, after the fact, the circumstances that
prevailed on a
specified date, for the purposes of considering the application of an Australian
criminal offence provision. I accept
the prosecution submissions in this
regard. The exercise for this Court is the common exercise of determining
whether, on the date
of certain events, there is proof beyond reasonable doubt
of the physical elements of the offence by relating them to the facts as
actually existed; not as purportedly altered subsequently.
find that Mr Tong’s agreement to cl 3(a) being deleted was not effective
until 6 August 2014, given the terms of the emails
– particularly where Mr
Tong stated
“I agree to have Article 3 deleted”
at 10:55 on
that day. I find that the email exchanges complied with the formal requirements
set out by Ms Kannaperan at 35-38 of
her report relating to the
Commerce Act 2006
(Malaysia).
there might be some evidence
Black Prince
thought that Lengkap never
intended that clause3(a) would imply that Lengkap had ‘direct or indirect,
conditional or unconditional
power to control or restrict disposal of the
the only other
evidence relevant to mistake is that Mr Tong agreed to delete cl3(a). I am not
satisfied that the defendant has discharged
any evidentiary burden sufficient to
raise a doubt whether the prosecution case excludes an honest and reasonable
mistake on this
matter. Under ss 13.3 and 13.4 of the
defendant bears both an evidential burden and a legal burden in respect of any
factual matter relevant to the question of mistake.
The defendant’s
burden is to point to evidence adduced (even if by the prosecution) which is
sufficient to discharge the burden.
She has not done so.
Finding that Lengkap had a ‘relevant interest’ in
Black Prince’s BAL shares via the first avenue of control
the circumstances of the findings I have made, above, I am satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that the defendant controlled Lengkap
through the CNA and in
her own right as the ultimate beneficial owner of Lengkap. I am also satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that
through the mechanism of the BPLA clause 3(a),
Lengkap had the power to dispose of, or control the exercise of a power to
of, Black Prince’s BAL shares through the BPLA clause 3(a). I am
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the terms of the BPLA
permitted the
defendant to exercise, or control the exercise, of Black Prince’s power to
dispose of its BAL shares by requiring
it to execute a mortgage, which would
prevent it from the shares without Lengkap’s approval.
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the defendant had a relevant interest
in Black Prince’s shares in BAL for the purposes
of s608(1)(c).
Second avenue of a ‘relevant interest’ – the
defendant as Founder of Black Prince
second avenue by which the prosecution seeks to prove that the defendant had a
relevant interest in Black Prince’s shares
relies on three
propositions:
defendant’s control of Bicheno;
control of Lengkap;
being the Founder of Black Prince.
relation to the first two propositions:
not disputed that the defendant controlled Bicheno; and
have already made a finding beyond reasonable doubt that Bicheno controlled
relation to the third proposition, the prosecution submits that the evidence
proves that:
was perceived, at least by Black Prince or Trustmoore, to be Black
Prince’s Founder at the time Black Prince acquired
14,000,000 shares in
(and probably the defendant’s lawyers Mr Peters and Mr Pearson) considered
Lengkap to be the ultimate beneficial
owner of Black Prince, because of
Lengkap’s interest in the sale proceeds of the BAL shares (
UBO is a person who will in the end profit from the benefits of the Private
Foundation...”
set out above, on 17 January 2017, in its ‘Disclosure Statement’
responding to BAL’s direction under s672A,
Black Prince disclosed that in
June 2014, Lengkap
its founder and that it purchased the shares in
as a result of Lengkap’s wish
that Black Prince:
the shares; and
into a related funding agreement to finance the acquisition of the shares.
30 January 2017, Black Prince’s lawyers confirmed that situation, which
supports the accuracy and reliability of the statement
that Black Prince acted
as if Lengkap was the founder in relation to the acquisition of the shares in
June 2014. I have said more
Prince’s Disclosure’
, above. I accept, however, that there is
some evidence to the contrary:
2012 Mr Adgemis was appointed as founder, by the Deed of Appointment of Founder
June 2014, Trustmoore was dealing with Mr Adgemis consistently with his
assertion that he was the founder of Black Prince;
draft Deed of Appointment of Successor Founder dated ‘July 2015’
recited that Mr Adgemis was the founder and that
Lengkap was to be appointed as
Successor Founder.
July 2015 Ms van Dijk wrote to Mr Adgemis about a letter of wishes, consistently
with him being the founder at that
of the original letter of wishes in favour of Mr Adgemis.
taking the above into account, the point is that Black Prince
clear terms that:
was its founder in 2014; and that
such it may have indirect control of the exercise of a right to vote attached to
the shares.
is not this Court’s function to make any determinations about whether
Lengkap was, under laws of Curacao and Black Prince’s
articles, truly the
founder at this time.
ignore the high probative value of this evidence or to diminish its weight
because it was written in 2017 and not 2014 would be
to take a perverse
approach. Black Prince said that Lengkap expressed a wish
in June 2014
that Black Prince should acquire the shares and also enter into a related
finding arrangement to finance the acquisition of the shares.
Prince’s lawyers confirmed this. The significance of this evidence, on
the questions arising on the issue of
‘relevant interest’
under s608, is that these statements are ‘straight from the
horse’s mouth’: that is, from the entity that has the
knowledge. The other evidence referred to in this section simply reinforces and
fleshes out what Black Prince itself explained.
relation to this particular pathway of control relating to the powers of the
founder in relation to the Supervisory Board identified
by the prosecution would
amount to ‘real and practical’ control – I have a doubt
whether those powers amount to
any realistic or proximate practical means by
which the requisite degree of control could be exercised over Black Prince as at
material date for the purposes of charge 1.
evidence very strongly supports the inference that the decision-making relating
to Black Prince’s holding if the BAL shares
was significantly if not
wholly dependent upon the (possibly indirect) control exercised by the defendant
through Lengkap. This
is supported by the facts relating to the genesis of the
arrangement involving Black Prince; Black Prince’s disclosure that
shares were acquired based on Lengkap’s wish; that even though Mr Adgemis
was not concerned with the BPLA not being comprehensive
enough, ‘adequate
security’ was included based on Lengkap’s wish; and that the BPLA
was amended to delete clause
3(a) based on Lengkap’s wish. If one
considers all of those matters together with the fact that these arrangements
Lengkap and Black Prince reflect the defendant’s desire to hold
shares in BAL on a private and confidential basis, this conclusion
compelling. Indeed, accepting that Lengkap was incorporated at the
defendant’s initiative and direction solely as a part
arrangements, the inference is so strong as to exclude any other reasonable
hypotheses.
find beyond reasonable doubt that Lengkap had a relevant interest in Black
Prince’s 14 million shares in BAL through being
the perceived founder of
Black Prince. There was (for the purposes of s608(2)) an agreement, arrangement
or understanding, either
formal or informal, whether or not it had legal or
equitable force and whether or not it was based on legal or equitable rights,
the effect that Lengkap had indirect control of the exercise of a right to vote
attached to those shares.
Third Avenue of a ‘relevant interest’ - the basic
rule in s608(1)
prosecution submitted that the third avenue by which the defendant had a
relevant interest in Black Prince’s BAL shares
was under the basic rule in
s608(1). It was submitted that it could be inferred beyond reasonable doubt that
the defendant herself
had power or control (whether directly or indirectly
through other entities controlled by her) in relation to the exercise of a right
to vote attached to the shares held by Black Prince and/or the right to dispose
of those shares.
was submitted that the power to vote the shares could be inferred because Black
Prince’s acquisition of the shares was done
at Ms Cameron’s behest,
with Black Prince “warehousing” those shares for the
defendant’s benefit. The prosecution
set out particular circumstances
supporting that inference in para [250](a)-(q) of its closing submissions. I
will deal with each
of these circumstances in turn:
defendant’s position in relation to this third avenue of control under the
basic rule, was to refer to her submissions made
elsewhere about the facts said
to premise the complaints. She submitted that the funds in question were
transferred in accordance
with contractual arrangements, which did not
themselves, or, considered with other evidence, provide the defendant with
The defendant submitted that the evidence fails to establish that she
had an objective or desire to acquire a holding; merely that
Bicheno lent money
to Lengkap, a portion of which Lengkap lent to Black Prince. The defendant
submitted that irrespective of her
desire, the legal agreements speak for
themselves and must be construed according to their terms.
[250](a)-(b)
The Prosecution submitted at para [250](a)-(b) that the funds used by Black
Prince to purchase the shares came from Bicheno, which
of course was controlled
by Ms Cameron personally; and that money represented the proceeds of the sale of
Bicheno’s pre-IPO
stake in BAL. It is submitted that the defendant used
this money to purchase a replacement substantial shareholding.
have already made a finding beyond reasonable doubt that Bicheno’s
was the source of the
funds used to purchase Black Prince’s 14 million BAL shares, as outlined
by the prosecution at para 105
of its closing submissions. Briefly restated, I
found that:
received $34,948,864.84 under the pre-IPO Share Sale Agreement relating to its
sale of Bellamy’s
same amount was deposited to HWL Ebsworths’ trust account described as
“Share sale”
on 20 June 2014;
the convertible note purchase agreement circulated that same day and executed on
21 June 2014 (but effective 19 June 2014),
Bicheno lent Lengkap $23m;
then loaned Black Prince $14,020,000 on about 24 June 2014;
was anticipated by the parties to the BPLA that the purpose of that loan was the
purchase of the 14m BAL shares for $14m;
defendant’s authorisation was sought for the transfer of the transfer of
the funds from Lengkap to Black Prince’s
agent, Pacific Custodians, under
Prince used the $14m to purchase the 14m BAL shares.
defendant urged the Court not to draw the inference sought by the prosecution,
repeating her written submissions on the first
alleged avenue of control (see
the defendant’s written submissions at section E.2 paras [160]-[205]). In
my view these facts
support the inference that the shares were acquired by Black
Prince at the defendant’s behest, or command.
[250](c)-(e)
The prosecution submitted at para 250 sub-paras (c)-(e) that the objective of a
replacement substantial shareholding was canvassed
with the board of BAL,
referring to Mr Woolley’s unchallenged evidence that he received a
proposal about Ms Cameron acquiring
an interest in BAL, through a group of
investors in Singapore, one of whom was the defendant. Mr Woolley said he took
that to the
Board and it was agreed that 15% would be sold to
Mr Woolley’s evidence provides circumstantial
evidence in support of the proposition that a proposal existed in relation to
the defendant where she would replace the shareholding she sold with a new one.
Mr Adgemis said that the defendant told him she
wanted to participate in the IPO
of BAL, in a manner that was
“confidential”
, at a point in time after Bicheno agreed to
sell its pre-IPO stake in
That evidence supports
the conclusion that the defendant was herself the directing mind behind all of
this. A further circumstance
strongly supportive of the prosecution submission
is that after the defendant told Mr Adgemis, he told the defendant about Black
Prince as a potential vehicle for a private and confidential way of
participating in the IPO, and in that context he referred the
defendant to Mr
defendant referred to her written submissions at part E.2 where she exhaustively
dealt with this subject matter. I accept that
these circumstances identified by
the prosecution provide strong circumstantial evidence in support of the
inference that the shares
were acquired by Black Prince at the defendant’s
At para 250 (f) of its submissions, the prosecution submitted that a further
circumstance demonstrating that the shares were acquired
by Black Prince at the
defendant’s behest was the evidence that
“the only person who can
instruct the bank is [the defendant]”
. I have found earlier that that
the defendant’s approval for the transfer of the purchase funds was not
only sought but obtained
(under the heading
‘Advance of monies pursuant
to the Black Prince Loan Agreement – 25 June 2014
, above). The
defendant submitted that at its highest, the evidence is that she was the UBO of
Lengkap, which lent the money to Black
Prince, but that neither establishes (i)
her control (as opposed to proprietorship) of Lengkap; nor (ii) Lengkap’s
over Black Prince. It was submitted that any force in the evidence that
Mr Tong told Trustmoore that
“the only person who can instruct the bank
is [the defendant]”
, was undermined by the possibility that was a
mistake, given the anomalous authorisation form naming an account for Black
not Pacific Custodians (BAL’s agent). It was further submitted
that no one from Trustmoore, nor David Tong were called to
give evidence –
but I also take into account the information in footnote 55 at page 26 of the
defendant’s closing submissions
available for cross-examination. My finding is that these circumstances support
the inference
that the shares were acquired by Black Prince at the
defendant’s behest; and that the defendant had practical control and power
over the shares in all the circumstances.
At para 250 (g), the prosecution submitted that further circumstances which
demonstrated that the shares were acquired by Black
Prince at the
defendant’s behest included that:
defendant controlled Bicheno;
controlled Lengkap;
was an entity established at the defendant’s direction;
BPLA ultimately permitted the defendant to exercise, or control the exercise, of
Black Prince’s power to dispose of its
BAL shares by requiring it to
execute a mortgage, which would prevent Black Prince from selling its BAL shares
without approval from
Proposition
(a) was not in dispute. Proposition (b) was found proved beyond reasonable
doubt, above: see the finding under the heading
‘The defendant
controlled Lengkap through the CNA
'). Proposition (c) is proved beyond
reasonable doubt: see the finding under the headings
‘The incorporation
of Lengkap’
‘The defendant controlled Lengkap as ultimate
beneficial owner’
to the effect that defendant was the person whose
instructions brought about the incorporation of Lengkap; that she was its
beneficial owner; and that she controlled Lengkap. In relation to
proposition (d), I found this proposition be proved beyond reasonable
above, in relation to Lengkap, under the heading
‘Conclusion on clause
3a of the BPLA’
, such control must extend the defendant because she
controlled Lengkap.
At para 250 (h), the prosecution submitted that when Black Prince acquired its
BAL shares, Black Prince’s director –
Trustmoore - referred to and
recognised the defendant as being the ‘Ultimate Beneficial
submitted that the “Client Compliance Form” executed by the
defendant for Trustmoore, which identified her as
the “Ultimate Beneficial
Owner”, was clearly a reference to her being the ultimate beneficial owner
of Black Prince.
That is because the only reasonable conclusion to draw is that
the only connection between the defendant and Trustmoore is Black
suggested by the prosecution at para [101] of its closing submissions).
defendant submitted that the client compliance form did not expressly refer to
Black Prince; and that the date to which the form
related could be no earlier
than 5 May 2016, for reasons related to activity evidenced in certain ASIC
historical company extracts.
I rejected that submission in the section dealing
‘Proposal for Black Prince to acquire 14,000,000 shares in
BAL’s IPO – June 2014’
, above. The defendant submitted
that being the ultimate beneficial owner does not equate to control. I have
already observed that
while it is not possible to conclude beyond reasonable
doubt that the client compliance form was completed
Prince’s acquisition of the shares in BAL in 2014, it is strongly
supportive of the inference that Trustmoore regarded
the defendant as the
ultimate beneficial owner at that time. This is strongly suggestive that the
parties conducted themselves according
to an understanding that the defendant
was in fact the beneficial owner and head power or control (whether direct or
indirect or
through entities controlled by her) in relation to the exercise of
the rights in relation to the shares. In that sense, the client
compliance form
is a circumstance strongly supporting the inference that the shares were
acquired by Black Prince at the defendant’s
behest and that she ultimately
retained control over those rights. The client compliance form also supports
the inference that the
defendant had practical control and power over the shares
in all the circumstances.
At para 250 (i) the prosecution submitted that further circumstances
demonstrating that the shares were acquired by Black
Prince at the
defendant’s behest included that in July 2015, by reason of the
significant appreciation in value of BAL’s
shares, the defendant expressed
a desire to have greater “comfort” over the “distributions
from Black Prince”.
Greater ‘comfort’ obviously meant greater
control at a time when it was required, given that the value of the asset
greatly appreciated. The defendant’s desire to be in a position have her
instructions or wishes followed supports the
inference that she had practical
control and power over the shares in all the circumstances.
was submitted that the circumstances surrounding what occurred in July 2015,
including Trustmoore emailing Mr Adgemis a form for
him to sign, directing
Trustmoore to consider the wishes expressed by the defendant ‘fortifies
the conclusion’ that Black
Prince was merely a vessel in which to
‘warehouse’ shares for the defendant’s benefit. It was
submitted that the
fact that the defendant wanted comfort in relation to her
ability to instruct Black Prince or express her wish in relation to
distributions
from Black Prince. “bespeaks of an interest in those shares,
or at least an association with Black Prince”. I have taken
into account
the defendant’s submissions made at paragraph 251 of her closing
submissions. In my view, the circumstances at
para 250 (i) support the
inference the defendant had practical control and power over the shares in all
the circumstances.
At para 250 (j) the prosecution submitted that from at least July 2015 onwards
(and possibly from June 2014), Lengkap was
the Founder of Black Prince (at least
in Black Prince’s/Trustmoore’s eyes), capable of exercising the
attendant powers
thereof. As stated above, I am satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that Lengkap could exercise powers as Black Prince’s founder,
basis that Black Prince said it could and acted accordingly when the wish was
expressed to acquire the shares. Black Prince
said that Lengkap may have
indirect control of the exercise of a right to vote attached to the shares,
extending back to June 2014
when Lengkap instructed Black Prince to acquire
them. This matter strongly supports the inference that the defendant, as the
who controlled Lengkap, had power to control the exercise of a right to
vote attached to Black Prince’s shares in BAL, for
the purposes of s
608(1) and (2).
At para 250 (k) the prosecution submitted that the terms of the BPLA, including
clause 5 relating to the payment of
, were such that
Lengkap’s position was more akin to an equity investment relating to the
acquisition of BAL shares, than a
commercial loan. Under the heading
‘Entry into the Black Prince Loan Agreement 23-25 June 2014’
I accepted this submission and made this finding. I am satisfied that the BPLA
provided Lengkap with power or control – even
if indirect – or
informal or unenforceable – but which involved a true measure of control
in a practical sense, over
the disposal of the shares and it was not
‘control’ that was minor, peripheral, or merely hypothetical,
theoretical or
notional. Because the defendant controlled Lengkap, I find that
through the BPLA, clause 5, the defendant had a role akin to an
equity investor
in Black Prince’s 14 million shares in BLA. A similar approach can be
taken into clause 3(a). That obligation
was an enforceable one, with an
equitable mortgage/charge arising upon Lengkap requesting the relevant security.
However, even if
clause 3(a) involved an unenforceable arrangement or
understanding, whether a measure of control exists is to be determined on the
assumption that the parties act in accordance with, rather than contrary to,
their arrangement or understanding. I am satisfied
that as at 5 August 2014 the
parties intended to act in accordance with that clause. The terms of the BPLA
support the inference
that the defendant had practical control and power over
the shares in all the circumstances.
At para 250 (l), the prosecution submitted that from at least July 2015 onwards
Lengkap expressed wishes, as founder (even if the
wishes were not legally
binding), for any distributions from Black Prince to be paid to entities
associated to the defendant. It
was submitted that from December 2015 onwards,
the evidence provides even stronger support for this inference, because
distributions
were requested to be made solely to ECF. It was submitted that
these connections with the defendant are inexplicable unless the defendant
“is truly the one standing behind and able to control Black
. I refer again to the finding made above that Black Prince
regarded Lengkap as having control over the of the exercise of the right
attached to its shares in BAL. I also have regard to the matters considered
above under the heading
‘Lunch at the Mandarin Oriental’
accept that all of these circumstances support the inference that the defendant
had practical control and power over the shares
in all the circumstances.
At para 250 (m) the prosecution submitted that from July 2015 onwards, and
especially from December 2015 when the defendant’s
personal email was
registered as the email address for Black Prince, the relevant contact details
for Black Prince were details associated
with the defendant (and not Trustmoore,
the director of Black Prince, nor any national of Curacao): see paras 167 to 168
of the prosecution
submissions. It was submitted these circumstances were
“the manifestation and formalisation of the prior, undocumented control
and association” between Black Prince and the defendant. Against this
circumstance the defendant simply said that she dealt
with it in Part D of her
closing submissions by pointing out the anomalies in respect of Black
Prince’s preferred address in
the relevant period. I find that these
circumstances which surround the defendant’s personal mail being
registered as Black
Prince’s email address are supportive of an inference
of earlier association between Black Prince and the defendant (either
through her control of Bicheno and Lengkap).
At para 250 (n) it was submitted that from January 2017 onwards, the defendant
was openly able to utilise Black Prince’s shareholding
to advance her
interests and agenda with respect to the corporate affairs of BAL, with there
being no explanation advanced as to
when and how she procured that support, if
that foundation was, indeed, truly independent of her. This submission does not
it clear what evidence the prosecutor refers to, but the defendant
understood it to refer to Black Prince requisitioning the EGM
in January 2017
with the defendant’s support. The defendant submitted that the defendant
and Black Prince shared a desire
to ‘Save Bellamy’s’ when it
was in trouble with its share price, given her association with Bicheno which
2% of BAL’s shareholding as trustee for the Jan Cameron Trust. This
submission by the prosecution was made without any sufficient
reference to any
specific evidence. It is a submission made at too high a level of abstraction to
be taken into account.
At para 250 (o), the prosecution submitted, relevantly that - at least from the
date of the subsequent Substantial Holder Notices
on 17 January 2017 –
“letters of wishes” from Lengkap created at least an expectation
that Black Prince would act
in accordance with its wishes. I accept this
submission and I am satisfied of that beyond reasonable doubt. It was submitted
there is no explanation how and why Lengkap obtained this role or influence
other than that Black Prince was acting as a vehicle
for the benefit of the
defendant. That is a submission which is strongly supported by the evidence;
especially the evidence that
Black Prince said that Lengkap may have indirect
control of the exercise of a right to vote attached to the shares and that in
2014, Lengkap expressed a wish to Black Prince to acquire 14 million shares
in BAL and that Black Prince acted in accordance with
defendant submitted that Black Prince’s reference to the
‘expectation’ that it would act in accordance with
wishes is qualified by (i) reference to Black Prince’s articles; and (ii)
Item 7 in Black Prince’s response
that its Board was not satisfied after
having taken legal advice in Australia and Curacao, that anyone other than the
Board and its
directors had a relevant interest.
accept proposition (i) but not (ii) – especially not in light of Black
Prince’s disclosure that Lengkap may have control
over the voting rights
attached to the BAL shares. I am satisfied that the circumstances relating to
the expectation that Black
Prince would act in accordance with Lengkap’s
wishes should be taken into account when considering the contention that Black
Prince had practical control and power over the shares in all the circumstances.
At para 250(p) the prosecution submitted that in June 2017 the defendant caused
Black Prince to acquire further shares in BAL via
funds advanced from Mr
Pearson’s trust account, which funds had been deposited there by the
defendant and Bicheno. This is
dealt this by the prosecution at D.15 of its
closing submissions and in these reasons under the heading
Prince acquires an additional 1,840,000 shares in BAL - June 2017’
above. It was submitted that the loan agreement in relation to these funds was
instituted directly between Bicheno and Black Prince
(and not Lengkap and Black
Prince), having the effect of
“reducing the attenuation between
[the defendant]
and Black Prince”
. The defendant submitted
that (a) by this stage nearly 3 years had passed since the IPO; (b) there is no
evidence of Ms Cameron
exercising power or control in respect of Black
Prince’s decision in respect of the rights issue; (c) the opportunity of
rights issue was independently determined by Black Prince’s Board to
be in the interests of the foundation; and (d) given the
substantially
discounted share price, this was a commercially sensible decision. On this
issue, I am saIt is the case that
my view, the fact that Black Prince borrowed money from Bicheno at this time, is
at least consistent with the defendant having
practical control and power over
Black Prince’s shares in BAL, in light of all of the facts and
circumstances relating to the
connections between Black Prince and the
defendant, which have been discussed elsewhere.
The final circumstance – at para 250(q) - is that in December 2017, the
monies advanced to Black Prince under the BPLA to purchase
the original
shareholding were repaid, in part, via a transfer of shares to Bicheno by Black
Prince: 2,525,000 of Black Prince’s
15,000,000+ shares in BAL. The
defendant submitted (consistently with her earlier submissions at para [154] of
her closing submissions)
that the transaction is documented and that there is no
indication that any of the parties, including Black Prince, “acted
way other than independently” (referring to the ‘Explanatory
Memorandum re Deed of Settlement’ at Exhibit
P2, p1226 relating to the
settlement of the obligations which Lengkap owed Bicheno under the terms of the
CNA between Bicheno and
Lengkap dated 19 June 2014). I accept that this
circumstance is at least consistent with the prosecution submission that the
practical control and power shares in circumstances.
prosecution submitted more precisely that these circumstances in para
[250](a)-(q) reveal the existence of a relevant power or
control on behalf of
the defendant (whether directly or indirectly through other entities controlled
by her) in relation to the exercise
of a right to vote attached to the shares
held by Black Prince and/or the right to dispose of those shares. It was
submitted that
a finding in accordance with this submission gives rise to a
relevant interest under the basic rule pursuant to s 608(1) of the Act.
defendant submitted, in summary, that:
evidence relied on by the prosecution mostly relates to events well after the
date of the alleged offending in charge 1 –
5 August 2014 (para 252);
evidence falls short of establishing that Black Prince acted in in any manner
other than under the free will of its Board;
is no evidence of a practice or pattern of behaviour whereby Black Prince acted
in accordance with or at the instruction of
the defendant, Bicheno or
structure is consistent with eschewing control, not concealing it. There were
lawyers and professionals involved at every step
and so the prosecution
submissions amounting to ‘subterfuge’ are implausible;
amendment to the BPLA ensured that there was not any control or incorrect
perception of it.
defendant submitted that while the prosecution submitted that the defendant had
an undisclosed relevant interest, it failed to
“indicate precisely what
she was obliged to give under s671B and without those details
the Court should be left in doubt about what it is the Crown alleges
defendant failed to do. The defendant submitted that there exists an inference
consistent with innocence which is reasonably
open on the evidence, being that
“as at August 2014” the defendant did not have power to exercise
some true or actual
measure of control in respect of Black Prince’s BAL
shares. It was submitted
legal relationships do not give rise to a relevant interest for the reasons
advanced. No sufficient evidence has been adduced
to suggest a collateral
agreement inconsistent with the legal arrangements. Key witnesses haven’t
been called, the case of
sham has not been run, and the witnesses that have been
called (and documents adduced) do not prove practical influence. The
basic case does not advance the position for the Crown any further
beyond the contracts.
my view, these facts support the following findings, beyond reasonable doubt, in
relation to the contention that the defendant
had a relevant interest in Black
Prince’s BAL shares, under the basic rule in s 608(1):
August 2014 when BAL was admitted to the ASX, and since that time, the defendant
had a ‘relevant interest’ in the
BAL shares held by Black Prince,
even though not all the above circumstances existed at that date. The
circumstances occurring after
1 August 2014
“confirm and make plainer
the true arrangement that existed from the
arrangements were designed to benefit the defendant, under which she could
exercise control over the voting rights attached to
Black Prince’s shares
in BAL and/or the sale of those shares, even if those arrangements were not
documented in such terms;
defendant established an opaque and complex structure which disguised her
substantial shareholding in BAL purchased with her money;
defendant incorporated Lengkap and employed Black Prince for the express purpose
of keeping her interest in BAL “private”
“confidential”;
these structures and the attendant commercial rigmarole is only explicable as an
‘effort in subterfuge’, as the prosecution.
Reduced to its barest,
it can be inferred that Bicheno sold its pre-IPO stake in BAL and used the same
money to purchase a new stake
in BAL. There is no other rational or commercial
explication for the structure employed;
events surrounding the amendment to the BPLA on 6 August 2014 came about by
reason of the defendant’s desire to circumvent
the reporting requirements
under s 671B of the Act. Those events reflect the defendant’s desire to
remove a documentary link
between Lengkap and Black Prince without changing the
substance of the transaction: that this was all occurring at the behest and
the benefit of the defendant;
notion that cl 3(a)of the BPLA was an error or mistake is irreconcilable with
the emails exchanged at the time it was executed,
which made plain that Lengkap
originally required security for its advance over the shares in BAL. The only
thing which was in error
was documenting something that might compel Lengkap to
disclose its interest in Black Prince’s shareholding (which would, in
turn, require disclosure by Bicheno and BAL).
find that the evidence excludes any alternative hypotheses, beyond reasonable
doubt. I find, beyond reasonable doubt that the defendant
had a “relevant
interest” in Black Prince’s 14 million BAL shares on the basis that
she had practical control and
power over the voting rights and disposal of those
shares. This finding satisfies, the basic rule in s 608(1) of the Act. The
had a relevant interest Black Prince’s 14 million shares in BAL,
amounting to more than 5% of the total number of votes attached
to voting shares
Fourth avenue of control – ‘Associate’
fourth avenue of proof of charge 1 focuses the defendant’s failure to
notify details of her associate’s interest
in a substantial shareholding
in BAL. It requires proof of a
‘relevant agreement’
the defendant and Black Prince for certain purposes related to BAL; or that the
defendant and Black Prince acted
‘in concert’
in relation to
is alleged that the defendant had a
‘relevant interest’
Black Prince’s 14 million shares in BAL in that Black Prince qualified as
the defendant’s
‘associate’
because of:
section 12(2)(b) a
purpose of controlling or influencing the composition of the designated
body’s board or the conduct of the designated
body’s affairs
(‘the statutory purpose’); or
section 12(2)(c) acting
‘in concert’
in relation to the
designated body’s affairs’.
expressions
‘relevant agreement’
‘in concert’
‘affairs of a company’
are all dealt with under individual
headings above.
prove that the defendant had a relevant interest in this way, the prosecution
relied on all of the same circumstances which constituted
the third avenue of
proving the defendant’s relevant interest, with this additional aspect of
an association.
to the assessment of whether there is an associate relationship, are a number of
considerations relevant to whether the facts
and circumstances fall within the
broad definition of
‘relevant agreement’
in s9. These
include the following:
(a) a shared goal or purpose;
(b) prior collaborative conduct;
(c) structural links;
(d) common investments and dealings;
(e) common knowledge of relevant facts; and
(f) actions which are uncommercial.
considering the competing submissions on this issue, it is necessary to go into
some detail about the submission made by the defendant
in relation to this
avenue by which the prosecution alleged the defendant had a relevant interest in
Black Prince’s BAL shares.
defendant submitted at para [50] that the operation of s 12(2)(b) and (c) is
modified by ASIC Class Order [CO 13/520] to the effect
‘relevant agreement’
as contemplated by s 12(2)(b) or (c) and which also falls
within clause 2A(b) of the Class Order modification will not, of itself,
rise to an association. There is no dispute about that. However the defendant
went further to submit that the Class Order
should be interpreted as imposing a
legal requirement on the prosecution to allege with precision - and then prove -
the precise
purpose of any relevant agreement.
defendant submitted that the
‘statutory purpose’
12(2)(b) could not be found in the absence of evidence of the precise agreement
and its terms. At para [57] of the defendant’s
closing submissions, the
defendant referred to the
‘associate’
aspect of the
prosecution case as a ‘vague allegation’. The defendant submitted
that “the Class Order
makes plain that in order to find an associateship, it must be possible to state
the alleged common purpose
with precision”. The prosecution disagreed,
submitting – correctly, I find - that the Class Order said no such thing
and that the defendant had ‘elevated’ the effect of the Class Order
to require more than the Act prescribes.
defendant submitted that to prove she was an
‘associate’
through either a
‘relevant agreement’
with Black Prince under
s 12(2)(b) - or through
‘acting in concert’
with Black Prince
under s 12(2)(c), the prosecution is required to (i) say what the alleged
relevant agreement is; (ii) to supply
its terms; and (iii) allege with precision
what is the purpose of any relevant agreement. It was submitted that a vague
of a relevant agreement for the purpose of controlling or influencing
the composition of BAL’s board or the conduct of the
‘affairs’ does not suffice. It was submitted that
in s 12(2)(b) could not be found in the absence of evidence
of the agreement and its terms. I will further address the issue of
defendant submitted that the evidence related to the requisitioning of the EGM
and the appointment of four new directors (the
‘Let’s Save
Bellamy’s’ activity) in 2017 was not contemporaneous with the
alleged acquisition of the relevant
interest in 2014. It was submitted that the
evidence of the ‘cataclysmic’ fall in the share price in 2017
plainly did
not exist in 2014 when the IPO occurred. She submitted that because
these circumstances arose much later, and because they significantly
all shareholders in much the same way, this evidence did not support the
inference that the statutory purpose for the purposes
of s 12(2)(b) existed as
at the material date in August 2014 for the purposes of charge 1.
relation to the prosecution case based upon s 12(2)(c), these same submissions
above were repeated by the defendant in relation
to the consideration of whether
‘associate’
with Black Prince. In addition, it was submitted that the
legal principles
under the headings
‘relevant agreement’
‘in concert’
‘affairs of a company’
, above, are to be applied here to the
effect that proof of
‘acting in concert’
contemporaneity, community of purpose and something more than the mere entry
into the transaction and acquisition of
It required
‘knowing conduct’ showing that the parties are not independent of
one another;
and that the
Court must examine the underlying objects or purpose of the arrangements.
defendant submitted further that ‘the short point’ in relation to
the Class Order is that the defendant could not
be found to have a relevant
agreement for the purposes of controlling or influencing the composition of the
BAL board (the designated
body) or the conduct of BAL’s affairs if it is
merely a relevant agreement for a power to dispose of the shares. The defendant
submitted that even if clause 3(a) gave Lengkap some rights in relation to the
disposal of the BAL shares the BPLA is incapable of
supporting an association
due to the Class Order modifications - which state that a person is not an
“merely because”
they have entered into a relevant
agreement to dispose of shares or control the exercise of a power to control the
defendant referred to the legal principles referred to at para [265] of her
closing submissions and submitted that there is no
cogent and contemporaneous
evidence upon which the Court could find beyond reasonable doubt that Black
Prince acquired the shares
for any other reason than to fulfil its purpose as
set out in its articles:
defendant reiterated, as with the third way above, there was insufficient proof
that the defendant was acting
‘in concert’
with Black Prince
‘in relation to the designated body’s affairs’
and August 2014. It was submitted that
“merely advancing
funds which ultimately allowed [Black Prince] to acquire its shares in BAL is
not enough for there to find
that any parties were ‘acting in
The defendant repeated the submission that any so-called “structural
links” or “common investments and dealings”
must be governed
by the terms of those legal agreements, which are ordinary incidents of the
transaction itself. It was submitted
that they merely establish the
transaction, i.e., that Bicheno loaned money to Lengkap, and Lengkap loaned
money to Black Prince,
which invested in the IPO of BAL using those funds, Black
Prince’s Board decided to do.
was submitted further that Mr Adgemis’s evidence does not disclose that
Black Prince and Ms Cameron were acting in concert.
It was submitted that the
evidence was to the contrary – that he acted as an adviser to Trustmoore.
It was submitted that
the Court should find that the evidence cannot establish
any common purpose in relation to BAL’s affairs; especially without
precise articulation of what the common purpose was. It was submitted that the
prosecution submission about the arrangements
being uncommercial was groundless.
It was submitted that no evidence was led concerning commercial considerations
such as the tax
or estate planning possibilities or otherwise.
reply, the prosecution
that the Class
Order has no bearing on this matter at all and that the Court must be satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt of the defendant’s
relevant interest through her
association. It was submitted that having regard to the relevant facts and
circumstances said to give
rise to relevant
in concert”
the Court should conclude beyond reasonable doubt that was
in fact, the case.
accept the prosecutor’s submissions about the Class Order. The Class
Order does not express any of the requirements contended
for by the defendant.
Even so, the Court still must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt by the
and circumstances said to give rise to relevant indicia of
acting in concert.
following particular circumstances are established beyond reasonable doubt,
relevant to the fourth avenue by which the
is said to have a
relevant interest in the BAL shares held by Black Prince (via her association
with Black Prince):
was an informal, and ‘not strictly documented’, but shared goal or
purpose between Black Prince and the defendant:
her wish to participate in the
BAL IPO and obtain a parcel of BAL shares via
“confidential”
That conclusion flows
from the defendant’s pre-IPO disclosures of her wishes to Mr Adgemis and
the activities and events, the
subject of findings, above, about how the
defendant, Lengkap and Black Prince acted in concert in furtherance of a common
namely the use of Black Prince told the defendant’s private and
confidential interest in the BAL shares;
was a significant structural link between the defendant and Black Prince, the
BPLA, together with the attendant establishment
of Lengkap and the agreements
through which the funds flowed for the purpose of Black Prince’s
acquisition of the shares.
were common investment and dealings between the defendant and Black Prince. The
money that Black Prince received to purchase
its shareholding in BAL came from
the defendant’s company Bicheno, being the proceeds of the pre-IPO sale of
the defendant’s
shares in BAL for the purpose of Black Prince’s
subscription replacing the defendant’s former shareholding with an
BPLA was more like an equity investment than a commercial loan, because the loan
agreement tied Lengkap’s fortunes, as lender,
to the success or failure of
the borrower’s investment of the loan funds. It is legitimate to look at
this when considering
whether there were ‘uncommercial’ actions by
the defendant and Black Prince in the sense referred to in
Re Viento Group
[2011] ATP 1 at [120].
fact that there was an agreement to delete the clause of the BPLA which provided
Lengkap with security for the $14 million advanced
to Black Prince as a loan was
a further ‘uncommercial’ aspect of the arrangements between the
defendant (she controlled
Lengkap) and Black Prince. It is open to regard the
inclusion of clause 3(a) as commercially rational, but its removal as irrational
unless understood in light of its presence requiring disclosure of
Lengkap’s control of the shares, conflicting with the overriding
of the arrangement as the defendant’s private and confidential investment
determining the submissions in relation to the third avenue by which it is
alleged the defendant had a relevant interest, I found
that she had a relevant
interest in Black Prince’s BAL shares, under the basic rule in s 608(1).
findings made above in relation to the third avenue of control are also relevant
to the consideration of the issues arising under
s 12(2)(b).
findings which bear upon the issues of
‘relevant agreement’
and whether
the defendant and Black Prince acted
‘in concert’
findings made, above, in relation to the third avenue where I deal with
prosecution submissions made at paragraphs [250](a)-(q)
of the Closing
Submissions for the Prosecution, particularly in relation to [250]((f), (g),
(h), (i), (j), (k) and (l).
my view, these facts support the findings that the defendant was an associate of
Black Prince because they had an understanding
or agreement in relation to the
shares in BAL relating to the defendant’s control of those shares: s
12(2)(b). Further, BAL’s
membership and the power to exercise, or to
control the exercise of, the rights to vote attached to Black Prince’s
shareholding
in BAL or to dispose of, or to exercise control over the disposal
of, such shares, establishes the proposition that, at the very
defendant and Black Prince were acting
“in concert in relation to the
designated body’s affairs”
namely BAL’s membership and the
power to exercise, or control the exercise of, the rights to vote attached to
Black Prince’s
shareholding in BAL or to dispose of, or to exercise
control over the disposal of, such
prosecution submitted that the submission that the defendant and Black Prince
had no sufficient association was fanciful, not
plausible and does not amount to
a rational hypothesis consistent with
accept the submission made by the prosecution that the arrangements discussed
above (referred to as the ‘commercial
explicable as an as an effort in ensuring that the identity of the defendant was
not disclosed as being linked to Black
Prince’s shareholding (not unfairly
referred to by the prosecution as ‘an effort in subterfuge’).
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Black Prince was an associate of the
defendant’s as well as being an associate of
Bicheno and Lengkap. I am
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the findings made, above, establish that
there was a relevant agreement
between the defendant and Black Prince for the
‘statutory purpose’
in s12(2)(b); and I am satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that the association is also established under s12(2)(c)
through the defendant
and Black Prince acting in concert.
all of the evidence, I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the statutory
purpose is satisfied by the existence of the arrangements
or the understanding
between the defendant, Bicheno, Lengkap and Black Prince was always to secure
control of a substantial parcel
(ultimately 15%) of the voting shares in BAL for
the defendant, during the IPO process, without disclosing the defendant’s
identity: s 12(2)(b). That purpose falls within the scope of the expression
“influencing the ... conduct of the designated body’s
. Therefore, I am satisfied that the defendant had a relevant
interest in Black Prince’s BAL shares through her association
PART 6 Determination of the charges
Charge 1 is proved
beyond reasonable doubt
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that by 1 August 2014 the defendant had a
relevant interest in Black Prince’s shares
in BAL and that she knew she
the details giving rise to a relevant interest, yet she failed to give them to
BAL and the ASX as required.
I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt on the
basis of each of the four avenues identified by the prosecution in accordance
the findings I have made above. I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
on or about 5 August 2014 in Hobart in Tasmania the defendant
by herself and
along with her associate the Black Prince Private Foundation had a substantial
holding in BAL and she failed to give
the information referred to in the act, s
671B within two business days of becoming aware that she, along with her
associate the
Black Prince Private Foundation, had a relevant interest in BAL
amounting to a substantial holding, contrary to s 671B(1)(a) and
Corporations Act 2001
2 alleges that on 15 February 2017 the defendant lodged a Substantial Holder
(SHN) with ASIC which
omitted something that the defendant knew that it should have contained; and
that without that information
the defendant knew the SHN was misleading. The
omitted information was that the defendant had a relevant interest in Black
shareholding in BAL dating from August 2014 and that Black Prince
was an associate of hers.
facts in relation to this charge are set out under the heading
Defendant’s SHN – the basis of charge 2’
. I will address
the elements of the charge in the scheme set out in the Closing Submissions for
the Prosecution at para [47]. In
order for the prosecution to succeed in
proving charge 2 beyond reasonable doubt, it must succeed in proving the aspect
of the charge
1, that the defendant did have a “relevant interest”
in Black Prince’s shareholding in BAL. That element is obviously
here because of my determination that charge 1 is proved beyond reasonable
is no dispute about the first element of charge 2 - that on or about 15 February
2017 the defendant lodged or submitted a document
to ASIC. The second element
involves proof that the defendant omitted her relevant interest in Black
Prince’s shareholding
in BAL from August 2014 and her association with
Black Prince as proved under charge 1.
is no dispute that the information identified by the prosecution was omitted:
neither the SHN or the annexed
‘Lets’s Save
letter disclosed the defendant’s
“relevant interest”
in Black Prince’s shareholding by
reason of the facts and matters tendered to prove charge 1; nor the fact that
the defendant
‘associate’
of Black Prince by reason of
those matters.
defendant’s primary submission was
charge 2 must fail
because the prosecution had not proved the facts and circumstances comprising
charge 1. That submission fails
for the same reasons given for finding that
charge 1 is proved beyond reasonable doubt.
defendant submitted that she had no obligation to give ASIC information that it
was already aware of. The defendant submitted
“in combination,
the market, ASX, BAL, and ASIC were all informed of the following
information
a) the defendant’s SHN gave details of each of the substantial holders and
stated that they and the defendant may be associates
of Black Prince in their
concurrence and distribution of the
‘Let’s Save
b) Black Prince had already given BAL all the information in the disclosure
statement or ‘tracing notice response’ on
17 January 2017;
Prince had given ASIC information further explanation of what had been said in
the ‘tracing notice response’, on
30 January 2017, including
providing its articles and information about:
Prince’s relationship with Lengkap as the Founder;
Partnership was the sole director of Lengkap
beneficiary of distributions from Black Prince’s assets (consistent with
Lengkap’s letter of wishes date 15
reject these submissions. The offence provision in
A person who,
in a document lodged with or submitted to
ASIC, makes or authorises the making of a statement that to the person’s
is false or misleading in a material particular or omits or authorises
the omission of any matter or thing without which the document
person’s knowledge misleading in a material respect is guilty of an
can be seen that there is no element of the offence in
which creates
any obligation on a person to provide particular information. That obligation
is found in
Section 1308(2)
expressly prohibits misleading by omission.
I accept the oral submissions of the prosecutor in this
prohibits is lodging a document with ASIC that either contains a statement or
omits something, making it misleading in a material
respect. I reject the
defendant’s submissions at paras [273]-[283] of the Closing Submissions
for the Defence.
is clear that the defendant turned her mind to the question of whether she had a
‘relevant interest’
in Black Prince’s shareholding and
that she considered whether she was Black Prince’s
‘associate’
, given the various sections of the form she
completed in relation to the
‘Let’s Save
letter. The defendant had been specifically requested
by ASIC to provide the true picture of what appeared to ASIC to be a close
relationship with Black Prince. ASIC’s letter dated 25 January 2017 set
out some regulatory information relating to relevant
interests, relevant
agreements and associates and in that context asked the defendant specifically
“details of the nature of the relationship between yourself
(or your associates) and Black Prince, Lengkap or BPPF”
that context, for the defendant to state that the nature of the association
between herself and Black Prince related only to their
concurrence in the
signature and distribution of the
‘Let’s Save
letter was profoundly misleading, because the true
picture was that the defendant, through Lengkap had indirect control the
of a right to vote attached to Black Prince’s shares in BAL,
amounting to about significant percentage of the shares of the
company. The
defendant omitted to disclose that. Nor did she disclose any relevant agreement
related to her control of Black Prince’s
shareholding. She did not
explain that she was an associate of Black Prince by virtue of their
understanding that the defendant
was the ultimate beneficial owner of the Black
Prince’s shares in BAL. To withhold that information from ASIC was
in a material respect.
information which the defendant withheld was, at least, that which was required
to be disclosed under
in August 2014. The defendant omitted to provide
the information. The defendant’s failure to inform ASIC about this in
2017 circumvented the regulatory scheme relating to substantial
shareholding notices. In
ASIC v Avestra Asset Management Ltd (in liq)
[2017] FCA 497
(2017) 348 ALR 525
per Beach J stated that the primary purpose of the
substantial shareholding notice regime is to facilitate the operation of an
and informed market.
find that the defendant knew all of this information. I infer that the defendant
knew that if her SHN did not contain that information
within it, her notice
would be misleading in a material respect and that it would obscure the true
position from ASIC and the market.
I find beyond reasonable doubt that the
defendant intentionally omitted the information from the notice.
fault element that must attend this final physical element is knowledge. That
is, Ms Cameron was aware that her omissions from
her SHN caused the
representations in the notice to be misleading in a material respect. Again, the
evidence compels this conclusion.
It is, of course, a matter of inference.
However, the circumstances indicate a deep involvement by Ms Cameron in the
affairs of Black
Prince along with a considerable experience as a significant
shareholder and investor in listed entities. It is the only rational
in all the circumstances.
Charge 2 is proved beyond reasonable doubt
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the defendant was a person who lodged
with ASIC a statement in her SHN dated 15 February
2017 knowing that it omitted
to disclose her relevant interest in Black Prince’s shareholding in
Bellamy’s, as a result
of which the SHN was, the defendant’s
knowledge, misleading in a material respect. For these reasons, the defendant
of charge 2.
--------------------------------------------
14 December 2023
Annexure A – defendant’s letter on Lengkap
See the section below dealing
with ‘Completion of BAL’s IPO’.
See Closing Submissions of the
Prosecution, para 54 and Transcript p170.23-34, the evidence of Mr
See Exhibit P2,
See Closing
Submissions of the Prosecution para 182.
Section 671B
has since been
amended, but not materially, by both the
Corporations Amendment (Asia Region
Funds Passport) Act 2018
(Cth), Sch 2, items 166-172 and
Treasury Laws
Amendment (Strengthening Corporate and Financial Sector Penalties) Act 2019
(Cth), Sch 1, items 34-36.
The Act, s9 provides
“listed: a company, managed investment scheme or other body is listed if
it is included in the official list of a prescribed
financial market operated in
this jurisdiction.”
Corporations Regulations 2001
(Cth) (Regulations), reg 1.0.02A(b) as at
Exhibit P1 - Agreed
Facts at [1].
See the section
under the heading
'The fourth alleged avenue of control - Associate'
below. This
North Sydney
Brick & Tile Co Ltd v Darvall
(1986) 5 NSWLR 681
at 689, Mahoney JA
(with whom Kirby P and Glass JA agreed)
Re Austral Coal Ltd (No
(2005) 23 ACLC 1797
at [262] per Farrell P, Scott DP and Byrne; see
North Sydney Brick & Tile Co Ltd v Darvall
(1986) 5 NSWLR 681.
Re MYOB Ltd
ATP 27 at [17] per Ashforth P;
Edensor Nominees Pty Ltd v ASIC
FCR 78 at [33] per Hill, Sundberg and Mansfield JJ.
Re Kornblums Furnishings
Ltd; Blair v Commissioner for Corporate Affairs
[1982] VicRp 11
[1982] VR 123
ASIC v Yandal
Gold Pty Ltd
[1999] FCA 799
(1999) 32 ACSR 317
per Merkel J (and the authorities
set out therein);
Edensor Nominees Pty Ltd v ASIC
(2002) 120 FCR 78 at
[33] per Hill, Sundberg and Mansfield JJ.
Bank of Western Australia
v Ocean Trawlers Pty Ltd
(1995) 13 WAR 407
Ocean Trawlers
431-432 (per Owen J)
Boart Longyear Ltd (No. 2)
[2017] NSWSC 1105
(2017) 323 FLR 241
See Closing Submissions
for the Defence at [63] citing
Re Orion Telecommunications Ltd
Systems Ltd v MTIC Corporate Pty Ltd
[2000] WASC 316
(2000) 36 ACSR 454
[2000] WASC
Ocean Trawlers
Ocean Trawlers
IPT Systems Ltd v
MTIC Corporate Pty Ltd
[2000] WASC 316
(2000) 36 ACSR 454
[2000] WASC 316
Re Austral Coal
2005] ATP 13 (28 June 2005);
Smith v The Queen
[2007] WASCA
; Chameleon Mining NL v Murchison Metals Ltd
[2010] FCA 1129
ommissioner of the Australian Federal Police v Courtenay Investments Ltd
[2016]WASCA 194;
Condor Blanco Mines Limited
[2016] ATP 8;
[2019] NZHC 222.
Closing Submissions for the Defence para
See Closing Submissions
for the Prosecution paras [19], [250], [258], [260] for
See the discussion
Submissions for the Prosecution para [42].
for the first
avenue concerning clause 3(a), that Ms Cameron had actual knowledge of the
existence of that clause and that she was
aware it was operable at the relevant
time. See Closing Submissions for the Defence para [28]
Defendant’s Closing
Submissions Part H, para
Defendant’s
Closing Submissions Part H, para
See Defendant’s
Closing Submissions at paras [290]-[302] and prosecution agreement at TR
671B(6)(a).
No document with
this precise number could be found in Ex P2, but at p 253 the document matching
this description is in evidence.
Ex P2, p 1452; see also Ex
P2, p 934 (date recorded in the Deed of Incorporation of Black Prince –
first line).
Ex P2, p 46; T 171.08-24
(XIC Mr Adgemis).
See e.g. T 178.19-26 (XIC Mr
Adgemis). See also Ex P2, p 607-608.
T 171.30-31 (XIC Mr
T 181.13-14 (XIC Mr
See Ex P2, p 934.
Ex P2, pp 40-41 (albeit this
document is unsigned); Ex P2, p 46; T 176.31-38 (XIC Mr
Tender Bundle page
935. See Closing submissions for the Defendant paragraph 14
Ex P2, p 935.
Ex P2, p 936.
Ex P2, p932-933.
See Closing Submission of
the Prosecution, para 54 and Transcript p170.23-34 (XIC Mr
see Closing
Submissions for the Defence paras [91] and [92].
Ex P2, pp 1302-1303.
Ex P2, p 2.
T 73.16-17, 74.14-26 (XIC Mr
T 72.34-73.11 (XIC Mr
T 77.33-78.05 (XIC Mr
Ex P1 (Agreed Facts at [2]);
Ex P2, p 565.
T 79.06-09, 81.07-15 (XIC Mr
Ex P2, p 1315.
T 81.12 (XIC Mr
T 81.13-15, 84.35-40 (XIC Mr
T 84.38-40 (XIC Mr
T 85.25-32 and 88.24-30 (XIC
Mr Woolley).
T p 85 (XIC Mr Woolley).
The facts relating to the
incorporation are not disputed. Ex P2, pp 96-97.
Ex P2, pp 103 and 129
(execution page of Memorandum of Association and Articles of Association).
Mr Woolley T 75
T 183.20-35 (XIC Mr
Adgemis). Mr Adgemis said that Mr Pearson was a tax lawyer for the defendant,
but that he was not certain of
his exact role.
Ex P2, p 271 (email from Mr
Tong describing himself as much, which is copied to the defendant’s
‘white dog’ email
address – see Ex P1 (Agreed Facts at
Mr Adgemis T
T 183, 184.
Ex P2, p 71.
Ex P2, p 130.
Ex P2, p 70.
Ex P2, p 70.
Ex P2, p 69.
Ex P2, p 69.
Ex P2, p 68.
Ex P2, p 73.
Ex P2, p 73.
Ex P2, p 73.
Ex P2, pp 96-97.
Ex P2, pp 103 and 129
(execution page of Memorandum of Association and Articles of Association).
Ex P2, p 47.
Ex P2, p 54.
Ex P2, p 54.
Ex P2, 1267.
Ex P2, p 1312-1317 (ASIC
records for the defendant).
Ex P2, p 1461 – see also the submissions of the prosecution at [101].
Ex P2, p 55.
Ex P1 (Agreed Facts at
Ex P2, pp 77-85.
Ex P2, p 79.
Ex P2, p 73.
Ex P2, p 93.
T 182.39-183.45 (XIC Mr
T 52.09-23 (XIC Mr
T 56.34 (XIC Mr
T 53.17-24 (XIC Mr
T 54.04-16 (XIC Mr
T 85.25-32 and 88.24-30
(XIC Mr Woolley).
T 85.23-40 (XIC Mr
T 56.27-33 (XIC Mr
T 85.01-26 (XIC Mr
T 117.38-118.31 (XIC Mr
Robertson).
T 85.20 and
88.24-30 (XIC Mr
The evidence is
summarised at Closing Submissions for the Defence, Annexure A, items 3-6
p161 lines 35-41.
T 163.21-25 (XIC Mr
T 163.42-43 (XIC Mr
T 164.08-17 (XIC Mr
T 164.46-47
(XIC Mr Adgemis).
T 165.16-26 (XIC Mr
T 57.19-45 and 58.05-10
(XIC Mr Webber).
T 60.08-13 (XIC Mr
See Ex P2, p 137 for the
date of 12 June 2014 (covering email exchanging executed agreement).
Ex P2, pp 138-165.
Ex P2, p 158.
Ex P2, p 139.
Closing Submissions
for the Defence para [95].
Ex P1 Agreed facts at 9,
See also Ex P2, p
Ex P2, p 232
Ex P2, p 139.
Ex P2, p 221.
Ex P2, p 141
Ex P2, p 143
Ex P2, p 144.
Ex P2, p 232
Ex P2, p 192.
T 61.40-44 (XIC Mr
T 60.45-61.30 (XIC Mr
Webber). At TR 69 Mr Webber explained this meant “a large investor in a
transaction such as an IPO that,
ie, that represents a large proportion of the
funds being raised.”
T 168.43-169.26 (XIC Mr
T 148.10-26 (XIC Mr
Robertson).
T 117.13-14 and lines
31-36 (XIC Mr Robertson).
T 78.11-24 and
78.44-79.04 (XIC Mr Woolley); T 162.35-44 (XIC Mr Adgemis – confirming he
“few meetings on her
T 117.13-14 and lines
31-36 (XIC Mr Robertson).
T 167.32-22 (XIC Mr
T 167.06 (XIC Mr
T 168.24-25 (XIC Mr
T 170.16-17 (XIC Mr
T 170.23 and 170.34 (XIC
Mr Adgemis).
T 170.39-42(XIC Mr
T 171.03-06 (XIC Mr
T 168.43-169.26 (XIC Mr
T 178.25-28 (XIC Mr
T 180.41-42 (XIC Mr
T 88.32-89.05 (XIC Mr
[2013] NSWCA 297
per Gleeson JA (Beazley P and Barrett
JA agreeing).
T 168.24-25 (XIC Mr
T 171.03-06 (XIC Mr
T 178.25-28 (XIC Mr
T 180.41-42 (XIC Mr
Submission for the Defence para
T 178.25-28 (XIC Mr
T 180.41-42 (XIC Mr
Closing Submissions
for the Defence, para 96.e, Closing Submissions of the Prosecution para 89.
submissions for the Defence para 103.
Closing Submissions for
the Defence para 102.
pp 195-198.
and 69.37-71.10.
(XIC Mr Webber).
T 169. (Mr Adgemis
T 180.41-42
(XIC Mr Adgemis).
Submissions of the Prosecution at 100.
submissions for the Defence para
ExP2 p 236-7
Ex P2, p 236-237.
Closing Submissions
for the Defence para 108.
International Labuan Branch.
Ex P2, p 235 (a summary
sheet prepared by ASIC); see also Ex P2, pp 225-226 and 230-232.
Ex P2, p 232.
Ex P2, p 222.
See Ex P2, p 253 (19 June
2014 is defined as the
“Effective Date”
Ex P2, pp 252-267. And
see Ex P2, p 249 (email circulating document
“the signature page with
Jan Cameron's signature”).
Ex P2, pp 257-258.
Ex P2, p 260 & 267
(the CN is dated 21 June 2014).
Lengkap Ltd.
Bicheno Investments Pty
This is relied
upon as a measure of the defendant’s ‘control’ of Lengkap
– through Bicheno - for the purposes
of s 608(3)(b) – see
prosecution submissions para
This is relied
upon as a measure of the defendant’s ‘control’ of Lengkap
– through Bicheno - for the purposes
of s 608(3)(b) – see
prosecution submissions para
This is relied
upon as a measure of the defendant’s ‘control’ of Lengkap
– through Bicheno - for the purposes
of s 608(3)(b) – see
prosecution submissions para
This is relied
upon as a measure of the defendant’s ‘control’ of Lengkap
– through Bicheno - for the purposes
of s 608(3)(b) – see
prosecution submissions para [235].
Ex P2, p 270.
Ex P2, p 282 (a summary
sheet prepared by ASIC). See also Ex P2, pp 278-279 (Westpac bank statement for
HWL Ebsworth for transfer
of $23m) and p 286 (Overseas telegraphic
Ex P2, p 273.
Ex P1 (Agreed Facts at
Ex P2, pp 346-354.
Ex P2, pp 287-288.
Ex P2, p 287.
Ex P2, p 290.
Ex P2, pp 291-294; T
68.18-27 (XIC Mr Webber).
Ex P2, p 301.
Ex P2, pp 346-354.
Ex P1 (Agreed Facts at
Ex P2, p 353.
Ex P2, p 312 and p 313
(copy of the Black Prince Loan Agreement executed solely on behalf of Lengkap
– although the effective
date is 24 June 2014, whereas the final version
has an effective date of 25 June 2014).
Ex P1 (Agreed Facts at
See prosecution
submissions at [115].
Ex P2, p 312 and p 313
(copy of the Black Prince Loan Agreement executed solely on behalf of Lengkap
– although the effective
date is 24 June 2014, whereas the final version
has an effective date of 25 June 2014).
Ex P1 (Agreed Facts at
Ex P2, p 331; the same
email is also at Ex P2, p 341.
Ex P2, p 331; the same
email is also at Ex P2, p 341.
Ex P2, p 330.
Ex P2, p 330.
Ex P2, p 335.
Ex P2, p 371 (a summary
sheet prepared by ASIC). See also Ex P2, p 132 (remittance issued by Maybank
International Labuan Branch).
Ex P2, pp 362, 366,
Ex P1(Agreed Facts at
[17]-[18]).
Ex P2, p 567-568.
Ex P2, p 568.
Ex P1 (Agreed Facts at
Ex P1 (Agreed Facts
at [2]); Ex P2, p 565.
Ex P2, p 562,
Facts at [2]).
Ex P2, p 564.
Ex P2, p 540.
Ex P2, p 562.
Ex P2, p 584.
Closing Submissions
of the Defence at [120]
Closing Submissions of the Defence at
Closing Submissions
of the Defence at [120]
Defence submissions at [122]; Prosecution submissions at [151], citing Ex P2, pp
Ex P2, pp 1472-1475.
Ex P2, p 591.
Ex P2, p 573.
Adgemis’s oral evidence is at transcript reference p.220-221
T 221.11-13 (XIC Mr
Submissions for the Defence para
Ex D1, Section
Closing Submissions
for the Prosecution para [153].
Ex P2, p 607.
T 223.13-15 (XIC
Mr Adgemis).
handwritten note on the cheque at Ex P2
Ex P2, p 191 18
Ex P2, p 617.
T 223.25-32 (XIC Mr
Exhibit P 2,
T 234.09-11 (XIC Mr
T 235.35-39 (XIC Mr
Ex P2, pp 614-616.
T.235.45 (XIC Mr
T 234.14-40 (XIC Mr
T 234.42-235.01 (XIC Mr
See the letter of
July 2015 from Lengkap to Black Prince expressing wishes as founder at Ex P2, p
Submissions for the prosecution para
Submissions of the Defendant para [130].
Ex P2, p 918. Referred
to as a ‘Beneficial Tracing Notice’.
Ex P2, p 919 (see
Ex P2, p 635 and 636.
Ex P2, p 1448.
Ex P2, p 649, 658,
639 (30 September 2015 dividend) and p. 657, 658 and 656 (23 March 2016
Ex P2, p 658 (summary
sheet prepared by ASIC) and Ex P2, p 652 (ANZ bank statement for statutory trust
account of Peter Linnette
Lawyers Pty Ltd).
Ex P2, p 1138 (which
lists the dates and amounts of all three dividends paid by BAL to Black Prince)
and Ex P2, p 899 (payment advice
Ex P2, p 1106
(reconstructed Pearson Tax Lawyers Trust Account ledger), p 1206 (Westpac
disbursal report for payment of $1,092,000
from Pacific Custodians to Pearson
Tax Lawyers).
pp1044-1046.
Mr Robertson TR
T 92.17-93.03 and
107.12-30 (XIC and XXN Mr Woolley); T 124.42-44 (XIC Mr Robertson).
Ex P2, p 914.
Ex P2, p 918.
Ex P2, pp 916-917.
Submissions for the Prosecution [174]-[175]; Closing Submissions for the Defence
Submissions for the Defence para
Submissions for the Defence para [146].
Ex P2, pp 970-978 (the
SHN annexed the “Let’s Save Bellamy’s”
Ex P2 p 973,
referring to the “Let’s Save Bellamy’s”
Ex P2 pp 982-984.
Ex P2, pp 1036-1037
(Cameron), pp 1012-1017 (Black Prince)
Ex P2, pp 1036-1037. See
Ex P2, pp 1012-1017.
See Ex P2, pp 988-991
“Let’s Save Bellamy’s”
Ex P2, p 931.
Ex P2, p 1027.
See Ex P2, pp 988-991
“Let’s Save Bellamy’s”
Ex P2, p 1064.
Ex P2, pp 1044-1046.
Ex P2, pp 1106; see also
Ex P2, p 1107 (a summary sheet prepared by ASIC).
Ex P2, p 1082 (board
resolution of Black Prince), p 1086 (terms of loan) and pp 1368-1380 (loan
agreement between Black Prince and
Bicheno, albeit
1172-1187 (executed by Lengkap), pp 1188-1203 (executed by Bollinger) and pp
1210-1225 (executed by Bicheno and Black Prince).
See also the accompanying
explanatory memorandum: Ex P2, pp 1226-1232.
Ex P2, pp 1239 and 1245
“off market
Closing Submissions for the Prosecution para [190].
These categories of
admissibility follow the statements of principle identified and explained in
Ahern v The Queen
[1988] HCA 39
(1988) 165 CLR 87
Tripodi v The Queen
[1961] HCA 22
T 85.25-32 and 88.24-30
(XIC Mr Woolley).
T p 85 (XIC Mr
see Closing
Submissions for the Defence, para [156], Transcript page 538 per Mr Crowley SC
“...the Crown does not cavil with the proposition at
TB 486, pdf
Closing Submissions
of the Prosecution para
Submissions for the Defence [161].
Ex P2, pp 257-258.
Ex P2, p 260 & 267
(the CN is dated 21 June
Submissions of the Prosecution,
Amcor v Barnes
[2016] VSC 707
, cited in the Defendant’s closing submissions at
Ex P2, pp 49-67.
Ex P2, pp 77-85.
Ex P2, pp 166-167
corporate Services Agreement and the address for service being 31/1 Castray
Submissions for the Prosecution para [241].
Closing Submissions of
the Prosecution para [118].
Closing Submissions for
the Defence para [169]
Closing Submissions of the Defendant, para 168.
Closing submissions
for the defendant, at para [174].
See Ex P2 p
Closing submissions
for the defendant at para [177].
[2005] NZHC 1724
(2005) 5 NZ ConvC
, per Rodney Hansen J.
Roberts v Investwell
[2012] NSWCA 134
(2012) 88 ACSR 689
per Bathurst CJ, Beazley and Tobias JJA
Ex P2, p 287,
Email from van der Veen to Mr Adgemis and Ms van Dijk (Trustmoore/Black Prince
Transcript at
Submissions for the Defence at para
Submissions for the Defence at para
Sheikh Brothers
Ltd v Ochsner & Anor
[1957] AC 136
, referred to in
Soon Lee Huat Palm
Oil Mill Sdn Bhd v Stable-Win Sdn Bhd
[2013] 4 CLJ 640
at 649. See Ex D1 p.
Soon Lee Huat
Palm Oil Mill Sdn Bhd v Stable-Win Sdn Bhd
[2013] 4 CLJ 640
It is to be noted
that this is an English common law case decided after 7 April 1956, supporting
the applicability of common law
cases decided after that date.
Soon Lee Huat Palm
Oil Mill Sdn Bhd v Stable-Win Sdn Bhd
[2013] 4 CLJ
Transcript at p
Sheikh Bros v
Ochsner & Anor
[1957] AC 136
Closing Submissions
for the Defence at para
Ex P2 p 584-575,
email Ms van der Veen to Mr Tong dated 5 August
here is within the meaning of s608(3)(b) (and
therefore within the meaning of
in s608(4) and
See the section
‘The defendant controlled Lengkap through the CNA’
See Closing
Submissions for the Prosecution paras 187-188 and the facts referred to at part
D.14, particularly
See Closing
Submissions for the Prosecution para 99 – email under the heading
Ex P2, pp 919-920.
See [103]-[111]
of the Closing Submissions for the Prosecution, and the defendant did not
dispute those submissions, see Closing
Submissions for the Defence at para
See section D.4
of the Closing Submissions for the
Prosecution.
Submissions of the Prosecution, para
provided that no interest on the loan sum accrued on a daily basis. Instead, if
Black Prince sold the shares, 50% of the
increase in value of the shares had to
be paid to Lengkap. If the shares remained unsold after three years, the shares
independently valued, with Lengkap to receive, 50% of the increase in
the price of the shares
Closing Submissions for
the Defence para [259].
Transcript p. 251 this
For the definition of relevant agreement see section 9
As set out by the
Takeovers Panel in
Re Viento Group Ltd
[2011] ATP 1 at
Submissions of the Defendant at para
Also set out at para
[265] of the defendant’s closing
submissions.
submissions of the defendant at para
Ocean Trawlers
at 525-526 cited at para [64 of the defendant’s closing submissions.
See Closing Submissions
for the Defendant paras
See Closing Submissions
for the Prosecution at para
See Closing
Submissions for the Prosecution at paras 25 and
Closing Submissions
for the Prosecution para
Submissions for the Prosecution para
See Exhibit P2,
See Closing
Submissions of the Prosecution para 182.
See Closing Submissions
of the Prosecution para
Transcript p.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (4.63 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter