URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASLPDT/2024/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:16:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
NX & LX v A Legal Practitioner KBC (No 2) [2024] TASLPDT 3; (19 June 2024)
Legal Profession Disciplinary Tribunal
Citation: NX & LX v A Legal Practitioner KBC (No 2) [2024] TASLPDT 3
NX & LX Complainants
KBC Practitioner
Mr D Wallace Deputy Chairperson
Ms L Mackey
Mr M Kitchell
Hearing on written submissions
Delivered On: 19
of June 2024
Representation:
Complainants In person
Practitioner Mr T Barrett
Solicitors:
Complainants: In person
Practitioner Tierney law
The Tribunal ordered that the names of the parties to the application be
anonymised and not be published or communicated to any other
Reasons for Decision
reasons concern an application for ‘costs’ by the Practitioner (the
‘practitioner’) following an unsuccessful
re-hearing appeal by the
‘Complainants’ (the ‘principal
‘principal reasons’ should be read with these reasons. The Tribunal
did not vary determinations made by the
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania
(‘Board’) dismissing 12 complaints (‘A to L’
inclusive).
‘Board’ summarily dismissed complaints ‘B’ and
‘C’, pursuant to s.433(1)(e) of the
Legal Profession Act
(‘LPA’) as ones it did not have power to deal with
(‘the B&C determinations’). Complaints ‘A’,
to ‘L’, the ‘Board’ dismissed pursuant to s.451(a) of
the ‘LPA’, being satisfied following
an investigation that
there is no reasonable likelihood that the practitioner will be found
guilty of either unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
” (the ‘A, D to L determinations’). The Tribunal
heard and determined the re-hearing application
. Each complaint remained dismissed
as previously ordered by the ‘Board’.
re-hearing the Tribunal evaluated the material and information before the
‘Board’ together with further information
submissions
‘practitioner’ and the ‘Complainants’
submissions
as to a costs order and
the basis of any order have been given full
consideration.
Complainants.
481 (4), (5), (6) and (7) of the ‘LPA’ provide as
The Tribunal may make an order requiring the complainant to
pay costs if the Tribunal is satisfied that the complaint is vexatious,
misconceived, frivolous or lacking in substance.
(5) An order for costs-
(a) may be for a specified amount; or
(b) may be for an unspecified amount but must specify the basis on which the
amount is to be determined.
(6) An order for costs may specify the terms on which costs must be
(7) The Tribunal may make an order directing those costs be taxed in
accordance the
Supreme Court Rules 2000
‘practitioner’ seeks payment of costs on a special order indemnity
If the Tribunal is satisfied a complaint is
‘vexatious,
misconceived, frivolous, or lacking in substance’
the Tribunals
discretion to order complainants to pay costs is enlivened. This restriction
from the usual grant of costs following
the event to a successful party is
consistent with the general purposes of the complaint and discipline provisions
of the ‘LPA’
terms ‘vexatious’, ‘misconceived’,
‘frivolous’, and ‘lacking in substance’
descriptors
‘) are common in legislation where complaints
against lawyers and others such as medical practitioners are dealt with. They
have been considered in a variety of contexts. The descriptors appear in
of the ‘LPA’, in the context of empowering summary
dismissal of complaints
The Tribunals discretion to award costs in
of the ‘LPA’ be
paid by a complainant is in
of the ‘LPA’. It applies to
both a re-hearing of ‘Board’ determinations, and to hearings of
complaints by
a complainant pursuant to
of the ‘LPA’. In
respect of a re- hearing, the Tribunal must be satisfied the complaint is within
one of the ‘
descriptors
’ before a costs order, however
fashioned could be made.
‘Misconceived’
means a misunderstanding of legal principle while the term ‘lacking in
substance’ connotes
an untenable proposition of law or
Khalafallah v TASCAT
[2023] TASSC 8
Khalafallah’
) His Honour Brett J of the Supreme Court of
Tasmania dealt with a matter concerning the descriptor ‘
in the Tasmanian
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
) in the context of dismissal of a complaint
by the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner, as misconceived and “
in substance
”. On review in the Anti-Discrimination Tribunal
(‘ADT’) (now ‘
Tasmanian Civil and Administration
, the ‘ADT’ tribunal member was satisfied the
correct decision had been made in dismissing the complaint as
misconceived
lacking in substance
The matter came before His Honour in proceedings like certiorari to quash the
decision of the ‘ADT’ decision.
to the explanation of the descriptor ‘
in anti-discrimination legislation as stated by
Ronald Wilson as President of the Australian Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission in
Assal v Department of Health, Housing Community
(the citation differs to that in
Khalafallah’
[1990] HREOCA 8
(26September 1990;
which presents
no more than a remote possibility of merit or which does no more than hint at a
just claim would ordinarily, I think,
be found to be lacking in
substance”.
’ the complaint was dismissed as ‘
’ when the hearing (called an ‘inquiry ‘in the
legislation) was ended by the President part heard, but when all
documentation and exhibits and submissions by the parties were before the
Honour Brett J in
Khalafallah
went on to describe the provision in the
’ as whether a complaint has substance is
concerned with the power to summarily dismiss
cases which are without substance. This must include those which have no real
‘descriptors’, ‘misconceived’ and ‘lacking in
substance’ in s.481(4) of the
’LPA’, are in the context
where complaints for “
unsatisfactory professional conduct
professional misconduct“ have
been dismissed by the Tribunal
following a s.464 hearing or after a re-hearing pursuant to s.458(1)(a). Whereas
the context of the
descriptors’
in s.433 (1)(a) of the
‘LPA’ empower the ‘Board’ to summary dismiss a complaint
before or without completing
an investigation. The context of the
descriptors
’ in s.466(7)(c)(ii) to dismiss a complaint, is
to focus on the
application
to the Tribunal. It would necessarily involve
an exercise of the power to dismiss before embarking on a hearing or a
re-hearing.
It is necessary to again consider each complaint as to whether we
are satisfied that any of the ‘
descriptors’
apply to each.
Complaints ‘B’ and ‘C’
conduct in each complaint ‘B’ and ‘C’ occurred more than
3 years before the complaints were made in December
2013. The legal effect of
the ‘Board’ making no positive order pursuant to s.428(2) of the
‘LPA’ was the
complaints could not be dealt with other than being
dismissed by the ‘Board’. We are satisfied that the conduct
of as set out in the principal
was not capable of
amounting to ‘
professional misconduct’
. There also was no
public interest in having the complaints dealt with despite their age. The
‘Complainants’ in seeking
a re-hearing of the Board determinations
concerning these complaints when the ‘Boards’ could not deal with
than being dismissed was ‘misconceived’.
Tribunal has jurisdiction to order the ‘Complainants’ pay the
practitioners ‘costs’ in respect of complaints
Complaint ‘A’
practitioner instituted proceedings against the ‘project manager’
and the builder of the ‘Complainants’
house on the 18
of March 2011.He was first instructed surrounding the dispute in August
2009.This complaint was “
Between August 2009 and March 2011
the practitioner
failed to take appropriate legal action against the [project
manager] or ...in the alternative failed to follow the Complainants expressed
[sic] instructions in relation to taking appropriate legal action against the
[project manager’] “
the period complained of the Tribunals assessment in the’
’ was that the ‘practitioner’ acted cautiously and
competently and dealt with the many issues evolving in the dispute.
A failure or delay to take
appropriate legal action, involves an evaluation of reasonableness. It was
reasonable for the ‘practitioner’
not to have issued legal process
until March 2011.The ‘Complainants’ made serious allegations of
misconduct that the
‘practitioner’ intentionally assisted the
project manager in the dispute, including to delay issuing the legal
proceedings.
There was no information that gave credence to these allegations.
There was no material before us that the ‘practitioner’
follow express instructions to issue proceedings against the project manager
earlier than they were. The complaint allegation
was untenable. There was no
real prospect of its success. It was therefore lacking in substance.
Tribunal has jurisdiction to make a costs order against the
‘Complainants’ in respect of complaint A.
complaint is set out at paragraph 22 of the
principal reasons
reasons for determining the ‘Board’ were correct are in paragraphs
22.1 to 22.14 of the
principal reasons
. On becoming aware of a sale of
the builders’ house, the ‘practitioner’ sought
counsels’ advice in August
2011 whether there was sufficient evidence to
obtain a freezing order or alternatively seek the builder to quarantine the
of the sale, to avoid costs of a court application. The
‘practitioner’ responded to the Board that counsel advised the
evidence was not sufficient for a successful application for a freezing order.
On the 2 September 2011, the day after registration
of new owners of the
builder’s house, a file note of the advice from counsel on the
‘practitioners’ file at a meeting
at chamber’s records that
only a 25% chance of obtaining a freezing order existed on the evidence. The
‘Complainants’
dispute the authenticity of the file note. They
assert they heard no such advice. They do not dispute that counsel, following a
concerning a freezing order and advice that the sale
went through
, in the presence of the ‘Complainants ‘dictated a
letter for the ‘practitioner’ to send to the builders’
solicitor asking whether his client would quarantine the proceeds of sale, to
avoid an application for a freezing order.
builders’ solicitor responded to the letter, that the builder had used the
proceeds of sale to pay debts and purchase a
block of land, but the builder
would agree not to deal with the land until the litigation was over. The land
contract had been entered
in June 2011.The debts and the obligation to buy the
land were likely excluded from any court order prohibiting the builder to deal
with any proceeds of sale. The ‘Complainants’ appear to have
achieved all they could of the sale proceeds, without a
risky application for a
freezing order as explained in the
. The practitioner
took appropriate action in seeking counsels’ advice, seeking and obtaining
an alternative way of securing
what proceeds of the sale were likely available
other than a risky and costly application for a freezing order on the proceeds
are satisfied that there was no substance to the complaint. It was untenable so
it was lacking in substance.
Tribunal has jurisdiction to make a costs order against the
‘Complainants’ in respect of complaint
Complaint E
. This complaint was that –
Between December 2010 and August 2012, the Practitioner knowingly
provided counsel acting for the Complainants with false and misleading
information in relation to: [
seven (7) separate matters set out in the
principal reasons
It is unnecessary to repeat them or our reasons in the
. The allegation in the complaint is one of deceit. The
‘Complainants’ submissions on this cost’s application was
raise matters not previously subject of complaint, to do with alleged inadequacy
of briefing counsel.
was no information or material before us that gave substance to the complaint.
We are of the opinion the complaint was untenable.
It had no real prospect of
success that the practitioner would be guilty of “
unsatisfactory
professional conduct
professional misconduct
The complaint was lacking in substance.
Tribunal has jurisdiction to make a costs order against the
‘Complainants’ in respect of complaint
Complaint ‘F’
complaint was dealt with at paragraphs 24.1-24.6 of the
The contract between
the ‘practitioners’ firm, and the ‘Complainants’ was
entered on the 31 August 2009 and
You authorise us to apply
trust funds provided by you or from any other source to any account rendered to
by us “. Those terms could not unilaterally be changed by the
’Complainants’. The ‘Complainants’ agreed
there was a
legal right for the ‘practitioner’ to act to have the firms’
costs paid from its trust account as instructed
by the firms’
withdrawal of trust funds to pay the firms last invoice was authorised.
complaint was untenable. It had no prospect of success, and it was lacking in
Tribunal has jurisdiction to make a costs order against the complainants in
respect of complaint ‘F’
Complaint G
complaint is set out at paragraph 25 of the
principal reasons
. It has an
element of dishonesty alleged against the ‘practitioner’ that he was
aware no meaningful outcome could be
achieved at a court mediation to be held on
of September 2011 in Hobart, having the
‘Complainants’ attend in person from England.
previous mediation for the 18
of July 2011had been vacated to the
of September 2011, necessitating cancelling flights booked to
leave England the 7
of July 2011. The practitioner had then advised
the project managers lawyers were not ready and had requested the mediation be
the ‘practitioner’ advising only a slim chance of
anything meaningful being achieved at the July mediation. The
‘Complainants’
informed the ‘practitioner’ of new flight
arrangements leaving England 1
of September 2011 to Hobart and
departing Hobart for England the 13
of September 2011 to attend the
of September 2011 mediation.
‘Complainants’ identified what to them were indicators the
‘practitioner’ knew no meaningful outcome could
occur at the
mediation but did not advise them to cancel travelling and seek to adjourn the
mediation. Following an investigation
each of the indicators proffered by the
‘Complainants’ were found to be wrong or paltry, such as the alleged
the ‘practitioner’ did not say anything at the mediation,
when the advocacy was left to their counsel. None of the indicators
substance to show a form of disciplinary
The practitioner
refuted the allegation, and an offer was made to settle the proceedings at the
mediation although not accepted.
The complaint was untenable. It had no real
prospect of success and was lacking in substance.
Tribunal has jurisdiction to make a costs order against the
‘Complainants’ in respect of complaint ‘G’
Complaint ‘H’
complaint and reasons for not varying the ‘Boards’ determination are
stated in the
. To paraphrase the
complaint, it was the ‘practitioner’ gave negligent advice around
June 2012, regarding opposing an
application by the respondents in proceedings
for production of documents claimed as privileged.
‘Complainants’ submission on costs to this complaint failed to
address it. Instead, the ‘practitioners’
work in preparing discovery
and making the list of documents, finalised about November 2011was addressed,
alleging a more extensive
list was prepared than otherwise the
Federal Court
applicable at the time required.
was no information or material of the alleged negligent advice as complained of,
that could be identified.
complaint was untenable; it is without any real prospect of success. It was
lacking in substance.
Tribunal has jurisdiction to make a costs order against the
‘Complainants’ in respect of complaint
Complaint ‘I’
complaint alleged negligent advice concerning the ‘Complainants’
particulars of loss and damage in the legal proceedings.
At paragraphs 27.1
-27.3 of the
our decision is
explained in not varying the ‘Boards’ determination.
negligence or incompetence will not constitute a form of professional
misconduct.
Something more is
first part of the complaint alleged a failure to institute proceedings before
March 2011, that rendered any loss and damage incurred
prior to then could not
be recovered. There was no negligence, and the notion that loss and damage prior
to March 2011 could not
be recovered was a misconception in law and
The second part of the complaint was- whether
the’ practitioner’ was negligent as he –
particulars of loss and damage that were not
‘Complainants’ requested an amendment to the complaint with the
‘Board’, so the alternative part of it
was to read
or in the alternative
, filed in the
particulars of loss and damage that were not legitimate.” [ the
underlining is ours]
seems between the request for amendment and the ‘Board ‘making its
determination the word ‘
remained the wording of
the complaint and the words ‘
filed in the Court’
part of it.
change of wording or their omission may have been made by ‘the
‘Board’ mistakenly or in its obligation pursuant
to s. 467(5)
‘LPA’ so a meaningful response from the ‘practitioner’
could be made to the complaint. The practitioner
prepared the particulars of
loss and damage, but it was most unlikely he filed them in the Court. The
‘Complainants’
wished to agitate that legal advice relating to the
consequential loss and damage part of their claim, as distinct from the
rectification
or reinstatement part, was attended to negligently. Whether the
particulars were ‘prepared’ or ‘filed’ or
‘caused to be filed’ was irrelevant to the determinations made
whether negligence occurred or if so, could amount
to a professional conduct
matter for the ‘practitioner.’
‘Complainants’ submissions to the Tribunal that the complaint was
‘doctored ‘to the benefit of the’
practitioner’
altered context made the complaint of negligence less serious
are rejected.
investigation report to the ‘Board’ before us showed and the
‘practitioners’ response to the
‘Complainants’ gave instructions under various heads of damage for
‘consequential loss,’ that the
practitioner advised some were
hopeless and were removed. Advice as to other heads of claim involving
consequential loss relating
to property in England and unfavourable currency
exchanges caused due to delay in the Tasmanian build were arguable but were
to be subject to remoteness arguments and depended on evidence of
surrounding circumstances at the time of contracting for the house
practitioner forwarded draft particulars of loss and damage and his file note as
to remoteness issues concerning those
remaining on the
‘Complainants’ instructions to counsel prior to mediation and
pending their filing.
particulars with those subject to possibly being too remote were filed. Counsel
then took a firm view that some were too remote
and could not succeed. All the
heads of damage, originated from the ‘Claimants’. None were
ultimately tested. The issue
for the ‘practitioner’ was an
assessment, revisited as proceedings continued and evidence either obtained or
not in support,
whether a particular head of loss and damage could be supported
wholly or partly and not too remote.
.`There was no
material that could amount to negligence by the practitioner in this
. `The complaint was misconceived and lacking in substance as to the
first part and had no real prospect of success in respect of
the second part;
we are satisfied it was lacking in substance.
Tribunal has jurisdiction to make a costs order against the complainants in
respect of complaint ‘I.’
Complaint ‘J’
complaint and our reasons for determining the Boards decision was correct is set
investigation of this complaint from August 2009 to August 2012, regardless of
time issues, established the investigator reporting
to the ‘Board’
.... encountered no negligent or useless
work during the investigation. The allegation has not required me to review
particular items
on the practitioner’s bills, or the manner of charging
and I have not done so”.
are satisfied as stated in the
principal reasons
that the allegation
replicated parts of other complaints. The ‘Complainants’ had an
opinion they were charged for work
they thought was unnecessary, incompetently
undertaken and done for the project managers benefit and not theirs. None of the
information
before us gave even a hint that such a view could be rationally
are satisfied the complaint was untenable. It had no prospect of success and was
therefore lacking in substance.
.The Tribunal has
respect of complaint ‘J’.
Complaint ‘K’
Paraphrased,
this complaint was that the ‘practitioner’ whilst instructed
deliberately made decisions and took actions
‘Complainants’ best interests and which advantaged the respondent
project manager
proceedings.
Tribunal in the re-hearing, assessed the potentiality of the information and
material as to the’ practitioner’ being
‘unsatisfactory professional conduct’ or ‘professional
misconduct’. The complaint overlapped with
other complaints especially
parts of complaint ‘A’ and complaint ‘J’. The complaint
is a serious allegation
of intentionally harming the ‘Complainants’
and benefitting the
project manager
‘Complainants’ in their submission on costs repeat the allegations
and asserted the investigator, ‘Board’
and Tribunal had “
excess of 25 actions of the practitioner that supported the allegation that the
practitioner was protecting the project manager
and not working in their best
interests”.
They were not set out or separately referenced to material
e re-hearing
application
alleged conduct prior to the 3 December can be dealt with by the
‘Board’ or the Tribunal. No inference should be made
that in that
period there was any misconduct. As stated in the
principal reasons
information did not show the ‘practitioners’ actions were anything
but in the ‘Complainants’ interests.
The investigator set out in
tabular form 11 examples of the ‘Complainants’ grievances after 11th
of March 2011as to those
allegations. We stated in the principal reasons
have read the grievances and the investigators response to each
from her investigation. .... but suffice to state that a theme of
deceitful conduct by the practitioner is levelled without any basis for doing so
on the information before the
allegations are very serious
other information than that before the ‘Board’ in respect of these
assertions was before the Tribunal. We are satisfied
the complaint was
untenable. There was no real prospect of it succeeding. We are satisfied the
complaint is lacking in substance.
Tribunal has jurisdiction to make a costs order against the
‘Complainants’ in respect of complaint
Complaint ‘L’
complaint relates to the ‘practitioner’ giving the
‘Complainants’ estimates of costs as required by the
cost disclosure
provisions in Division 3 of
of the ‘LPA’, specifically
Sections 291(1)(c) and s.299 and the possible effects of a failure to disclose
provided for
in Sections 300 (1) to (7).
300(7) of the ‘LPA’ makes a failure to comply with a statutory
requirement such as not disclosing any substantial
change to anything included
in an already made costs disclosure (that is the immediate earlier disclosure if
one) as soon as reasonably
practicable, capable of constituting
“unsatisfactory professional conduct” or “professional
misconduct”.
was no reasonable likelihood of the ‘practitioner’ being found
guilty of ‘unsatisfactory professional conduct’
‘professional misconduct’ on this complaint for the reasons in the
principal reasons
to the test of whether any of the ‘
descriptors’
the information and material before the Tribunal, we are not satisfied any do. A
breach of s.299 by the law practice of
failing to give an update of costs
between September 2011 and August 2012 could not be excluded on the material.
The practitioner
was involved in any breach by the law practice that then
occurred. It cannot be said the complaint was untenable; was lacking in
substance or any other ‘
descriptors
Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to make a costs order against the
‘Complainants’ concerning complaint ‘L’.
Discretion to Order costs and the basis of costs order
Tribunal has a discretion whether to order the ‘Complainants ‘pay
the ‘practitioners’ legal costs. Being
a legal practitioner, he
cannot and does not seek to recover costs of his own time as lawyer, which we
accept was of considerable
value over a long duration.
orders in s.481(4) ‘LPA ’are referenced by s.481(5) as to the bases
on which taxation or assessment
is to be conducted so to determine the extent to
which a costs order is to provide indemnity in Tribunal proceedings.
bases, being either party and party basis, solicitor
and client or indemnity
basis is required for costs to be paid
are satisfied that the ‘Complainants’ be required to pay the
‘practitioners’ costs of and incidental to
the re-hearing
application except in respect of complaint ‘L’. The usual basis for
costs in proceedings in a Court are
that they be paid on a party party basis. We
accept party and party should be the starting point for the basis of proceedings
the Tribunal for determining the extent of indemnity for costs incurred
by the ‘practitioner’.
‘practitioner’ applies for a special cost order they be paid on an
indemnity basis. That is, to the extent of what
he has incurred excluding any
costs that are clearly unreasonable or excessive.
Hamod v State of New South Wales
[2002] FCAF97 Gray J with whom Carr and
Goldberg JJ agreed stated at [20]:
“ Indemnity costs are not
designed to punish a party for persisting with a case that turns out to fail.
They are not awarded
as a means of deterring litigants from putting forward
arguments that might be attended by uncertainty. Rather, they serve the purpose
of compensating a party fully for costs incurred, as a normal costs order could
not be expected to do, when the court takes the
view that it was unreasonable
for the party against whom the order is made to have subjected the innocent
party to the expenditure
above passage being cited with approval by Blow CJ in
Di Benedetto v
[2019] TASSC 33
and by Pearce J in
Fingal Pastoral Pty Ltd v Page
Seager Lawyers
[2020] TASSC 40.
considering ordering costs be paid and the basis for them, in exercise of our
discretion we take account of the following factors-
(i) Costs orders including special costs orders are not punitive.
(ii) The ‘Complainants’ were unrepresented throughout the
application but there was information they consulted lawyers
at times, at least
as to procedural matters before the Tribunal.
(iii) The ‘Complainants’ were informed at the first opportunity by
the Tribunal that they could be liable for costs of
‘practitioner’ and were warned costs could be considerable if
counsel was involved.
(iv) Although unrepresented, as counsel for the practitioner submitted, their
complaint material and submissions reveal they are
articulate and not lacking
education. They also had an ability to fashion content of correspondence and
material to suit their perceptions
of conduct and made assumptions that had no
(v) Being unrepresented by solicitors and counsel was a choice of the
‘Complainants‘ unfettered by financial disability,
or availability
of legal representation.
(vi) Being unrepresented meant they had little need for ethical considerations
or restraint, making serious allegations of deceit
and dishonesty without a
basis, where if they were represented by a lawyer they could not have been made.
As observed in
Bhagat v Royal Sun Alliance Life Assurance Australia Ltd
[2000] NSWSC 59
Hodgson CJ in Eq observed:
“...litigants in person can cause great hardship and expense to other
parties, through making allegations and claims that could
not reasonably or even
properly be made, and through making proceedings much longer and more expensive
than they would otherwise
be, by not focusing on the real issues in the case.
Conduct of that nature by legally represented parties would often lead to orders
for indemnity costs.”
(vii)`The Complainants being wholly unsuccessful of establishing any
complaints amounted to “unsatisfactory professional conduct”
“professional misconduct” and all except ‘L’ being
‘misconceived’ or ‘lacking in substance’.
(viii)`The ‘practitioner’ was required to incur expense of
representation by solicitors and counsel that should have not
been brought by
the ‘Complainants’ to the Tribunal.
are strong factors that satisfy the awarding of costs on a special indemnity or
solicitor client basis in respect of all complaints
other than ‘L’.
‘E’ and ‘K’ on the material involve unjustified
allegations of deceit and dishonesty
and lying to counsel ( part of E) ) against
the ‘practitioner’. Also, there was an unjustified belief the
‘practitioner‘
was deliberately assisting the opposing party project
manager by his actions in the court proceedings, all of which support such
basis for costs order.
complaints other than ‘L’ do not have the same elements of special
circumstances as ‘E’ and ‘K’,
but they do have the
element they should never have been brought, because of being misconceived
(‘B’ and ‘C’
and part of’ I’) and
‘lacking in substance’ (A, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, and K).
It is desirable to fashion a costs order to allow the ‘practitioner
‘to recover a substantial proportion of costs expended
by him to his
lawyers, less than full indemnity, to be taxed on one basis in respect of all
complaints excluding complaint ‘L’
and relating to the
Supreme Court
is ordered that-
(1) Pursuant to
Legal Profession Act 2007
Complainants are required to pay the costs of the ‘practitioner’ of
and incidental to the re-hearing application
to the Tribunal made pursuant to
of the ‘LPA’ except for costs relating to complaint
particular ‘L’;
(2) That pursuant to
of the ‘LPA’ the amount of the costs
required to be paid is to be determined on a solicitor client basis; and
(3) The costs be taxed in accordance with the
Supreme Court Rules 2000
NX & LX v A Legal
Practitioner KBC
[2023] TASLPDT 1 August
‘LPA’ pursuant to
‘LPA’ except
(5)(b) and s.
. Also pursuant to
16 August 2023 and 22
February 2024
Dated 16 February
Complaints and discipline and
‘LPA’ to provide for the
protection of consumers of the services of the legal profession and the public
generally and
provide a means of redress for complaint about
(7)(c)(ii) I
State Electricity
Commission of Victoria v Babel[1998]1VR102 per Ormond JA at 109; Cocks Macnish
and Anor v Biundo [2004]194 at [21]-[31]
; Laurent and Commissioner of Police
[2009] WASAT 254
; PB v Legal Practitioner [2019]TASLPDT1 at 30 as to their
Ibid @1 paragraphs
20.1-20.8 and paragraphs
Ibid 1 paragraph
Ibid at paragraphs
22.10 -22.13
Ibid paragraph
Ibid paragraphs 24.1
Ibid at paragraph
Ibid at paragraphs 26.1
Myers v Elman [1940]AC
282@288; Pillai v Messiter (No2) (1989)16 NSWLR197; Law Society Tasmania v
[2001] TASSC 12
9 at 46 and comments concerning Complaint ‘
H’ Ibid 1 at paragraph
Complainant submission
15 January 2017 Tab 7(b) page 5
Complainants’
submission on costs 16 February 2024 page
IR page 29 and
practitioners’ response at IR page
Ibid 1 paragraph 28.1
See Ibid 1 at
paragraphs 29.1 - 29.7
1 principal reasons at paragraph
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
and cases cited at paragraph 19.1.6 of the
paragraphs 30.1- 30.19
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v Green (N02) [2022] TASPDT 2 [103] and
Del Pont ‘Law of Costs’ 4
Edition .Also see the
discussion of the majority in the
Court of Appeal NSW in
[1995] NSWSC 17
, held the Medical Council of New South Wales
disciplinary tribunal as a statutory body, had power to order indemnity costs be
against a complainant as encompassing the word ‘Costs’.
Transcript of directions
hearing 10 December 2015
Shepherd J in Colgate -Palmolive Company v Cussons Pty Ltd (1993) 46 FCR 225 at
24 provides some categories of the special features
where indemnity orders have
been made, allegations of fraud knowing them to be false, making irrelevant
allegations of fraud, making
allegations that should never have been made or the
undue prolongation of a case on groundless contentions. The categories not being
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (610 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter