URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCCA/2025/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Roland v State of Tasmania [2025] TASCCA 1 (27 May 2025)
[2025] TASCCA 1
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (COURT OF CRIMINAL
Roland v State of Tasmania
[2025] TASCCA
: ROLAND, Mark Raymond
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE/S:
JUDGMENT OF:
Pearce J, Brett J and Marshall AJ
Criminal Law – Appeal and new trial – Particular grounds of
appeal – Conduct of defence counsel – Appellant
found guilty of
trafficking – Evidence not adduced from defence witnesses – No
miscarriage of justice.
Aust Dig Criminal Law [3515]
TKWJ v The Queen
[2002] HCA 46
212 CLR 124
JAGD v Tasmania
[2021] TASCCA 16
Criminal law – Appeal and new trial – Verdict
unreasonable or insupportable having regard to evidence – Appeal
for one of three counts – Circumstantial case of trafficking in
controlled drugs.
Aust Dig Criminal Law [3476]
Misuse of Drugs Act
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Director of Public
Prosecutions
Judgment Number:
[2025] TASCCA 1
paragraphs:
Serial No 1/2025
File No CCA 3549/2023
MARK RAYMOND ROLAND v THE STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
27 May 2025
Orders of the
to appeal granted.
against conviction on counts 1 and 3 on indictment 87/2023 dismissed.
against conviction on count 2 on indictment 87/2023 allowed and verdict of
acquittal substituted;
imposed by Jago J on 7 December 2023 quashed;
1 and 3 on indictment 87/2023 remitted to Jago J for
re-sentence.
Serial No 1/2025
File No 3549/2023
MARK RAYMOND ROLAND v THE
STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT PEARCE J
27 May 2025
appellant was tried before Jago J and a jury on three counts of trafficking in a
controlled substance contrary to the
Misuse of Drugs Act
All three counts concerned controlled drugs found during a police search of the
appellant's home in Devonport on 2 July 2020. The
first count alleged
trafficking in N-ethylpentylone. The second count alleged trafficking in
1,4-Butanediol. The third count alleged
trafficking in MDMA, methylamphetamine
and cocaine. On 15 September 2023 the jury returned verdicts of guilty on each
count. On 7
December 2023 the appellant was sentenced to a global term of
imprisonment for two years from 30 June 2023 with eligibility for parole
having served one year. This appeal challenges the convictions on two grounds.
Because the grounds involve questions of fact
alone, or mixed questions of fact
and law, the appeal may be brought only with the leave of the Court:
, s 401(1)(b).
appellant was unrepresented. His notice of appeal, as originally drawn, did not
sufficiently identify the grounds he wished to
argue. In advance of the hearing
the grounds of appeal were refined and added to such that three grounds, one
also challenging the
sentence, were advanced in these terms:
(a) the appellant's trial counsel caused a miscarriage of justice by failing to
call the appellant and other named persons to give
evidence, and failing to
sufficiently challenge parts of the prosecution evidence;
(b) the verdicts of the jury were unreasonable or could not be supported having
regard to the evidence;
(c) the sentence was manifestly excessive.
the reasons which follow, the first ground is not made out. The second ground of
appeal is not made out in respect to counts
one and three on the indictment and
the appeal against the convictions on those two counts should be dismissed.
However, the second
ground is made out in respect to count two on the indictment
and the appeal against the conviction on that count should be allowed.
single sentence was imposed for all three counts it will be necessary to quash
the sentence. The appellant should be re-sentenced
by the trial judge. As a
result, it will not be necessary to determine the third ground of appeal that
the sentence was manifestly
The evidence at
police search of the appellant's home commenced at about 6.15am. The prosecution
case was that the appellant, in respect to all
of the drugs which were found,
prepared them for supply, guarded or concealed them or possessed them with the
intention of selling.
The appellant did not give or adduce evidence, but
participated in a police interview in which he admitted that some of the drugs
were his but were for personal use. He claimed that the other substances did not
belong to him and he had no knowledge of them even
though they were found at his
appellant's house was described to the jury by a number of police witnesses and
photographs of it were tendered. As it was viewed
from the street, the house was
oriented to the right of the block. A sealed driveway led from the street along
the left boundary
towards a separate rectangular building, referred to in the
evidence as the "shed", which continued from the end of the driveway
to near the
rear boundary. That building contained a row of six rooms, first a tattoo
parlour adjacent to a work shop, then, progressively
further from the street, an
office, a printer room, a storage room and, at the back, a bedroom occupied by
the appellant's son. There
were three external entrances to this building. A
sliding door off the driveway and a door adjacent to the garden led directly
the tattoo parlour. The third external entrance was from the back yard into
the rear bedroom. The only access into the office, the
printer room and the
storage room was from an internal door from the tattoo parlour and then, in
turn, through further internal doors.
There was no access to these other rooms
from the appellant's son's room.
the house and extending to the rear boundary adjacent to the building just
described was an open garden area. On the right
boundary, just behind the house,
was a water feature. A vegetation hedge then extended back from the water
feature along the right
boundary to the rear.
evidence established that other persons, Taneesha Dance, Emmy McDermott, Amy
McDermott and Adrian Wood, were in the tattoo parlour
or office when the police
arrived. Mr Roland was inside the main house but was brought to the shed.
the course of the search, controlled drugs were found in various locations. A
hollowed out rock was found under logs under the
water feature. Inside the rock
was a cryovac bag containing 14.8 grams of N-ethylpentylone and seven snap lock
bags. Three of those
snap lock bags contained no common drugs. However:
contained 1.7 grams of MDMA;
contained 1.4 grams of MDMA;
contained 0.2 grams of N-ethylpentylone;
contained 15.1 grams of N-ethylpentylone.
first count on the indictment concerned the N-ethylpentylone, a total of 30.1
grams. Neil McLachlan-Troup, a toxicologist, gave
evidence that N-ethylpentylone
was closely related to MDMA and cocaine and was often passed off as those
of swabs taken from three of the snap lock bags inside the sealed bag disclosed
the presence of DNA with a high grade match
to the appellant. Dr Corey
Griffiths, a forensic scientist, gave evidence that each of the DNA profiles
were mixed profiles, but
the profile he obtained from the swab from one bag was
100 billion times more likely if the appellant, rather than another member
the population, was a contributor. In the case of the swabs from the two other
bags, the likelihood ratio that the appellant was
a contributor to the profile
was 15 billion.
two on the indictment concerned the drug 1,4-Butanediol. Inside a refrigerator
in the workshop the police found three plastic
containers. One of the containers
was partially wrapped in black tape. Inside each container was what was
described as a "frozen
crystalline substance" which at room temperature was a
clear viscous liquid, respectively 5 millilitres, 29 millilitres and 4
millilitres.
The liquid was analysed and, in each case, identified as
1,4-Butanediol. The expert evidence adduced by the prosecution established
1,4-Butanediol was known as a "date rape" drug which metabolised to a drug known
as GHB. At higher doses 1,4-Butanediol caused
drowsiness, unconsciousness and
lack of memory. At lower doses it caused euphoria and improved sexual
performance or libido. The
typical recreational dose was 1 to 3
millilitres.
three on the indictment concerned MDMA, methylamphetamine and cocaine which was
found in various locations. Two of the bags
retrieved from the hollow rock
contained MDMA. Another sealed cryovac bag was found on the ground under the
hedge which extended
along the boundary from the water feature. The police
officer who found that bag said that the hedge was deep and about three metres
tall. He was down on his hands and knees when he found the package and had to
reach in more than an arm's length to retrieve it.
Sealed inside the cryovac bag
was a snap lock bag with a further seven snap lock bags inside. The contents of
the bags were analysed
with the following result:
contained MDMA, respectively 0.2 grams, 0.1 grams and 0.2 grams;
contained 0.1 grams of methylamphetamine;
contained 0.4 grams of cocaine.
of two of the bags containing MDMA inside the cryovac bag from under the hedge
revealed the presence of DNA. Analysis of the
DNA in each case revealed a mixed
profile but which matched to the appellant with likelihood ratios of 9.1 billion
and 12 million
respectively.
package wrapped in black tape was also found within the water feature. Vacuum
sealed inside that package were seven snap lock bags.
Six were swabbed and the
contents analysed with the following result:
contained 1.1 grams of MDMA;
contained 0.3 grams of cocaine;
contained 0.8 grams of MDMA;
contained 0.6 grams of cocaine;
contained 0.7 grams of cocaine;
contained 0.3 grams of methylamphetamine.
in the desk in the office. The crystals
were analysed and shown to be
methylamphetamine, in all 0.5 grams. Inside a plastic tool box in the top drawer
of the desk were two
snap lock bags. One of the bags contained 1.8 grams of
methylamphetamine. The other contained a substance which was negative for
drugs. Two other snap lock bags were found in a desk in the tattoo parlour. One
of those bags contained 1.8 grams of methylamphetamine
and the other 1.9 grams
of methylamphetamine.
prosecution adduced evidence of other items found during the search which it
relied on as circumstantial evidence to support
the inference of
trafficking.
was a large fence between the shed and the house with what appeared to be spikes
covering the top and a combination lock on
the gate. The fence restricted access
from the driveway to the back yard. The property was extensively covered by
surveillance cameras
and motion sensors. There were television screens in the
tattoo parlour and in the office which were linked to at least some of the
cameras. Motion sensors along the driveway, if activated, sounded a noise which
could be heard from within the tattoo parlour and
the office. The prosecution
contended that evidence of the security and electronic monitoring of the
property made it more likely
that the drugs found at the property belonged to
the appellant, and that it was relevant to the jury's assessment of whether
person could have hidden the drugs without the appellant's
the second drawer in the desk in the office was a vacuum sealed bag containing
$9,050 in $50 notes. A wad of 31 $50 notes, amounting
to $1,550, was in the
pocket of a jacket hanging on the back of the door of the main bedroom in the
house. The appellant had $973.35
in cash on his person. A small set of digital
scales was found in the same desk.
Sunbeam Food Saver vacuum sealer machines were found, both in the tattoo
parlour. One was on the desk. The other was on a shelf
at the rear with a box
containing rolls of vacuum seal bags. Other unused vacuum bags were also
the workshop the police found five rolls of black tape. Another roll of black
tape was found in the backyard near the water feature.
The tape was consistent
with the tape used to bind the cryovac packages containing drugs which were
found. In the storage room the
police found a number of clip seal bags and in
the draw of the desk in the office there were a large number of new clip seal
Sergeant Jennifer Hawkins gave expert evidence about the sale of controlled
drugs. Her opinion was that in July 2020, during
the pandemic, drug prices were
approximately double pre-COVID prices. As to methylamphetamine, a point, meaning
0.1 of a gram of
the drug, commonly sold for $100 prior to COVID but for at
least $200 during the pandemic. Larger quantities were also sold for about
double the former price. She said that "point deals" were commonly in small snap
lock bags and weighed on electronic scales. Larger
quantities were usually
purchased, she said, by persons who intended to sell rather than use the drug.
Heavy users may use five or
ten points per day. According to Detective Sergeant
Hawkins, cocaine was sold for approximately $100 per point or up to $500 per
gram. MDMA was typically sold in capsule form for about $50 each, but could be
sold in powder form for five hundred dollars per gram.
N-ethylpentylone, she
said, was very similar to MDMA and sold for the same price. 1,4-Butanediol sold
for $40 per three millilitres.
was no evidence adduced by the prosecution of any actual or proposed drug sales.
The appellant's mobile phone was seized but
no evidence was adduced about
whether it was analysed.
on Detective Sergeant Hawkins' evidence the approximate value of the drugs found
on 2 July 2020 was:
N-ethylpentylone,
a total of 30.1 grams, around $15,000;
1,4-Butanediol, a total of 38 millilitres, around $500;
MDMA, a total of
5.5 grams, $2,750 ;
cocaine, a total
of 2.0 grams, depending on how it was sold, between $1,000 and $2,000; and
methylamphetamine,
a total of 6.4 grams, if sold in point form, $12,800.
appellant participated in a police interview on 2 July 2020. An edited audio
visual recording of the interview was played to
the jury. In the course of the
interview the appellant told the police that:
he lived at the
house with his son and daughter;
that numerous
other people stayed there from time to time including Emmy [McDermott], Amy
[McDermott], Adrian Wood and Taneesha [Dance];
he had a "bad
habit of taking in strays";
the "shed" was
entered through the glass sliding doors into the tattoo studio;
when people
stayed they mainly stayed "behind the studio" but sometimes in the lounge
he normally
slept in the main bedroom in the house;
quite a few
people, up to thirty, regularly stayed at his house;
when "Woodsy"
came to stay he sometimes entered over the back fence;
he had cameras
as a security measure which were monitored via a television in the shed and a
motion sensor which triggered an alarm
in the studio. Adrian Wood, who he also
called "Grug", experimented with cameras, some of which did not work, but some
were monitored
via screens in the shed;
there was a
fence between the shed and the house and the spikes on the top of it were "bird
there was a
Rottweiler at the house which belonged to his son;
he spent most of
his time in the studio;
amphetamine, Ice, by smoking it, and purchased it weekly;
the item found
in the hollow rock was "definitely not" his and he did not know what it was,
although it looked like MDMA;
he used MDMA
"very very rarely";
he did not put
the package in the water feature and he did not know who did;
vacuum sealing machines was his and he used it for "putting me money in outside"
to "stop people pinchin' it";
he had handled
the roll of vacuum seal bags that were found;
he did not know
what the item found under the hedge was;
he used cocaine
"very, very rarely";
he had not seen
the two items located in the desk drawer before, they were not his, and there
were "four drug users in the room when
you got there";
he was not aware
of the package taped up with black tape found near the water feature. It looked
like "MD" but it was not his and
he did not know whose it was;
most of the
people who come to his house were recreational drug users;
the rolls of
black tape were his;
the cash was
his, and it was "partly inheritance (from his father) and partly savings" from
the tattoo business;
the cash was
vacuum sealed because he hid it outside, but had brought it in "last night"
because he was expecting someone to bring
a motorbike he planned to
business was not registered, but was "cash in hand", and what he earned varied a
believe in banks and did not use them;
he assumed the
money found in the jacket in the bedroom was his but he did not know what it was
most people paid
in fifty dollar notes which he "collected";
a lot of people
called in to his house, and many came to use drugs with him, although he did not
supply drugs;
the package in
the fridge door was not his but he had seen it, and thought it was "resin";
the scales were
his and he used them for "resin" and to weigh drugs when he bought them to
some of the many
people who were coming and going would "leave their
The law, the issues and the verdicts
Misuse of Drugs Act
, defines trafficking in the following
, in relation to a controlled
substance, includes
sell the substance; and
prepare the substance
for supply with the intention of selling it or in the belief that another person
intends to sell it; and
transport the substance
with the intention of selling it or in the belief that another person intends to
sell it; and
guard or conceal the
substance with the intention of selling it or in the belief that another person
intends to sell it; and
possess the substance
with the intention of selling it; and
import the substance
into Tasmania with the intention of selling it or in the belief that another
person intends to sell it."
was no issue at trial that N-ethylpentylone, 1,4-Butanediol, MDMA,
methylamphetamine and cocaine were controlled drugs. It
was an agreed fact that
N-ethylpentylone was an analogue of pentylone and thus a controlled drug by
operation of the Act, Schedule
(c)(vi) and
Item 29AA. A
controlled drug is a controlled substance by virtue of the definition in
each count, the prosecution was effectively required to prove beyond reasonable
doubt that the appellant was in possession of
the controlled substance the
subject of that count. In the circumstances of this case, the allegations of
preparing for supply and
guarding or concealing both necessarily involved the
assertion that the accused knew about, and exercised some control over, the
substances. As to the concept of possession, the trial judge directed the jury
that a person is in possession of property "if he
or she has it within his or
her power, disposition or control", and that unless it was proved that the
accused knew about an item
he could not have been in possession of it. Thus, on
whichever basis the accused was found guilty of trafficking, the jury must have
been satisfied beyond reasonable doubt for each count that the accused knew of,
and exercised some control over, the controlled drugs
which he had told the
police were not his and did not know about.
trial judge correctly directed the jury that, for count one on the indictment,
of the Act applied when it came to consider whether the appellant had the
requisite intention or belief concerning the controlled
substance in his
possession. The provision
it is proved in proceedings for an offence under subsection (1) that the
prepared a trafficable quantity
of a controlled substance for supply; or
transported a trafficable
quantity of a controlled substance; or
guarded or concealed a
trafficable quantity of a controlled substance; or
possessed a trafficable
quantity of a controlled substance; or
imported a trafficable quantity
of a controlled substance into Tasmania —
it is presumed, unless the accused on the balance of probabilities proves
otherwise, that the accused had the relevant intention or
belief concerning the
sale of the controlled substance required to constitute the offence."
only drug found in a trafficable quantity was N-ethylpentylone. A trafficable
quantity of that drug was a quantity of not less
than 25 grams:
, and Sch1,
, item 29AA. The total quantity
found during the search was 30.1 grams. As a result, for count one, it was for
the prosecution to
prove beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant prepared the
N-ethylpentylone for supply, guarded or concealed it or possessed it.
jury was satisfied of one or more of those things, then
operated to
create a presumption that the appellant had the relevant intention or belief
concerning the sale of the drug unless he
proved otherwise on the balance of
probabilities. Thus, for that count, it followed from the verdict that the jury
was satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant either prepared for
supply, guarded or concealed or possessed the N-ethylpentylone and
appellant failed to displace the presumption that he had the relevant intention
of the drugs 1,4-Butanediol, MDMA, methylamphetamine and cocaine were found in a
trafficable quantity. As a result, for counts
2 and 3 on the indictment the
prosecution carried the onus of establishing every element of the charge. That
meant that, for 1,4-Butanediol
for count two and one or more of MDMA,
methylamphetamine and cocaine for count three, the prosecution was required to
establish not
only that the appellant either prepared the drug for supply,
guarded or concealed it or possessed it, but also that he did so with
required intention or belief notwithstanding that he was in possession of less
than a trafficable quantity. It followed from
the verdicts on each of those
counts that the jury was satisfied of both elements beyond reasonable doubt. In
light of those verdicts,
it would be difficult to accept that the verdict on
count one would have been any different even if the presumption had not
case against the appellant that he had possession of the controlled substances,
and for counts 2 and 3 that he had the relevant
intention or belief, was a
circumstantial one. The jury was required to assess the credibility of the
account given by the appellant
during his interview. Otherwise, the prosecution
case depended entirely on drawing an inference of guilt from the largely
uncontroversial
evidence of the results of the search. Thus, subject to
operation of the presumption for count 1, the prosecution bore the onus of
establishing, for each count, that the circumstances were inconsistent with any
reasonable hypothesis other than the guilt of the
accused. The learned trial
judge did not give a circumstantial evidence direction in the conventional
sense. However, a number of
relevant directions were given which, in my
respectful view, were sufficient. Her Honour directed the jury that the
prosecution bore
the onus of proof of the charges beyond reasonable doubt. In
the context of giving a direction about the drawing of inferences, her
directed the jury to examine with care any possible inference to ensure that the
inference was justifiable and logical, and
"Importantly,
you should not draw an inference from direct evidence that supports the guilt of
the accused unless it is the only rational
inference available to you in the
circumstances."
jury was directed to consider each count on the indictment separately, although
her Honour noted that much of the evidence was
relevant to all counts. The trial
judge continued by indicating:
"It's not a situation where you look
at the first and say, for example, I'm satisfied beyond reasonable doubt.
They've proved that
one, therefor he must be guilty of all of them. That would
be a most erroneous approach."
trial judge reminded the jury, in particular about count 1, that the defence
case was that the appellant "knew nothing about
it", and "if he knew nothing
it." Her Honour then
"And that will be a matter for you
to consider, whether you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the State
have (sic) proven
he was in possession of it, or is it a reasonable possibility
that you can't exclude, that he did not know anything about it and
therefor was
not in possession of it."
jury could have been left in no doubt that if it considered that there was a
reasonable possibility, for each count considered
separately, that the appellant
did not know about the controlled substance or substances, the appellant was to
be acquitted. Similarly,
for the second and third counts, if there was a
reasonable possibility that the appellant did not intend to sell at least some
the drug or drugs to which those counts related, the appellant was to be
Ground 1 – The conduct of counsel
ground of appeal concerns the conduct of the appellant's trial counsel, Mr
Callum Purcell. The appellant's principal contentions
are that Mr Purcell failed
to comply with his instruction to call, and adduce evidence from, defence
witnesses, and wrongly refused
to accept that the appellant terminated his
instructions during the trial. The appellant, on this appeal, does not complain
the decision that he would not give evidence himself. He accepted that his
instructions to Mr Purcell, at trial, were that he would
rely on the account he
gave in his police interview.
appellant also makes a secondary contention that Mr Purcell failed to
sufficiently challenge aspects of the circumstantial evidence
adduced by the
prosecution.
will be further explained, a contention that a conviction should be set aside on
the ground that trial counsel acted incompetently
or contrary to instructions
will not, of itself, attract appellate intervention:
D'Orta-Ekenaike v Victoria Legal Aid
per McHugh J at [196],
Macartney v R
[2006] WASCA 29
31 WAR 416.
The onus is upon the appellant to establish
that "on any ground whatsoever there was a miscarriage of justice": the Code, s
The appellant must establish a deficiency or conduct which resulted in a
miscarriage of justice:
TKJW v The Queen
[2002] HCA 46
(2002) 212 CLR 124
per McHugh J
at 149 [79]. The question of whether a miscarriage of justice has occurred
raises two issues: did counsel's conduct
result in a material irregularity in
the trial and, if so, is there a significant possibility that the irregularity
affected the
per McHugh J at [79];
[2005] HCA 8
per Hayne J at [18].
first issues for determination are whether the appellant has established that Mr
Purcell did refuse to follow instructions or
refuse to accept that his
instructions were withdrawn and allow the appellant to represent himself. They
are questions which require
findings about disputed questions of fact. To enable
determination of those contentious factual issues this Court exercised the power
to receive evidence: the Code, s 409(1)(c). The appellant gave evidence and was
cross examined. He also tendered a statutory declaration
made by his son, on 6
September 2024, and called evidence from a witness, Tayla Colbeck. The
respondent adduced evidence from Mr
appellant's evidence to this Court, part of which emerged under
cross-examination, was that the drugs found in the hollowed out
rock near the
water feature, N-ethylpentylone and MDMA, belonged to a man named Luke Jackson.
The appellant told the police in his
interview in 2023 that he did not know
police was not completely true. He admitted that Mr Jackson had "showed
[the drug] to me and we'd had some of it", but he gave a
different version to
the police because he did not want to "dob anyone in". However, the appellant
claimed that he did not know that
Mr Jackson, after he had gone to live
somewhere else, had "stashed them there, in my property". According to the
appellant, it was
the N-ethylpentylone he thought he was "in trouble for", and
so in 2020, soon after the raid, he had Mr Jackson prepare a statutory
declaration accepting responsibility for the drugs in that sealed bag. At the
time, he said, Mr Jackson was on the run from the police
and was going to be
"hard to find." After having obtained the statement from Mr Jackson he gave it
to the lawyer who first acted
for him, Stephen Wright. He asked Mr Wright "if I
could just give it to the police", presumably to persuade the police to not
with the charge against him, but Mr Wright told him "we had to wait till
Wright ceased acting for the appellant in circumstances which were not fully
explained by the evidence. Another lawyer, Fabiano
Cangelosi, was engaged. Mr
Cangelosi was based in Hobart. Then, in 2023, not long before the trial of the
charges against the appellant
was due to commence, Mr Purcell was engaged after
Mr Cangelosi, according to the appellant, told him that he "didn't want to
The appellant met with Mr Purcell in his office in Devonport. The
appellant's account of that meeting was that he told Mr Purcell
Jackson. He said that he instructed Mr Purcell that, by then, Mr Jackson was in
prison in Tasmania, that "he'd done a
statutory declaration that was given to
Stephen Wright in Burnie when the charges first happened", and that the
appellant "wanted
him as a witness". The appellant had not kept a copy of Mr
Jackson's 2020 statement, but he understood Mr Purcell had asked for Mr
Cangelosi's file and expected Mr Jackson's statement was on it. He thought that
was important because "that was the spot that I thought
I was in trouble for".
to the appellant, by the time of the trial, when he knew that he was being
charged not only for the drugs in the hollow
rock which he said belonged to Mr
Jackson, but in respect to all of the drugs found at his home, he told Mr
Purcell about other witnesses.
He said he instructed Mr Purcell that he wanted
to call the other persons who would accept responsibility for the drugs which
to them, who were all willing to "come to court and claim theirs". He
claimed he instructed Mr Purcell that he wished to call "everybody
drugs there", which included Adrian Wood, Renee Davey, Taylor Colbeck, Amy
McDermott and Jed McDermott, as well as Mr Jackson.
He said that he gave Mr
Purcell a copy of the "drugs sheet", referring to the drug exhibit list provided
by the police, with notes
identifying which drugs the proposed witnesses agreed
they owned. The appellant's evidence was that, at the start of the trial, "we
were having my witnesses", and Mr Purcell, on the first day of the trial said
"we would have my witnesses" after the prosecution
witnesses. Then, however, on
the second day, Mr Purcell "threatened to quit if we had my witnesses" and
"wasn't interested" in having
them. With particular reference to Mr Jackson the
appellant's evidence continued:
"I wanted him as a witness and
– and then Mr Purcell said he didn't – he wanted to have the last
say and didn't want witnesses,
and we couldn't agree on that. Mr Purcell wanted
to say Mr Nobody put it there and I didn't know who it was, whereas I did know
it was and the person who put it there admits that they did. I couldn't
understand why – it wasn't a better way to go in court."
appellant's evidence was that Mr Purcell then threatened to quit if he insisted
on "having [his] witnesses":
"And on the second day, he said he'd
quit if he had my – if I insisted on having my witnesses. The judge
– Judge Jago
had already growled at me for not having a lawyer. Um, so, I
didn't want him to quit, but by the end of the second day, that was
dinnertime that that meeting happened, and by the end of the second day, I said,
"Maybe you should quit, mate, 'cause I think
– I think I'd rather have my
witnesses." You know."
the appellant was not entirely sure about when the conversations with Mr Purcell
took place, he thought the first exchange
counsel occurred in the middle of the second day of the trial, Wednesday 13
September 2023. When
it was suggested to the appellant in cross examination that
he agreed with Mr Purcell that the witnesses would not be called, the
said that he did "agree with [Mr Purcell] for that afternoon, and went along
with it", but by the end of the afternoon
he had changed his mind and said that
"he should put them", by which he meant that he still thought that the witnesses
called. Each time he raised the suggestion, he said, Mr Purcell
responded to the effect that "he wanted to have the last say and
thought that
was more important than the people that owned it saying they owned it". The
appellant accepted that he knew about the
right of "last say" from his
experience of, and advice from another lawyer during, a different trial.
appellant's evidence was that even though he had told Mr Purcell at the end of
the second day of the trial that he should quit,
Mr Purcell arrived at Court the
following morning and told him that he "couldn't sack him at that stage of the
trial." That passage
of the appellant's evidence reads:
"... I sort
of said, 'Why – why are you here, you' – because the night before
– at the end of the night before I
– we sort of – I thought we
agreed to part company, but, um, he said I couldn't sack him at that stage of
the trial."
to the appellant he did not know what to do. During a break he tried to have a
security guard get a message to the judge
but that person reported back to Mr
Purcell. He said Mr Purcell "came out and reiterated that we couldn't sack him
at that stage",
and that this was said in the presence of the appellant's
partner Amy McNulty and his son. He said "Amy ended up emailing the judge's
assistant". The appellant was asked during cross-examination why "didn't you
just put your hand up and say [to the judge], I want
to sack my lawyer". He
answered "I've never done that before. I've never seen it done before." He could
not remember being asked
the question in Court at the close of the prosecution
evidence whether he intended to give or adduce evidence, or what his answer
appellant relied upon a statutory declaration made by his son on 6 September
2024. None of the contents were disputed by the
respondent. It is relatively
brief and may conveniently be set out in full. The appellant's son
"...on one of the days of my dad's trial I attended court
with him and his partner Amy. Callum Purcell his lawyer said he won't be
dad's witnesses so he could have last say not the prosecution and it was too
late in the trial to seek other legal advice.
These conversations took place in
the small private room off the court room and in the waiting area."
appellant adduced evidence from a witness, Tayla Colbeck. She claimed that the
plastic container in the refrigerator which contained
1,4-Butanediol, which she called liquid G, was hers. She said that she paid
The purchase was organised by her friend and
the drug was delivered to the appellant's house by "a man" she did not identify.
cross-examined she agreed that she was not present at the time of the
police raid. She did not tell anyone at that time that the
container was hers
but said that if she had been asked she would have. She made a short statutory
declaration admitting ownership
of the four millilitres of that drug but agreed
that the appellant did not ever tell her to go to his lawyer or the police to
them about it, and did not ever ask her to go to court to give evidence.
referring to Mr Purcell's evidence reference should be made to what the material
before this Court reveals about the course
of the trial. The trial began on
Tuesday, 12 September 2023. The prosecution evidence continued through 13
September and for most
of 14 September. As soon as the Court convened on
Thursday, 14 September, Mr Purcell asked the trial judge, in the absence of the
jury, to allow him time to speak to the appellant "prior to the election being
made". He foreshadowed that he anticipated that then
"the election can be made
and then closings tomorrow and then finalise at that stage." The prosecution
case did not then conclude
until towards the end of that day. During the day,
the jury heard evidence from Detective Sergeant Jennifer Hawkins, and from the
two scientists Mr McLachlan-Troup and Dr Griffiths. The final piece of evidence
was the playing of the audio visual recording of
the appellant's police
the conclusion of the prosecution case, the following exchanges occurred between
the trial judge and Mr Purcell, in the presence
of the appellant and the
"HER HONOUR: Thank you. Are you in a position to have the
election put Mr Purcell?
MR PURCELL: Your Honour, if I may just have a moment. It would only be five
HER HONOUR: All right. Ladies and gentlemen that's all of the evidence that
the State intend to put before you. Very shortly we'll
turn and find out what
the accused seeks to do but I'm just going to give Mr Purcell five minutes, I'll
ask you to just step into
the jury room for a moment, please."
when the Court reconvened, the transcript records:
"HER HONOUR: All
right. Ready for the jury?
MR PURCELL: Thank you, yes.
HER HONOUR: Thank you, yes. Jury please.
THE JURY RETURNED
HER HONOUR: Right, thank you, ladies and gentlemen. My associate will put the
question to the accused, but it's customary that his
counsel answers it for him.
So I'll have the election put please.
THE FORMAL QUESTION WAS PUT TO THE ACCUSED
ACCUSED: No, thank you, your Honour.
HER HONOUR: The accused will not give nor adduce evidence.
MR PURCELL: That's correct, your Honour.
THE ACCUSED INDICATED THAT HE WOULD NEITHER GIVE NOR ADDUCE
can be seen from the foregoing that, when the accused was asked whether he would
give or adduce evidence, the accused answered
for himself "No, thank you, your
Honour", despite having heard the trial judge say to the jury that it was
customary for his counsel
to answer for him. In his evidence before this Court
he claimed that he did not, at the time, properly understand what he was being
14 September 2023, after the appellant was put to his election, the jury was
sent away until the following day. Before the Court
was adjourned, in the
presence of the appellant, counsel and the trial judge spent time addressing the
terms of the draft memorandum
to the jury her Honour had prepared, and making
submissions about other possible directions to the jury. The trial resumed on
15 September 2023 when the jury heard closing addresses, first from
counsel for the prosecution and then from defence counsel, before
Purcell had a substantially different account of these events. His evidence was
that the appellant contacted his office in August
2023 to arrange an
appointment. Before meeting with the appellant Mr Purcell contacted the
prosecuting authority and was informed
that the trial was listed in the very
near future. He sought and obtained an agreement that the trial would be
adjourned for about
a month and was provided with some disclosure from the
police and a copy of the Crown papers. His first meeting with the appellant
place at Mr Purcell's office, but not until after he had reviewed the material
he had been given, including a transcript of
the appellant's police interview.
During the meeting, according to Mr Purcell, he reminded the appellant of what
he had told the
police during the interview and they discussed how the charges
could be defended. At the conclusion of the meeting Mr Purcell recommended
the appellant maintain his plea of not guilty to each charge on the basis that
"he did not have possession of the drugs", relying
also on evidence from the
police and from the appellant's police interview of "a number of people
attending the residence", which
might explain the presence of the drugs.
According to Mr Purcell, the appellant confirmed his instructions to defend the
on that basis. In the course of their meeting the appellant told Mr
Purcell about his two previous lawyers. As a result, Mr Purcell
then wrote to Mr
Cangelosi with a request that he be provided with the file, but he did not
receive a response. According to Mr Purcell,
the appellant, during that first
meeting, also referred to "rumours that people were storing drugs at his house",
and said that he
had a list of who actually owned the drugs. Mr Purcell asked
the appellant to provide details of those persons and, if possible,
from them. However, at that time, no names or contact details were given, and Mr
Purcell's view was that the witnesses
"were not necessary for the defence being
run at that stage".
to Mr Purcell, he spoke to the appellant again about the basis of the defence
case prior to the start of the trial. He
said that the appellant was "happy with
it...given it was his defence and his record of interview". Mr Purcell's
evidence was that
it was not until Thursday, 14 September 2023, the third day of
the trial, that the appellant said to him that he wished to call witnesses.
was said to him, he said, outside the court room during an adjournment, just
before the audio visual recording of the appellant's
police interview was to be
played. It was then that he asked the trial judge for some time to speak with
the appellant. He then met
with the appellant in a small room outside court, in
the presence of the appellant's son. According to Mr Purcell the appellant
his instructions that he did not intend to give evidence himself. As
has already been noted, no issue with that evidence is taken
in this appeal. As
to the suggestion that evidence should be called from other witnesses, Mr
Purcell's account was as follows. He
said that during that conversation the
appellant gave him the names of three persons, all with the surname McDermott.
The appellant
also told him that there was a person in Queensland who was "on
the run from the police in Queensland" who may also give evidence.
None of the
persons were present at the Court. He had not been given contact details of, or
statements from, any of the proposed
witnesses. He advised the appellant that
these witnesses should not be called. He was, he said, concerned about "the
issues with
respect to credit and me not knowing what the persons would say in
relation to the drugs and potential...of [the appellant's] knowledge
in relation
to the drugs". He was also concerned that if evidence was adduced on the defence
case he would lose the right of last
address to the jury.
Purcell agreed that there was a discussion about whether he should withdraw and
leave the appellant to proceed unrepresented.
Mr Purcell said that his view at
the time was that he would not be able to proceed unless his advice was followed
because it was
a condition of the grant of legal aid to the appellant that he
follow "reasonable legal advice". According to Mr Purcell, "after
considering it
for a short time...[the appellant] wanted to continue with me and that he would
not adduce evidence after having already...given
the indication that he wouldn't
be giving evidence himself."
Purcell gave evidence that, when the guilty verdicts were returned, the
appellant's partner became distraught, and the appellant
commented quite openly
in Court and sought to address the trial judge directly. On 20 September 2023,
by which time the appellant
had been remanded in custody, Mr Purcell had a
further meeting with him by audio visual link for the purpose of taking
instructions
for sentencing submissions. The appellant sought to raise the issue
of not having called the defence witnesses. When Mr Purcell informed
"we're beyond that point now" the appellant terminated his instructions. Mr
Purcell wrote a letter confirming the termination
of his instructions and filed
and served a notice that he had ceased to act for the appellant.
cross-examined by the appellant, Mr Purcell's evidence was the he knew nothing
of Luke Jackson prior to the trial and did not
know that name until reading the
papers prepared for this appeal. He said that he was not informed by the
appellant that Mr Jackson
was the person who had been "on the run in Queensland"
and there was no discussion of Mr Jackson being in custody at the time of
trial. He was not told, at any stage, about any written statement made by Mr
Jackson, or that Mr Cangelosi's file may contain
such a statement. Although he
had the police drug exhibit sheet, the appellant did not, he said, give him a
version of that document
annotated with the names of the people who claimed
ownership of the relevant listed drugs.
principles to be applied in an appeal on this ground were summarised by Porter
AJ, with whom I agreed, in
JAGD v Tasmania
[2021] TASCCA 16
34 Tas R 250
"[63] The proper approach to cases in which a
miscarriage of justice is alleged to have arisen from the incompetence of
counsel has
been explained by the High Court in
[2002] HCA 46
212 CLR 124
[2006] HCA 9
80 ALJR 614.
[64] The following propositions emerge:
Incompetence of
counsel is not of itself a ground of appeal, the relevant ground is whether
there was a miscarriage of justice as
referred to in s 402(1) of
Criminal Code
per Gleeson CJ at [2].
The concept of a
miscarriage of justice has two relevant aspects; outcome and process –
different but related in the sense that
due process is to secure a just result.
A failure of process that departs from the essential requirements of a fair
trial is a miscarriage
of justice:
per McHugh J at
at [3]-[7] per Gleeson CJ.
If there has not
been a fair trial according to law, that will give rise to a miscarriage of
justice without regard to whether counsel's
conduct might have affected the
per McHugh J at [76];
[3]-[7] per Gleeson CJ.
In other cases
– perhaps the majority – irregular conduct of counsel will not
deprive a person of a fair trial. In such
circumstances, the ultimate question
of whether a miscarriage of justice has occurred raises two issues; did
counsel's conduct result
in a material irregularity in the trial, and is there a
significant possibility the irregularity affected the
per McHugh J at [79];
Gummow and Hayne JJ at [24].
In a case of
that kind, the enquiry is an objective one; the question is whether so viewed,
the course taken by counsel was capable
of rational justification or
explanation:
per Gleeson CJ at [16], Gaudron J at
[26]-[27], McHugh J at [95], Hayne J at [107];
per Gleeson
CJ at [9], [16], per Callinan and Heydon JJ at [158].
applicant contends that the conduct of counsel has caused a criminal trial to
miscarry, he or she carries a heavy burden:
per McHugh J
at [74]. As a general rule, counsels' decisions bind the client; the party
is held to the way in which counsel presented
per McHugh J at [79];
Gleeson CJ at [9]. This is so even if decisions were made without or contrary to
instructions, or involve errors of judgment
negligence:
per McHugh J at [79]
Describing trial
counsel's conduct as 'incompetent' – with or without some emphatic term
like "flagrantly" – must not
distract attention from the question of
whether there was a miscarriage of justice. That requires a consideration of
what did or
did not occur at the trial, not why that situation came about. The
question does not turn on adjectival classifications of
competence.
per Gaudron J at [31], per McHugh J at [75],
per Hayne J (with whom Gummow J agreed) at [103];
Gleeson CJ at [8], per Gummow and Hayne JJ at [24]-[27].
however, a decision about whether a miscarriage of justice has occurred requires
an understanding of the circumstances;
this may involve an understanding about
why something happened:
per Gleeson CJ at [9]. (Footnotes
AJ's summary
JAGD v Tasmania
was applied by this Court in
[2022] TASCCA 8
Davey v Tasmania
[2024] TASCCA
Refer also to the principles stated by Gleeson CJ in
Crampton v R
[2000] HCA 60
206 CLR 161
which include the overarching social
interest in the finality of criminal litigation. I would add reference to the
reasons of Hayne
J, with whom McHugh J agreed in
[2005] HCA 8
"As McHugh J pointed out in
, '[t]he critical issue in an appeal like the present is not whether
counsel erred in some way but whether a miscarriage of justice
has occurred'.
The conduct of counsel remains relevant as an intermediate or subsidiary
issue because the issue of miscarriage of
justice in a case such as the
present requires consideration of the two questions which McHugh J identified
. Did counsel's conduct result in a material irregularity in
the trial? Is there a significant possibility that the irregularity affected
outcome? But the ultimate question is whether there has been a miscarriage of
justice." (citations omitted)
Huggins v The State of Western Australia
[2018] WASCA 61
Western Australian Court of Appeal summarised the relevant principles and stated
"An appellant who seeks to demonstrate that the conduct of
his or her counsel caused a miscarriage of justice undertakes a heavy burden
which is not easily discharged. This is a consequence of the adversarial nature
of a criminal trial and the role played by counsel.
Ordinarily, an accused is
bound by the way the trial is conducted by counsel even if that was not in
accordance with the wishes of
the client. It is not a ground for setting aside a
conviction that decisions made by counsel were made without or contrary to
instructions
or involved errors of judgment or even negligence. It is not the
province of appellate courts to review the wisdom or prudence of
the conduct of
a trial by trial counsel. For example, an apparently rational decision by trial
counsel as to what evidence to call
or not to call does not give rise to a
miscarriage of justice simply because an appellate court thinks it worked to the
disadvantage of the appellant." (citations omitted)
the following reasons I am not satisfied that the appellant has demonstrated any
irregularity in the conduct of the trial. The
appellant has not established that
Mr Purcell's conduct of the trial was in any way incompetent or contrary to the
appellant's instructions.
There was a rational and proper basis for Mr Purcell's
decisions about the conduct of the trial, and in particular the decision about
whether or not to adduce evidence from defence witnesses. I am also satisfied
that Mr Purcell did not continue to act for the appellant
after having had his
instructions terminated. Wherever there is conflict between the evidence of Mr
Purcell and the appellant, I
would accept the evidence of Mr Purcell.
my view, Mr Purcell's evidence was inherently more logical and plausible than
the appellant's account. I believe Mr Purcell when
he said that he was not given
the names of contact details of any potential witnesses until the appellant,
during the trial, gave
him three names all with the surname McDermott. That is a
detail unlikely to be remembered unless it were true. I accept Mr Purcell's
evidence that he was not given a copy of the drug list annotated with the list
of the supposed owners. I also regard it as entirely
likely that Mr Purcell
would have, when the prospect of calling witnesses was raised with him, advised
the appellant against calling
witnesses when there was no way of reliably
knowing what any of them might have said, and when there was a distinct
possibility that
one or more of them may have given evidence damaging to the
appellant's defence. Calling witnesses would have resulted in loss of
forensic advantage of the right of last address. None of the witnesses were
present. According to the appellant he was waiting
to be told when they were
required, but I do not accept that to be true. To the limited extent that the
evidence addresses the attendance
of those witnesses at the trial the
appellant's account is inconsistent with Ms Colbeck's evidence that nothing was
said to her about
attending court.
appellant's evidence that his discussions with Mr Purcell about calling
witnesses commenced prior to the trial, but that Mr Purcell
altered his position
on the second day, makes little sense. There is no rational explanation for such
a change of view on Mr Purcell's
part. Mr Purcell's version also fits more
coherently with the chronology of the trial. By the middle of the second day the
prosecution
evidence was far from complete and the prosecution case did not
close until later on the third day. It was plain from what was said
Purcell to the trial judge prior to and at the conclusion of the prosecution
evidence on the third day of the trial that he
intended to take further
instructions about the appellant's election following the close of the
prosecution case. Mr Purcell's account
is also more consistent with the way in
which the appellant responded when the election was actually put. It is very
unlikely that
the appellant would have responded in that way if he was still in
active disagreement with his defence counsel about the calling
of witnesses. His
present claim that, at the time, he did not really know what to do has a
distinctly hollow ring. In all of those
circumstances, I accept as true Mr
Purcell's account that the appellant, after considering his position for a short
time, confirmed
his instructions that he would not give or adduce evidence and
then made that election.
if, contrary to my finding, Mr Purcell failed to comply with an instruction to
call the witnesses he referred to, no miscarriage
of justice is established. The
failure to call the witnesses was an apparently rational decision. Had there
been an instruction to
call witnesses an adjournment of the trial would almost
certainly have been necessary. As has already been made clear, none of the
witnesses were present at Court at the time of the trial and able to give
evidence. According to the appellant, his plan, if Mr Purcell
had ceased to
appear for him, was to ask the trial judge for "a mistrial", a course unlikely
to have been acceded to by the trial
judge. On Mr Purcell's assessment, the
witnesses were not necessary for the conduct of the appellant's defence. As the
authorities
to which I have referred make clear, it is not the province of
appellate courts to review the wisdom or prudence of the conduct of
trial counsel.
do I accept the appellant's evidence that he terminated Mr Purcell's
instructions at the end of the second day of the trial.
I would accept that
there must have been, when the prospect of calling witnesses was raised by the
appellant, a discussion about
whether Mr Purcell should continue as his counsel.
Otherwise, there would have been no need for Mr Purcell to have mentioned the
condition of the appellant's grant of legal aid requiring him to follow
reasonable legal advice. Nothing said by his son in his affidavit
inconsistent with Mr Purcell's account. The email from the appellant's partner
which the appellant referred to as having been
sent to the judge's chambers, was
not in fact sent until 25 September 2023, many days after the conclusion of the
trial. The appellant's
evidence that Mr Purcell told him that he could not "sack
him" at that stage of the trial defies logic and reason. On the view of
evidence most favourable to the appellant, he likely misunderstood what was
being said to him. Be that as it may, I am satisfied
that if the appellant had
terminated Mr Purcell's instructions, there is no rational reason Mr Purcell
would not have complied. It
may have been inconvenient for the trial court, but
there was no plausible explanation for why he would not have done so and he
very likely have explained the position to the trial judge. As counsel for
the respondent correctly submitted, when Mr Purcell's
instructions were in fact
terminated on 20 September 2023, he promptly complied and ceased acting.
there was no reason that the appellant, himself, could not have informed the
trial judge that he no longer wished Mr Purcell
to appear for him. He claimed to
have attempted unsuccessfully to send a message to the judge through a security
officer, but there
was ample opportunity for him to raise the matter directly
with the judge in Court in the absence of the jury before or immediately
he was called upon to make his election.
is another even more fundamental reason why no miscarriage is demonstrated. With
the exception of Ms Colbeck, none of the witnesses
which the appellant claimed
would have given exculpatory evidence at the trial have appeared to confirm with
this Court that they
would have given evidence at the trial or explain the
evidence that they would have given had they been called. That failure to attend
is to be understood in the context that the appellant was given notice well in
advance of the appeal that the attendance of those
witnesses would be necessary.
Mr Jackson, Mr Wood and Renee Davey-Linklater each swore affidavits in the
appeal proceedings but none
appeared. The appellant informed this Court that Mr
Jackson had, shortly before the hearing, agreed to attend but failed to do so.
No explanation for the absence of Mr Wood and Ms Davey-Linklater, or any of the
other persons named by the appellant, was offered.
In the absence of that
evidence there is no basis upon which it could be established that the failure
to call any of those persons
to give evidence at the trial affected the outcome
of the trial.
principles to be applied to an appeal based on the conduct of trial counsel also
put an end to the other complaints which the
appellant now seeks to advance
matters were subsidiary
to his principal argument about the failure to call
witnesses, but nevertheless he asserted that during the trial he handed notes
Mr Purcell about matters raised by the prosecution witnesses, but "he just
wasn't interested". The appellant now claims that Mr
Purcell, in his cross
examination of witnesses at the trial:
failed to make
sufficiently clear to the jury that the reference in the police interview to
"hash" was to a pond enzyme, not a drug;
sufficiently address with the witnesses the appellant's instructions that many
of the surveillance devices described in
the evidence were not operative
failed to make
enough of his instructions that the vacuum bags containing drugs were not
compatible with the vacuum sealer machine
belonging to him;
failed to make
sufficiently clear that the snap lock bags found in his desk drawer were
consistent with use for storing ink in the
tattoo parlour and larger than the
very small bags in which some of the drugs were found, called "scam bags".
Purcell's evidence about his treatment of the evidence complained about should
be accepted. The reference to "hash" was inconsequential.
His cross-examination
of the police witnesses achieved the concession that the number of operative
cameras, and whether some could
have been sensors, was uncertain. Evidence was
obtained in cross-examination that the cryovac bags found inside the shed were
to those which contained drugs and the difference was pointed out to
the jury. A similar concession was obtained from the prosecution
witnesses in
relation to the snap lock bags. It is necessary to point out again that the
basis of the defence case was that the jury
could not be satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that the appellant knew of the presence of the drugs and that
the possibility that
they had been left in the locations in which they were
found by others, could not be excluded beyond reasonable doubt. As was noted
Gleeson CJ in
Ali v The Queen
"It is not a mark of
competent advocacy to pursue at trial every line or argument that can be
imagined, regardless of its consistency
with other arguments, and regardless of
its prospects of success. On the contrary, such an approach is the hallmark of
incompetence."
am satisfied, considering the matter objectively, that Mr Purcell made
legitimate, rational and understandable forensic decisions
in relation to the
evidence. The appellant has not demonstrated that he was deprived of a chance of
acquittal that was fairly open
to him and he is bound by the conduct of his
Crampton v The Queen
[2000] HCA 60
206 CLR 161
ground of appeal is not made out.
Ground 2 – The
unreasonableness ground
, s 402(1), provides that the Court "shall allow the appeal if it is of
the opinion that the verdict of the jury should be set aside
on the ground that
it is unreasonable, or cannot be supported having regard to the
evidence." The approach that an appellate court
must take when addressing
"the unreasonableness ground" was authoritatively stated in the joint reasons of
Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson
and Toohey JJ in
M v The Queen
181 CLR 487
at 493. The Court must ask
"whether it thinks that upon the whole of the evidence it
was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused
was guilty".
explained in
and restated in
[2002] HCA 53
213 CLR 606
[2020] HCA 12
268 CLR 123
, the question does
not depend on whether, as a matter of law, there is evidence to support the
verdict, but rather whether the evidence
required the jury, acting rationally,
to have entertained a doubt as to the appellant's guilt. An appellate court must
independent review of the evidence, but making full allowance for
advantages enjoyed by the jury, including from having seen and
witnesses. Because of the central role of the jury in the administration of
criminal justice, this Court is not to substitute
trial by an appeal court for
trial by jury:
R v Baden-Clay
[2016] HCA 35
. The Court must proceed on the basis that issues of
credibility and reliability of oral testimony are matters primarily for the
The function of this Court is then to examine the record to see whether,
notwithstanding that assessment, either by reason of other
inconsistencies, discrepancies, or other inadequacy, the Court is satisfied that
the jury, acting rationally, ought nonetheless
to have entertained a reasonable
doubt as to proof of guilt:
at 145 [39].
course, this ground is to be determined according to the evidence which was
before the jury at the trial. As was explained in
the context of the first
ground of appeal, the prosecution case depended almost entirely on drawing an
inference of guilt from the
largely uncontroversial circumstantial evidence of
the results of the search. The jury did not enjoy any particular advantage over
this Court in a review of the evidence except in one important respect, in the
assessment of the appellant's police interview. Having
reviewed the evidence my
view is that, for counts 1 and 3, the evidence did not require the jury, acting
rationally, to have entertained
a doubt as to the appellant's guilt and the
appeal against the appellant's conviction on those two counts should be
each count it was for the prosecution to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the
appellant was in possession of the controlled
drugs. The drugs were found at his
and a sensor activated
alarm. Access to the back yard was restricted by a locked
gate with spikes at the top. There was every reason to believe that the
appellant knew who was coming and going from his house, even if visitors were
frequent. He told the police that the water feature
had only been there for six
or seven months, which meant that the drugs must have been hidden within that
time. There was no plausible
explanation for why others would hide drugs at that
house rather than keep them themselves. It defied logic that the supposed true
owners of the drugs would conceal them in or around that water feature or under
the hedge without the appellant's knowledge, when
there was no ready access
without the appellant's knowledge and permission. The packages were bound by
black tape matching the tape
found in the shed and outside which the appellant
admitted was his. DNA with a very high grade match to the appellant's was found
on bags within two of the sealed packages. The appellant had vacuum sealer
machines and packaging and scales. Other drugs were found
in his desk.
was primarily for the jury to assess the credibility of the account given by the
appellant to the police during his interview.
However, I regard the account, as
the jury must have, with a high degree of scepticism. The appellant's claim that
the spikes on
the fence which restricted access from the driveway to the back of
the house were "bird spikes" was, in the context of the other
security and
surveillance measures in place, an unlikely explanation. The jury was entitled
to reject his contention that the sealed
bags in which the drugs were found were
not compatible with his vacuum machine. His explanation for the substantial
amount of cash
found sealed in a vacuum bag was unlikely in the extreme.
combined force of the circumstantial evidence gave rise to a very strong
inference that the drugs were his. The jury was correct
to exclude, as a
reasonable and rational hypothesis, that the drugs subject to counts 1 and 3 on
the indictment belonged to someone
else, were hidden without the appellant's
knowledge and were not in his possession.
it was proved that the N-ethylpentylone was in the appellant's possession there
was little or no evidence to displace the presumption
which applied to count 1
that the appellant possessed the substance intending to sell it. As to count 3,
it was necessary only for
the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
the appellant intended to sell some of the methylamphetamine, cocaine or MDMA
his possession. He told the police that he used MDMA and cocaine only rarely. He
was in possession of a quantity of methylamphetamine
which was inconsistent with
his claim to have purchased it weekly for personal use. Having regard to the
quantity and value of the
drugs in the appellant's possession, the manner in
which the drugs were concealed, packaged and stored and all of the other
circumstantial
evidence, the jury was correct to exclude as a reasonable
possibility, that the appellant did not intend to sell at least some, if
all, of the drugs. There was no other evidence which required the jury to have a
reasonable doubt of his guilt. There is not
a significant possibility that an
innocent person has been convicted of either count.
have reached a different conclusion in respect to count 2 on the indictment. The
quantity and value of the 1,4-Butanediol found
in the refrigerator in the
workshop was modest to say the least. The drug was divided between three plastic
containers. There was
no forensic connection to the appellant. The drug was left
in an obvious place and was not concealed or packaged in the same manner
other drugs. At least four other persons were present in the direct vicinity of
the place where the three containers were
found when the police arrived very
early that morning, the inference being that they had been occupying that area
overnight. In my
view, a reasonable jury could not exclude, beyond reasonable
doubt, as a reasonable and rational hypothesis, that the drug belonged
more of those persons or another of the appellant's associates and was for
personal use.
Result and orders
those reasons I would grant leave to appeal on each count but dismiss the appeal
against the convictions on counts 1 and 3. The
appeal against the appellant's
conviction on count 2 should be allowed, the conviction quashed and a verdict of
acquittal substituted.
The matter should be remitted to Jago J for re-sentence
on counts 1 and 3. It will be a matter for her Honour to determine whether,
if so to what extent, the original sentence should be
MARK RAYMOND ROLAND v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT BRETT J
27 May 2025
I agree with Pearce J.
MARK RAYMOND ROLAND v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT MARSHALL AJ
27 May 2025
I agree with the reasons for judgment of Pearce J.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (415 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter