URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMC/2025/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Constable Julie McCullough v Bronwyn Marie Auksorius [2025] TASMC 4 (2 April 2025)
[2025] TASMC 4
: MAGISTRATES COURT OF TASMANIA
Constable Julie McCullough v Bronwyn Marie Auksorius
[2025] TASMC 4
CONSTABLE, Julie
AUKSORIUS, Bronwyn Marie
COMPLAINT NO:
DELIVERED ON:
2 April 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
22 January 2025
DECISION OF:
Magistrate R Webster
Magistrates - Jurisdiction and procedure generally -
Procedure – Fail to comply with the duties of a driver involved in a crash
– Adequacy of the charge in the complaint– Charge discloses no cause
of action – Amendment of the charge –
Amendment of the charge in the
complaint to disclose cause of action after statutory period for laying of
charge expired.
(Road Rules) Regulations
Traffic Act
Vehicle and Traffic Act
Subordinate Legislation Act
Canning v Taylor
[1967] TASStRp 4
[1967] Tas SR 42
[1957] TASStRp 10
[1957] Tas SR 111
Serial No 59/1979;
Malahoff v White
[1991] TASSC 60
Tregilgas v Howie
[1926] SAStRp 22
[1926] SASR 122
Fiala, ex parte G J Coles & Co Ltd
(1986) 46 SASR 47
[2001] WASCA 74
Jerrim v Smith; Bedi v R
[1993] SASC 4210
Taylor v Environment Protection Authority
(2000) 50 NSWLR 48,
McConnell Dowell Contractors (Aust) Pty Ltd v Environment Protection
Authority [No. 2]
[2002] NSWCCA 24
54 NSWLR 39
and Kowalski v Cole
[2012] SASC
REPRESENTATION
Prosecution:
Solicitors:
Prosecution: N
: Monk Lawyers
Decision Number:
[2025] TASMC 4
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No: 4/2025
File No: 3150/24
CONSTABLE JULIE McCULLOUGH v BRONWYN MARIE
REASONS FOR DECISION
2 April 2025
Introduction
defendant has been charged on complaint 3150/2024 with drive under the influence
of a drug contrary to
Road Safety (Alcohol and Drugs) Act
and two counts of fail to comply with the duties of a driver involved in a
crash contrary to regulation 287 (1) and (2) of the
Traffic (Road Rules)
Regulations
decision concerns the two counts of fail to comply with the duties of a driver
involved in a crash. The prosecution has applied
to amend those charges. That
application is opposed.
was agreed this decision would be handed down today because I am due to hear a
further application which is to be filed by the
defendant seeking to change her
pleas to each charge from guilty to not
The charges
and the application
charges the subject of the application appear in the complaint in the following
“AND FURTHER: 2. –
CHARGE: Fail to comply with the duties of a driver involved in a crash
– (Civilian parties).
BREACH OF: Regulation 287 (1) & (2) Traffic (Road Rules) Regulations,
PARTICULARS: You are charged with on the 18th January, 2024 being the driver
of a vehicle involved in a crash on a road, namely Road
related area,
Bridgewater McDonalds Bridgewater in Tasmania, and you failed to give the
required particulars, namely your name and
address, the registration number of
your vehicle to the owner of the vehicle damaged in the crash within the
required time and, where
it was practicable, at the scene of the crash.
“AND FURTHER: 3. –
CHARGE: Fail to comply with the duties of a driver involved in a crash
– (Civilian parties).
BREACH OF: Regulation 287 (1) & (2) Traffic (Road Rules) Regulations,
PARTICULARS: You are charged with on the 18th January, 2024 being the driver
of a vehicle involved in a crash on a road, namely Main
Road Glenorchy in
Tasmania, and you failed to give the required particulars, namely your name and
address, the registration number
of your vehicle to the owner of the vehicle
damaged in the crash within the required time and, where it was practicable, at
of the crash.
prosecution handed up a document which set out the proposed amendments. Apart
from some punctuation differences it was proposed
that the substance of the
particulars would be identical to those set out in paragraph 4. The amendment
sought to substitute the
provision which had been allegedly breached by deleting
Regulation 287 (1) & (2)
Traffic (Road Rules) Regulations
Rule 287(1)
and (2). In summary all that the
amendment sought was to substitute the legislation in which the charge appeared.
The legislative history of the provisions
Traffic (Road Rules) Regulations
1999 (the 1999 Regulations), apart from
Division 2 of Part 14, took effect on 1 December 1999. Division 2 of Part 14,
which is not
relevant to this case, took effect on 1 December 2000. Regulation
287 therefore came into effect on 1 December
The 1999 regulations were
made under the
Traffic Act
. Regulation 287 is in the
following terms:
287. Duties of a driver
involved in a crash
(1) A driver involved in a crash must comply
with this rule.
Penalty: Fine not exceeding 20 penalty units.
Note 1: Crash is defined in the dictionary.
Note 2: The law of this jurisdiction also requires a driver involved in
a crash to stop and give assistance to anyone who is injured.
(2) The driver (or the driver’s
representative) must give the driver’s required particulars, within the
required time
and, if practicable, at the scene of the crash,
(a) any other driver (or that
driver’s representative) involved in the crash; and
(b) any other person involved in the crash
who is injured, or the person’s representative; and
(c) the owner of any property (including
any vehicle) damaged in the crash (or the owner’s representative), unless,
in the case
of damage to a vehicle, the particulars are given to the driver of
the vehicle (or the driver’s representative).
(3) The driver (or the driver’s
representative) must also give the driver’s required particulars, within
the required
time, to a police officer if –
(a) anyone is killed or injured in the
(b) the driver does not, for any reason,
give the driver’s required particulars to each person mentioned
subrule (2)
(c) the required particulars for any other
driver involved in the crash are not given to the driver; or
(d) a vehicle involved in the crash is
towed or carried away by another vehicle (except if another law of this
that the crash is not required to be reported); or
(e) the crash is required to be reported to
a police officer under another law of this jurisdiction.
Note: Police officer is defined in the dictionary.
(4) For this rule –
required particulars, for a driver involved in a crash,
(a) the driver’s name
and address; and
(b) the name and address of
the owner of the driver’s vehicle; and
(c) the vehicle’s
registration number (if any); and
(d) any other information
necessary to identify the vehicle; and,
subrule (3)
includes any other information required to be given to a police officer about
the crash under another law of this jurisdiction.
Note: Driver’s vehicle is defined in the
dictionary.
required time, for a driver involved in a crash, means as soon as possible
but, except in exceptional circumstances, within 24 hours
Subordinate Legislation Act
the 1999 Regulations were repealed on
the tenth anniversary of the date on which they were made; that is they were
repealed on 30
November 2009. On that day the
. Those rules were made
pursuant to the regulation making power contained in
Vehicle and
Traffic Act
which commenced on 14 August
Regulation 287 in the
is almost in identical terms to
regulation 287
in the 1999
Regulations.
Subordinate Legislation Act
were repealed on the tenth anniversary of the date on which they
were made. On 25 November 2019
the regulations contained in the
took effect apart from
which took effect on 1 December 2019. Regulation 79A is not relevant to
this case. The
were also made under the
Vehicle and
Traffic Act
. Regulation 287 in the
identical terms to
regulation 287
and therefore it
is in almost identical terms to
regulation 287
in the 1999
Regulations.
Can the amendment sought be made?
power to amend a complaint is contained in
Justices Act
. That section, omitting irrelevant parts, is as
Irregularities and
(1) An objection shall not be taken or
allowed to a complaint in respect of –
(a) an alleged defect therein, in substance
or in form; or
(b) a variance between it and the evidence
in support thereof.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions
(a) a complaint fails to disclose an offence
or matter of complaint; or
(b) the defendant appears to have been
prejudiced by any defect or variance referred to in that subsection
the justices shall, unless the complaint is amended as provided
, dismiss the complaint.
(3) If it appears to the justices that the
complaint –
(a) fails to disclose an offence or matter
of complaint, or is otherwise defective; and
(b) ought to be amended so as to disclose an
offence or matter of complaint, or otherwise to cure the defect –
the justices may amend the complaint upon such terms as may be
is implicit from the submissions of the prosecutor that the evidence he would
lead to prove the charges under the 1999 Regulations
was the same as the
evidence he would lead to prove the charges under the
Accordingly what was sought by way of amendment was to correct the alleged
defect therein or either it was a non-material variance;
Justices Act
. A variance of this kind, if such a variance can be
characterised as non-material, is capable of making the complaint
within the meaning of
Justices Act
Canning v Taylor
[1967] TASStRp 4
[1967] Tas SR 42
per Burbury CJ at p49;
Gibson J at p50 who expressed his agreement with the reasons of the Chief
Justice with a qualification which
is not relevant to this case; and Crawford J
[1957] TASStRp 10
[1957] Tas SR 111
Burbury CJ at pp
115–116 made the following comments about the predecessor to
Justices Act
"The purpose of the procedural
amendments to the Justices Procedure Act made by Parliament in 1954
was to avoid justice being defeated
and the law being brought into contempt
through police magistrates and other justices of the peace being required to
dismiss charges
against defendants by reason of unmeritorious technical
objections to the precise form in which those charges are laid. But these
procedural amendments clearly cannot be construed so as to justify any departure
from what is a fundamental rule of the administration
of criminal justice; that
a man may only be convicted if the evidence establishes beyond reasonable doubt
that he is guilty of the
specific charge laid against him. He cannot be
convicted upon some other charge which may be proved by the evidence. The charge
him must clearly inform him of the legal nature of the offence and the
facts basic to it. He goes to court prepared to meet that
charge as so pleaded.
An amendment may only be granted so long as he is given adequate opportunity to
meet the new material. And
at the close of the whole case he may only be
convicted upon the charge as originally framed subject to such amendments as may
have been made and which he has had an opportunity to meet."
"But of course the discretion to
amend must be exercised judicially. An amendment of substance either to the
legal nature of the offence
or to the material facts relied upon as the
foundation to the charge could not properly be allowed without giving the
defendant full
opportunity to answer the newly framed charge. In the case of a
material departure from the charge as laid no amendment could be
entertained at
a stage in the proceedings which would be too late to enable the defendant
fairly to meet the amended charge. It is
difficult to imagine a case where the
interests of justice would require a fundamental amendment to be made except at
the commencement
of the proceedings. A prosecutor must be alert to apply for an
amendment as soon as variation between the evidence and the charge
appears. He should ordinarily be aware of such a variation and apply to amend
the complaint at the commencement of the proceedings."
Serial No 59/1979, Neasey J upheld the power of a Magistrate
to amend the complaint by altering the charge from refusing to submit
breath test, contrary to s8(4) (as it then stood) of the
Safety (Alcohol and Drugs) Act
the charge of refusing to submit to a breath analysis test, contrary to
that Act. The case had been conducted by both parties on the basis that the
latter charge had been laid. It was the Magistrate
who raised the issue that the
wrong section appeared in the complaint. At p3 of his decision Neasey J
"The purpose of the procedural amendments represented by
these powers in s31 is explained by Burbury CJ in Wickham v Cole (supra).
The overriding question is whether an amendment of the kind contemplated by s31
can be made without injustice to the defendant, but
if it can be, the general
intent of the section is that it should be."
J, as he then was, said the following in
Malahoff v White
[1991] TASSC
“The Tasmanian legislation as to the power of Courts of
Petty Sessions to amend complaints is, in substance, the same as that
Australia. In
Crafter v McKeough
[1943] SAStRp 57
[1943] SASR 371
, Napier CJ said at p375:
‘I adhere to the opinion expressed in Williams v
Wight ([1943] SASR 301), namely, that a person charged with one offence
be convicted of an entirely different offence; but, nevertheless, the
complaint can be amended to charge a 'different offence', in
the sense of an
offence which is differently described or stated, so long as the pith and
substance of the charge remains constant.’
Schultz v Pettitt
(1980) 25 SASR 427
, Cox J had to deal with an
amendment by justices to a complaint so as to allege the commission of the same
offence on a day some
three months earlier than that stated in the complaint.
His Honour said at p433:
‘A complaint may not be amended, under s183 or any other power, if
the result would be to convert a bad complaint into a good
one, or to charge the
defendant with a different offence. There is a sense, of course, in which to
vary the allegation at all is
to charge a different offence, but the cases show
that what is meant here is a change in the essential elements of the charge
a change in its 'quality or effect' (Williams v Wight), or in its 'pith
and substance' (Crafter v McKeogh). Often a question of degree
involved, Warner v Sunnybrook Ice–Cream Pty Ltd
[1968] VicRp 11
[1968] VR 102
He held that the amendment of the date was properly made”.
this case Mr Tye submitted there was no prejudice to the defendant, on the
assumption she could read, because she would have known
from the very beginning;
that is when she was served with the complaint, the nature of the charge and
that would not change if the
amendment was allowed. In summary it was the same
charge just laid under different legislation. He indicated it was an
administrative
error which led to the charge being laid under the wrong
regulations. Mr Tye submitted “the pith and substance would not change
the amendment sought is not permitted then the prosecution will be out of time
to lay a fresh complaint as 6 months has
since the alleged
[1926] SAStRp 22
[1926] SASR 122
, Murray CJ said at page
"that no offence was alleged in the complaint does not admit
of doubt.... Then the question is whether the so-called "complaint" could
amended...[and]...that if no offence is disclosed in the complaint until it is
amended, the time from which it becomes a good
complaint is the time of making
the amendment".
He therefore held a complaint which did not disclose an
offence could not be amended outside the limitation period so as to charge
v Jiri Fiala, ex parte G J Coles & Co Ltd
(1986) 46 SASR 47
, Jacobs J said at
"Put another way, it was said that these counts disclosed no
offence, at least in respect of place, if not of time, until after the
was made and Tregilgas v Howie (supra) is a clear authority that
such an amendment cannot be made when the complaint is
thereby out of time. That
argument ought to prevail if indeed we are obliged to hold that counts 2 to 9
disclose no offence unless
Starling v Ostrowski
[2001] WASCA 74
the Full Court of Western
Australia said at paragraph 24:
“In the present case the
complaint describes no offence known to law. To amend such a complaint, in which
an essential element
of the offence has been omitted, may properly be regarded
as amounting to the commencement of fresh proceedings for the purposes
limitation period, and therefore as being out of time.”
Court therefore disallowed the amendment which had been sought.
J, as he then was, in
Malahoff v White
(supra) at paragraph 16
“I see no warrant for the assertion that a valid
as this clearly is
, cannot be amended after the limitation
time has expired if this can be done without injustice. In R v
Newcastle–upon–Tyne
Justices, ex parte John Bryce (Contractors)
[1976] 2 All ER 611
, the Court of Appeal held
that justices had power to amend so as to allege a new offence out of time. May
J at p614, delivering a
judgment in which Lord Widgery CJ and Park J concurred,
‘In my view the six months' limitation provision in the 1952 Act is
to ensure that summary offences are charged and tried as
soon as reasonably
possible after their alleged commission, so that the recollection of witnesses
may still be reasonably clear,
and so that there shall be no unnecessary delay
in the disposal by the magistrates' courts throughout the country of the summary
offences brought before them to be tried. It is in this context that their power
to permit the amendment of an information, referred
to by Lord Widgery CJ, is to
be exercised; it must be exercised judicially; it must be exercised so as to do
justice between the
parties. But where it can be so exercised, where an
information can be amended, even to allege a different offence, so that no
is done to the defence, I for my part can see no reason why the
justices should not so exercise it even though, as I say, the amendment
allowed after the expiry of the six months' period from the commission of the
alleged offence.’”
(my emphasis)
this Court, Magistrate CP Webster in
Jerrim v Smith
[2020] TASMC 6
refused an application to amend a complaint out of time when the complaint
failed to contain a valid charge as the charge set out
in the complaint omitted
an essential element of the offence. Likewise in
The Police v James
(6493/2019) (an unpublished decision) His Honour dealt with a
complaint which charged the defendant with exceeding the speed limit
2019 in that he travelled at 100km/h in a 140km/h speed zone. An amendment was
sought to amend the speed to 140km/h in
a 100km/h zone outside the 6 month time
limit. That amendment was not allowed as the complaint, as drafted, did not
allege an offence
known to the law. The complaints in both these cases were
dismissed. The amendments sought to convert a bad complaint into a good
complaint outside the permissible time limit. A bad complaint is one that does
not disclose an offence at all or it omits an essential
element or elements of
the offence charged: see
[1993] SASC 4210
(1993) 61 SASR 269
Environment Protection Authority
(2000) 50 NSWLR 48,
McConnell Dowell
Contractors (Aust) Pty Ltd v Environment Protection Authority [No. 2]
[2002] NSWCCA 24
54 NSWLR 39
and Kowalski v Cole
[2012] SASC 30
this case Mr Tye relied heavily on
Malahoff v White
(supra). That case
can be distinguished on two bases. The first is in that case the prosecution
sought to amend the charge by substituting
a provision which was in force at the
time of the alleged offence with another provision which was also in force at
that time; that
“by alleging a breach of the Road Safety
(Alcohol and Drugs) Act 1972 s19A(1) in lieu of the
and by alleging in the particulars that the disqualification had
been imposed under the former Act rather than the
case the amendment seeks to substitute a regulation which is not in force and
which expired in excess of 15 years ago with
one that is in force. While I agree
with Mr Tye that the pith and substance between the two charges is the same the
difference in
this case is the charges which appear in the complaint are no
longer part of the law of this State The second basis is the complaint
Malahoff v White
(supra) is a good complaint as it disclosed an offence
whereas charges 2 and 3 in the complaint in this case are bad. No such offence
under the 1999 Regulations existed at the date of the alleged offence let alone
at the date of the application for the amendment.
The charges which appear in
the complaint did not exist at the time the complaint was made and are a
nullity. The prosecution cannot
seek to amend a charge which did not exist. To
permit such an amendment seeks to make a bad complaint in so far as those two
are concerned into a good complaint. The prosecution’s
administrative error, if that is what it was, is in my view fatal.
Accordingly I dismiss charges 2 and 3.
A plea of guilty does not
validate a conviction where the complaint does not disclose an offence: Ex parte
[1928] NSWStRp 25
(1928) 45 WN (NSW) 118
; O’Donnell v Gardiner
[1902] ArgusLawRp 25
(1902) 27 VLR 718
Phillips v Spencer
[2006] Qd R
Regulation 2 of the
Traffic (Road Rules) Regulations
See the regulation making
Traffic Act
now repealed.
Section 11(2):
“Unless it sooner ceases to be in force, subordinate legislation made on
or after the commencement of this Act is repealed
on the tenth anniversary of
the date on which it was made.”
Subordinate legislation
defined in section 3 as a regulation that is made by the Governor.
Traffic (Road Rules) Regulations
1999 were made by GSM Green Governor; see
the long title to those
regulations.
regulation 2
See section 2 of the
Vehicle Traffic Act
1999 and statutory rule number
126 of 2000.
regulation 2
Justices Act
“(1) In the case of a simple offence that is not an
indictable offence, or of a breach of duty, unless some other time is limited
for making complaint by the law relating to the particular case, complaint must
(a) within 6 months
from the time when the matter of complaint
Malahoff v White
[1991] TASSC 60
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (190 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter