URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASGAB/2021/50.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
TKH (Advice and Direction) [2021] TASGAB 50 (13 October 2021)
TKH (Advice and Direction)
[2021] TASGAB 50
HEARING DATE(S):
DATE OF ORDERS:
13 October 2021
DATE OF STATEMENT OF REASONS:
13 October 2021
Mr A Mihal, Member
APPLICATION
Application for Advice and Direction by Administrator
CATCHWORDS:
administration; role of administrator; plan for accumulated funds; section
57, best interests and wishes of the Represented Person;
consultation with the
Represented Person
LEGISLATION CITED:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
CASES CITED:
T (Administration)
[2003] TASGAB 1
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication
STATEMENT OF REASONS
1. By an Application received by the Board on 26 August 2021, the Public
Trustee as administrator of the estate of TKH (the ‘Represented
Person’) has made a request for Advice and Direction from the Board
pursuant to Section 61 of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
(‘the Act’).
2. The Application arises from Orders made by the Board in respect of the
Represented Person on 24 May 2021, which were as follows:
1. The Administration Order for TKH made on 2 June 2016
has been reviewed and Public Trustee continues as Administrator of the estate
2. The Administrator is to prepare and submit to the Board before the expiry of
this Order, a plan for the administration of the
estate of TKH which includes
greater expenditure to promote the represented person’s best interests,
having regard to the represented
person’s life expectancy and the
retention of an appropriate sum to allow for contingencies or an explanation as
is not in TKH’s best interests to increase expenditure from his
3. The Administrator is to submit to the Board on any further Application for
the review of this Order, evidence of TKH’s wishes
Administration of his estate insofar as he is able to express such wishes.
4. This Order remains in effect until 23 November
3. The Public Trustee’s request begins as follows:
In reference to Order 2, the Public Trustee as
administrator is unsure of the Board’s expectations and/or requirements in
it requires in its direction that “a plan for the administration of
the estate [of the Represented Person] which includes:
(a) greater expenditure to promote the represented persons best interests
As best interests is a lifestyle issue, does the Board expect the Public Trustee
to make an application for a guardian to be appointed,
to assist in establishing
what is required to promote [the Represented Person’s] best
4. The Board’s advice is that Section 57 of the Act requires that an
Administrator act in the Represented Person’s best
interest at all times.
Doing so is not ‘a lifestyle issue’ or a matter for a guardian. It
is an administrator’s
T (Administration)
[2003] TASGAB 1
, the Board has
previously observed that:
Resulting from an order under section 54, an
administrator has specific instructions for the performance of his or her duty
57(2). These instructions are aimed at encouraging self-reliance
in the represented person and enabling consultation between administrator
represented person in all decisions.
6. The decision to allow the Represented Person’s funds of just under
$200,000.00 as at 1 March 2021 to accumulate is similarly
a decision which must
be made only if it is in the Represented Person’s best interests, which
must be positively established
by the administrator including by consulting with
the Represented Person.
7. The reason for the direction was that the Board was concerned about the
lack of evidence about how the Public Trustee was discharging
its obligations
under section 57 of the Act. The Public Trustee is required to consider and act
in the best interests of the Represented
Person at all times, and not just when
its account manager hears from a support person for the Represented Person.
8. Acting in the Represented Person’s best interests not only includes
ensuring that he receives maximum income entitlements,
that assets are prudently
managed and debts and expenses are responsibly controlled. There is also an
obligation to actively ensure
income and accumulated funds are being expended to
improve the Represented Person’s quality and enjoyment of life. It
on the limited available evidence that the Represented Person’s
therapeutic needs are being met by the NDIS but otherwise only
necessities of life are being met from the Represented Person’s estate but
no more, and instead funds are being allowed
to accumulate by default.
9. There should be a proper plan to expend those funds appropriately for the
Represented Person’s benefit having regard to his
life expectancy, noting
he is middle aged, or a positive decision made to allow funds to accumulate if
that is in fact in the Represented
Person’s best interests. It may be
that the Represented Person’s wishes are to ensure that he leaves a
substantial legacy
for the beneficiaries of his estate after he dies, and that
he wishes to maintain his current lifestyle to allow that to happen.
that an amount, or even the entire amount, should be held back for
contingencies.
10. If there is no direct communication between the Public Trustee’s
account manager and the Represented Person or if that is
not possible a support
person, family member or advocate for the Represented Person, it is difficult to
see how the Public Trustee
could be discharging its obligation to act in
consultation with the Represented Person and to take his wishes into account in
to the administration of his estate, and thereby acting in his best
interests. The Public Trustee should instigate regular communication
Represented Person (or his representative) that would allow the Public Trustee
to understand the Represented Person’s
wishes, particularly as to
expenditure that might improve his quality of life.
11. Finally, the administrator has a positive obligation to encourage and
assist the Represented Person to become capable of administering
his own estate.
The Represented Person has a mild intellectual disability. There may be steps
that the Public Trustee could undertake
to improve the Represented
Person’s capacity to manage his own estate in furtherance of his best
interests, and freedom of
decision making and action. Those formulating a plan
for the administration of the Represented Person’s estate must consider
such steps and include them in the plan.
12. The Public Trustee’s request for advice and direction continues as
(b) Life expectancy of [the Represented Person]
Can the Board please advise what it requires to meet its direction that we take
into account TKH’s life expectancy (how does
the Board want us to
determine the Life expectancy? I.e. tables, doctor’s
13. The Board advises that the Public Trustee should consult with the
Represented Person and his care providers to determine if he
is diagnosed with a
condition that might lessen his life expectancy. If so, a report from a doctor
might be appropriate to guide
the Public Trustee, and if the Represented
Person’s life expectancy is short, that might point to funds being
expended at a
greater rate than might otherwise be prudent to promote the
Represented Person’s best interest. If not, then the Public Trustee
assume that the Represented Person as a middle aged man, might live for a
significant number of years and it may be in the Represented
Person’s best
interest to hold back a sum of money for contingencies and to spend the funds in
the estate conservatively.
14. The reason for the direction is that the Board with the limited evidence
it has on matters pertaining to section 57 matters, considers
it unlikely that
it would be in the Represented Person’s best interest to die with close to
$200,000.00 in his estate when
those funds could be used throughout his lifetime
to improve his quality and enjoyment of life.
15. The Public Trustee’s request then sets out the Public
Trustee’s usual procedure for preparing an investment strategy
budget for the Represented Person. The Public Trustee asks:
So is there anything over and above, from preparing and reviewing the budget,
a prudent investment review and procedure, and speaking
to [the Represented
Person’s] support staff and NDIS co-ordinator that the Board requires us
16. The Board’s direction requires the Public Trustee to do more than
prepare a budget and an investment strategy, and speak
generally to support
staff. The Board has directed that a plan for the administration of the estate
should be prepared.
17. Preparing the plan might include the following:
the budget and investment strategy for the Represented Person, and having regard
to the person’s life expectancy, determine
what funds might be made
available from his estate over a particular period of time, leaving aside a
prudent amount for contingencies
having regard to the Represented Person’s
life expectancy, over and above his current expenditure.
time with the Represented Person to assist him to understand the nature and
extent of his estate, his current expenditure
and the possibility of greater
expenditure to improve his quality and enjoyment of life.
Discussions
with the Represented Person’s support providers and NDIS co-ordinator to
assist them to understand the nature and
extent of his estate, his current
expenditure and the possibility of greater expenditure to improve his quality
and enjoyment of
Consultation
with the Represented Person’s support providers and NDIS co-ordinator for
advice as to possible expenditure that
will improve his quality of life,
focusing on matters that are not funded by the NDIS.
Consultation
directly with the Represented Person (or a third party briefed by the
Administrator) to determine his wishes as to increased
spending from his estate,
particular expenditure that will improve his quality and enjoyment of life, his
likes, dislikes, future
plans, whether he does in fact wish to accumulate funds
in his estate rather than to increase his expenditure and any other relevant
Consultation
directly with the Represented Person (or a third party briefed by the
Administrator) and with his support providers to
determine how the Public
Trustee can encourage and assist the Represented Person to become capable of
managing his own estate.
into account all of the above, preparation of a plan.
Consultation
directly with the Represented Person (or a third party briefed by the
Administrator) and his support providers as to
his wishes in connection with the
plan and the appropriateness of the plan to promote the Represented
Person’s best interests.
18. Finally, the Public Trustee has asked the following:
In reference to Order 3, the Public Trustee seeks advice
and direction regarding what evidence it is seeking of [the Represented
wishes from the Public Trustee? For example, is it documented
face-to face conversations with TKH, a doctor’s report, a report
TKH’s support workers, family, or something
19. The medical evidence before the Board at the time the Order was made was
to the effect that the Represented Person has a mild
intellectual disability.
The Represented Person ought to be able to express relevant wishes with support
and assistance from the
administrator. Indeed, in order for the administrator
to properly discharge its obligations under Section 57 of the Act, it is likely
the administrator would need to spend time consulting directly with the
Represented Person, and providing him with encouragement
and assistance, or
obtaining assistance from a third party (who has been briefed by the
administrator) acting as a conduit between
the Represented Person and the
administrator. The best evidence of the Represented Person’s wishes would
therefore likely
come from the person having that direct contact with the
Represented Person on behalf of the Public Trustee.
20. If it is difficult for the Represented Person to communicate with the
administrator by electronic means, then those consultations
and discussions
should occur in person where possible, or by using a third party.
21. It would be appropriate for the Public Trustee to put evidence of those
discussions before the Board in writing as part of the
report the client account
manager usually prepares for review applications or in the form of file
22. The administrator could also appropriately encourage the Represented
Person to attend the hearing of the next review application
in order to also
express those wishes directly to the Board.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (137 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter