URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASHPT/2019/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Medical Board of Australia v Dr Humphrey John Polycarp Gomes [2019] TASHPT 1 (11 January 2019)
[2019] TASHPT 1
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL
Medical Board of Australia v Dr Humphrey John Polycarp
Gomes (Ref No 6/2018)
[2019] TASHPT 1
MEDICAL BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
GOMES, Humphrey John Polycarp
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
10 December 2018 and by written submissions
DELIVERED ON:
11 January 2019
DECISION OF:
Chairperson Webster
CATCHWORDS:
Former medical practitioner – professional
misconduct – fraudulent Medicare claims totalling $175,266.50 over 2 years
– claims for services not provided – reprimand and
disqualification
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law Act
Health Practitioners Tribunal Act
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (Tasmania) Act
Craig v The Medical Board of South
[2001] SASC 169
Tasmanian Board of the Medical Board of
Australia v Lyall
[2015] TASHPT 3
Medical Board of Australia v Roberts
[2014] WASAT 76
Pharmacy Board of Australia v Meaney
[2017] TASHPT
Adamson v Pharmacy Board of Tasmania (No 2)
[2004] TASSC 82
v Prothonotory of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
[1957] HCA 46
MacMillan v Pharmaceutical Council of Western Australia
[1983] WAR 166
Chan v The Nurses Board of Western Australia
Quinn v Law Institute of Victoria
[2007] VCSA 122;
Board of Australia v Hung Phan
[2018] VCAT 1324
Secretary to the
Department of Planning and Community Development v Muto
[2011] VCAT 328
Medical Practitioners Board of Victoria
[2007] VCAT
DETERMINATION:
The respondent is guilty of professional misconduct and
the appropriate sanctions are imposed.
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Australian Health
Practitioner Regulation Agency
Respondent:
HWL Ebsworth
[2019] TASHPT 1
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. On 7 June 2018 the applicant referred to the Tribunal
pursuant to s193 of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law Act 2009
(QLD) (“the National Law”) and
Health Practitioners
Tribunal Act 2010
conduct of the respondent which it asserts amounts to
professional misconduct. The National Law set out in the Schedule to the Health
Practitioner Regulation National Law Act 2009 (QLD) has been adopted by the
Tasmanian Parliament and applies as a law of this
case concerns the professional consequences for a medical practitioner, Dr
Gomes, of making fraudulent Medicare claims totalling
$175,266.50 in a period of
a little over 2 years between May 2011 and July 2013 while he was a registered
medical practitioner.
3. During the period mentioned in paragraph 2 the
respondent submitted or caused to be submitted claims for bulk billed medical
for 1,520 services that had not been provided. With 829 of these
services the respondent also submitted a separate claim for an
“additional
bulk billing payment” for which he was not eligible, as such additional
payments were only payable in conjunction
with a related service, which in the
relevant instances had not been provided.
4. The false claims arose from 202
separate individual and batch online claims to Medicare. They related to
services purportedly
provided to 413 patients. For many patients the respondent
submitted a number of false claims for professional services he did not
5. During nine periods the respondent claimed for 198 professional
services while he was in fact overseas. The services claimed required
attendances, including the preparation and review of care plans. He received
payment of $14,271.45 with respect to these
claims which is included in the sum
mentioned in paragraph 2.
6. During the period in paragraph 2 the
respondent was the owner and principal medical practitioner of the Wentworth
Medical Practice
which was situated at 127 Clarence Street, Bellerive in
7. In or about August 2011 a doctor at the respondent’s
practice raised concerns with the Commonwealth regarding the respondent’s
billing. At that time the respondent provided proof of the particular service
which had been queried and the matter was not investigated.
8. In March 2013
that same doctor, who had by then left the respondent’s practice, and
another who worked with the respondent
at his practice, raised further concerns
with the Department and they provided supporting information including details
for services provided while the respondent was overseas.
separate criminal proceedings the respondent has been found guilty of four
counts of dishonesty obtaining a financial advantage
from the Commonwealth
contrary to s134.2(1) of the Criminal Code (Cth). He was sentenced on each
count to 3 years imprisonment to
be served concurrently which in essence meant a
3 year period of imprisonment commencing on 7 May 2018. He is to be released
serving 18 months of the 3 year sentence upon entering into a recognisance
in the amount of $5,000.00 to be of good behaviour for
10. Dr Gomes
has not been a registered medical practitioner since his registration lapsed in
March 2018.
11. When this matter first came before the Tribunal on 2 July
2018 the parties were agreed with respect to outcomes they proposed
the period during which the respondent was to be disqualified from applying from
re-registration as a medical practitioner.
This is something counsel for the
applicant wished to discuss with counsel for the respondent before putting a
paper to the applicant
for approval. When the matter next came on before the
Tribunal, counsel for the applicant indicated the Board wished to wait for
outcome of a similar case involving a medical practitioner that was being dealt
with by VCAT. That matter was heard on 22 August
2018. At the next directions
hearing on 19 October 2018 the VCAT decision had only just been handed down.
Further time was therefore
required to obtain instructions from the Board and
for those instructions to be discussed with counsel for the respondent who then
needed to take instructions from her client. At the final directions hearing on
26 November 2018 I was advised there was agreement
between the parties as to the
period of disqualification and hence the matter could be set down for hearing
which proceeded on 10
December 2018. The parties provided written submissions
on 7 December 2018.
12. For the reasons which follow I have decided that Dr
Gomes’ conduct amounts to professional misconduct. Insofar as penalty
concerned he is to be reprimanded and disqualified from applying for
registration as a registered health practitioner for a period
of 3 years from 11
January 2019.
The Criminal Proceedings
13. The four counts of dishonestly obtaining a financial
advantage related to four periods from:
• 3 May 2011 to 18 August 2011 (count 1);
October 2011 to 24 April 2012 (count 2);
• 29 May 2012 to 16 January
2013 (count 3); and
• 12 February 2013 to 8 July 2013 (count
14. Count 1 concerned falsely claiming $21,370.40 for
professional services and 115 location services. Count 2 concerned falsely
claiming the total sum of $38,285.00 for 311 professional services and 174
location services. Count 3 concerned falsely claiming
$65,425.35 for 612
professional services and 381 location services. Count 4 concerned falsely
claiming $50,185.75 for 423 professional
services and 159 location services. As
mentioned previously 198 of the professional services were claimed whilst the
was in fact overseas.
15. Commonwealth investigators commenced a
formal investigation after the concerns raised with them in March 2013 and a
was executed at the respondent’s practice on 31 July
16. On 29 August 2013 the respondent was interviewed regarding the
claims for attendances when he was overseas. He admitted the claims
submitted on his behalf and that he received the payments and he admitted he was
overseas at the relevant times. He also admitted
there was no direct patient
may not have provided consent
however he denied deliberate wrongdoing, claiming
that in his mind he had done the work while overseas that he thought was
to make each claim.
17. On 7 August 2014 Dr Gomes was interviewed
regarding all the other claims. He admitted he submitted or arranged for the
claims to be submitted and received payment with respect to the claimed
services provided, and he admitted there was never a face
to face attendance on
the patient. However again he claimed he had, in his mind, done the work for
which he claimed payment, and
had made an electronic entry in his own personal
computer to remind him to say something to the patient when he saw him or her at
a later date. Again he denied any deliberate wrongdoing and claimed he had put
in the work he thought was necessary.
18. In May 2016 charges were served
upon Dr Gomes and on 17 August 2016 he was committed to stand trial. After a
number of mentions
and following discussions between the parties an indication
was apparently given on 5 February 2018 that he would plead guilty to
These Proceedings
19. As stated in paragraph 2, these proceedings have a
different purpose from the criminal proceedings in that they deal with
professional
consequences for the respondent of his criminal conduct.
making orders under the National Law it is important to understand the
Tribunal’s primary purpose is protection of the
public and the Tribunal
makes orders with the purpose of maintaining standards of and public confidence
in the medical profession.
As the Court said in Craig v The Medical Board of
South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
purpose of disciplinary proceedings is to protect the public, not to punish a
practitioner in the sense in which punishment
is administered pursuant to the
criminal law. A disciplinary tribunal protects the public by making orders
which will prevent persons
who are unfit to practice from practising, or by
making orders which will secure the maintenance of proper professional
A disciplinary tribunal will also consider the protection of the
public, and of the relevant profession, by making orders which
will assure the
public that appropriate standards are being maintained within the relevant
profession.”
21. The allegations referred to the Tribunal in the application
in this matter are as follows:
Respondent’s conduct which occurred between 3 May 2011 and 8 July 2013 and
for which he was convicted in the Supreme
Court of Tasmania and sentenced to
three years imprisonment on 7 May 2018.
Particulars of criminal conduct
counts of dishonestly obtaining a financial advantage from the Commonwealth
totalling $175,266.50, contrary to s.134.2(1) of
the Criminal Code
22. The applicant alleges the conduct in paragraph 21 amounts
to professional misconduct and a determination is sought in those terms.
respondent does not disagree with a determination that his conduct amounts to
professional misconduct.
23. By way of consequential orders the applicant
seeks a reprimand and disqualification of the respondent from applying for
registration
again as a medical practitioner for at least 3 years. Again the
respondent does not disagree with those proposed sanctions.
The Joint Submissions of the Parties
24. The joint submissions indicate the relevant facts giving
rise to the application are summarised in the application filed with
Tribunal and that is reproduced in paragraph 21 above.
25. The joint
submissions say further facts are contained in the comments on passing sentence
of Estcourt J which were provided to
the Tribunal and the respondent admits
those facts.
26. In addition, at the hearing and after a number of
questions posed by me, the parties agreed to provide me with a copy of a defence
outline which was filed by the respondent in the criminal proceedings together
with an independent psychiatric report of Dr Danny
Sullivan, consultant forensic
psychiatrist, dated 3 February 2018.
27. As noted above the respondent does
not dispute a finding of professional misconduct is appropriate. Section 138(2)
of the National
Law permits proceedings to be taken in relation to a
person’s behaviour while registered as if the person was still registered.
It therefore does not matter the respondent is no longer registered. In
addition s196(2)(a) of the National Law permits the Tribunal
to impose a
reprimand following a finding that a practitioner has behaved in a manner that
amounts to professional misconduct. In
the applicant’s submission a
reprimand is a severe reproof, a chastisement for past conduct. The Board
considers this an appropriate
28. The following further matters
were raised in the joint submissions:
Tribunal also has the power, pursuant to section 196(4)(a) of the National Law,
to disqualify the former practitioner
from applying for registration as a
registered health practitioner for a specified period.
The Board considers that a substantial period of disqualification during
which the former practitioner cannot apply for registration
is appropriate
following his conviction and sentencing for offences involving multiple counts
of dishonestly obtaining a financial
advantage from the Commonwealth. The Board
considers that the relevant behaviour in this case amounts to professional
which does not reflect well on the medical profession. Such
behaviour is inconsistent with the practitioner being a fit and proper
The dishonest conduct has potentially brought the medical profession into
disrepute particularly through media coverage
such as the article published in
the Mercury newspaper in Hobart on 8 May 2018, a copy of which is annexed hereto
and marked ‘B’.
the circumstances and after considering the range of sanctions available to the
Tribunal in s.196 of the National Law the Board
considers that a substantial
period of disqualification is required for general deterrence and to demonstrate
that the profession
does not tolerate dishonest behaviour particularly where it
impacts on the community’s limited public health funding. The
Board notes
that such conduct reflects very poorly on the profession.
Board acknowledges the practitioner is currently serving a period of
imprisonment. He is expected to be released in October 2019
after serving 18
months of a three year sentence. The Board has considered for comparison a
recent decision of Medical Board of
Australia v Dr Hung Phan
[2018] VCAT 1324.
In that decision Dr Phan, a former medical practitioner, was reprimanded and
disqualified from applying for registration for six
years. The scale and extent
of his dishonesty arising from making fraudulent Medicare claims amounted to
$834,188. This was considerably
larger in scale to Dr Gomes’ fraudulent
claiming which totaled
$175,266. Dr Phan made fraudulent claims
over a seven year period which was considerably longer than Dr Gomes. Dr Phan
have made fraudulent claims up until the time he was detected by a
Commonwealth agency. Dr Gomes had stopped making fraudulent claims
activities were detected...The Board considers that a disqualification period of
at least three years is a proportionate
but not punitive response to the former
practitioner’s dishonest conduct.
Board notes that the former practitioner has previously appeared twice before
this Tribunal in 2015 in matters
[2015] TASHPT 4
regard to all relevant circumstances, in the Board’s view the proposed
orders strike a proper balance between the protective
element of the duties and
functions of both the Board and the Tribunal and the need to arrive at an
outcome that will not be unduly
The former practitioner has, in respect of the
conduct that is the subject of the Application, been sentenced to a period of
months imprisonment.
8. The practitioner concurs.”
29. The comments on passing sentence of Estcourt J, the defence
outline and the report of Dr Sullivan reveal further relevant facts
not in dispute. The respondent will be 55 years of age on 26 January 2019. He
was born in Malaysia and emigrated to Australia
in 1978 when he was 14 years of
age. He was aged 47 to 49 at the time of the offences. He graduated in 1987
from the University
of Sydney with a Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of
Surgery. He completed his internship in Wollongong and then undertook a 2
residency at Concord Repatriation Hospital after which he commenced practice as
a general practitioner in 1990. He has worked
in that field since. It appears
he moved to Hobart in 1992 and worked in hospitals and general practice in
Hobart before purchasing
the Wentworth Medical Practice. He did spend 1994 in
New Delhi as a lay member of a Roman Catholic religious order.
reference provided by a Catholic priest and another reference provided by a
general practitioner during the criminal proceedings
said the respondent was of
previous good character who contributed to the community through his profession
and who was an active
lay member of the Roman Catholic Church and a respected
medical practitioner. The respondent’s former parish priest said the
respondent was a caring and compassionate doctor and he was a deeply spiritual
person for whom the commencement of criminal dishonesty
in 2011 was singularly
out of character. At the time of Dr Sullivan’s assessment in December
2017 it appears the respondent
was an observant Catholic who attended church,
when possible, daily.
31. Dr Gomes met his wife in 2001 in Hobart and married
in 2002. There is one child of the marriage, a daughter who was born in
2005. In 2008/2009 he experienced relationship difficulties with his
wife which resulted in his separation from his wife and daughter
in 2010. In
2012 they were divorced and his wife and daughter returned to the Philippines.
It seems in October 2016 they reconciled
and his wife and daughter returned to
live with him at that time however they have separated again in 2018 and his
wife and daughter
have returned to the Philippines. At the time of the criminal
proceedings he was residing alone in Melbourne, Victoria and he was
single. His
daughter is now attending high school in the Philippines and he has casual and
infrequent contact by telephone with
his former wife and daughter.
appears prior to his wife leaving him the family ran and lived in a bed and
breakfast establishment in Hobart. The respondent
felt this had destroyed his
family life. From 2007 he engaged in online gambling and in May 2012 he became
involved in an internet
based racing syndicate in respect of which he spent
$150,000.00 in 18 months.
33. When his wife left him in 2012 he described his
life as chaotic. He effectively moved into his medical practice keeping one
of the premises as his bedroom. When his wife returned to the Philippines
he turned increasingly to online sexual chat and gambling.
He was also drinking
to excess and in July 2010 he was convicted and fined and his licence was
suspended for 15 months because of
two drink driving offences in March and June
of 2010. In October 2013 he was again convicted of exceed 0.05% and his licence
suspended and he also received 70 hours of community service. He was
ordered to complete a sober driving course. He completed the
community service
and the course. The relevant readings were 0.087%, 0.119% and
34. The drink driving offences brought him to the attention of AHPRA
and he was subject to sanction by this Tribunal. I will return
35. Dr Gomes sold the Wentworth Medical Practice in 2013 and continued
to work in Hobart as a general practitioner. He also worked
in Queensland and
in Melbourne, Victoria between June 2015 and August 2016 as a contract general
practitioner. In September 2017,
following a performance assessment by AHPRA he
ceased practising medicine on his own undertaking not to practice. Thereafter
commenced work as a courier driver with Allied Express in February 2018 but
as a result of an injury suffered later that month he
was unable to continue
working and was, at the time of the criminal proceedings, in receipt of sickness
benefits from Centrelink.
The injury was a left tendon quadriceps
36. Prior to this he had been declared bankrupt on 28 July 2014 from
which he was discharged in July 2017. He was declared bankrupt
again on 1 May
2018 due to debts of approximately $78,000.00. It appears, however, he has
repaid the Commonwealth the sum of $29,982.00
which Estcourt J indicated was
evidence of some contrition “and some remorse might be inferred from the
defendant’s plea
of guilty and his confirmed spirituality, although I note
his cooperation with investigators fell short of admissions of
dishonesty.”
37. In the mid-1980s when the respondent was in his
twenties he first reported an episode of depression. However no formal
was sought until 1996 when he was 32 years of age. It was at that
time a formal diagnosis of depression was made. He was initially
Zoloft which was changed in 1998 to Effexor and since 2002 he has been taking
Fluoxetine. In the past he may have suffered
from bipolar disorder type II and
an adjustment disorder and possibly alcohol abuse or dependence and pathological
gambling. It
seems at the time of sentencing in May 2018 the respondent lacked
insight into his alcohol abuse and played down any potential diagnoses
substance use disorder or addictions or the level of his past alcohol use. It
appears he was also suffering at the time of sentencing
from metabolic syndrome
due to raised cholesterol, raised blood pressure, being overweight and having
borderline type II diabetes.
This condition is made worse by significant stress
and there is an increased risk of heart attack or stroke. It was thought to
highly desirable he have ongoing contact with his treating
psychiatrist.
38. Dr Sullivan, in his report of 3 February 2018, said that on
the information provided to him he could not determine any association
mental disorder and the respondent’s offending. He says there is no
indication that any “putative mental illness
grossly affected Mr
Gomes’ social or occupational functioning. Although it is possible that
his judgement was impaired during
the previous period of alcohol use, this would
not have affected his appreciation of the wrongfulness of his conduct.”
Accordingly
Estcourt J did not see scope for any reduction in an otherwise
appropriate sentence for mental impairment.
Prior Matters
39. Dr Gomes’ conduct first came to the attention of this
Tribunal in 2014. During that year Dr Gomes referred a determination
the Immediate Action Committee of the Tasmanian Board of the Medical Board of
Australia on 27 February 2014, to suspend his
registration, to the Tribunal and
he sought a review of that determination. The Tribunal found the immediate
action taken by the
Board to suspend Dr Gomes was appropriate but it was
concerned as to the period during which he had already been suspended and the
fact that no referral had been made to the Tribunal in respect of the
substantive issue as to Dr Gomes fitness to practice. That
decision is reported
[2014] TASHPT 3.
40. The history of that matter is that five notifications
had been received by the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency
(AHPRA) about the applicant between August 2011 and February 2014. On 7
December 2012 the Board decided to impose conditions upon
registration requiring regular psychiatric review and reporting as to his health
status. On 4 March 2013 a notification
was received by AHPRA containing several
allegations concerning Dr Gomes drinking alcohol at his practice between seeing
and at lunchtime. Following this, on 27 June 2013 the Board removed
the previous conditions imposed and imposed ten new conditions
registration and for the purposes of Dr Gomes’ referral the relevant
conditions were:
(1) He was required to undergo breath analysis prior to
commencing consultation sessions and at the conclusion of the final consultation
session on each day.
(2) The results of such breathalyser readings were to be
recorded and forwarded to the compliance unit of AHPRA once per fortnight
immediately in the event of a positive reading.
(3) If, on any occasion the
result of the breathalyser registered above 0.00%, the applicant was not
permitted to practise for a period
of at least 24 hours and the supervisor of
the breathalyser test unit was to inform the compliance officer at AHPRA
immediately of
such an occurrence.
(4) He was to have 3 monthly liver
function blood tests.
(5) His treating medical practitioners were authorised
to inform AHPRA and the Board of any failure to attend for treatment or any
significant change in his health and/or mental status.
(6) He was to attend
for regular psychiatric review at a minimum of once every 3 months and reports
of these reviews were to be provided
41. Following the imposition of those conditions, Dr Gomes
entered into an agreement with a business which was based in Bellerive
would undertake the breath analysis required by the conditions.
July 2013 he recorded a blood alcohol reading of 0.05%. The Board asserted that
Medicare records demonstrated he worked
on that day in breach of condition
43. On the afternoon of 2 September 2013 he recorded a blood alcohol
reading of 0.009%; at the commencement of the day he had recorded
reading. The Board suggested this indicated he consumed alcohol during the day.
A statutory declaration was sought from
Dr Gomes as to whether or not he had
practised during the following day, being 3 September 2018, in breach of the
third condition.
The Board asserted his failure to provide a statutory
declaration as requested and Medicare records obtained showed he had practised
on 3 September 2013 and consulted with 38 patients.
44. On 19 September 2013
he recorded a blood alcohol reading of 0.036%. Again a statutory declaration
was sought from Dr Gomes and
on this occasion he provided one stating he did not
work that day. The Board submitted medical records which demonstrated he
for professional services in relation to 8 patients on that
45. On 10 November 2013 Dr Gomes recorded a positive blood alcohol
reading of 0.024% but he did not practice on that day.
46. On 11 October
2013, he recorded a blood alcohol reading of 0.013% and records confirm he did
not practice on that day.
47. On 7 February 2014 the Health Committee of the
Board issued a caution to him in respect of breaching condition 1, as on 15
2013 he failed to attend for breath analysis testing at the conclusion
of his final consultation on that day.
48. On 20 February 2014 at 11:08am,
AHPRA were advised by email from the alcohol testing business that Dr Gomes
failed to attend his
breath testing appointment that morning. The practice
where he was employed was contacted and it was determined he was consulting
patients. He was advised to cease and to attend a breath analysis. He did not
attend that analysis until 2:50pm that afternoon
by which time he asserts he had
gone to lunch and consumed alcohol. His reading was 0.094%.
49. It was the
next day the Immediate Action Committee proceeded to suspend his
registration.
50. The next decision of the Tribunal involving Dr Gomes is
reported at
[2014] TASHPT 6.
That decision sets out the Tribunal’s
determination with respect to submissions it received in relation to what orders
be made given the suspension which had been imposed in February 2014, and
the fact that no subsequent referral had been lodged by
the Board in respect of
Dr Gomes fitness to practice. In its decision the Tribunal expressed the view
that immediate action to suspend
the registration of a health practitioner is
designed to ensure the preservation of public safety whilst investigations occur
relevant action taken in respect of the conduct, behaviour or health of that
health practitioner. In this particular case Dr Gomes
was suspended by the
Immediate Action Committee on 27 February 2014 and no subsequent referral of the
substantive issue as to his
behaviour had been filed and accordingly the ongoing
prejudice to Dr Gomes of the suspension became disproportionate. While the
Tribunal acknowledged that immediate action and a suspension from practice was
necessary, it considered, given the time that had
elapsed since then, that an
appropriate balance between the Tribunal’s primary role of ensuring public
safety and the ongoing
prejudice to Dr Gomes by way of suspension could be
achieved by lifting the suspension and imposing conditions on his registration.
The suspension was lifted on and from 1 November 2014 and from that date similar
conditions with respect to breath analysis testing
which had been previously
imposed were re-imposed. In addition he was to attend for regular psychiatric
review at a minimum of once
every 3 months and his treating psychiatrist and
other treating practitioners were authorised to provide a report to AHPRA (with
respect to the psychiatric reviews) and to report any failure of Dr Gomes to
attend for treatment, any termination of treatment or
if there was a significant
change in his health or mental status. AHPRA’s subsequent investigation
of Dr Gomes’ practise
lead to the filing, by the Board, of a further
referral that sought a determination Dr Gomes had practised in such a way as to
guilty of professional misconduct and/or unprofessional conduct. The
particulars of such conduct included the following:
(a) His failure to undergo blood alcohol testing prior to
attending work on 20 February 2014 and at the conclusion of his final
consultation
session on that day.
(b) The prescription of narcotic substances
for five patients on numerous occasions between February 2011 and February 2014
having any authority to do so under
Poisons Act 1971
contravention of
of that Act.
(c) That on up to 18 occasions in and
between January 2004 and February 2012 he falsely prescribed antidepressant and
antipsychotic
medication for his then wife for the purpose or intention of
administering these medications to himself.
(d) On his conviction on 26 July
2010 of exceeding 0.05% on 7 March 2010 (namely 0.087%) being an offence
punishable by imprisonment,
he failed to give notice of that conviction as
required by s130(1) of the National Law.
(e) That following his conviction on
26 July 2010 of a further instance of exceeding 0.05% (namely 0.119%) on 18 June
2010, being
an offence punishable by imprisonment, he failed to give notice of
that conviction as required by s130(1) of the National Law.
(f) That on or
or ought to have known, that alcohol
was present in his blood or with reckless
disregard for the possibility that alcohol may have been present in his blood.
This particular
was not conceded (the previous five were) and after hearing
evidence the Tribunal expressed the view it was not persuaded Dr Gomes
ought to have known of the possibility of alcohol in his blood but it rejected
his assertions he positively knew there was
no prospect. It found he accepted
there may have been some risk of that but chose, nonetheless, to consult
patients and to not undergo
a breath analysis test which may or may not have
confirmed his doubt. It found Dr Gomes made a conscious decision to take the
that he may have had alcohol in his blood when he consulted patients that
51. Accordingly the Tribunal found all six particulars
52. The Tribunal found that the conduct set out in particulars (a) to
(c) inclusive amounted to professional misconduct. The remaining
particulars
were found to amount to unprofessional conduct.
53. The Tribunal then
reconvened and heard submissions with respect to penalty. Its decision is
reported at
[2015] TASHPT 5.
I note the following which appears in paragraphs 6
and 7 of that decision:
common thread, however, in the Tribunal findings in relation to the respondent
has been that:
He has taken
deliberate action to avoid or not comply with conditions of his registration
which related to monitoring his alcohol
consumption and were designed to ensure
that he did not consult patients if alcohol was present in his blood.
the obligation of which he knew to obtain authority to prescribe opiate
medication.
Deliberately
falsified prescription details for anti-depressant and anti-psychotic
medication.
Tribunal attributed his action to aspects of the respondent’s personality
concluding that:
He refused to
accept the seriousness of his conduct and to respect action taken designed to
monitor his alcohol use.
arrogant and contemptuous for the authority of others and this manifested as an
unwillingness to abide by both professional
and civil restrictions placed upon
54. At the time of the decision in paragraph 53 I note Dr Gomes
had abstained from consuming alcohol. It appears that abstinence
ongoing as Estcourt J noted he was told Dr Gomes “has been abstinent from
alcohol for the past 3 weeks”. The
Tribunal did not see the need to
impose conditions upon Dr Gomes’ registration believing that these were
best dealt with by
the Medical Board and it was assumed that conditions would
remain on his registration to ensure ongoing monitoring for this alcohol
his physical and mental health. His inability to obtain any employment in the
last 16 months up until that point had resulted
in a significant financial
penalty. He had been provided with an opportunity to take up an offer as a
general practitioner in Queensland
but only if the conditions on his
registration were amended to allow this to occur. It seems this did occur given
the material that
was supplied to me. The applicant, in that matter, also
sought a 6 month period of suspension but the Tribunal considered that was
excessive and overly prejudicial given he had been unable to practice for 16
months. It was considered this exclusion from practice
provided adequate
general and personal deterrence. He was therefore reprimanded.
Findings of Fact
55. Given the comments on passing sentence of Estcourt J and
the admissions of the respondent I find that he was convicted of four
dishonestly obtaining a financial advantage from the Commonwealth contrary to
s134.2(1) of the Criminal Code (Cth). He
was sentenced to the penalties set out
in paragraph 9 in the Supreme Court of Tasmania on 7 May 2018.
Do the Proven Allegations Amount to Professional
Misconduct?
56. The respondent does not dispute that in the circumstances a
finding of professional misconduct is appropriate.
57. Insofar as the
categorisation of the admitted conduct is concerned, the Tribunal can determine
in respect of all or some of those
matters the respondent:
(a) behaved in a way that constitutes unsatisfactory
professional performance;
(b) behaved in a way that constitutes
unprofessional conduct; or
(c) behaved in a way that constitutes professional
58. The meaning of those terms has been previously discussed by
this Tribunal in the decisions of Tasmanian Board of the Medical Board
Australia v Lyall
[2015] TASHPT 3
and Pharmacy Board of Australia v Meaney
[2017] TASHPT 1
wherein the decision of Medical Board of Australia v Roberts
[2014] WASAT 76
has been discussed. I have considered the general principles
set out in those cases for the purposes of this case.
59. Each of the terms
in paragraph 57 is defined in the National
and in summary they are:
(d) Unsatisfactory professional performance means the
knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised by the practitioner
the practice of the health profession in which the practitioner is registered is
below the standard reasonably expected of a health
practitioner of an equivalent
level of training or experience.
(e) Unprofessional conduct means
professional conduct which is of a lesser standard than might reasonably be
expected of a health
practitioner by the public or the practitioner’s
professional peers.
(f) Professional misconduct includes unprofessional
conduct of a practitioner that amounts to conduct that is substantially below
the standard reasonably expected of a registered health practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience. Additionally,
where more than one
instance of unprofessional conduct, when considered together, amounts to conduct
substantially below the standard
reasonably expected of a registered health
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience then this amounts
to professional
misconduct. In addition it includes conduct whether that
conduct occurs in connection with the practice of the health
practitioner’s
profession or not, which is inconsistent with the
practitioner being a fit and proper person to hold registration in the
profession.
60. I accept the definition of “professional
misconduct” is an inclusive one and is not an exhaustive statement of that
term. The definition therefore includes conduct that may not fall within any of
the paragraphs of the definition, for example matters
established at common law
or under previous disciplinary legislation.
61. The term
“unprofessional conduct” is defined by including examples and is an
exhaustive statement of that term. It
is conduct of a less serious nature than
professional misconduct and must be judged in accordance with the standards of
the practitioner’s
peers. This term has both a performance component and
a conduct component. As explained in Medical Board of Australia v Roberts
(supra) at [181]:
performance component is professional conduct that is of a lesser standard than
that which might reasonably be expected
of the health practitioner by the public
or by the practitioner’s professional peers. The conduct component is,
for example,
the conviction of the practitioner for an offence under an Act
other than the National Law, the nature of which may affect the
practitioner’s
suitability to continue to practise the
profession.
62. In Medical Board of Australia v Roberts (supra), the
Tribunal went on to say at [182]:
“Unsatisfactory
professional performance, on the other hand, has only a performance component
(the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised by a medical
practitioner is below the standard reasonably expected of a medical practitioner
equivalent level of training or experience). It is suggestive of a
generalised deficiency in the way in which a practitioner handles
professional affairs...[i]t is likely that a finding of unsatisfactory
professional performance will occur where the performance
of the practitioner
concerned has consistently fallen below the expected standard as a medical
practitioner, or where the practitioner
has never attained that
63. The comments in Medical Board of Australia v Roberts
(supra) are confined to medical practitioners as the respondent in that case
a consultant paediatrician, however the statutory definitions do not distinguish
between health professions and therefore apply
to all health
professionals.
64. Professional misconduct, by reference to common law
principles, includes behaviour on the part of a member of a profession that
would reasonably be regarded as disgraceful or dishonest by members of that
profession of good repute and
considered the authorities referred to above and the admitted conduct, my view
is the respondent’s conduct is clearly
unacceptable, it is inappropriate
and would not be considered by the public or by Dr Gomes’ profession to be
appropriate.
It amounts to clear breaches of the criminal law. Given the
principles set out in the case law referred to above there are, in this
repeat examples of instances of dishonest conduct which is unacceptable and
accordingly those instances amount to a substantial
departure from the proper
conduct of a medical practitioner. As set out in paragraphs 2 to 5 there were
numerous false claims made
for services that had not been provided over a period
of a little over 2 years. This conduct, in my view, is self-evidently
substantially
below the standard reasonably to be expected of a medical
practitioner and accordingly the allegations amount to professional
misconduct.
What Consequential Orders are Appropriate?
66. The parties seek the following consequential
the former practitioner be reprimanded.
(b) That the former practitioner be disqualified from applying for
registration as a registered health practitioner again for a period
of at least
3 years from the date of these orders.”
67. Having made the professional misconduct finding, what
purpose is to be served by the consequential orders? This question was
relevant passage from that case is set out above in paragraph
pieces of legislation which deal with professional vocations require a member of
that profession to be a fit and proper person.
Where a member of a profession
is convicted of an offence, it is ordinarily said the real question is not
whether the person has
been convicted of an offence, but whether his or her
conduct has been so serious to demonstrate that he or she should not remain
member of the profession: Ziems v Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
; MacMillan v Pharmaceutical Council of
Western Australia
[1983] WAR 166
per Kennedy J. at 173.
69. Convictions are
generally regarded as more serious if they are for offences of dishonesty or are
otherwise so serious, either
in themselves or as representing a course of
disregard for the law as to reflect particularly adversely on the character of
the respondent:
Chan v The Nurses Board of Western Australia
[2005] WASAT 115
70. While the term “fit and proper” was considered in the
context outlined in paragraphs 68 and 69 above as to whether
a practitioner
should remain a member of a relevant profession, the question whether the
respondent is a “fit and proper”
person to practise must be
considered in the context of the definition of what constitutes professional
misconduct for the purposes
of the definition of that term in s5 of the
National Law.
71. Professional misconduct in terms of the definition set out
in paragraph (c) in s5 of the National Law only requires a practitioner’s
conduct to be “inconsistent with the practitioner being a fit and proper
person to hold registration in the profession”
(my emphasis).
there is a choice of sanctions the Tribunal will choose the sanction which
maximises the protection of the public: Quinn
v Law Institute of Victoria [2007]
VCSA 122 at [31].
73. The dominant purpose of the disciplinary regulation of
the medical profession is the protection of the public by the maintenance
proper standards within the profession. Therefore, the impact which an
appropriate penalty would have upon a practitioner who
is guilty of misconduct,
and any personal hardship imposed on such a practitioner, are secondary
considerations
appropriate sanction is to be considered at the time of imposing the sanction
and not by reference to the date of the
75. Suspension
is of course a less serious consequence for the respondent than cancellation of
his registration because suspension
is for a specified and limited period. The
proper use of a suspension is in cases where the practitioner has fallen below
standards to be expected of such a practitioner, but not in such a way
as to indicate that he or she lacks the qualities of character
necessary attributes of a person entrusted with the responsibilities of a
practitioner
is suspension is appropriate where the Tribunal is satisfied that, upon
completion of the period of suspension, the practitioner
will be fit to resume
76. In determining an appropriate sanction I have previously said a
number of matters require
consideration
matters which previous cases have considered are inter-related and are not
mutually exclusive. There may, of course, be other
relevant matters depending
upon the circumstances of each case. The matters are as follows:
(a) Any need to protect the public against further
misconduct by the
practitioner
need to protect the public from similar conduct, through general deterrence, of
practitioners
need to protect the public and maintain confidence in the profession by
reinforcing high professional standards, denouncing
transgressions and thereby
articulating the high standards expected of the
that even where there may be no need to deter a practitioner for repeating the
conduct, the conduct is of such a nature that
the Tribunal should give an
emphatic indication of its
disapproval
(d) In the case of conduct
involving misleading conduct, including dishonesty, whether the public and
fellow practitioners can place
reliance on the word of the
practitioner
(e) Whether
the practitioner has breached any Act, regulations, guidelines or code of
conduct issued by the relevant professional
body and whether the practitioner
has done so knowingly.
(f) Whether the practitioner’s conduct
demonstrates incompetence, and if so, to what level.
(g) Whether or not the
conduct was isolated such that the Tribunal can be satisfied of his or her
worthiness or reliability in the
practitioner’s disciplinary
(i) Whether
or not the practitioner understands the error of his or her ways, including an
assessment of any remorse and insight (or
lack thereof) shown by the
practitioner. It has been said a practitioner who fails to understand the
significance and consequences
of misconduct is a risk to the
desirability of making available to the public any special skills possessed by
the practitioner.
(k) The practitioner’s personal circumstances at the
time of the conduct and at the time of imposing the sanction. The weight
given to personal circumstances cannot, however, override the fundamental
obligation of this Tribunal to provide appropriate
protection of the public
interest in the honesty and integrity of practitioners and in the maintenance of
proper standards of such
Tribunal may consider any other matters relevant to the practitioner’s
fitness to practice and other matters which may
be regarded as aggravating or
which mitigate its
seriousness
Generally speaking, mitigating factors such as no previous misconduct or a
practitioner’s service to the profession are of
considerably less
significance than in the criminal process because the jurisdiction is
protective, not punitive
77. In this case the matters identified above at paragraphs
76(f) and (j) are not relevant. There is nothing in the facts of this
which falls within paragraph 76(l) which I need to take into account.
to paragraph 76(a) I take the view any conviction for dishonesty is a very
serious matter. In this case there are four such
convictions. The respondent
has admitted to dishonestly obtaining a financial advantage from the
Commonwealth over a period of just
over 2 years from May 2011 to July 2013
whereby he received $175,266.50 by false claims on Medicare for 1,520 services
not been provided. He was sentenced to a term of 3 years imprisonment
with respect to those offences. The offending was directly
connected to his
medical practice in that it was related to patient billing and had the effect of
depriving the public health system
of substantial funds. The public and the
public purse is entitled to be protected against further similar
79. Similarly in respect of paragraph 76(b) and (c) health
practitioners ought to be aware that such convictions will more than likely
some impact on their registration under the National Law.
80. In relation to
paragraph 76(d) it was submitted the public and practitioners could place
reliance on Dr Gomes’ word because,
as was noted by Estcourt J, Dr Gomes
“was a caring and compassionate doctor and deeply spiritual person for
whom the commencement
of criminal dishonesty in 2011 was singularly out of
character.” It was submitted it was also important to note Dr Gomes
his dishonest conduct prior to having been detected and therefore it
followed there was a negligible risk he would, in the future,
seek to deprive
the public health system of funds or indeed interfere with patient information.
In addition it was said that since
Dr Gomes’ registration has lapsed he
has tried to make amends by obtaining a job as a courier because he did not want
off the public purse and he raised as much money as he could in order to
repay the Commonwealth the sum which has been repaid which
I note is $29,982.00.
In addition, since being in prison, Dr Gomes has commenced a certificate in
hospitality and is hoping to obtain
his forklift licence. He has undertaken
these qualifications in the knowledge he will have to support himself in a
vocation other
than medicine immediately on his release. It was conceded that
while his ability to demonstrate integrity in a position of trust
limited at this point, he is taking steps towards his own personal
rehabilitation.
81. In relation to paragraph 76(e) the convictions establish
a number of serious breaches of law. Dr Gomes breached the law knowingly
because there were multiple instances of dishonesty for which he ultimately
pleaded guilty.
82. With respect to paragraph 76(g) there were 1,520 separate
instances of dishonesty contained within the four counts which were
over a period of approximately 26 months. I note from the defence outline his
relationship difficulties with his wife
commenced in 2008 and 2009 and he
separated from his wife and daughter in 2010. His offending commenced in 2011
and he was divorced
in 2012. Even though online gambling commenced in 2007 it
appears it increased significantly from May 2012 from which time he spent
approximately $150,000.00 in one and a half years. His online sexual chat also
commenced in July 2012. He was also drinking to
excess as is evidenced by his
drink driving convictions and the conditions which were placed upon his
registration. However, since
he ceased offending in July 2013 he continued to
work in general practice for a period in Hobart in 2013 before recommencing
as a general practitioner in June 2015 through to August 2016. It
seems from September 2017 as a result of a performance assessment
by AHPRA he
ceased practising medicine on his own undertaking not to do so and 5 months
later he commenced work as a courier driver;
however that work was short lived
due to an injury sustained in February 2018. Given he commenced practice in
1986, I note the respondent
worked as a medical practitioner for a period of 25
years prior to the commencement of his offending and in the five and half years
since the offending ceased I note Dr Gomes worked for a further 18 months to 2
years as a general practitioner before undertaking
not to practise in September
2017. Given that chronology and the submission that the major cause of his
offending was the breakdown
of his marriage, I think it is fair to say the
conduct is isolated to a specific and chaotic period in his life. Whether or
he is ever entitled to practise again will be dependent upon what view the
Board, not the Tribunal, takes of any application he might
make in the future
for reregistration. If he remains committed to his faith and if any future
practise of medicine by Dr Gomes is
supervised and subject to financial audit
then any risk about his reliability in the future may be reduced, although I
note Dr Sullivan
did say this in relation to the risk of reoffending:
“Reoffending
risk is difficult to determine in financial crimes. There is no information
suggesting that Mr Gomes is currently
abusing alcohol, but should his alcohol
use increase, there is potential for impaired self-regulation; similarly, while
he is supported
in his current relationship, the risk of offending is reduced,
but should his relationship deteriorate or end, the risk of further
might increase.”
The relationship mentioned in that paragraph is with his
ex-wife with whom he reconciled in October 2016 but separated from again
83. Dr Gomes’ disciplinary history is dealt with in paragraphs 39
to 54. It is clear to me his conduct first came to the attention
Tribunal because of his abuse of alcohol, his refusal to accept the seriousness
of his conduct and his arrogant and contemptuous
attitude for the authority of
others which manifested itself in an unwillingness to abide by both professional
and civil restrictions
which were placed upon his practice. I note in
particular the deliberate falsification of prescriptions for antidepressant and
antipsychotic
medication which, by themselves, demonstrate dishonesty which
occurred well before the offences which were the subject of the criminal
proceedings.
84. As to paragraph 76(i), I was concerned with the comments of
Estcourt J that on the two occasions Dr Gomes was formally interviewed,
denied any deliberate wrongdoing. This suggested to me the respondent might not
have understood the error of his ways and he
might not have shown any remorse.
His counsel made submissions that in Dr Gomes’ own mind he believed he had
spent time considering
a number of plans and he believed he was working for the
patient but it was clear once his conduct was compared to the Medicare regime
had committed an offence and therefore that is why he pleaded guilty at what was
recognised to be an early time and for which
he received a discount in the
sentence of somewhere in the vicinity of 25% on what would have otherwise been
an appropriate sentence.
As to remorse, all that could be put was there was an
early plea of guilty. In addition I note the repayment to the extent of
$29,982.00.
85. As to the respondent’s personal circumstances at the
time of the impugned conduct he was working as a general practitioner
respects his life was chaotic in that he was drinking alcohol to excess,
gambling on the internet and losing excessive
sums of money, engaging in online
sexual chat and his relationship with his wife and daughter was at an end. It
also seems his general
mental and physical health were not in a good state. At
the time of this hearing and my determination in this matter, Dr Gomes is
incarcerated. He will be due for release in or about November 2019. By then he
may have attained the additional qualifications
that are mentioned in paragraph
80. He will need to find work in order to support himself. The circumstances
which he will have
to confront on his release from prison do not override the
fundamental obligation of this Tribunal to appropriately protect the public
interest and the honesty and integrity of health practitioners and in the
maintenance of proper standards of such practice.
86. The decision of
Medical Board of Australia v Hung Phan
is referred to above. In addition to the matters raised above I note VCAT would
have considered a period of at least 10 years disqualification
to be appropriate
in the interests of specific deterrence, general deterrence and protection of
the standards of the medical profession
if the following matters had been
• He had already been unregistered for 2
• He cooperated in the VCAT proceedings and in the previous
criminal proceedings.
• His admissions saved the time and expense of a
contested hearing.
• His evidence at the hearing indicated a
recognition that by his conduct he failed himself, his family and his
profession.
Similar factors are relevant here.
87. In making
determinations and orders in this matter I am assisted and guided by statements
of Ross J. in Secretary to the Department
of Planning and Community Development
[2011] VCAT 328
, where his Honour observed that:
proceedings in respect of civil penalties there is now a well-established line
of authority in support of the proposition
that where a regulatory body and a
respondent have reached a negotiated settlement and the penalty proposed is,
broadly speaking,
within the ‘permissible range’ having regard to
all the circumstances, the court (or in this case the Tribunal) should
depart from the agreed sanction. I propose to adopt the same approach to the
matter before me. The question then becomes whether
the sanction proposed is
within the permissible range.”
88. This approach has been followed in other health
practitioner disciplinary
proceedings
89. As I have previously
whether the
sanction proposed is within the permissible range must be answered by whether
the protection of the public and maintenance
of professional standards is
achieved by imposition of the proposed penalties. Before determining this
question it is important
to look at the differences between a suspension and a
cancellation. In Honey v Medical Practitioners Board of Victoria
[2007] VCAT
the Tribunal said the following at [42]-[45]:
“42 The major difference between a period of
suspension and cancellation is that once the doctor’s registration is
he must reapply after the period specified. He is not guaranteed that
he will be so re-registered. He must still satisfy the Board
that registration
is appropriate and that he fulfils the qualifications for general
registration...
Cancellation
of registration sends a clear message of unsuitability to practice. Suspension
may be thought to indicate confidence
in the doctor’s future ability to
practice once the period of suspension is served.
are some cases in which it is abundantly clear that deregistration is the only
option available to protect the public from a
miscreant doctor.
is apparent in situations in which the practitioner does not accept the
inappropriateness of his conduct, or has been shown to
be a serial
offender...”
90. In this case Dr Gomes is not currently registered and
therefore it is not open to the Tribunal to order cancellation of his
registration.
His counsel made no submissions, if suspension had been
available, whether or not it was appropriate to cancel his registration.
Counsel for the Board said that although he did not have instructions on that
issue he said it was a distinct possibility that it
was something the Board may
well have sought. In my view, had that sanction been available it would have
been appropriate.
91. Dr Gomes has agreed with the Board’s submission
that it is appropriate for the Tribunal to reprimand and disqualify him
period from being eligible to apply to the Board to be reregistered as a medical
practitioner. I must say having considered
the matters in paragraphs 76 to 85 I
agree a reprimand and disqualification are appropriate. It is very important to
note that even
after an order is made prohibiting Dr Gomes from applying for
registration this does not mean that after the disqualification period
will be reregistered. It means he cannot apply for reregistration until that
period ends and any application is not guaranteed
of success. He will need to
satisfy the Board at that point, should such an application be made, that
registration is appropriate
and he fulfils the qualifications for registration
and he is not unsuitable for
reregistration
In this case it is my view the combined effect of the proposed sanctions is
onerous but it recognises the very serious allegations
which are before the
Tribunal and which have been established by the applicant. I therefore conclude
the proposed sanctions are
within the permissible range.
DISPOSITION
92. I have found the respondent’s conduct amounts to
professional misconduct so I formally determine the conduct summarised
paragraphs 2 to 5 for which the respondent was convicted and punished
constitutes professional misconduct pursuant to the National
Law. Insofar as
penalty is concerned I order that:
(a) The respondent is reprimanded.
(b) The respondent is
disqualified from applying for registration as a registered health practitioner
for a period of 3 years from
11 January 2019.
CHAIRPERSON
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (Tasmania) Act
See s196(1)(b) of the
National Law.
See s5 of the
National Law.
Adamson v Pharmacy Board of
Tasmania (No 2)
[2004] TASSC 82
Legal Profession Complaints
Committee v Detata
[2012] WASCA 214
Legal Profession Complaints
Committee v Masten
[2011] WASC 71
Legal Profession Complaints
Committee v Leask
[2010] WASAT 133
Medical Board of Australia
[2014] WASAT 137(S)
A Solicitor v Council of the Law
Society of NSW
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253.
Legal Profession Complaints
Committee v A Legal Practitioner
[2013] WASAT 37(S)
Practitioner
(1984) 36 SASR 590
at 593 per King
Nursing & Midwifery
Board of Australia v Gregory John Hogan
[2018] TASHPT 3.
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
at 440C and
NSW Bar Association v
(1999) NSWCA 404
Veterinary Practitioners
Board of NSW v Johnson
[2010] NSWADT 308
NSW Bar Association
(supra) at [77].
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman
(supra) at 444F and
NSW Bar Association v Hamman
(supra) at [77] and
Craig v The
Medical Board of South Australia
(supra) at [64].
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman
(supra) at 445B and 445G;
Veterinary Practitioners Board
of NSW v Johnson
(supra) at [109].
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman
(supra) at 442E and 442G;
New South Wales Bar Association
[1968] HCA 20
(1968) 117 CLR 177
Council of the Law
Society (NSW) v A Solicitor
[2002] NSWCA 62
Chamberlain v Law
Society of the Australian Capital Territory
[1993] FCA 527
(1993) 118 ALR
at 62 and 63.
Profession Complaints Committee v O’Halloran
[2013] WASC 430
New South Wales v Walsh
[1997] NSWCA 185
per Beazley JJA;
Profession Complaints Committee v Lashansky
[2007] WASC 2011
Law Society of New South Wales v Foreman
Settlement Agents Supervisory Board
[2007] WASCA 97
(2007) 33 WAR 361
Profession Complaints Committee v A Legal Practitioner
(supra) at [25].
Law Society of New South
Wales v Walsh
See paragraph 28 at
subparagraph 5 on page 5 above.
See for example
Board of Australia v Saykao
[2011] VCAT 1338
Board of Australia v Gazelakis
[2011] VCAT 726
Pharmacy Board of
Australia v Victoria Brice
[2018] TASHPT 2.
See s55 of the National
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (239 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter