URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASPComm/2025/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:19:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tasmanian Planning Scheme - Tasman amendment AM 2-2024 [2025] TASPComm 8 (28 May 2025)
Tasmanian Planning Scheme - Tasman
AM 2-2024 - apply the priority
vegetation area overlay to properties in the Low Density Residential Zone
Planning authority
Tasman Council
Date of decision
28 May 2025
The draft amendment is modified under
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
as set out in
Annexure A and is approved under
section 40Q.
John Ramsay
Executive Commissioner
REASONS FOR DECISION
draft amendment proposes to apply the Natural Assets Code - priority vegetation
area overlay (overlay) to properties in the Low
Density Residential Zone.
Site information
The Tasmanian Planning Scheme - Tasman (planning
scheme) came in effect on
8 December 2021. The planning scheme does not
currently apply the priority vegetation overlay to land in the Low Density
Residential
The overlay is proposed to be applied to approximately 291 properties in the
Low Density Residential Zone in the Tasman Municipal
area that are large enough
to be considered to have subdivision potential.
The minimum lot size for the Low Density Residential Zone is 1,500m²
under the Acceptable Solution which can be reduced to 1,200m²
Performance Criteria.
Issues raised in representations
The draft amendment was referred to TasWater under
section 56S
Water and Sewerage Industry Act 2008
. In response
TasWater made a representation stating it had no objection to the draft
amendment and that TasWater did not wish to
attend any hearing.
No other representations were received.
Planning authority’s response to the
representations
The planning authority considered the representations
and recommended no modification to the draft amendment.
Consideration of the draft amendment
section 40M of the
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
the Commission is required to consider the draft amendment to the Local
Provisions Schedule (LPS) and the representations,
statements and
recommendations contained in the planning authority’s section 40K report
and any information obtained at a hearing.
representations was received and after consultation under section 40L(2) of the
Act, the Commission dispensed with holding a hearing.
Commission must also consider whether the draft amendment meets the LPS criteria
as set out under section 34(2) of the Act:
(a) contains all the provisions that the SPPs specify must be contained in an
(b) is in accordance with section 32; and
(c) furthers the objectives set out in Schedule 1; and
(d) is consistent with each State policy; and
(da) satisfies the relevant criteria in relation to the TPPs; and
(e) as far as practicable, is consistent with the regional land use strategy, if
any, for the regional area in which is situated
the land to which the relevant
planning instrument relates; and
(f) has regard to the strategic plan, prepared under
Government Act 1993
, that applies in relation to the land to which the
relevant planning instrument relates; and
(g) as far as practicable, is consistent with and co-ordinated with any LPSs
that apply to municipal areas that are adjacent to the
municipal area to which
the relevant planning instrument relates; and
(h) has regard to the safety requirements set out in the standards prescribed
Gas Safety Act 2019
relevant, these matters are discussed below.
Regional land use strategy
relevant regional land use strategy is the Southern Tasmania Regional Land Use
Strategy 2010-2035 (regional strategy).
planning authority’s report supporting the draft amendment (supporting
report) submitted that the draft amendment was consistent
with the biodiversity
regional policy of the regional strategy.
planning authority considered that the draft amendment meets policy BNV1 as the
application of the priority vegetation area mapping
will enable the overlay to
protect natural values.
planning authority considered that the draft amendment meets policy BNV2 as:
The management of natural values through the updated priority vegetation area
overlay will ensure the protection of vegetation communities,
flora and fauna
species, and habitat for threatened species, important for building resilience
and adaptation to climate change.
Commission consideration
Commission agrees with the planning authority that the draft amendment is
consistent with the regional strategy’s regional
policy for biodiversity
and will protect natural values in the municipality.
Commission finds that the draft amendment is, as far as is practicable,
consistent with the regional strategy.
Strategic Plan
planning authority’s supporting report noted that there is currently no
strategic plan for the Tasman municipality and for
this reason the draft
amendment to the LPS does not conflict with any strategic plan for the
Commission consideration
Commission accepts the submission from the planning authority.
Natural Assets Code - priority vegetation
planning authority’s supporting report submitted that currently vegetation
on land within the Low Density Residential Zone
is not protected and the
proposed amendment will enable the application of the overlay to identify
priority vegetation and protect
natural values.
overlay is proposed to be applied to approximately 291 properties in the Low
Density Residential Zone.
of the Natural Assets Code states that the priority vegetation overlay applies
to development on land within the Low Density
Residential Zone only if an
application is for subdivision.
planning authority submitted that Esk Spatial had undertaken mapping of the
priority vegetation areas for the Tasman Local Provisions
Schedule which came
into effect in December 2021 based on the Regional Ecosystem Model (REM) of
Tasmanian Biodiversity model.
REM contains assessments of four attributes of biodiversity that may need to be
considered for conservation:
vegetation (TASVEG-based units assessed Statewide and bio regionally)
Priority species
(threatened and other important species)
Hollow dwelling
species habitat
ecological function - the ability of the landscape to maintain the elements of
biodiversity it contains.
Section 8A Guideline No. 1 Local Provisions Schedule LPS zone and code
application (Guideline No. 1) state that:
The priority vegetation area overlay is intended for native vegetation that:
integral part of a threatened native vegetation community as prescribed under
Schedule 3A of the
Nature Conservation Act 2002
is a threatened
flora species;
significant habitat for a threatened fauna species; or
identified as native vegetation of local importance.
planning authority addressed the requirements of Guideline No. 1 and submitted
that the draft amendment met Guidelines NAC7, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12 and 13.
planning authority advised that the mapped priority vegetation areas shown on
the overlay maps include:
native vegetation communities as identified in TASVEG Version 3 and 4 Mapping
threatened flora
species based on the threatened flora data from the Natural Values Atlas
threatened fauna
species, including areas identified as significant habitat based on the
threatened fauna data from the Natural Values
Atlas (NAC 10).
planning authority is satisfied that any anomalies or inaccuracies in the
mapping and data can be dealt with on a case by case
basis through the
development application process.
planning authority submitted that the application of the priority vegetation
area overlay within the Low Density Residential Zone
will provide protection of
the known natural values of the area during the consideration of any future
subdivision application.
Commission consideration
application of the priority vegetation area overlay to the Low Density
Residential Zone will ensure that natural values are considered
as part of any
future subdivision application.
priority vegetation area overlay has been applied in accordance with the REM
mapping, which is based on expert evidence.
Commission accepts that the overlay has been applied as required by Guideline
No. 1 and is consistent with the LPS requirements
of the SPPs.
Commission notes that the application of the overlay to the Low Density
Residential Zone only applies to subdivision and impacts
on identified priority
vegetation would be managed by the standards in the Natural Assets
State Policies and Resource Management and Planning System
Commission finds that no State Policies are relevant to the draft amendment and
that it seeks to further the Objectives of the
Resource Management and Planning
System in Schedule 1 of the Act.
Modifications required to draft amendment
section 40M of the Act the Commission must consider whether modifications to a
draft amendment of an LPS ought to be made.
draft amendment certified by the planning authority shows all the current
overlays applied to the planning scheme under the Natural
Assets Code.
draft amendment requires modification to only display the areas of the priority
vegetation area overlay for the Low Density Residential
Decision on draft amendment
to the modifications described above, the Commission is satisfied that the draft
amendment meets the LPS criteria and gives
its approval.
Attachments
Annexure A - Modified amendment
Modified amendment AM 2-2024 to the Tasmanian
Planning Scheme - Tasman
the priority vegetation area overlay to land parcels in the Low Density
Residential Zone as shown below.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (139 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter