URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASGAB/2020/69.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
LKD (Guardianship) [2020] TASGAB 69 (4 December 2020)
LKD (Guardianship)
[2020] TASGAB 69
HEARING DATE(S):
4 December 2020
DATE OF ORDERS:
4 December 2020
DATE OF STATEMENT OF REASONS:
12 January 2021
Mr R Grueber, Member
Ms W Hudson, Member
Mr G Dibley, Member
APPLICATION:
Application for Guardianship
CATCHWORDS:
Guardianship – need for decisions in respect to residence and
services – wishes of represented person – preservation
relationships
LEGISLATION CITED:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION:
This decision has been anonymised for the purposes of publication.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
Application
By an Application filed 21 October 2020 Ms Hui-Yu Yao applied for a
guardianship order in respect to Mr LKD. The Application proposed
appointment of the Public Guardian as Mr LKD’s guardian.
Application was heard by the Board on 4 December 2020.
following people appeared at the hearing:
LKD (the proposed represented person);
Hui-Yu Yao (the Applicant);
Elizabeth Love (Office of the Public Guardian, with Ms Tegan Edwards observing);
Blair Adamczewski (consultant geriatrician, Royal Hobart Hospital);
ND (Mr LKD’s wife);
PXD (Mr LKD’s daughter);
KXD (Mr LKD’s daughter); and
David Cocker (Tasmania Legal Aid – legal counsel for Mr
Board had before it the following documents:
Application
for Guardianship and Administration;
Care Professional Report by Dr Blair Adamczewski, geriatrician, dated 13 October
Aged Care Assessment support plan;
Guardianship Order made 13 October 2020;
adjourning application made 12 November 2020; and
by the Office of the Public Guardian to the Board dated 5 November 2020 in
respect to the Emergency Guardianship Order.
Legislation
section 20 of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
(the Act) the
Board may make an order appointing a full or limited guardian in respect of Mr
LKD if it is satisfied that:
a person with a disability; and
unable by reason of that disability to make reasonable judgements in respect of
all or any matters relating to his personal
circumstances; and
is need of a guardian.
determining whether or not an order should be made section 20 requires:
the Board consider whether Mr LKD needs could be met by other means less
restrictive of his freedom of decision and action; and
the Board be satisfied that an order would be in Mr LKD’s best interests;
the Board not appoint a full guardian unless it is satisfied that an order for
limited guardianship would be insufficient to
meet Mr LKD’s needs, and if
a limited order is made the order must be the least restrictive to Mr
LKD’s freedom of decision
and action as possible in the circumstances.
Board must also have regard to the general principals in section 6 which add
requirements that:
best interests of Mr LKD be promoted; and
wishes of Mr LKD are, if possible, carried into effect.
Preliminary matter
8. At the outset of the hearing Mr Cocker,
counsel for Mr LKD, raised a concern that the Health Care Professional Report by
Adamczewski was over four weeks old by the date of the hearing and that Dr
Adamczewski’s evidence might contain matters that
Mr Cocker had not
obtained instructions on. He did not apply to have the hearing adjourned, but
indicated that he might make such
an application during the course of the
hearing. The applicant, Ms Yao, was content to proceed with the hearing. Dr
Adamczewski told
the Board that if he were completing the Health Care
Professional Report on the day of the hearing it would not contain anything
significantly different. He said that Mr LKD’s disability was a permanent
one. At the time Dr Adamczewski prepared the report
Mr LKD was not exhibiting
any evidence of delirium, which would have indicated the possibility of
fluctuation in domains of cognition
and would have been an indication for a
further report. Mr LKD had undergone multiple general anaesthesia since the
report, but Dr
Adamczewski did not consider that that would change the
assessment of Mr LKD’s disability. Ultimately, no application to adjourn
was made during the hearing.
LKD is a 75 year old man who normally lives with his wife, Mrs ND, and their
adult son at [a suburb of Hobart]. At the time of
the hearing Mr LKD was an
inpatient at the Older Persons Unit at the Royal Hobart Hospital.
Yao is a social worker employed by the Tasmanian Health Service. Ms Yao’s
evidence, from the Application and oral evidence
to the Board, was that Mr LKD
was admitted to the Royal Hobart Hospital on 10 June 2020 following a stroke. He
was subsequently transferred
to the Acute Rehabilitation Unit, known as the
Peacock Ward, for rehabilitation. Due to Mr LKD’s high level of care needs
high falls risk the treating team at the Peacock Ward recommended that he
enter a residential care facility on discharge from the
hospital. Mr LKD was
robustly and consistently opposed to moving to an aged care facility. He was
discharged home on 21 September
2020 with family and formal supports in place.
Unfortunately, later that same day Mr LKD had a fall which resulted in a
neck of femur. As a consequence, Mr LKD was readmitted to the Royal
Hobart Hospital. Mr LKD’s mobility has subsequently improved
rehabilitation in the Acute Older Persons Unit at the hospital. However, the
treating team’s recommended discharge destination
remains a residential
care facility due to his falls risk and need for twenty four hour supervision.
Mr LKD continues his strong
desire to return home. Ms Yao says that he is unable
to identify his risk of falls and his current care needs. Consequently, an
emergency Guardianship Order was obtained on 13 October 2020 appointing the
Public Guardian to make medical treatment decisions in
respect to Mr LKD. It
included section 28 powers to ensure compliance with decisions made by the
Yao identified Mr LKD as having needs in respect to decisions concerning
accommodation, services and health care.
Yao proposed the appointment of the Public Guardian as Mr LKD’s Guardian.
She said that Mr LKD was opposed to the making
of a guardianship order, but that
if an order was to be made he preferred that the guardian be either of his
daughters Ms PXD or
Ms KXD. Ms Yao spoke to Mr LKD’s daughters and his
wife, Mrs ND, to discuss the application and Mr LKD’s preference
family member be appointed. The view of the family members was that it was
preferable that the Public Guardian be appointed
as a substitute decision maker.
Given Mr LKD strongly held desire to return home and the view of the treating
team that it was unsafe
for him to do so, it was apparent that there were
difficult decisions to be made that could well generate tension and stress
Mr LKD and any substitute decision maker.
Adamczewski is a consultant geriatrician. His report, dated 13 October 2020,
notes that he has known Mr LKD for eighteen months
and has seen him three times
per week while Mr LKD has been an inpatient. He has diagnosed Mr LKD with
vascular dementia which manifested
after the stroke in June 2020. It has
resulted in a moderate disability of slow progression. Dr Adamczewski considers
that Mr LKD’s
disability affects his capacity to make reasonable judgments
in respect to where to live, both permanently and temporarily. He describes
LKD as being hard to engage in discussions in respect to accommodation as Mr LKD
has been adamant that he will return home. Discussions
of alternatives, such as
residential care, had resulted in Mr LKD attempting to leave hospital against
advice. Dr Adamczewski says
that Mr LKD is unable to identify his very high risk
of falls and current care needs, including recommendations and concerns by the
medical team in respect to discharge. With prompting Mr LKD could only partially
identify some risks and did not agree with the assessments.
Adamczewski also considers that Mr LKD’s disability affects his capacity
to make reasonable judgments in respect to medical
treatment and health care.
He describes Mr LKD’s understanding of his health and medical
treatment needs as superficial. Mr LKD struggles to retain and
information. Mr LKD has fixed views regarding his medical care. For example, he
has refused medications which were not
provided at his preferred times. Mr
LKD’s disability also affects his capacity to make reasonable judgments in
respect to provision
of support services. For example, because Mr LKD does not
recognise his care needs, and is fiercely independent, he has refused support
his activities of daily living which has resulted in multiple falls while he has
been an inpatient. Mr LKD has poor planning
and reasoning skills and cannot
make or articulate decisions as to what support services he might need.
reaching his conclusions, Dr Adamczewski has taken into account investigations
including administration of the Montreal Cognitive
Assessment of cognitive
impairment (MoCA) and radiological imaging of Mr LKD’s brain.
Adamczewski confirmed to the Board in his oral evidence that his views as
expressed in the report have not changed. He noted that
when Mr LKD was
discharged on 21 September 2020 he was assessed as being at a very high risk but
that the discharge to his home with
support services was considered the least
restrictive option at that time. Unfortunately, the very high level of risk
by the treating team was manifested by Mr LKD’s fall and
fracture of his neck of femur within hours of discharge from the hospital.
Adamczewski noted that Mr LKD had had multiple anaesthetics since preparation of
his report, which may have resulted in decline
in Mr LKD’s cognition.
Given the nature and cause of Mr LKD’s condition and his reluctance to
engage Dr Adamczewski did
not see any benefit in repeating cognitive assessment.
response to questions asked by Mr LKD’s legal counsel, Dr Adamczewski said
that Mr LKD’s MoCA results showed multi-domain
deficits, which were
particularly striking in the memory component. There were some parts of the
assessment that could not be completed
because of the physical
consequences of Mr LKD’s stroke. He had good orientation and
his attention was intact. Dr Adamczewski said that the deficit
in Mr LKD’s
cognition is not simply a matter of recall. Mr LKD can retain information, but
he is unable to reason through that
information. Dr Adamczewski was asked
LKD’s overwhelming desire to return home overshadowed and obscured Mr
LKD’s true underlying ability to make decisions.
Dr Adamczewski considered
that it was not simply that Mr LKD had a fixed view on the topic of residential
care, but that his ability
to process information is impaired. Mr LKD’s
MRI indicated extensive and confluent effects on Mr LKD’s brain of the
that affect executive functioning. The imaging ties in with clinical
findings, such as Mr LKD’s concrete thinking and difficulties
reasoning, leading Dr Adamczewski to conclude that Mr LKD has a global deficit,
not simply the appearance of impairment resulting
from his emotional
preoccupation with returning home rather than moving into residential care. Dr
Adamczewski was asked whether,
if presented with clear concrete alternatives, Mr
LKD could choose between them. Dr Adamczewski expressed a preference for
decision making and referred to meetings with the family to explore
this as a less restrictive option than the appointment of a guardian.
he did not consider that having an advocate or support person would enable Mr
LKD to reason through decisions, such as those
surrounding his discharge.
terms of health care and treatment decisions, Dr Adamczewski said that Mr
Cripps had five operations as a result of his
fracture, which was now stabilised.
Management of Mr LKD’s wound has been complex. Mr LKD needed to remain
in the hospital in the short term to manage wound care
and infection issues. Dr
Adamczewski was unable to give a timeframe for recovery to the point of
discharge, but he expected it to
be a matter of weeks. It is likely that Mr LKD
would be discharged in a wheelchair which would reduce his risk of falls, but Dr
Adamczewski
described Mr LKD’s falls risk as extreme in any event.
LKD’s daughter Ms PXD told the Board that the family understood the need
for the appointment of a guardian. In respect to
who should be appointed, she
initially expressed a willingness, as opposed to a desire, to be appointed,
subject to any opinion expressed
by her mother, Mrs ND. Mrs ND expressed a
preference for the Public Guardian, and on that basis Ms PXD supported the
appointment
of the Public Guardian. Ms KXD did not express any opinion other
than that she was happy for the Board to make a decision. Ms PXD
expressed a
similar view to Ms KXD. She also said that her desire was that Mr LKD return
LKD confirmed to the Board that, on being discharged from hospital, he wanted to
return home. When asked what services or supports
might enable him to return
the view that their home
was not suited to an electric wheelchair. Ms KXD
expressed a similar view. Mr LKD considered that he would not need any
with activities such as showering and dressing, notwithstanding the
level of care he was receiving at the hospital. Mr LKD was steadfast
in his view
that he did not want to move into aged care accommodation and that nothing would
change his mind in this regard. Mr LKD
confirmed that if anyone were to be
appointed to make decisions on his behalf he would prefer it to be either Ms PXD
Consideration
Adamczewski’s diagnosis of vascular dementia and his opinion in respect to
the effects of that condition constituting a disability
within the meaning of
section 3 of the Act were not challenged or countered by any other expert
opinion and are accepted by the Board.
Similarly, his expert opinion in respect
to the cognitive deficit caused by Mr LKD’s dementia on his ability to
make reasonable
judgments in respect to matters relating to his personal
circumstances was not countered by other expert opinion and is accepted
focus of Mr Cocker’s submissions related to whether there was a need for a
guardian, and if so whether that need could be
met by other means less
restrictive than an order. The evidence of Ms Yao and Dr Adamczewski established
that there is a need for
decisions to be made in respect to where Mr LKD is to
live following his discharge from hospital. They advanced cogent reasons why
LKD requires residential care. Mr Cocker made detailed and persuasive
submissions why Mr LKD could be discharged to his home.
However, where Mr LKD
ultimately resides is not a matter for the Board to decide. Rather, the Board is
required to determine whether
there is a need for a guardian to be appointed to
make that decision. Clearly there are very real risks and challenges that will
need to be addressed in connection with Mr LKD’s accommodation needs, and
the decision is not so clearly in favour of return
restrictive option is to make no order. The Board is satisfied that Mr
LKD’s robustly held view that he
should return home is not one which might
be characterised as a poor decision by a person with capacity, but rather a
consequence
of his inability to process, use and weigh information provided to
him in respect to the risks and requirements surrounding his accommodation
Yao also identified a need for substitute decision making surrounding the
provision of services for Mr LKD. This would be of particular
importance if Mr
LKD were to return home. It is apparent from Dr Adamczewski’s evidence
and Mr LKD’s engagement with
the Board that he does not have even a
superficial understanding of the support and services that he would need to take
care of his
activities of daily living. Mr LKD is unable, by reason of his
disability, to make decisions in this regard.
Yao also identified a need for decisions in respect to medical treatment. It is
apparent from Dr Adamczewski’s evidence
that, while Mr LKD will have
ongoing needs surrounding wound care in the short term, his more acute needs
arising from his fracture
have resolved. It appears to the Board that, as a
guardian would become Mr LKD’s person responsible authorised to consent to
medical treatment
, and as Mr LKD
will likely be discharged either to the care of family members or residential
care a specific order in respect to
medical treatment is not required.
Board notes Mr LKD’s opposition to the appointment of a guardian.
However, there is clearly a need for decision making in respect to
where Mr LKD should live permanently or temporarily and the provision
services for him. In respect to accommodation, there is a need for Mr LKD to
remain in hospital until his wound care has progressed
to a point at which he
can safely leave the hospital and there will then be a need for a decision in
respect to whether he returns
to his home or to some other accommodation.
Appointment of a guardian in respect to these matters will be in Mr LKD’s
interests, particularly having regard to management of his fall risks and
his requirements of daily living. Although Mr LKD has
a supportive family, he
is robustly dogmatic in respect to his views and not amenable to persuasion, and
there is no less restrictive
means of meeting the identified needs.
Who should be appointed?
applicant proposes appointment of the Public Guardian. Mr LKD wish is that if
anyone is to be appointed that it be either of his
daughters. The view of
Mr LKD’s family is that the Public Guardian ought to be
appointed. In the report on the Emergency Guardianship Order to the
Board by Ms
Liz Love from the Office of the Public Guardian Ms Love comments that ‘Mr
LKD is a very forceful character, and
it is quite likely that no family member
would be able to make and implement a decision that did not accord with his
That observation accords with the evidence detailed above and the
Board’s observation of Mr LKD. There is no doubt that decisions
guardian, particularly surrounding where Mr LKD is to live, permanently or
temporarily, will likely be fraught. Dissociating
Mr LKD’s family from
emotionally stressful decisions will assist in preserving Mr LKD’s family
relationships. It is appropriate
to appoint the Public Guardian.
Length of the order
Board considers that the least restrictive approach to meeting Mr LKD’s
needs will be to make an order for a period of twelve
months. That should
provide sufficient time for the making of decisions in respect to Mr LKD’s
discharge to appropriate living
arrangements, for any consequential arrangements
or variations, and for him to be settled in his accommodation and for the
establishment
of services.
Public Guardian is appointed as the limited guardian of Mr LKD with the power
where Mr LKD is to live permanently or temporarily.
which services Mr LKD should access and provide consent to such as required.
Order remains in effect until 3 December 2021.
See Sections 4 and 39 of the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (164 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter