URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASGAB/2020/53.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ZGS (Guardianship and Administration) [2020] TASGAB 53 (8 October 2020)
ZGS (Guardianship and Administration)
[2020] TASGAB 53
HEARING DATE(S):
8 October 2020
DATE OF ORDERS:
8 October 2020
DATE OF STATEMENT OF REASONS:
4 November 2020
Ms L Mollross, Member
Ms M Duvnjak, Member
Mr G Dibley, Member
APPLICATION:
Guardianship and Administration
CATCHWORDS:
who to appoint as guardian and administrator – potential for conflict
– independent appointment
LEGISLATION CITED:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION:
This decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
Applicant made an Application for Guardianship and Administration in respect of
Mrs ZGS dated 15 September 2020 (‘the Application’).
Board heard the Application on 8 October 2020.
to COVID-19 restrictions, the hearing was held by way of telephone.
attendance at the hearing were:
Megan Benier, substitute Applicant;
ZGS, the proposed represented person;
Maddy Russell, Office of the Public Guardian;
Rosemary Jurs, Public Trustee;
TS, daughter of Mrs ZGS;
XS, daughter of Mrs ZGS;
VS, son of Mrs ZGS;
NS, daughter-in-law of Mrs ZGS;
LX, son of Mrs ZGS – attended for part of the hearing;
Natasha Veenstra, Peacock Ward, Royal Hobart Hospital; and
Brad Saunders, Advocacy Tasmania;
Board had before it the following documents:
Application
for Guardianship and Administration dated 15 September 2020;
Care Professional Report of Dr Kumar dated 7 September
report from Ms Barbara Moerd dated 16 September 2020;
Australia Bank Report dated 24 September 2020;
Property Report dated 18 September 2020 for property situated at [the location
in Tasmania];
dated 29 September 2020 from Mrs NS and Mr VS.
Legislation
the Board determines an Application for Guardianship Order it needs to be
satisfied of the matters in section 20 of the
Guardianship and Administration
(‘the Act’). Those requirements are that the proposed
represented person:
person with a disability; and
unable by reason of the disability to make reasonable judgements in respect of
all or any matters relating his person or circumstances;
in need of a guardian.
the Board determines an Application for Administration Order it needs to be
satisfied of the matters in section 51 of the Act.
Those requirements are that
the represented person:
person with a disability; and
unable by reason of the disability to make reasonable judgements in respect of
matters relating to all or any part of his or her
in need of an administrator of his or her estate.
Board must also balance the principles in section 6 of the Act, which
means which is the least restrictive of a person’s freedom of decision and
action as is possible in the circumstances is
adopted; and
best interests of a person with a disability or in respect of whom an
application is made under this Act are promoted; and
wishes of a person with a disability or in respect of whom an application is
made under this Act, are if possible, carried to
Guardianship Order may be made for a period of up to 3 years and an
Administration Order may be made for a period of up to 3
Who may be appointed as an Administrator:
54 of the Act sets out who the Board may appoint as an administrator. The
potential administrators include the Public Trustee
and any other person who
consents to act as administrator of Mrs ZGS’ estate provided that, in
accordance with section 54(1)(d)
the Board is satisfied that:
person will act in the best interests of Mrs ZGS; and
person is not in a position where his or her interest conflict or may conflict
with the interest of Mrs ZGS; and
person is a suitable person to act as the administrator of the estate of Mrs
person has sufficient expertise to administer the estate.
determining whether a person is suitable to act as an administrator the Board,
pursuant to section 54(2) of the Act, must take
into account:
wishes of Mrs ZGS so far as they can be ascertained;
compatibility of the proposed administrator with Mrs
Who may be appointed as a Guardian:
section 21(1) of the Act, the Board may appoint the Public Guardian
or any other person who so consents to act as guardian if the
Board is satisfied
person will act in the best interests of Mrs ZGS; and
person is not in a position where his or her interests conflict or may conflict
with the interest of Mrs ZGS; and
person is a suitable person to act as the guardian of Mrs ZGS.
to section 21(2) of the Act, in determining whether a person is suitable to act
as guardian the Board must take into account:
wishes of Mrs ZGS so far as they can be ascertained; and
desirability of preserving existing family relationships; and
compatibility of the proposed guardian with Mrs ZGS and with the administrator
(if any) of Mrs ZGS’ estate; and
the person proposed as guardian will be available and accessible to Mrs ZGS so
as to fulfil the requirements of guardianship
of Mrs ZGS.
Application discloses the following information:
ZGS has a disability, being mixed Alzheimer’s and vascular dementia;
the time of the hearing, Mrs ZGS was an in-patient at the Royal Hobart Hospital
ZGS normally lives in her home with her daughter, Ms TS and Ms TS’ son
ZGS is assessed as needing a high level of care, including support to walk with
a wheeled walker and assistance to manage urinary
incontinence;
care Mrs ZGS receives at her home is wholly dependent on Ms TS remaining well
and demonstrating sound judgment about her mother’s
frailty and
ZGS has reported that Ms TS’ son has displayed behavioural volatility
while living in her home, which the Applicant believes
is incompatible with Mrs
ZGS’ care and safety requirements;
Applicant believes that Mrs ZGS is vulnerable to coercion because of her frail
physical state and dependence upon others.
the course of the hearing, the Board was further advised by the substitute
Applicant that:
September 2016, Mrs ZGS had been scammed of $3,500 by a member of the
ZGS had disclosed to nursing staff during her hospital admissions that since
her daughter, Ms TS, and grandson had moved in with
her, approximately 12 months
prior to her admission her money had decreased and she wanted them to leave her
substitute Applicant advised the Board that upon admission to the RHH, Ms TS was
reported to have requested that Mrs ZGS transfer
$400 to her debit card in
relation to laundry costs while in hospital. Mrs ZGS was unable to do this and
sought assistance from
hospital staff;
substitute Applicant reports that Mrs ZGS has consistently reported financial,
physical and emotional abuse including damage and
destruction to her home and
property by family members who reside with her. As she is physically frail and
cognitively impaired,
she has no ability to protect herself in her home
environment and that abusive behaviour towards her has been recorded over
hospital admissions and specifically during the last two hospital
admissions in 2020;
substitute Applicant also remains concerned about the pressure and distress
caused to Mrs ZGS from time to time when visited by
family members while an
in-patient at the RHH.
Health Care Professional Report
Health Care Professional Report (‘HCPR’) by Dr Kumar accompanied the
Application. Dr Kumar states that Mrs ZGS has
a disability being mixed
Alzheimer’s and vascular dementia which was diagnosed in August of 2020
although the condition has
been evident for 2 years and is moderate with slow
progression. Dr Kumar states that Mrs ZGS shows impaired judgment, insight and
executive function with poor short-term memory recall which impacts her ability
to manage financial decision making. His opinion
is that she is vulnerable and
susceptible to elder financial abuse which has been highlighted by concerns from
community social worker
reports. He identified that to her myriad of cognitive
deficits there has been evidence of impaired problem solving and judgment
that his, in combination with her susceptibility to coercion, leaves her
vulnerable because of her frail physical state and dependence
on others. Dr
Kumar further states that Mrs ZGS’ cognitively impaired judgment and
insight leaves her vulnerable to family
members’ attempts to interfere
with healthcare decisions that might adversely affect her. He noted that Mrs
ZGS has shown
poor insight into her care requirements and adversely decided to
cease care provisions in the community leading to inappropriate
discontinuation
of medical treatment, citing Mrs ZGS’ decision to decline Anglicare
support in her home as illustrating impaired
insight and judgment into her
deficits, leading to periods of becoming unhygienic.
Kumar advises that Mrs ZGS completed a Montreal Cognitive Assessment on 12 March
2020 and scored 13/30 and 1/5 on a mini cognitive
test. Her previous Montreal
Cognitive Assessment on 14 January 2019 scored 21/30 showing deterioration over
14 months. Mrs ZGS completed
an assessment with an old age psychiatrist, Mr
Martin Morrissey and Dr Ian Navin a Psychiatry Registrar on 19 August 2020
13 August 2020 which showed she had a lack of capacity for financial
decision making and lifestyle decision making and that she would
benefit from
appointing an independent public guardian.
Kumar reported that because of Mrs ZGS’ impaired judgment
and executive function with poor short-term memory recall that this impacts on
her ability to manage financial decision making.
He also reported she is
vulnerable and susceptible to elder financial abuse.
relation to matters relating to personal decision making, Dr Kumar states
that her cognition and impaired judgment and insight
leaves her vulnerable and
that she has shown poor insight into her care requirements and has acted adverse
to her interests.
family members present at the hearing agreed that an administrator and guardian
were required. Dr Kumar’s evidence was not
challenged and is accepted by
Report from Ms Barbara Moerd
Barbara Moerd, Director of Allied Health Services for the Department of Health
and Human Services at the RHH completed a report
on 16 September 2020. Ms Moerd
advised that Mrs ZGS was admitted to the RHH for the second time in 2020 by an
Emergency Department
admission in each case. Mrs ZGS had sustained 10 falls in
12 months as of 24 February 2020 and since that time had sustained two
falls one resulting in her current admission to the RHH on 25 August 2020 with
two fractured bones in her back. Ms Moerd
advises that Mrs ZGS had reported that
she is living in a familial context of verbal, physical and financial abuse. Mrs
ZGS has consistently
disclosed this abuse to the RHH staff since 2020. Ms
Moerd advises that prior to Mrs ZGS’ current admission to the RHH
was diagnosed by Dr Martin Morrissey with mixed Alzheimer’s and
vascular dementia which is supported by Dr Kumar following
an additional
assessment during her current admission to the RHH.
Evidence from family members
TS denies any abuse to her mother by her or her son, Mr UX advising that she
only came last year from Melbourne to care for her
mother. She stated that she
Anglicare services for her
mother. Ms TS advises that she can manage the care of
her mother notwithstanding her own health issues which include suffering from
kidney disease and undergoing medical tests in relation to her heart. Ms TS
advised the Board that her son, Mr UX suffers from OCD
and takes medication.
TS reported that she and her son were not paying rent or board to Mrs ZGS, but
she helped with the power bill and the phone bill.
She advised that her son
contributes what he can to his own food costs.
TS advised that she had previous experience as an administrator in that she was
appointed as an administrator for her son in Victoria.
She, however, advised
that during her time as her son’s administrator, $15,000 was stolen from
his funds and an alternative
administrator was appointed.
XS, who is Mrs ZGS’s daughter residing in Western Australia, ultimately
supported the appointment of an independent guardian
and administrator
notwithstanding that during the course of the hearing she indicated that she
would like to be her mother’s
guardian. Mrs XS advised there was
significant conflict between herself and Ms TS. Ms TS confirmed this conflict
and stated there
was also conflict between Mrs XS and Mr VS, who is Mrs
TS could not identify how she would manage the conflict when both care and
financial decisions needed to be made. Mrs XS could
also not identify how she
would manage that conflict if she was appointed as guardian.
VS acknowledged the need for an appointment of a guardian and administrator. He
provided a letter of support for the appointment
of Ms TS as guardian and
administrator but agreed during the course of the hearing that it would be
better for an independent guardian
and administrator to be appointed
particularly given the concerns raised in the Application and the reports of the
substitute Applicant.
Maddy Russell, on behalf of the Office of the Public Guardian, raised concerns
as to how that family conflict could cause difficulties
and possibly exacerbate
the existing conflict, given the decisions which will need to be made for Mrs
ZGS. Ms Russell believed there
was a need for an independent person to be
appointed to make guardianship decisions and supported the appointment of a
guardian with
powers referred to in the Application ultimately made by the
Rosemary Jurs, from the Public Trustee, supported the appointment of an
independent administrator given the family conflict.
impartial person was identified that could act independently of their personal
needs and remain sufficiently objective to consider
what is in the best
interests of Mrs ZGS.
Wishes of Mrs ZGS
her advocate, Mr Brad Saunders, Mrs ZGS advised she would prefer not to have a
guardian and that she wanted to go home and
live with Ms TS and that Ms TS was a
competent carer for her. She advised the Board that she did not wish to go to
Western Australia
to live. Mr Saunders also reported that Mrs ZGS would prefer
to have control over her finances but accepted that an administrator
required. Through her advocate, Mrs ZGS also accepted that a guardian may be
necessary and that it may need to be the Public
Guardian. Further, Mr Saunders
advised that he had spoken with Mrs ZGS in relation to her wishes over the days
leading up to the
hearing and that she had no recollection of any of the abuse
identified in the Application that was claimed to have been previously
The Board’s determination
Board is satisfied that Mrs ZGS is a person with a disability. This was not
disputed at hearing. The medical evidence provided
through the HCPR of Dr Kumar
was accepted by the Board. That evidence was that Mrs ZGS suffers from mixed
Alzheimer’s and vascular
dementia which was diagnosed in August 2020 which
is not reversible and that Mrs ZGS’s condition will deteriorate.
Board accepts Dr Kumar’s opinion that by reason of the mixed
Alzheimer’s and vascular dementia, Mrs ZGS experiences
the deficits
referred to in Dr Kumar’s report and set out above. The Board also
accepted Dr Kumar’s evidence that as
a result of her disability Mrs ZGS
was unable to make reasonable decisions in relation to her estate or in relation
to her person
and circumstances.
Board is satisfied by reason of Mrs ZGS’ disability she is unable to make
reasonable judgments in respect of her finances
and her estate. She is also
unable to make reasonable judgments in respect of matters relating to her person
and her circumstances.
Board also accepted the evidence of the Applicant (including the substitute
Applicant) and Dr Kumar that there was the need for
the appointment of an
administrator and for a guardian with limited powers. This was not challenged by
anyone present at the hearing.
ZGS is the joint registered proprietor, together with her late husband, of her
property at [the address in Tasmania] where she
presently resides with Ms TS and
her son. She has significant savings and is in receipt of a Centrelink pension.
Her assets and
Centrelink pension need to be managed. Should Mrs ZGS need to
move into a residential aged care facility, there will need to be
decisions made
with respect to her real estate interests and a financial agreement entered into
with the residential aged care facility.
There will also need to be decisions
made with respect to her care, accommodation, support services available to her
and her general
health care needs.
respect of the appointment of a guardian the least restrictive option has been
considered and applied. With respect to the question
of administration there is
no less restrictive option other than appointing an administrator. Mrs ZGS
lacks capacity to appoint
an attorney or authorise an agent to act on her behalf
with respect to the management of her finances, estate and contractual relations
that may arise.
Board carefully considered whether to appoint Ms TS or the Public Trustee as
administrator. There is significant family conflict
and the potential for
further family conflict in that Ms TS and her son Mr UX are accommodated in Mrs
ZGS’s home, without the
payment of rent or board. There is the potential
for conflict between Ms TS’ interests (and those of her son Mr UX) and the
best interests of Mrs ZGS in respect of the management of the residence, given
Ms TS and her son are accommodated at that residence.
In the Board’s view,
it is in Mrs ZGS’s best interests that an independent body be appointed to
manage her financial
relation to the appointment of a guardian, both Mrs XS and Ms TS wished to be
considered for this role. Ongoing family conflict
between Mrs ZGS’s
children, and in particular between Mrs XS and Ms TS, and Mrs XS and Mr VS was
acknowledged by all family
members who appeared at the hearing. Neither Ms TS
nor Mrs XS were able to identify a clear plan as to how that conflict could be
managed in terms of any decision making with respect to decisions relating to
their mother. Further, Mrs XS resides in Western Australia
and, in a practical
sense, would not be present in Tasmania to make ongoing decisions as and when
they arose.
Board notes the concerns raised by independent persons with respect to aspects
of the care provided to Mrs ZGS by Ms TS. The Board
also notes Ms TS has her own
health problems which may weigh against her ability to provide the care and
support required and make
appropriate decisions in relation to her
mother’s care. Further, the potential for conflict between the interests
and her son and the best interests of Mrs ZGS with respect to
accommodation decisions is apparent. A guardian will necessarily need
consider whether Mrs ZGS’s best interests lie with being discharged to her
move to residential aged care. It
would be in Ms TS and her son’s best interests that Mrs ZGS not move into
residential care
because that may then require the sale of the Old Beach
property which provides rent free accommodation for Ms TS and her son.
Board determines that for the reasons identified, an appointment of Mrs XS or Ms
TS as guardian or administrator is not appropriate
and that the evidence
establishes that independent appointments are appropriate. The Board considers
that the Public Trustee should
be appointed as Administrator and the Public
Guardian should be appointed as Guardian.
Accordingly,
the Board orders on 8 October 2020 in respect to Mrs ZGS:
the Public Trustee (Tas) is appointed as Administrator of the estate of
Order remains in effect until 7 October 2023.
Public Guardian (Tas) is appointed as limited Guardian of ZGS with the power
where ZGS is to live whether permanently or temporarily.
what services ZGS should access and provide consent to such as required.
health care decisions for ZGS.
visits to ZGS to such extent as may be necessary in her best interests and to
prohibit visits by any person if the Guardian
reasonably believes they would
have an adverse effect on ZGS.
Order remains in effect until 7 October 2023.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (229 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter