URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASADT/2021/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:11:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Alhossain Khalafallah v Tasmanian Health Service & Anor [2021] TASADT 8 (1 November 2021)
[2021] TASADT 8
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
Alhossain Khalafallah v Tasmanian Health Service &
[2021] TASADT
KHALAFALLAH, Alhossain
TASMANIAN HEALTH SERVICE
GAUDEN, Stan
Hobart and Launceston
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
6 October 2020, 9 February 2021, 23 February 2021,
complainant’s closing submission filed 9 March 2021, respondent’s
closing submissions filed 15 March 2021.
DELIVERED ON:
1 November 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
S71(1)(a), S71(3) and S72
DECISION OF:
Tribunal Member Robert Winter
CATCHWORDS:
Review of dismissal, taking complainant’s case at
its highest, nature of review process
Anti-Discrimination Act
The State of Tasmania v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal &
[2009] TASSC 48
; Alhossain Khalafallah v Tasmanian Health Service &
[2020] TASADT 3
; Jacobson v Willie & Anor
[2005] TASADT 11
Cassidy v Rotorlift Pty Ltd & Ors
[2017] TASADT 8
; Prakash v Bobb Borg
Enterprises Pty Ltd
[1999] NSWADT 73
; Carr v Botany Bay Council
[2003] NSWADT
; Williamson v Bedelph
[2017] TASADT 7
; Bennett v Department of Health and
Human Services & Ors
[2010] TASADT 9
; Briginshaw v Briginshaw
(1938) CLR 34
Cain v. The Australian Red Cross Society
[2009] TASADT 3
; Lucy Orchard v Frayne
[2020] TASADT 11
; Evershed v The City of Geraldton
(1995) EOC 92-745
Alone v The State Housing Commission Homewest citing Fenwick v Beveridge
Building Products Pty Ltd
(1986) EOC 92-147
; Drummond v Telstra Corporation
[2008] VCAT 2630
; Costello v Tasmania Police
[2012] TASADT 9
; Langley v
[1981] 2 NSWLR 104
; Maree Summers v. Department of Education and Ors
[2019] TASADT 8
; Makkar v Australian Dispatch Company Pty Ltd t/as 131 008
Hobart (“ADCCO”) and Carroll; Singh v Australian Dispatch
Pty Ltd t/as 131 008 Hobart (“ADCCO”) and Carroll
[2020] TASADT 9
DETERMINATION:
Decision of the
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner to dismiss the complaint was the correct
decision. The complaint lapses
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant
: G Maguire (S McElwaine SC on 9 February 2021)
Respondents
Solicitors:
Complainant
: Bishops Lawyers
Respondents
: Office of the Solicitor-General
[2021] TASADT 8
REASONS FOR DECISION
APPLICATION
1. The complainant has applied to the Anti-Discrimination
Tribunal (“the Tribunal”) to review a decision of the delegate
the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner (“ADC”), dismissing his
complaint. The application is made pursuant to s71(3)
of the Anti-Discrimination
Act 1998 (“the Act”), which provides:
complainant whose complaint is dismissed may apply to the Tribunal for the
dismissal to be reviewed.”
Section 72 is also relevant and provides:
“(1) If, on reviewing
the rejection or dismissal of a complaint, the Tribunal is satisfied that the
Commissioner made a correct
decision in rejecting or dismissing the complaint,
the complaint lapses.
(2) If, on reviewing the rejection of a complaint, the Tribunal is not
satisfied that the Commissioner made a correct decision in
rejecting the
complaint, the Tribunal is to refer the complaint back to the Commissioner for
investigation.”
(3) If, on reviewing the dismissal of a complaint, the Tribunal is not
satisfied that the Commissioner made a correct decision in
dismissing the
complaint, the Tribunal is to deal with the complaint as if it were an inquiry
under Division 4.”
The ADC Proceedings
2. On 13 June 2018, the complainant filed a complaint with the
ADC alleging that during the course of his employment with the first
respondent,
he was discriminated against by the second respondent -
(a) On the basis of his race;
(b) On the basis of his
religious belief or affiliation;
(c) That he had been victimised on the basis
of a previous complaint made to the ADC by the complainant;
(d) Incitement on the basis of his religious belief or
affiliation.
3. On 16 July 2018 by a written decision, the ADC decided to
accept the complaint for investigation of the following possible breaches
(a) Direct discrimination against the complainant (s14) on
the basis of race and religious belief or affiliation in connection with
employment - s16(a), (o), and s22(1)(a).
(b) Indirect discrimination against
the complainant (s15) on the basis of his religious belief or affiliation in
connection with
employment - s16(o) and s22(1)(a),
(c) Victimisation of the
complainant on the basis that the complainant had previously made a complaint to
the ADC - s18(1)(a), and
(d) Incitement on the basis of his religious belief
or affiliation - s19.
4. The area of activity in which the discrimination, prohibited
conduct, and incitement was alleged to have occurred was employment
5. The ADC advised that the investigation would explore whether
the first respondent had complied with s104 of the Act by taking reasonable
steps to ensure that discrimination or prohibitive conduct was not engaged
6. The ADC further advised that the allegation of incitement on the basis
of race or religious belief or affiliation would not be
investigated as there
was no possibility of incitement having occurred.
7. By written decision
dated 25 January 2019 and following completion of its investigations, the ADC
determined pursuant to s71(1)(a)
of the Act that the complaint against the
second respondent ought to be dismissed pursuant to s64(1)(a) of the Act on the
it was trivial, vexatious, misconceived or lacking in substance. The
ADC specifically found that the complaint was misconceived
and lacking in
8. Given that the ADC decided that no possible breaches of the Act
were identified by the second respondent, there was no need to
consider whether
or not the first respondent had complied with s104 of the Act.
Tribunal Proceedings
9. By letter dated 20 February 2019, the complainant made
application to the Tribunal for a review of the ADC’s decision to
the complaint pursuant to s71(3) of the Act.
10. The complainant’s
application was made in writing within 28 days pursuant to s71(4), of the
11. The history of the Tribunal’s dealings with the
complainant’s application for review of the dismissal of his complaint
from the time of its initial referral to the Tribunal and the hearing occurring
on 23 September 2019 are set out in the Tribunal’s
decision Alhossain
Khalafallah v Tasmanian Health Service & Anor
[2020] TASADT 3.
consequence of the orders detailed in that decision, subsequent to direction
conferences occurring on 13 August 2020 and
2 September 2020, and where the
witnesses were identified whom the complainant’s counsel wished to cross
examine. the complainant’s
application for a review was set down for
hearing in Launceston on 6 October 2020.
13. On 3 September 2020, the
complainant’s counsel provided further documents upon which he intended
to rely upon at the hearing.
This was in addition to the summary of the
evidence to be relied upon by the complainant provided to the Tribunal on 20
August 2020.
14. As a consequence of indications from the complainant’s
counsel that, in light of the Tribunal’s decision of 5 May
desired to cross-examine five respondent witnesses the hearing in Launceston was
listed for two days. By 3 October 2020,
the complainant’s counsel had
indicated to the Tribunal and the respondent’s counsel, that the
complainant only desired
to have one witness available for cross-examination,
that being the second respondent, Dr Stanislaw Gauden, the Director of Northern
Cancer Services THS.
15. At the commencement of the hearing on the morning of
6 October 2020 in Launceston, with Dr Gauden being present, counsel for the
complainant indicated that he no longer desired to cross-examine Dr Gauden and
he wished to advance the complainant’s case
by making oral and providing
further written submissions.
16. The respondent’s counsel indicated
that as a consequence of the Tribunal’s ruling of 5 May 2020, and to
provide context
and explanation to the range of documentation the respondent
wished to put forward in response to the complainant’s application
review of the dismissal of his complaint, the respondent wished to call Dr
Gauden for this purpose.
17. The complainant’s counsel objected to this
course of action. After consideration of the submissions put before the
the Tribunal dismissed the complainant’s objection and permitted
Dr Gauden to give evidence under oath to assist the Tribunal
to understand the
respondent’s case.
18. Over the course of the balance of this
day’s hearing, Dr Gauden gave oral evidence without any significant
objection from
the complainant’s counsel. During this process,
significant documentary material was tendered, again without any significant
19. Given the nature of the evidence given by Dr Gauden, at the
conclusion of his evidence in chief, the Tribunal enquired of the
complainant’s counsel as to whether or not he desired to cross-examine Dr
Gauden which, up until the morning of 6 October 2020
had been his indicated
20. The complainant’s counsel indicated that he did not at
that point wish to cross-examine Dr Gauden but rather would seek
to provide a
written response/submissions in relation to the evidence provided by Dr
21. The respondent’s counsel objected to this course of action.
The Tribunal ruled that if the complainant wished to put any
material in
response to the evidence of Dr Gauden, it should do so through a process of
cross-examination. This ruling was on the
basis that to do so would be
procedurally fair to the complainant, in light of the complainant’s
counsel’s original intention
to cross-examine respondent witnesses,
including Dr Gauden, and because of the nature of the evidence Dr Gauden had
given during
his evidence-in-chief..
22. With there being no further time
available to the Tribunal on 6 October 2020, and the time allocated on 7 October
2020 having
been vacated based on the advice of counsel for the complainant, the
hearing was adjourned for continuation on 5 November 2020.
23. Due to the
complainant’s counsel’s advice that briefed counsel had become ill,
and was unable to appear at the hearing
on 5 November 2020, and with issues also
relating to the Tribunal’s own ability to proceed on that day, the matter
was adjourned
to 1 December 2020. At this directions conference, the matter was
relisted for a further hearing in Hobart on Tuesday 9 February
consequence of the complainant’s unavailability, for personal reasons,
prior to that date.
24. On the evening of Monday 8 February 2021, the day
before the scheduled hearing on 9 February 2021, the complainant’s counsel
provided to the Tribunal, a statutory declaration of the complainant dated 8
February 2021, with attachments, and written submissions
with regard to the
advancement of the review of the complainant’s application from Mr
McElwaine SC, on behalf of the complainant.
25. As Monday 8 February 2021 was
the Royal Hobart Regatta Day public holiday, neither the Tribunal nor the
respondent’s counsel
became aware of this material until the morning of
Tuesday 9 February 2021.
26. When the matter came on before the Tribunal on
the morning of 9 February 2021, Mr McElwaine was granted leave to appear before
the Tribunal to address the written submissions of 8 February 2021. During this
initial exchange, both Mr McElwaine SC and the complainant’s
indicated that that they did not wish to proceed to cross-examine the second
respondent, but rather wished to proceed to
progress the complainant’s
application, by the tendering into evidence of the statutory declaration of the
complainant with
its attachments dated 8 February 2021.
27. As a consequence
of the late service of the complainant’s counsel’s submissions and
the statutory declaration of the
complainant dated 8 February 2021, the Tribunal
granted the respondent an adjournment, and set a timetable for the provision of
responses to the material provided by the complainant’s counsel
and Mr McElwaine SC.
28. So as to not lose the benefit of allocated Tribunal
time, there being no further evidence from Dr Gauden, the respondent’s
counsel addressed the Tribunal by way of oral submissions.
respondent’s counsel filed written submissions regarding the
complainant’s application to put into evidence a
statutory declaration of
the complainant dated 8 February 2021, on 12 February 2021, with the
complainant’s counsel providing
a written response thereto on 22 February
30. The complainant’s review of dismissal application came back
before the Tribunal on 23 February 2021, and after hearing further
argument from
both the complainant’s counsel and the respondent’s counsel, the
Tribunal ruled that it would receive into
evidence the complainant’s
statutory declaration dated 8 February 2021 with its attachments.
timetable was also set for the complainant’s provision of final closing
submissions along with a response timetable for
the respondent’s final
written submissions.
32. The complainant’s final written submissions
were received by the Tribunal on 9 March 2021 with the respondent’s
final written submissions being received by the Tribunal on 15
March 2021.
Review Process
33. The law applying to the Tribunal’s role in
determining the review of rejection and dismissal of a complaint pursuant to
of the Act was clearly stated in The State of Tasmania v The Anti-Discrimination
Tribunal & Ors
[2009] TASSC 48
, being an appeal from a dismissal of an
application to review the dismissal of a complaint pursuant to s71(3), of the
Act. In that
decision, his Honour, Porter J expressed a concluded view on the
nature of the type of a review application pursuant to s72 of the
Act. See that
judgment at paras 27 – 49 inclusive.
34. At para 39, Porter J stated
the following:
– For the reasons which follow I conclude that the review carried out by
the Tribunal under s72 is a comprehensive
merit Review. It is not confined to
the material which was before the Commissioner. I think that the proper meaning
of the scheme
is that in carrying out a review, the Tribunal may take into
account such material as it thinks fit.”
35. Having concluded that the review process undertaken by the
Tribunal is “administrative in character”, his Honour held
paragraph 41:
“As to the scope of the
Review and the nature of the task, there are no prescribed grounds of review and
there is no requirement
that the Tribunal find any error of fact or law or
irrationality or unreasonableness or any other ground upon which to intervene.
If limitations on the scope or nature of the Review had been intended, it might
be thought that they would have been expressed.
Under the terms of s72, the
Tribunal is only concerned with whether or not it is satisfied “that the
Commissioner made a correct
decision”. On those bases the question for
the Tribunal is what decision ought to have been made and the Tribunal has to
the same issues as did the Commissioner. In Schi v Migration Agents
Registration Authority (above) – a case of administrative
Kiefel J said at 327 [140] that “a ‘correct’ decision, in the
context of review, might be taken
to be rightly made in the proper sense: Drake
v Minister for Immigration (1979) 46FLR 409 at 431 – 432 per Smithers
I take “in the proper sense “, to mean in an objective or
absolute sense.”
36. Additionally, at paragraph 47 his Honour stated clearly the
role of the Tribunal.
“Thus, when s72 speaks
of the Tribunal being satisfied or not that the Commissioner “made the
correct decision”,
it means that the question is whether the decision was
the correct one
on the material
before the Tribunal
The extent of such material is to be governed by relevance. That is the
interpretation which accords with the remedial nature of
the legislation and
which better promotes its objects.”
37. The Tribunal has followed his Honour’s binding
decision and has considered all of the materials provided by the ADC, and
the materials relied upon by both the complainant and respondents which are
before the Tribunal.
38. The standard of proof to be applied in the review
process is the civil standard, (see Briginshaw v Briginshaw
(1938) CLR 34).
onus of proof is on the complainant to identify relevant material in support of
his complaint
39. A significant basis of the arguments in support of the
complainant’s application was the submission that the Tribunal in
determination must take the complainant’s case at its highest. Support
for this argument was based on the approach adopted
by this Tribunal and similar
Tribunals in other jurisdictions.
40. Cases cited in this context were the
prior decisions of the Tribunal in Jacobson v Willie & Anor
[2005] TASADT 11
at 21 and Cassidy v Rotorlift Pty Ltd & Ors
[2017] TASADT 8.
cited in this context from other jurisdictions were Prakash v Bobb Borg
Enterprises Pty Ltd
[1999] NSWADT 73
and Carr v Botany Bay Council
[2003] NSWADT
42. Although Cassidy v Rotorlift (supra), was a decision involving the
review of the dismissal of a complaint - as in the current
matter - the support
for Chairperson Webster’s (as it then was) comment that “the test on
the review of a dismissal is
that the Tribunal must assess Mr Cassidy’s
(the complainant’s) evidence at its highest - paragraph 47” were the
two cases cited above from the New South Wales Administrative Decisions
43. These two cases involved an application pursuant to s111(1), of
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Anti-Discrimination
which relevantly states:
at any stage of an inquiry, the Tribunal is satisfied that a complaint is
frivolous vexatious misconceived or lacking
in substance, or that for any other
reason, the complainant should not be entertained, it may dismiss the
complaint”.
44. This provision is not dissimilar to the provisions of s99
of the Act which relevantly states:
(1) The Tribunal may dismiss
a complaint if it finds
an inquiry, that the
complaint is unsubstantiated.
(2) The Tribunal may dismiss a complaint
at any time
satisfied that:
a) The complaint is trivial vexatious misconceived or lacking in substance
b) Dismissing the complaint would, for some other reason, be just and
appropriate”.
45. The case of Jacobson v Willie, a decision of Tribunal
Member Brett (as he then was), properly categorised the respondent’s
“no case submission”, at the close of the complainant’s case,
as an application that he should dismiss the complaint
pursuant to s99(2)(a) of
the Act on the basis that he ought to be satisfied that the complaint was
lacking in substance.
46. The Tribunal dealt with a similar situation in its
decision in Williamson v Bedelph
[2017] TASADT 7.
47. Both Tribunal cases
dealt with applications pursuant to S99 at the close of the complainants’
evidence in an inquiry.
48. Having considered these decisions and also the
Tribunal’s decision in Bennett v Department of Health and Human Services
[2010] TASADT 9
, the Tribunal has come to the conclusion that there is
merit in the respondents’ submissions of 15 March 2021, that “there
is not however, as submitted by counsel for the complainant, a general principle
that all review hearings under s72 must proceed
on that basis - ie, that the
Tribunal must take the complainant’s case at its
49. The Tribunal is not bound to follow its previous
decisions and with respect to the learned former Chair of the Tribunal, there
was not any analysis for his statement at paragraph 47 of Cassidy v Rotorlift
(supra)“The test on the review of a dismissal
is that the Tribunal must
assess Mr Cassidy (the complainant’s) evidence at its
50. Further, the cases of Prakash v Bobb Borg Enterprises Pty
Ltd and Carr v Botany Bay Council (supra) arose from the New South
Administrative Decisions Tribunal dealing with a situation in an inquiry process
not dissimilar to that occurring with the
Tribunal dealing with s99 in Jacobson
v Willie and Williamson v Bedelph (supra).
51. Taking the complainant’s
case at its highest may be an appropriate approach when the Tribunal is
reviewing a decision of
the ADC to reject a complaint pursuant to s64 of the
Act. It is clear from the Act that the review process in such circumstances
conducted without any input from a respondent.
52. In the Tribunal’s
view, in light of the duty of the Tribunal to provide procedural fairness, and
as the review of a dismissal
is conducted on an inter partes basis, the Tribunal
is also required to consider relevant material adduced by the respondent and
give it due consideration and weight.
53. S72 is a comprehensive merits
review empowering the Tribunal to determine if the ADC’s decision was the
correct one, and
is not confined to the material before the ADC.
approach is consistent with the approach as enunciated by Porter J in his
binding decision State of Tasmania v Anti-Discrimination
Tribunal & Ors
(supra), and does not amount to “an investigation of the complaint, or a
determination of the complaint
on its merits”.(see Bennett v Department of
Health and Human Services and Anor
[2010] TASADT 9
55. The Tribunal
has not, as urged by the respondents’ counsel in her submissions,
considered the credibility of the second
respondent as a consequence of his oral
evidence on 6 October 2020. As indicated previously in this decision, Dr
Gauden’s evidence
on that day was of relevance, and assisted the Tribunal
to understand the evidence proposed to be tendered by the respondent through
Gauden. The Tribunal’s invitation to the complainant’s counsel to
cross-examine Dr Gauden was for the purpose of
affording procedural fairness to
the complainant.
Evidence Before the Tribunal
56. The complainant relies upon the following evidence:
(a) Complaint filed 13 June 2018.
Statutory Declaration
Professor Alhossain Khalafallah dated 24 May 2019 (filed 27 May
(b) Statutory Declaration Professor Alhossain Khalafallah dated 8
February 2021 (filed 9 February 2021 - Exhibit C1).
(c) Statutory Declaration
Dr Fayez Hanna dated 24 May 2019 (filed 27 May 2019).
(d) Statutory
Declaration Dr Usira Vithanarachchi dated 17 May 2020 (filed 13 August
(e) Professor Alhossain Khalafallah written response to
respondent’s written submission (undated), filed 26 July
(f) Professor Alhossain Khalafallah written Statement (provided to
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner on 18 February 2019).
(g) Murdoch Clarke
letter to Anti-Discrimination Commissioner dated 21 November 2018 (email to ADC
21 November 2018).
(h) Murdoch Clarke letter to Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner dated 18 January 2019 (including written Statement by Professor
Khalafallah).
57. The ADC had before it the following material:
(a) Complaint filed 13 June 2018.
(b) Letter from second
respondent with initial response received 15 August 2018.
(c) Letter from
first respondent’s practitioner with initial response received 24 August
(d) Letter from the respondent’s practitioner with initial
response received 24 August 2018.
(e) Complainant’s reply to the
respondent’s response received 21 November 2018.
(f) Letter from the
complainant’s practitioner with further information received in January
58. On the respondent’s case, the Tribunal had before it
the following additional material from the complainant in addition
referred to by the complainant:
(a) University of Tasmania iGRad report for Dr Fayez
(b) University of Tasmania PHD research plan for Dr Fayez Hanna dated
(c) Written submissions filed 27 May 2019. Written submissions imply
filed 26 July 2019.
59. The respondent had placed before the Tribunal the following
(a) Documents 1-118 of the respondent’s list, dated 3
September 2020, all of which were tendered at the review hearing on 6
2020 and given the corresponding exhibit numbers.
(b) Documents tendered at
the review hearing 6 October 2020 – R1- 119.
(c) Further submissions
from the second respondent dated 6 June 2019.
(d) Respondent’s outline
of submissions dated 8 July 2019.
60. In their written submissions, the complainant’s
counsel and the respondents’ counsel were in general agreement that
were five principal matters/allegations upon which the complainant’s
claims of discrimination and victimisation were
based. These were:
(a) An allegation of inflexibility around how the
complainant could attend a Friday prayer group at the Mowbray
(b) Alleged unreasonable management scrutiny as to how the
complainant saw patients, particularly consulting with two patients on
occasions in his private rooms as opposed to the Holman Clinic at the Launceston
General Hospital.
(c) The alleged conduct of the second respondent regarding
his accommodation of Dr Fayez Hanna who was a PHD student the complainant
supervising, including an accusation of the complainant removing a computer
monitor without authorisation.
(d) An allegation of the
unreasonable/untenable scheduling of outpatient clinic hours for the complainant
at Holman Clinic.
(e) Alleged victimisation of the complainant because of the
complainant’s previous complaint pursuant to the Act in 2014 - general
antipathy and victimisation.
61. The Tribunal has considered the evidence before the ADC and
the Tribunal under each of these matters/allegation headings in its
determination as to whether the ADC’s decision to dismiss the complaint
was the correct decision.
Discrimination
62. Section 14 of the Act defines direct discrimination in the
following terms:
“(1) Discrimination to
which the Act applies is direct or indirect discrimination on the grounds of any
prescribed attribute.
(2) Direct discrimination takes place if a person treats another person on
the basis of any prescribed attribute, imputed prescribed
attribute or a
characteristic imputed to that attribute less favourably than a person without
that attribute or characteristic.
(3) For direct discrimination to take place, it is not necessary:
(a) that a prescribed attribute be the sole or dominant ground for the
unfavourable treatment, or
(b) that the person who discriminates regards the treatment as unfavourable
or that the person who discriminates has any particular
discriminating.”
63. In Cain v. The Australian Red Cross Society
[2009] TASADT 3
the Tribunal held at [403, 405, 410, 437 – 440, and 442-446] that the
terms of s14 require the complainant to prove the following:
(a) That the true reason or genuine reason for the alleged
discriminator’s acts was on the basis that the complainant had one
prescribed attributes under s16 of the Act or a characteristic imputed to the
attribute or attributes.
(b) That there was a different treatment of the
complainant when compared with the treatment of a comparator, that is, a
person similarly placed to the complainant, and in the like
circumstances but without the prescribed attribute: and
(c) That the
complainant has suffered a detriment that is, a disadvantage that is real, a
matter of substance and not trivial.
discrimination
64. S15 of the Act is entitled “Indirect
Discrimination”, and is in the following terms:
“(1) Indirect
discrimination takes place if a person imposes a condition requirement or
practice which is unreasonable in the
circumstances and has the effect of
disadvantaging a member of a group of people who:
(a) share, or are believed to share, a prescribed attribute, or
(b) share, or are believed to share, any of the characteristics imputed to
that attribute, more than a person who is not a member
65. S15(2) provides that for indirect discrimination to take
place, it is not necessary for the person who discriminates is aware
condition requirement or practice disadvantages the group of people.
Cain v The Australian Red Cross Society
[2009] TASADT 03
, the Tribunal has
previously identified that there are four elements to indirect discrimination as
(a) The imposition of a condition requirement or
(b) The condition requirement or practice is unreasonable in all
the circumstances.
(c) It has the effect of disadvantaging a
complainant.
(d) The complainant is disadvantaged as a member of a group of
persons who share or are believed to share a prescribed attribute more
person who is not a member of that group.
67. The prescribed attributes relied upon by the complainant
are his race (African/Egyptian) s16(a) and religious belief or affiliation
(Muslim) - s16(o).
68. The area of activity pursuant to s22(1)(a), is in
connection with employment.
Victimisation
69. s18 of the Act relevantly provides that:
“(1) A person must not
victimise another person because that other person
(a) made, or intends to make, a complaint under this Act; or
(b) gave, or intends to give, evidence or information in connection with any
proceedings under this Act; or..........
(2) Victimisation takes place if a person subjects, or threatens to subject,
another person or an associate of that other person to
detriment.”
70. “Detriment” is further defined in s3 of the Act
as including humiliation or denigration.
71. In her recent decision in Lucy
Orchard v Frayne Higgins
[2020] TASADT 11
, Tribunal Member Cuthbertson
summarised the state of the law relating to discrimination and stated from para
273 that in order to
establish that victimisation has occurred, a complainant
must show that any actual or threatened detriment experienced by them, or
associate of theirs, was because of one or more of the matters referred to in
s18(1) of the Act. If such victimisation is the
result of some other matter, it
is not prohibited by s18 of the Act. Von Stalheim v Anti-Discrimination
Tribunal and Attorney-General
for the State of Tasmania [2007] TASSC9, Evans, J
72. What is required to establish that there is a sufficient causal
link between the protected conduct set out in s18 (1)(a) –
(e) of the Act
and the detriment that the person says they have been subjected to (or
threatened to be subjected to) has been considered
in the context of like
legislation in other jurisdictions, but has not been the subject of appellate
consideration in Tasmania.
To establish the relevant causal connection it must
first be shown that the person who is alleged to have been engaged in the
victimisation
knows of the prohibited conduct (Vidler v Queensland &
[2010] QCAT 579
). A causal connection will be established
where the conduct complained of was a real, genuine or true reason for
subjecting a person
to a detriment (see the discussion in Schi v Technical and
Further Education Commissioner (3)
[2009] NSWADT 271
at 65-72). Such an
approach is consistent with the causal link required to be established in
respect of allegations of direct discrimination
under s14 of the Act.
ordinary civil standard of proof applies in respect of the proof of
victimisation claims. Proving a causal link can be difficult
and in the absence
of direct evidence of that link, a complainant often has to rely on the drawing
of inferences.
74. The question of whether that person has been subject to or
threatened to be subject to a detriment is to be determined objectively
subjectively. It is not sufficient for a complainant to allege that they have
suffered a consequence they describe as a
detriment - “The loss, damage or
injury suffered by a complainant must be something which a reasonable person
would consider
to be a detriment.” (Sivananthan v Commissioner of Police,
New South Wales Service
[2001] NSWADT 40
75. The complainant’s
complaint of victimisation is put on the basis of s18(1)(a).
76. With regard
to S 64(1)(a), in the context of similar provisions to s64(1)(a),
“misconceived or lacking in substance ”
has been defined as meaning
an absence or insufficiency of factual merit in the complaint (per Hunt J in
Langley v Miland
[1981] 2 NSWLR 104).
of a nexus/inferences to be drawn
77. In Evershed v The City of Geraldton
(1995) EOC 92-745
78,564 it was stated:
“In the absence of
direct evidence, the complainant could use inferences drawn from the primary
facts to establish the causal
link between a person’s characteristics and
the alleged discrimination so that it appeared that the discriminatory conduct
occurred by reason of that characteristic”.
78. Discrimination however cannot be inferred “when more
probable and innocent explanations are open on the evidence”
example Alone v The State Housing Commission Homewest citing Fenwick v Beveridge
Building Products Pty Ltd
(1986) EOC 92-147).
79. As was discussed in
Drummond v Telstra Corporation Limited
[2008] VCAT 2630
, every person possesses
some attribute as defined in S16. At [57] of that decision, Deputy President
MacNamara said:
people in one form or another possess most of the attributes. It is a frequent
experience in this list that people who
feel they have been unjustly dealt with
in employment or other context identify what they see as unfair treatment and
their possession
of one or more attributes leading to the allegation then that
they have been the victims of direct discrimination.
[58] If this mode of argument were acceptable, every instance of unfair
dismissal for instance would also be an instance of direct
discrimination
because every unjustly or allegedly unjustly dismissed employee possesses
certain attributes”.
80. Although the attribute is different, the nature of the
complaint in this case is similar to that which was dealt with by the Tribunal
in Costello v Tasmania Police [2012] TASADT9. In that case, the Tribunal said
“The complainant
asserts that it was a certain attribute. In this case, those relate to his
sexual orientation and disability.
He is, essentially dissatisfied with his
treatment at the hands of the respondents. He has formed the view that the
basis of the
respondents’ conduct at decision making in his regard is
based upon those attributes. At base he asks that an inference should
that the Act has been transgressed because of the existence of an attribute and
his dissatisfaction with the respondents’
action and decisions. There is
no evidence to support the conclusion that there is any link between the two.
The purpose of an
inquiry is not to give the complainant an opportunity to
‘fish’, for evidence that might provide the requisite
81. A belief does not amount to evidence which establishes
those beliefs as facts, nor does a belief amount to evidence from which
facts can be inferred. Something more is required before such an inference can
DETERMINATION
The Evidence
82. It is clear from the material before the Tribunal, that in
2014 the complainant had made and resolved a previous complaint with
(ADC reference number 14/04/061/JW) to which the first and second respondents in
this complaint were respondents. An agreement
was reached to resolve the
complaint at conciliation (this was tendered on 6 October as R39 entitled Office
of the Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner’s Agreement between complainant
and THO Grant Smith and Stan Gauden dated 5 August 2014).
83. The second
respondent became the complainant’s direct line manager in April
84. The complainant was on long service leave between April and
December 2017 and between January and February 2018.
85. The complaint to the
ADC is dated 13 June 2018.
86. The Tribunal has considered the evidence
before it under the following five principal matters/allegations basing the
complainant’s
complaint of discrimination and victimisation:
allegation of inflexibility around how the complainant could attend a Friday
prayer group at the Mowbray Campus.
87. The complainant alleged that
following his commencement of employment with the first respondent in 2006, he
had been permitted
to attend Friday afternoon prayer sessions as part of his
Muslim faith. He further stated that subsequent to his position being
reassigned to the Northern Cancer Service in 2016, he had been assigned to
clinic on Friday afternoons and could thus not attend
Friday prayers.
further alleges that Grant Smith, an employee of the first respondent, told him
at a consultants’ meeting that he would
need to submit applications for
leave without pay in order to attend prayer which he did.
complainant asserts that his only options to attend group prayer on Fridays was
to continue to submit applications for leave
without pay every Friday or arrange
to take his lunch break around that time, which gave him insufficient time to
travel to attend
the full sessions (2 hours travel).
90. In addition to the
complainant’s evidence as to these issues, in Consultant Haematologist Dr
Usira Vithanarachchi’s
statutory declaration, there is evidence of what
occurred in the consultants’ meeting on 4 August 2017 attended to by Mr
relating to this issue which the complainant asserts “generally
supports the complainant’s evidence” -9 see paragraph
Statutory Declaration.)
91. The respondent has however tendered clear
evidence denying this allegation including, but not limited to:
complainant’s Friday afternoon commitments were limited to one patient on
24 March 2017, one patient on 31 March 2017,
and 4 patients on 21 April
(ii) From 12 May 2017 to 31 December 2017, the complainant took annual leave
on Friday afternoon and from 1 March, the complainant
was only required to work
from 8am to 12 mid-day on Fridays.
(iii) The minutes of the consultants’ meeting on 4 April –
(document R47) - confirm that this was the first time the complainant
request for leave on Fridays to attend group prayers. The outcome of the
meeting was advised to the complainant in a
letter dated 30 April 2017 –
(refer R16).
(iv) In his transcript of interview (R43), Mr Smith, former Manager Northern
Cancer Services, denied that he ever advised the complainant
that he would need
to submit an application for leave without pay in order to attend Friday
(v) No other evidence was provided by the complainant of his alleged leave
(vi) The evidence disputing the complainant’s allegation of a 2-hour
travel time to attend Friday prayers is purportedly supported
by document
(vii) There was evidence from both Mr Smith and the second respondent that
other medical practitioners at the LGH routinely attended
Friday prayers at the
mosque in their lunch hour without the need for additional time – (R43 re
Mr Smith and R40 transcript
of interview Stan Gauden.
92. Based on the evidence before the ADC and the Tribunal, the
Tribunal finds that it is more probable that the first request for
flexibility
around attendance at Friday prayers was made at the meeting on 4 April 2017, and
was promptly agreed to without conditions.
93. The Tribunal agrees with the
ADC’s decision that even if the complainant had been required to use leave
entitlements in
order to attend Friday prayers, such a requirement would not
have been unreasonable. It was further noted that taking leave without
utilising some other flexible working arrangement when absent from work during
working hours was standard practice in the
Tasmanian State Service and that she
noted that State Service practices and policies apply equally to all employees
regardless of
the reasons for absence from the workplace.
94. The Tribunal,
having considered all material before it relevant to this allegation/basis of
the complaint, finds that the ADC
was correct in its finding that neither direct
nor indirect discrimination nor victimisation had been made out.
unreasonable management scrutiny as to how the complainant saw patients,
particularly consulting with two patients on two
occasions in his private rooms
as opposed to the Holman Clinic at the Launceston General Hospital
complainant alleges that he was treated less favourably by the second respondent
when on two separate occasions in 2017 he
saw two particular patients in his
private rooms, as opposed to the Holman Clinic at the LGH.
complainant asserts that this was common practice, including the practice of the
second respondent, and was done in circumstances
where it was to the benefit of
the patients.
97. The two specific examples were on or around 3 March 2017
when a patient and colleague of the complainant (RM) expressed that she
to see the complainant in his private rooms and around 30 March 2017 when a
patient (PC) expressed anxiety about entering
the Cancer Clinic at the LGH and
due to personal reasons wished to not be seen at the Holman Clinic.
complainant further alleges that correspondence from the second respondent on 3
April 2017 was responded to by the complainant
with explanations - refer
complaint paragraph 19 - but that the second respondent considered the
explanations insufficient and corresponded
with the complainant in four letters
seeking responses within 10-11 days.
99. The complainant further asserts
there is corroboration for his version of events in the Statutory Declarations
of RM and PC attached
to his Statutory Declaration of 8 February 2021 (refer
paragraphs 53 and 54).
100. The complainant also asserts that the level of
scrutiny was over and above that directed towards other staff, and that he was
the only one in the Clinic to be asked whether he took a patient out of the
101. The respondent has denied the facts asserted by the complainant
referring to significant documentary evidence tendered before
the Tribunal,
including the first letter of 3 April 2017 (R11); the second letter of 4 April
2017 (R13); the third letter of 30 April
2017 (R15) and the fourth letter of 30
May 2017 (R18).
102. Consideration of these letters appears to the Tribunal
to reflect efforts by the second respondent to deal with issues of concern
initially raised by a third party and that as a consequence of the
complainant’s one-line response to the letter of 14 April
2017 (on 19
April 2017,) the respondent sought advice from the Human Resources Department at
the LGH (via email on 20 April 2017
- R14). After receiving that advice, on 30
April 2017 sent a further letter to the complainant seeking more substantial
detail (R15).
103. Subsequent to the complainant’s response to letter
R11 and letter R13, which occurred on 22 May 2017 (R17), the second
provided a response to the Human Resources Department noting “I suspect it
will be difficult to argue with his comments”.
104. By letter dated 30
May 2017 (R18), the second respondent advised the complainant that his
explanation of the queried events had
been accepted and that it was acknowledged
that his actions were taken with the interests of patients in mind
105. The respondent provided exhibits R87 to R96 as evidence of
contemporaneous staff complaints made to the second respondent about
complainant from January 2016 to 29 May 2017.
106. The Tribunal accepts the
respondents’ submission that this evidence demonstrates that the second
respondent was doing no
more than following appropriate procedures in relation
to the complainant’s performance – (R40, page 7, lines 263-267
page 8, lines 268-271).
107. The Tribunal accepts the respondent’s
submissions that the untested Statutory Declarations of PC and RM relied on by
complainant did not advance his allegations of unlawful conduct. They
appear to merely verify the explanations for his conduct which
was accepted by
the respondents following an appropriate administrative process.
with this evidence the Tribunal finds that the way in which the second
respondent responded to this issue was not less favourable
treatment of the
complainant because of his race and religious belief or affiliation, nor because
he had made a previous complaint
to the ADC in 2014.
109. The Tribunal,
having considered all material before it relevant to this allegation/basis of
the complaint, finds that the ADC
was correct in its finding that neither direct
nor indirect discrimination nor victimisation had been made out.
The alleged
conduct of the second respondent regarding his accommodation of Dr Fayez Hanna
who was a PhD student the complainant was
supervising, including the accusation
of the complainant removing a computer monitor without authorisation
complainant asserts that, from early 2017, he was the Clinical Supervisor for
PhD student Dr Fayez Hanna, who was a registered
physician with the Australian
Health Practitioners Regulation Agency (AHPRA).
111. The complainant asserted
that prior to Dr Gauden becoming his manager in April 2016, he had previously
supervised students at
the LGH without any issue and was welcome to have those
students. Students would often attend his office at the LGH to discuss things
and have documents signed. There had not previously been issues with students
supervised by medical staff attending LGH premises.
112. The complainant
refuted the second respondent’s assertions that he (the second respondent)
had no knowledge of Dr Hanna
being supervised by the complainant as evidenced by
his email to Dr Gauden advising of Dr Hanna’s PhD work at 9.41am on 20
March 2017 – (refer complainant’s Statutory Declaration of 24 May
2019 at paragraphs 33 and 34.)
113. The complainant asserts that in late
May/early June 2017, he offered Dr Hanna the use of his office space at the LGH
when necessary,
with the complainant advising this to the second respondent at a
meeting with no objection being raised. He asserts that no formal
application
was required to be made.
114. The complainant asserts that he and Dr Hanna
were confronted by the second respondent on 2 and 6 June 2017 in the LGH and Dr
Hanna was asked to leave when other students were welcome at the LGH. The
complainant asserts that on 6 June 2017, the second respondent
raised his voice
and threatened to call security unless Dr Hanna left the LGH.
115. The second
respondent wrote to the complainant on 2 June 2017 advising him that Dr Hanna
was not permitted to use any office
space at the LGH, because of lack of office
space. At the same time, Dr Gauden also accused the complainant of removing a
screen without authority.
116. It was asserted by the complainant
that at no time was Dr Hanna conducting research at the Holman Clinic nor using
the records
and databases of the LGH (refer Statutory Declaration of Dr Hanna
dated 24 May 2019).
117. The complainant further asserted that the second
respondent directed staff at the Holman Clinic to notify him if Dr Hanna entered
the LGH - this was a “priority alert” in the LGH system - refer
complainant’s Statutory Declaration dated 8 February
2021 at paragraphs 43
118. Although the respondent did not provide evidence of becoming
aware of the complainant’s supervising of Dr Hanna by an email
of 20 March
2017 at 9.41am, it is clear that it was in the May/early June period of 2017
that the complainant offered Dr Hanna physical
use of some of the
complainant’s office space at the LGH when necessary.
119. The second
respondent’s evidence regarding his dealings in relation to Dr Hanna is
detailed in R40 (his Statutory Declaration)
120. The second
respondent’s evidence of his dealings with Dr Hanna on 2 June 2017 was
that he found Dr Hanna within a restricted
area of the Holman Clinic and that
(i) as he was not an employee of Northern Cancer Service (nor the State), (ii)
that no approval
had been granted for him to use the complainant’s office
space, or to conduct research within the Northern Cancer Service or
facilities of the Holman Clinic, (iii) Dr Hanna was not authorised to be present
on Northern Cancer Service premises.
121. The second respondent’s
evidence is that it was not a matter for the complainant to “inform others
presence, but was rather a matter about which the
complainant was required to seek approval or permission for”. No such
had been sought nor granted.
122. The explanation for concerns
regarding Dr Hanna’s presence at the Northern Cancer Service expressed by
the second respondent
were patient confidentiality, and security issues
associated with unauthorised individuals gaining access to secure areas within
the Northern Cancer Service.
123. Exhibit R53, a letter from the second
respondent to the complainant on 2 June 2017, advised the complainant of the
respondents’
position, in a direct and professional manner. In this
letter, the resolved issue of the complainants removal of the compute monitor
was also raised, and advice provided to the complainant as to how to source such
a device if required.
124. On the second respondents evidence, despite this
letter of 2 June, Dr Hanna was observed in the complainant’s offices
the Holman Clinic on a number of subsequent occasions.
125. Although
there was a dispute as to the date, there is no dispute the second respondent
was alerted to the presence of Dr Hanna
in one of the consulting rooms at the
Holman Clinic, and that the second respondent approached Dr Hanna and asked him
to leave and
that if he was not prepared to do so, hospital security officers
would escort him out.
126. By R10, a letter from the second respondent on 4
August 2017 to the complainant, further communication relating to Dr Hanna was
provided. That letter was copied to the Department’s Human Resources
section (R9).This letter clearly demonstrates the situation
then existing
regarding Dr Hanna’s unauthorised and unsanctioned presence within the
Holman Clinic, and that the complainant
was well aware of this.
second respondent’s evidence with regard to the complainant allegation
that in correspondence from the second respondent
of 2 June 2017 the complainant
was indirectly accused of removing one of the computer monitors from his
consultation space is set
out in that letter (R530,and also in R40, page 19,
line 722-738; and R8,
128. In addition to this corroboration of the letter
of 2 June 2017 (R53), there is also corroborative evidence from Roseanne
Administrative Assistant Holman Clinic (R42) regarding the
complainant’s actions in this regard.
129. This evidence clearly
indicates that the complainant was not “incorrectly” accused of
removing the monitor as alleged,
and that in any event it was returned by him
and advice regarding an appropriate means of sourcing a monitor was provided to
130. Based on the evidence before the ADC and the Tribunal, the Tribunal
finds the ADC’s decision that there was no indication
of the second
respondent’s dealings with Dr Hanna or the complainant in the context of
this allegation/basis of complaint,
referencing his race or religious beliefs or
the making of a previous complaint (re victimisation) was the correct decision.
was no evidence of a nexus between this conduct and an attribute to
establish direct or indirect discrimination or victimisation.
An allegation
of the unreasonable/untenable scheduling of outpatient clinic hours for the
complainant at Holman Clinic
131. The complainant evidence with regard to
this allegation/basis of complaint is that the second respondent had direct
of the outpatient clinic roster, and that consultations for the
complainant were arranged with unreasonable timeframes.
132. The complainant
asserted that the minimum amount of time generally scheduled for new
consultations would be at least half an
hour, even if the patient had a
relatively simple issue, but from about March 2018 he was regularly given brief
15-minute windows
for all consultations, including patients who presented with
complex medical conditions.
133. The complainant asserts he raised this issue
on numerous occasions with the Practice Manager without success, and that each
he was referred to the second respondent and his concerns were
134. The complainant found it stressful and potentially compromising
of patient care with a lack of time for assessment noting he
was handling most
of the new patient cases in the outpatient clinic, despite being .7
135. The complainant asserts that no other doctors practising in the
outpatient clinic were required to complete new consultations
restricted timeframes.
136. The respondent’s evidence was that the
complainant was not taking a fair share of the patient load during the relevant
period and his peers were being adversely affected.
137. The second
respondent’s evidence was that the complainant was simply being asked to
perform his normal duties within his
normal rostered hours in accordance with
his Statement of Duties. At .7 FTE he was required to perform 53.2 hours per
The second respondent asserted that in reality he was working only a
fraction of that time. The document R4 indicates that between
1 March 2018 and
20 June 2018, the complainant’s appointments were allocated on the same
basis as other practitioners in the
Northern Cancer Service
138. The evidence
presented by the second respondent clearly indicated that through the relevant
period, the complainant’s clinic
comprising 4.5 patients was not onerous,
particularly when compared to the patient loads of the complainant’s
colleagues’
139. Evidence from the second respondent was that, through
2018, the complainant’s colleagues routinely did outreach work at
Mersey Community Hospital and the North West Regional Hospital and outpatient
service sessions at the LGH, as well as carrying
out inpatient load and
laboratory services tasks not undertaken by the complainant.
140. On 13 July
2018, subsequent to the lodgement of the current complaint on 13 June 2018, the
second respondent agreed to extend
all of the complainant’s appointments
to 30 minutes, noting that prior to this it was expected that the complainant
would conduct
15-minute review appointments and 30 minutes for new
consultations.
141. Based on all of the material before the ADC, and that
provided to the Tribunal, the documentary material provided by the respondent
and the second respondent do not demonstrate that the complainant’s
assertions of unreasonable/untenable scheduling of patients
142. The Tribunal finds that the ADC was correct to decide that although
it may be possible that the respondent’s treatment
of the complainant was
less potentially favourable than his colleagues, there is insufficient evidence
to show that the way in which
this issue was dealt with was based on the
complainant’s race, religious belief or affiliation, or because he had
made a previous
complaint to the ADC..
Alleged victimisation of the
complainant because of the complainant’s previous complaint pursuant to
the Act in 2014 - general
antipathy and victimisation
143. The complainant
asserts that his treatment at the hands of the respondent has worsened since his
complaint to the ADC in 2014.
The complainant asserts that in addition to the
evidence relating to the preceding allegations/bases, there have been numerous
instances of the complainant being subjected to a detriment. In this
context, the issue relating to the computer monitor was cited
as an example even
though this conduct was denied by the second respondent.
144. The complainant
asserts he was also forced to see an unscheduled sick patient unethically with
an allocated time of 10 minutes
with the team leader standing in front of his
door, and that he was barred from entering the LGH grounds unless for medical
145. The complainant further asserts that second respondent would
copy many other members of staff into emails to the complainant,
even emails of
a very simple nature. To his knowledge he was the only person subject to
146. The complainant asserts that the second respondent wrote to AHPRA
making false claims about the complainant. The complainant
further asserts that
AHPRA effectively found the claims to be without foundation and took no
147. The second respondent also purportedly instructed administration
staff at the Holman Clinic to ignore the complainant’s
requests re
scheduling.
148. The second respondent also purportedly instructed that any
requests by the complainant to change or amend appointments were referred
and that was not the case with any other doctors, and threatened the complainant
(in 2014) that he ought “not put his
name on the door as he wouldn’t
be there long.’
149. The complainant also contended that he was told
not to attend ward meetings whilst on sabbatical leave notwithstanding he was
undertaking his sabbatical work at LGH at UTAS and that whilst he was the
clinical supervisor for a new consultant, had to write
a report in this
150. The complainant also contended that Dr Renshaw had made a
baseless report to Police about a patient of the complainant who died
2018. No adverse action was taken against the complainant by Police or other
authority with respect to this.
151. Numerous other examples were cited in
the complainant’s submissions in relation to this allegation/basis of
complaint culminating
in the assertion that:
• The complainant resigned employment because of
victimisation - he was in a hostile and untenable working
environment;
• The complainant felt denigrated and/or
humiliated;
• An associate of the complainant, namely Dr Hanna,
suffered detriment and he was humiliated by Dr Gauden and was prevented
consulting with the complainant in the complainant’s workplace.
152. Having considered all of the evidence before the ADC and
the Tribunal, there is no direct evidence or evidence from which an
can be drawn that demonstrates a causal link between any detriment allegedly
suffered by the complainant and his alleged
victimisation by the second
respondent.
DETERMINATION
153. The Tribunal has determined that there is no general
principle that the complainant’s case is to be taken at its highest
review of a dismissal, pursuant to s72(3) of the Act.
154. On the basis of
the material before the ADC and the Tribunal even if the complainant’s
evidence was taken at its highest,
the complainant’s case remains trivial,
vexatious, misconceived or lacking in substance pursuant to s61(a), there being
absence or insufficiency of factual merit in the complaint in Langley v
[1981] 2 NSWLR 104
155. There is no direct evidence nor
primary facts from which inferences can be drawn to establish a causal link or
nexus between
the complainant’s attributes of race and religious belief
and the conduct of the second respondent to establish that the alleged
discriminatory conduct occurred by reason of those attributes.
preponderance of evidence before the Tribunal is that the complainant’s
belief that the second respondent’s behaviours,
whether viewed
individually or cumulatively, establish discriminatory or prohibited conduct,
does not amount to evidence from which
inferences can be drawn.
157. Although
there was clear evidence before both the ADC and the Tribunal of what could be
considered a personality conflict between
the complainant and the respondent,
this does not amount to evidence of discriminatory nor prohibited conduct
perpetrated by the
second respondent.
158. With there being no direct
evidence or facts from which inferences can be drawn, there is no causal link or
nexus between the
complainant’s treatment by the second respondent which
relates to his attributes of race or religious affiliation, the Tribunal
that the ADC was correct to dismiss the complaint pursuant to
159. The evidence provided by the four witnesses for the
complainant does not do anything more than provide some corroborative evidence
of the occurrence of events, but does not, in the Tribunal’s view, assist
in establishing the required causal nexus, directly
or by inference.
its decision of 25 January 2019, and given that the ADC decided there were no
possible breaches of the Act as identified by
the complainant against the second
respondent, the ADC also decided there was no need for it to consider whether
the first respondent
had complied with s104 of the Act.
161. Section 104 of
the Act provides:
“Obligations
of organisations
(1) An organisation is to ensure that:
(a) Its members officers employees and agents are made aware of the
discrimination and prohibited conduct to which this Act relates:
(b) The terms of an order made under s89 relating to that organisation are
brought to the notice of those of its members, officers,
employees, and agents
whose duties are such that they may engage in conduct of the kind to which the
order relates: and
(c) No member, officer, or employee or agent of the organisation engages
in, or repeats or continues such conduct.
(2) An organisation is to take reasonable steps to ensure that no member
officer employee or agent of the organisation engages in
discrimination or
prohibited conduct.
(3) An organisation that does not comply with this section is liable for any
contravention of this Act committed by any of its members,
officers, employees,
and agents.”
162. In Chairperson Webster’s decision (as he then was),
in Maree Summers v. Department of Education and Ors
[2019] TASADT 8
he stated at
paragraphs 113-114:
“S104 only becomes
relevant in the event there is a finding that the respondents have discriminated
against Ms Summers. If
there is such a finding then the onus is on the
Department to establish it has discharged its obligations to take reasonable
to ensure that its employees were made aware of and did not engage in
discriminatory conduct.
As there is no finding of discrimination I need not consider this provision
any further.”
163. See also the Tribunal’s decision in Makkar v
Australian Dispatch Company Pty Ltd t/as 131 008 Hobart (“ADCCO”)
and Carroll; Singh v Australian Dispatch Company Pty Ltd t/as 131 008 Hobart
(“ADCCO”) and Carroll
[2020] TASADT 9
164. The Tribunal finds that the ADC
was correct in not proceeding to consider the respondent’s conduct
pursuant to S104, in
light of its findings that the second respondent’s
conduct did not amount to a breach of the Act.
165. For the reasons indicated above, the Tribunal makes the
following order:
Pursuant to s72(1), the Tribunal is satisfied that the
Commissioner made a correct decision to dismiss the complainant’s
The complaint lapses.
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (332 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter