URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASGAB/2020/64.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SKD (Guardianship and Administration) [2020] TASGAB 64 (4 December 2020)
SKD (Guardianship and Administration)
[2020] TASGAB 64
HEARING DATE(S):
4 December 2020
DATE OF ORDERS:
4 December 2020
DATE OF STATEMENT OF REASONS:
18 December 2020
Mr R Grueber, Member
Ms W Hudson, Member
Mr G Dibley, Member
APPLICATION
Application for Guardianship and Administration
CATCHWORDS:
Administration – guardianship – least restrictive –
alcohol related dementia – Korsakoff’s syndrome
LEGISLATION CITED:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication
STATEMENT OF REASONS
Application
an Application filed 15 October 2020 Ms Hania McIver applied for Guardianship
and Administration Orders in respect to SKD. The
Application proposed the
appointment of the Public Guardian as SKD’s guardian and the Public
Trustee as administrator of SKD’s
Application came on for hearing by the Board on 4 December 2020.
following people appeared at the hearing:
proposed represented person)
Ms Hania McIver
(the Applicant)
Ms Nicky Targett
(Office of the Public Guardian)
Ms Michelle
Spicer (Public Trustee)
Dr Ian Navin
(psychiatry registrar, Older Persons Mental Health Service)
Dr Jack Kingsley
(resident medical officer, Roy Fagan Centre)
Mr Ben Harris
(Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania– counsel for SKD)
Mr Brad Saunders
(Advocacy Tasmania for SKD)
Board had before it the following documents:
Application
for Guardianship & Administration
Care Professional Report by Dr Navin, clinical psychologist, dated 15 October
Aged Care Assessment Summary and recommendations dated 1 August
notice of account details 21 October 2020
Property Information Report for XXXX
from TD to Board 27 October 2020
Guardianship Order made 7 October 2020
adjourning application for administration made 5 November 2020
order on adjourning application for guardianship made 5 November 2020
by the Office of the Public Guardian to the Board dated 28 October 2020 in
respect to the emergency order
Legislation - Guardianship
section 20 of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
(the Act) the
Board may make an order appointing a full or limited guardian in respect of
SKD if it is satisfied that:
a person with a disability; and
unable by reason of that disability to make reasonable judgements in respect of
all or any matters relating to his personal
circumstances; and
is need of a guardian.
determining whether or not an order should be made, section 20
the Board consider whether the needs of SKD could be met by other means less
restrictive of his freedom of decision and action;
the Board be satisfied that an order would be in SKD’s best interests; and
the Board not appoint a full guardian unless it is satisfied that an order for
limited guardianship would be insufficient to
meet the needs of SKD, and if a
limited order is made the order must be the least restrictive to SKD’s
freedom of decision
and action as possible in the circumstances.
Board must also have regard to the general principals in section 6 which add
the best interests of SKD be promoted; and
the wishes of SKD are, if possible, carried into effect.
21 sets out who the Board may appoint as a guardian. It was apparent from the
evidence provided to the Board that the only
potential appointee was the Public
Legislation -
Administration
to section 51(1) of the Act the Board may make an order appointing an
administrator in respect to SKD’s estate if it
is satisfied
is a person with a disability; and
unable by reason of that disability to make reasonable judgements in respect of
matters relating to all or any part of his estate;
is in need of an administrator of his estate.
determining whether or not an order should be made section 51
Board consider whether the needs or SKD could be met by other means less
restrictive of his freedom of decision and action; and
the Board must not make an order unless it is satisfied that the order would be
in the best interests of SKD; and
if an order is made it must be the least restrictive of SKD’s freedom of
decision and action as possible in the circumstances.
Board must also have regard to the general principals in s6 as noted above.
54 sets out who the Board may appoint as an administrator of SKD’s estate.
It was apparent from the evidence provided
to the Board that the only potential
appointee was the Public Trustee.
is a XX year old retired accountant who normally lives alone in a unit owned by
him in Hobart. At the time of the hearing he was
an inpatient at the Roy Fagan
Centre, a specialised hospital for older persons with psychiatric illness or
cognitive impairment.
Ian Navin, a psychiatry registrar with the Older Persons Mental Health Service,
provided a Health Care Professional Report dated
15 October 2020 and also gave
evidence at the hearing. Dr Navin provided dual diagnoses of alcohol related
dementia, being Korsakoff
Syndrome which is an amnestic disorder, and substance
abuse disorder (severe) arising in connection with alcohol abuse. Both
have been evident for at least six years. The Report notes that
those conditions give rise to deficits for SKD in respect to orientation
person, place or time, expressive communication, receptive communication,
planning and reasoning skills and impulse controls.
applicant, Ms McIver, a social worker with the Tasmanian Health Service, told
the Board that SKD had been admitted to hospital
three times since 7 August
2020. Dr Navin said that when SKD was discharged to his home on 18 August 2020,
after the first admission,
he had concerns about SKD’s cognitive
impairments. On 17 August 2020 SKD had scored 64 out of 100 on the
Addenbrooke’s
Cognitive Assessment test. Dr Navin’s report noted
that at that time SKD had large deficits in recall and fluency, with relative
preservation of language and attention. Previous cognitive assessments had
demonstrated similar impairments. On mental state examination
SKD would present
a superficial and inaccurate account of his circumstances, recent events and
life history, demonstrating confabulation
and amnesia. He exhibited a profound
lack of insight and inability to appreciate and plan.
Navin told the Board that as a consequence of his concerns an application was
made for an emergency guardianship order, which was
made on 7 October 2020. SKD
had returned to hospital by that time, exhibiting confusion and disorientation
and was transferred to
the Roy Fagan Centre. The report of the Public Guardian
to the Board in respect to the emergency order notes that the Guardian had
a decision on 8 October for SKD to remain at the Roy Fagan Centre for further
assessment and treatment. On the same date consent
to treatment was provided.
The Public Guardian’s report says that at that time SKD believed that he
was attending a conference
Navin described SKD as intelligent and articulate with a prestigious career as
an accountant and author. In terms of cognitive
reserve SKD’s verbal
function is very high and that domain of function traditionally improved during
inpatient admission.
SKD’s Addenbrooke’s score has increased to
76/100. Dr Navin’s greatest concerns surrounded persisting deficits
memory and an absence of improvement in SKD’s ability to encode and
retrieve memories. This has had stark consequences
for SKD’s ability to
plan and manage his affairs, even in the very supported environment of the Roy
Fagan Centre. Dr Navin
said that the Addenbrooke’s cut-off score for
dementia is 87/100 and that SKD had been below that level for some years. His
cognition fluctuated with sobriety and environment, however SKD was insightless
as to his reduced cognition or its risks. There
had been no significant changes
in SKD’s condition since Dr Navin prepared the Health Care Professional
Report, although there
had been some improvements in domains of cognition other
than memory. SKD told the Board through his counsel that he believed that
ceasing drinking he had recovered. Dr Navin, however, considered that
SKD’s disability affected his capacity to make reasonable
decisions and he
did not expect to see any significant change in the future. If SKD resumed
drinking alcohol it would result in a
further decline in cognition. Dr Navin
noted that SKD rejected support services as he could not, because of his lack of
insight into
the effects of his condition, see any need for them. In respect to
healthcare decisions SKD presented in a very plausible manner
superficial understanding and did not appreciate the need for medical treatment
or recall advice given to him. When assessed
for the report SKD was unable to
recall the reason for his hospital admission, his GP or the importance of
medications in preventing
further serious decline. He was unable to describe a
history of medical illness and did not appreciate the continued risk of further
cognitive decline with ongoing alcohol misuse. Dr Navin gave the example of
recommending to SKD that he take vitamins to counter
the effect of his alcohol
use. As demonstrated to the Board at the hearing, SKD was unable to recall that
advice, and so was unable
to act on it.
McIver told the Board that SKD’s several admissions since August 2020 had
all resulted from functional decline on a background
of alcohol abuse and
alcohol related dementia. SKD was admitted to the Roy Fagan Centre most
recently on 6 October 2020 after transferring
from the Royal Hobart Hospital.
His admission to the hospital came about because he was experiencing significant
difficulty managing
at home and had presented to his GP in a confused and
distressed state, prompting his doctor to call an ambulance. SKD was
experiencing
grossly impaired memory, agitation, disorientation to person, place
and time as well as significant confusion, including a delusional
belief that he
had children at home. His home was in such a squalid state such that it
required industrial cleaning. As well as
health hazards detailed in the
Application, a pile of newspapers was stacked next to a heater and constituted a
fire hazard.
Person’s Mental Health Services had for some time attempted to assist SKD
to live independently in his home. He would
terminate services in the belief
that he could look after himself. He continued to deny the need for assistance
notwithstanding
the apparent health and safety hazards in his home. SKD does
not have any family living locally. SKD’s ex-wife TD, delivered
SKD while he was an inpatient, including outstanding bills. SKD denied needing
any assistance with financial matters. However,
Ms McIver found that he had an
outstanding bill with Telstra that had been referred for debt collection
interstate and also outstanding
accounts with Aurora, XXXX Council, Foxtel,
Royal Hobart Hospital and a provider of meals. SKD required a high level of
to deal with these accounts over a number of hours but could not recall
the assistance provided to him. Ms McIver assisted SKD to
recover $400.00 that
had been held securely at the Royal Hobart Hospital during his admission. She
described SKD as being very confused
been taken by Tasmania Police. When accompanied by Roy Fagan staff to the
supermarket he
was unable to use the check-out or his bankcard without
assistance. In respect to day-to-day financial requirements Dr Navin’s
report notes that SKD was unable to give an account of his income and
expenditure and had accrued debts with unaddressed utility
bills, and that he
did not recall the previous instances of administration.
had previously been subject to Administration and Guardianship Orders. Ms
Spicer from the Public Trustee informed the Board that
the Administration Order
was made on 21 March 2019. It was revoked on 19 March 2020 on the basis of a
report by SKD’s GP who
considered at that time that, although SKD’s
level of health was fluctuating, he would be able to manage his financial
with support. Ms Targett from the Office of the Public Guardian advised
that a Guardianship Order was revoked on 30 August 2019
on the basis that at
that time there was no ongoing need. Ms McIver indicated that TD has in the
past provided assistance and support
to SKD and has sought help for him. TD is
unable, by reason of her own circumstances, to continue providing assistance to
McIver said that TD, who did not attend the hearing supports the need
for administration and guardianship. In an email to the Board
TD expressed
concerns about SKD’s ability to function independently. SKD had no other
familial or friendship supports available
to assist him.
McIver told the Board that SKD has needs in respect to decisions surrounding his
accommodation following discharge from hospital.
She said that attempts had
been made to support SKD in his home and that it might be necessary that a
decision be made for him to
live in more supported accommodation. There was
also a need in respect to provision of services given what she described as
ad-hoc engagement with services and his denial of need for support.
She also identified a need for decisions in respect to healthcare
for the same
opposed the appointment of either a guardian or administrator. He presented to
the Board with the articulate and intelligent
manner that Dr Navin had
described. However, he also demonstrated a superficial understanding and
insight into the effects of his
illness and his needs for assistance arising
from it. Within the span of a minute or so SKD told the Board that he had
ceased alcohol
at the beginning of the year, had ceased four months ago and had
ceased on 1 August 2020. He said that as a consequence his mind
was clearer and
he was able to manage his affairs. He subsequently told the Board that the
reason he had been admitted to hospital
on 23 September 2020 was a consequence
of alcohol use. SKD told the Board that all his finances were totally
controlled by “one
or other of the administrative organisations” and
that he had not seen any cheques from an overseas pension. He said that
only debts that he had outstanding were a Telstra bill that he had now paid and
an amount owing for his meals. At the time referred
to by SKD there was no
substitute decision maker appointed in respect to his financial affairs and his
evidence was contrary to the
persuasive descriptions by Ms McIver of assisting
SKD to locate cheques, access his funds and deal with some accounts, and the
to deal with the Telstra account which had been referred for legal
proceedings. Contradicting his earlier evidence that he had not
involvement in his financial circumstances since becoming an inpatient, SKD
described Ms McIver as very helpful in assisting
him with financial matters.
SKD had no understanding or recollection of the squalid state of his house as
referred to by Ms McIver
and Dr Navin. Apart from assistance with gardening SKD
considered that he did not require any particular assistance to continue living
in his home. He gave a confused description of his intentions in respect to
future accommodation and referred to having paid two
$5,000.00 deposits for
options on properties that he now considered were lost. SKD’s evidence to
the Board, while given in
an articulate manner, demonstrated the poor memory and
lack of insight into his needs for assistance described by Dr Navin and Ms
Guardianship
Navin’s evidence establishes that SKD is a person with a disability, being
Korsakoff’s Syndrome, an alcohol-related
dementia, and substance use
disorder (severe) secondary to alcohol use. Dr Navin’s report describes
both conditions as severe,
and, respectively, as of rapid progression and
deteriorating. His evidence was not contradicted by any other expert opinion. Mr
on behalf of SKD, submitted that further medical assessment should be
undertaken based on SKD’s belief that his condition had
improved. The
Board was satisfied that the written and oral evidence of Dr Navin was
sufficient and that further assessment was not
required in order for the Board
to make findings and exercise its discretion.
Navin’s report notes that SKD’s disability affects his capacity to
make reasonable judgments about where to live, medical
treatment and health
care, access to support services and in respect to NDIS services. SKD asserts
his ability to live independently
in his unit however he has a history of a
clear pattern of inability to maintain his home to a safe and hygienic standard,
particularly
in respect to biological and fire hazards. In respect to medical
treatment and health care SKD is insightless into his health risks
and needs and
his ability to manage his health is impaired by his memory deficits. SKD has
declined offers of community support and
is unable to appreciate the rationale
or benefit of support services. Support from Community Mental Health Services
was unable to
prevent SKD’s readmission to hospital. Dr Navin’s
report notes that SKD’s disability affects his capacity to engage
decision making surrounding the NDIS but without any detail as to those
limitations, except by implication having regard to the
report’s comments
on ability to make decisions in respect to support services. Given that SKD has
passed the cut-off age for
NDIS support there was no need to interrogate that
Board accepts Ms McIver’s evidence that there is a need for a guardian to
be appointed in respect to decisions concerning
where SKD is to live, access to
services, and healthcare decisions. It is apparent that the making of a
Guardianship Order will be
in SKD’s best interests as it will facilitate
his discharge from hospital to appropriate accommodation, facilitate his
healthcare,
and ensure access to and acceptance of services. Given SKD’s
reluctance to accept assistance and the absence of less formal
supports it is
apparent that there is no less restrictive alternative to the making of an
order, limited to these matters.
SKD has been discharged from inpatient care and is settled in suitable
accommodation with appropriate services it may be that
the need for an order
ceases, or that a less restrictive means of meeting SKD’s needs becomes
apparent. An order for a period
of 12 months will be least restrictive of
SKD’s freedom of decision and action as possible in the circumstances.
Administration
comments made above in respect to SKD’s disability and his consequent
inability to make reasonable judgments also apply
to matters regarding his
Navin’s report states that SKD is unable by reason of his disability to
make reasonable decisions in respect to day-to-day
financial requirements,
complex financial and legal decisions and legal matters. SKD’s history
demonstrated a pattern of neglected
bills with adverse consequences. In respect
to complex financial and legal decisions Dr Navin says that SKD does not
appreciate his
cognitive deficits and his significant amnesia would make the
comprehension and retention of information relating to complex financial
legal decisions impossible. In respect to legal matters generally Dr Navin
observes that, in addition to the impairments identified
Korsakoff’s syndrome causes deficits in the processing of contextual
information. Dr Navin’s conclusions are supported
by the evidence outlined
above and are accepted by the Board.
need for administration extends to all aspects of SKD’s estate and,
notwithstanding SKD’s wishes to manage his own
finances, the Board is
satisfied that a plenary order is in his best interests and is the option least
restrictive to his freedom
of decision and action as possible in the
circumstances.
appears that SKD’s disability will not improve and may well deteriorate.
It is appropriate to make the order for a period
Who should be
applicant proposes appointment of the Public Guardian and the Public Trustee.
There were no other potential appointees identified
at the hearing and the Board
is satisfied that it is appropriate to appoint the Public Guardian and the
Public Trustee.
Board Orders in respect to the application for guardianship:
Public Guardian is appointed as the limited guardian of SKD with the power
where SKD is to live permanently or temporarily.
determine which services SKD should access and provide consent to such as
make health care decisions for SKD.
Order remains in effect until 3 December 2021
in respect to the application for administration:
Public Trustee is appointed as administrator of the estate of SKD.
Order remains in effect until 3 December
Which by operation of s24 of
the Guardianship and Administration Act is effectively the longest period for
which an order may initially
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (204 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter