URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASADT/2020/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:11:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Services Union, Tasmania Branch v The State of Tasmania (Department of Health) & Ors; Australian Education Union, Tasmanian Branch v The State of Tasmania (Department of Health) & Ors [2020] TASADT 2 (15 April 2020)
[2020] TASADT 2
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
Health Services Union, Tasmania Branch v The State of
Tasmania (Department of Health) & Ors; Australian Education Union, Tasmanian
Branch v The State of Tasmania (Department of Health) & Ors
HEALTH SERVICES UNION, TASMANIAN BRANCH
THE STATE OF TASMANIA (DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH)
THE STATE OF TASMANIA (DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITIES)
GALE, Jenny
AUSTRALIAN EDUCATION UNION, TASMANIAN BRANCH
THE STATE OF TASMANIA (DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION)
THE STATE OF TASMANIA (TAS TAFE)
GALE, Jenny
REFERENCE NO(S):
A/2019/12 & A/2019/13
HEARING DATE(S):
27 February 2020
DELIVERED ON:
15 April 2020
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Tribunal Member Cuthbertson & Tribunal Member
CATCHWORDS:
Human Rights – Tasmania – Anti-Discrimination
Tribunal – practice and procedure – directions conference –
application for notice to attend a directions conference and provide and produce
information and documents
Anti-Discrimination Act
Rollins v B
[2005] TASADT 9
DETERMINATION:
The applications made by the complainants pursuant to
Anti-Discrimination Act
are granted.
REPRESENTATION:
Health Services Union:
Australian Education Union:
Respondents:
P. Turner SC
[2020] TASADT 2
REASONS FOR DECISION
Application
1. This interlocutory determination concerns applications made
by the Health Services Union, Tasmania Branch (HSU) and the Australian
Union, Tasmanian Branch (AEU) pursuant to s.80(2) of the Anti-Discrimination Act
1998 (the Act) requesting that the Tribunal
issue written notices requiring a
number of persons to attend a directions conference and provide and produce
specified information
and documents.
2. The applications of each of the
complainants is in identical terms. The AEU and HSU have requested that notices
issue to Mr Tim
Bullard, Ms Jenny Dodd, Mr Michael Pervan, Ms Ginna Webster and
Mr Frank Ogle requiring them to attend a directions conference on
a date to be
fixed and to provide and produce the originals or copies of one or more of the
following, including any of them which
are stored on a computer or computer
storage device or any other type of storage medium or storage device namely:
(a) letters, emails, and/or file notes which they have in
their possession custody or control relating to communications between Ms
Gale and any one or more of them during the period 4 October 2018 to and
including 19 October 2018 regarding stop work meetings
which were to be held on
24 October 2018;
(b) records relating to State Service employees at the
Departments of Education, Health and Communities Tasmania, and TasTAFE who
informed their employer they intended to participate in a stop work meeting on
24 October 2018; and
(c) records relating to State Service employees at the
Departments of Education, Health and Communities Tasmania, and TasTAFE who
leave on 24 October 2018 using flex-time, TOIL [Time Off In Lieu] or other form
of leave entitlement.
3. The parties have each filed written submissions in respect
of the applications.
The Complaints
4. The HSU and AEU complaints each concern emails sent by
departmental secretaries and the CEO of TasTAFE on 19 October 2018 to all
members of their respective agencies. The terms of those emails were
substantially to the same effect and related to stop work meetings
planned by a
range of unions for 24 October 2018 from 3.00pm to 4.00pm. Each of the emails
relevantly stated that:
• the Head of the State Service has notified that the
stop work action is considered to be:
(a) an unauthorised meeting; and/or
(b) an unauthorised
withdrawal of labour;
• applications for leave of absence, use of flex-time or
time in lieu (TOIL) will not be approved for the purposes of staff
participating
in stop work action;
• employees who intend to participate in the stop
work action should inform their manager or Principal of their intent to do
enable them to manage the operational consequences of the action;
• all managers and Principals are required to record the times of
absence for employees who participate in the stop work action
and that this
information may be used to determine whether, or not, pay deductions will occur
for the period of time that the employee
is absent from the workplace.
5. In the case of HSU, they alleged in their written complaint
to Equal Opportunity Tasmania (EOT) that the memo sent by the Secretary
Department of Health, Michael Pervan and the Secretary of the Department of
Communities Tasmania, Ginna Webster breached ss.14,
15, 16, 20 and 21 of the
Act. The impugned conduct concerned the area of activity of employment under
s.22(a) of the Act. They argued
that the direction that leave of absence, use of
flex-time or time in lieu will not be approved for the purposes of staff
participating
in stop work action amounts to:
(a) ‘direct discrimination’ contrary to s.14 of
the Act because the direction involves ‘a person’ (the head
agency) treating ‘another person’ (employees in that agency) with a
prescribed attribute, imputed prescribed attribute
or a characteristic imputed
to that attribute, less favourably than a person without that attribute or
characteristic. The prescribed
attributes referred to in the complaint were
industrial activity and political activity under ss.16(l) and (n) as defined in
(b) ‘indirect discrimination’ contrary to s. 15 of the Act
because the direction by the heads of agencies impose upon
employees a
‘condition, requirement or practice’ which is unreasonable in the
circumstances and has the effect of disadvantaging
a group or member of a group
of people who share a prescribed attribute (i.e. the employees who wish to
participate in an industrial
activity) more than a person who is not a member of
that group (i.e. employees who wish to take leave, use flex-time or TOIL for
purposes other than participating in an industrial activity);
(c) ‘promoting discrimination’ contrary to s.20 of the Act in
that the heads of agencies have published a notice that
promotes or expresses
discrimination in the manner set out at (a) and (b) above; and
(d) ‘aiding contravention of this Act’ contrary to s.21 of the
Act. It is alleged that applications for leave, use of
flex-time and time in
lieu are managed by other personnel within the Departments of Health and
Communities Tasmania. It is alleged
that by the heads of agencies making the
discriminatory direction to those managers, they are causing, inducing and
aiding those
managers to contravene the Act when dealing with such
applications.
6. The HSU requested by email dated 19 November 2018 to EOT
that Ms Jenny Gale be added to the complaint as a respondent in her role
Head of the State Service.
7. The AEU complaint was in broadly similar terms,
though related to emails sent from the Secretary for the Department of
Tim Bullard and the CEO of TasTAFE, Jenny Dodd on 19 October 2018.
When explaining the allegation of direct discrimination, the
AEU complaint
stated that employees with a prescribed attribute were disadvantaged by not
being able to access their accrued leave,
use flex-time or TOIL to attend a
lawful activity authorised, organised and promoted by the AEU. The complaint
also referred to
employees without the attribute not having the same prohibition
placed on them when applying for leave for purposes other than attending
work meeting. The complaint noted that “there was therefore differential
treatment of employees who are AEU members
and attended the stop work meeting
when compared with the treatment of other employees similarly placed to the
complainant and in
like circumstances but without the prescribed attribute of
industrial activities”.
8. The AEU also requested by email dated 23
November 2018 to EOT that Ms Gale in her role as the Head of the State Service
as a respondent to the complaint.
9. The Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner notified the parties on 30 November 2018 that in her view the
complaint did not raise possible
indirect discrimination and as such, those
allegations would not be investigated. Consequently, the allegations of direct
discrimination
on the basis of industrial activity, political belief and
political activity in connection with employment, promotion of discrimination
connection with employment and causing, inducing or aiding a contravention of
the Act in connection with employment were investigated
and ultimately referred
to the Tribunal for inquiry.
Section 80(2)
10. Sections 80(2), (3) and (6) of the Act provide as follows:
Tribunal, by written notice, may require any person to -
(a) attend a directions conference; and
(b) provide and produce specified information and documents to a directions
conference.
(3) A person, without reasonable excuse, must not fail to comply with the
requirement notified under subsection (2).
Penalty: fine not exceeding 10 penalty units.
(6) The Tribunal may give any directions it considers necessary to ensure
that the inquiry is conducted fairly and
expeditiously.”
11. In Rollins v B
[2005] TASADT 9
, the Tribunal constituted by
Chairperson Wood (as she then was) made the following observations concerning
s.80 of the Act:
“19. First, it is clear
from the terms of s.80 of the Act that the Tribunal is granted discretion to
issue a notice and that
the process of issuing a notice is not merely an
administrative function that involves an automatic granting of any application
a notice. The word ‘may’ in s.80(2) indicates that the Tribunal
has a discretion. Furthermore, it is noted that the
Tribunal may of its own
initiative issue a notice suggesting that the process of issuing a notice
involves a consideration by the
Tribunal of the nature of the complaint and
whether it is appropriate to issue a notice to a person to produce the
Tribunal’s power to issue a notice under s.80 applies at a preliminary
stage before the Inquiry. This power is in addition
to the general power
granted to the Commissioner, an authorized person or the Tribunal to require any
person to provide specified
information or specified documents that the
Tribunal, Commissioner or authorized person believes may be relevant to the
s.97 (the Tribunal also has power to require any person to appear
before it to give evidence at Inquiry: s.87(2)). Accordingly,
if the Tribunal
becomes aware of documents at an inquiry the Tribunal may make a requirement
under s.97 of the Act for a person to
produce specified documents. Noting that
the test at Inquiry stage is whether the Tribunal believes that those documents
relevant it seems sensible that the test at the directions conference
stage should not be any more onerous.
80(6)] provides guidance to the Tribunal in determining the approach to be
followed with respect to issuing notices under
s.80 of the Act. It would not be
appropriate for the Tribunal to issue notices to produce documents that would
see the Tribunal
process delayed because the Tribunal was engaged in
consideration of peripheral matters that have no tangible connection with the
issues in the case. It would be contrary to the intention of Parliament to see
a protracted course of proceedings involved with
the production of documents
that are unlikely to shed any light on the issues to be considered at inquiry.
considered the guidance provided by various sections of the Act, the nature of
the proceedings, and the cases referred to me,
noting the observations I have
made about those cases, I conclude that the test for whether a notice should be
issued is whether
the specific documents sought may be relevant to the
complaint. The Tribunal accepts that the test should be a generous one and
it seems to the Tribunal that the documents could be relevant to the complaint
then the notice may be issued. However, it also
seems to the Tribunal that the
Tribunal should not issue notices in those cases where there is only a
speculative chance or remote
possibility that the documents may be relevant. It
seems contrary to the intention of Parliament to see time expended on gathering
potential evidence that only has a remote connection with the issues in the
The Complainants’ Submissions
12. The HSU and AEU submissions were substantially the same.
Those submissions referred to earlier correspondence sent to the Branch
Secretary of the Community and Public Sector Union (CPSU) by Ms Jenny Gale on or
industrial action being
undertaken by members of the CPSU and also the stop work meetings due to be held
on 24 October 2018. In
that letter she advised that “the declaration of
stop work leaves me with no alternative than to instruct Heads of Agencies
to pay employees who absent themselves to attend such meetings. However, each
stop work meeting will be assessed according to
the circumstances such as
duration, time of day with any request to be forwarded to the Director, SSMO
[State Service Management
Office]”. The complainants noted that the 19
October 2018 emails from the various heads of agencies referenced that Head of
the State Service, namely Ms Gale, considered the stop work meeting was an
unauthorised meeting and/or unauthorised withdrawal of
labour by employees. A
further letter sent by Mr Frank Ogle as the Director of SSMO dated 22 October
2018 to various union officials
referred to the employer informing employees in
advance of the consequences of attending the meeting and confirmed that they
not automatically entitled to flex-time, TOIL or other leave to attend the
13. Against this background, the complainants submit that it is
apparent from the correspondence that Ms Gale has communicated with
agencies regarding the stop work meeting and in particular conveyed to
(a) she considered the stop work meeting was unauthorised
and/or an unauthorised withdrawal of labour;
(b) that she intended to
instruct heads of agencies not to pay employees who absent themselves to attend
the stop work meetings; and
(c) informed employees in advance through the
heads of agencies of the consequences of attending the meeting and confirming
were not automatically entitled to flex-time, TOIL or other leave to
attend the meetings.
14. On that basis, the complainants submit that it is “on
the cards” that each of Mr Bullard, Ms Dodd, Mr Pervan, Ms Webster
Ogle can provide and produce information and documents that will materially
assist the AEU and HSU in making out its complaint.
They submit the material
they seek is relevant to establishing that its members had been discriminated
against in the ways alleged
in their complaint. The copies of correspondence
sought directly relate to allegations that Ms Gale knowingly caused, induced or
aided a contravention of the Act. The employee records sought would assist to
establish that applications for leave and use of flex-time
and TOIL by union
members on 24 October 2018 were treated differently than those made by employees
who were not union members.
15. Counsel for the AEU argued that the
documents so far obtained give rise to an inference that Ms Gale in particular
was the person
that gave the relevant instructions or directions to the heads of
agencies. Although that inference was open on the documents, the
there was no direct evidence that that was the case and the object of obtaining
copies of the correspondence sought was
to garner direct evidence of those
directions.
16. In respect of the employee records, it was further argued
that the complainants need to prove that union members intending to
stop work meeting were treated less favourably when compared with those seeking
leave for other purposes. According to
the complainants, it is “on the
cards” that the records of those granted leave, TOIL or flex- time for
purposes other
than attending the stop work meeting would assist in proving the
matters required to be established that arise in the context of
their respective
allegations.
Respondents’ Submissions
17. The respondents first noted the discretionary nature of the
power to make an order pursuant to s.80(2) of the Act. Secondly,
respondents argued that the complaints of both unions are confined and are to be
found in the materials provided to the Tribunal
by EOT on the referral of the
matter. The respondents argue that the complaints concern the emails appended
to the complaints, namely
those sent on 19 October 2018 by the various heads of
agencies. Accordingly, the respondents submit that any correspondence that
preceded those letters are irrelevant. They also submit the employee records
sought are also irrelevant. According to the respondents,
each complaint is
self-evident and the inquiry falls to be determined on the terms of the emails
attached to the complaints.
18. The respondents expanded upon this argument
during the course of the hearing of the application. Senior counsel for the
respondents
argued that the Tribunal must be focussed on the terms of the
complaint. Referring to what actually occurred in respect of various
applications for TOIL, leave without pay or flex-time sought to expand the
complaint and was productive of significant unfairness
to the respondents.
According to the respondents, the complaint is about the emails and is confined
to the receipt of the emails
by various employees. The respondents argue that
an inquiry is not “a roving commission to ferret out something
but must be confined to the terms of the complaint.
Consideration
19. If the respective complaints were confined as alleged by
the respondents, there would be merit in their argument that the documents
sought were not relevant to the complaint. The respondents’ submissions,
however, ignore two important aspects of the complaints
that were submitted to
EOT. First, in light of the joinder of Ms Gale to the complaints, evidence
relating to what instructions
or directions were issued by her (if any) to each
of the relevant heads of agencies in respect of the attendance of employees at
the stop work meeting is clearly relevant to the allegation pursuant to s. 21 of
the Act as it relates to her. Both complainants
allege that Ms Gale issued
instructions to each of the heads of agencies causing them to publish the emails
and therefore causing
or inducing them to commit acts of direct discrimination
and to promote discrimination contrary to s.20 of the Act. As a consequence,
documentation relating to the communications between Ms Gale and those named in
the application between 4 October 2018 and 19
October 2018 regarding the stop
work meetings held on 24 October 2018 may be relevant to the complaints made by
the complainants.
There is a clear forensic purpose to the request in this
respect, and the Tribunal accepts that it is ‘on the cards’
such correspondence took place and that records of it exist.
20. Secondly,
properly understood, each of the complaints further allege that managers
responsible for administering the granting
of leave or approval of flex-time and
TOIL were caused or induced to contravene the Act by refusing such requests made
by those wishing
to attend the stop work meetings. In both complaints, the s.
21 allegation was framed as follows:
“Specifically,
the Heads of Agencies have knowingly caused, induced or aided other persons to
contravene the Act. Applications
for leave, use of flex-time and time-in-lieu
are necessarily managed by managers in different sections that together form the
agency]. By the Heads of Agencies making a discriminatory direction to
those managers, they are causing, inducing and aiding those
managers to
contravene the Act.”
21. This allegation when considered in light of the whole of
the complaint brings into focus what actually occurred in response to
directions contained in the emails of 19 October 2018. The allegations insofar
as they refer to directions being made to those
administering the applications
for leave and use of flex-time or TOIL, do require the complainants to prove
that there was in fact
discriminatory conduct engaged in by those managers and
that their conduct was the result of actions by others that caused them or
induced them to make the impugned decisions. The Tribunal does not accept that
the complaint as submitted to EOT was confined only
to the sending and receipt
of the 19 October 2018 emails. The s.21 allegations clearly bring into question
how the instructions
or directions contained in those emails were actioned.
22. The particulars of the AEU complaint referred to at [7] above also
specifically refer to the differential treatment of those who
applied for leave
or to access flex-time or TOIL to attend the stop work meeting when compared
with those applying for other reasons.
23. In those circumstances, records
of decisions made in respect of applications for leave and for use of TOIL or
flex-time by employees
on 24 October 2018 may be relevant to the complaints made
by each of the complainants. HSU have filed a witness statement of a person
says she was refused leave as a consequence of the direction contained in one of
the 19 October 2018 emails. The Tribunal accepts
that there is a forensic
purpose to the requests for the employee records sought and that it is ‘on
the cards’ that there
are documents recording decisions made in respect of
requests for leave or use of TOIL or flex-time by employees for the purpose
attending the stop work meeting on 24 October 2018 or for other purposes
unrelated to the union action. It is also ‘on the
cards’ that such
documents could demonstrate whether there was differential treatment of
employees making such application
for purposes other than participating in the
union action.
24. No specific argument was raised by the respondents as to
why the Tribunal should not exercise its discretion to grant the applications
it was satisfied that there was a legitimate forensic purpose and that it was
‘on the cards’ that the documents sought
would materially assist the
complainants in the inquiry. As a consequence, the Tribunal determines that
notices will issue requiring
persons to attend a directions conference on a date
to be fixed and provide and produce information and documents. In so ordering,
it is noted that the complainants’ requests in respect of the employee
records is expressed in terms that is not specifically
confined to those
recording decisions made in respect of requests for leave or use of TOIL or
flex-time on 24 October 2018. The Tribunal
considers that the request ought be
so confined. With that comment in mind and as requested by the parties at the
hearing of the
application, the terms of the notices are to be discussed by them
and notified to the Tribunal. Mr Pervan, Ms Webster and Mr Ogle
are no longer in
the positions they held in October 2018. Consideration will need to be given to
the appropriate subjects of the
notices in those circumstances. The parties will
be given 14 days in which to provide the settled terms of the notices to the
In the event they cannot reach agreement, the matter will be listed
for a further directions conference.
25. The Tribunal orders as follows:
(a) The applications pursuant to s.80(2) of the Act made by
the AEU and HSU are granted;
(b) The parties are to confer and provide to the
Tribunal within 14 days of the date of this decision the terms of the notices to
be issued by the Tribunal;
(c) In the event the parties cannot reach
agreement as to the terms of the notices, the matters will be listed for a
further directions
conference on a date to be fixed.
CUTHBERTSON R. WINTER
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
The HSU complaint form
identified political activity as the relevant prescribed attribute. The attached
document describing the
alleged discrimination and prohibited conduct referred
to the prescribed attribute of industrial activity.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (130 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter