URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMACT/2016/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Burling v Motor Accidents Insurance Board (Ref No. 1/2015) [2016] TASMACT 4 (4 August 2016)
[2016] TASMACT 4
MOTOR ACCIDENTS & COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
Steven George Burling v Motor Accidents Insurance
HEARING DATE(S):
14 July 2016
4 August 2016
REFERRING SECTION(S):
Chairperson S. R. Carey
CATCHWORDS:
Entitlement to compensation – scheduled benefit
– medical benefit – medical practitioner consultation –
expense incurred as a result of injury
Motor Accidents (Liabilities and Compensation) Tribunal Regulations
2010; Part 2, Schedule 1
McDonald v Director-General Social Security
[1984] FCA 57
Withopf v Motor Accidents Insurance Board
[2005] TASSC 47
DETERMINATION:
The respondent shall pay to the applicant the cost of
the attendance upon Dr Paton on 26 November
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Page Seager Lawyers
[2016] TASMACT 4
Chairperson Carey
INTRODUCTION
1 It is not in issue that on 16 May 2012 the applicant was
involved in a motor vehicle accident when, due to the cars in front of
suddenly stopping, he ran into the vehicle directly in front of his motor
vehicle. He has been paid scheduled benefits by the
respondent for a period of
time. However, an account he incurred on 26 November 2014 for a consultation
with Dr Robert Paton, a
pain management specialist, was refused by the
respondent. The applicant referred to the Tribunal that account ($154.00) for
determination
as to whether it was properly payable pursuant to clause 1 of Part
2 of Schedule 1 of the Motor Accidents (Liabilities and Compensation)
Regulations 2010. The evidence given at this hearing disclosed that there was
additional expense incurred for treatment by the applicant
following the subject
consultation. The Tribunal raised with the parties that different
considerations might well apply to determining
whether a medical consultation
was reasonably and necessarily incurred as opposed to a subsequent specific
medical treatment noting
that significant evidence was given concerning the need
or utility of certain medical treatment. The parties acknowledged that the
issue before the Tribunal related solely to whether the applicant was entitled
to be indemnified for the cost of the subject medical
consultation.
DETERMINATION
2 Upon the evidence given to the Tribunal, it is satisfied
• The applicant had suffered from back and neck problems
for a number of years prior to the motor vehicle accident.
attended his general practitioner practice on six occasions from December 2010
until May 2011 for back and/or neck pain,
in relation to which a fair reading of
the brief general practice notes suggests was intractable and causing
significant disruption
to his normal life.
• No doubt due to this
history a referral was made for CT imaging of his back and neck which occurred
on 25 May 2011 and disclosed
widespread canal stenosis. The clinical data
recorded for this investigation is “chronic pain”.
presented again to his general practice on 3 and 20 June 2011 and 19 July 2011
for back or neck pain and at the consultation
on 19 July 2011 the notes record
that advice was given to the applicant about conservative measures recommended
to manage his pain.
This advice was repeated at the next visit on 16 August
• At the next consultations, 9 September 2011, 30 September 2011
and 5 December 2011 the attendance is recorded as primarily
for reasons other
than the back or neck pain although there is ongoing prescribing of
• At consultations on 11 November 2011 and 20 January 2012
back pain and radiation to the legs is recorded.
• There is then a gap
in presentations until 18 May 2012 when the applicant presented 2 days after the
motor vehicle accident
with neck pains.
• Presentations continued on
22 May 2012, 4 June 2012, 13 June 2012, 14 June 2012 and 21 June 2012 relating
solely to neck pain
with reference also made to headaches.
referral to physiotherapy and to Mr David Edis, orthopaedic
• There is referral by Mr Edis for a nerve root block at the
right side at C5 level. This took place in August 2012.
• On review
after this procedure the applicant reports no improvement. Consultations on 27
August 2012 and 5 September 2012
address headaches with a query that they are
linked to the neck problem.
• There is then an increase in strength of
prescribed analgesics, the applicant undergoes a facet joint block at C3/4 in
2012 without improvement and on 26 November 2012 it is recorded that he
is “booked with Dr Paton for pain management”.
The actual referral
for this came from Dr David Edis.
• There is then a disruption in the
applicant’s health as he is diagnosed with a cardiac condition and general
attendances in January to February 2013 relate to this
• However, the applicant sees Dr Paton on 23 January 2013.
Due to proposed open heart surgery planned for the applicant, Dr
Paton reports
that it was determined to maintain conservative treatment until the
applicant’s heart condition was stabilised.
• The applicant was
seen again by Dr Paton on 3 June 2013 with continuing history of
“persistent neck pain, all on right
side with some referral to the
occipital region”.
• Dr Paton arranged for a bone scan that
occurred on 6 June 2013 which reported:
“...there is moderately
increased uptake in the right C3/4 facet joint and the left C4/5 facet joint
which looks like osteoarthritis.
Increased uptake in both AC joints also looks
consistent with osteoarthritis.”
• On 21 August 2013 there was a
telephone conversation between Dr Paton and the applicant during which Dr Paton
recommended
that a facet block be done at C3/4 on the right side.
Paton reviewed the applicant on 26 November 2014 subsequent to advice from the
respondent that the proposed facet block
treatment was not approved. At this
time the applicant reported persisting neck pain on the right side and a booking
was made for
the facet block treatment to be undertaken. It is the account for
this consultation which is the subject of this referral. The
facet joint block
procedure occurred on 23 February 2015 and presumably was funded either by the
applicant or the public health system.
There was detailed evidence about the
reasonableness and necessity of this treatment; however that issue is not before
the Tribunal.
3 It is the respondent’s case that the applicant suffers
from a degenerative spinal condition that was causing him to suffer
symptoms in
the period before the motor vehicle accident and that his presentation and need
for treatment was unaltered by the motor
vehicle accident. It was submitted
that the precipitator of the applicant’s consultation with Dr Paton in
November 2014 was
the ongoing effects of his degenerative spinal condition and
not any injury from the motor vehicle accident.
4 The applicant’s case
is that although he suffered a degenerative back and neck condition prior to the
motor vehicle accident,
it was the motor vehicle accident that caused this
underlying condition to become and remain symptomatic and therefore required
5 Although the applicant appeared reluctant to admit a
prior history of neck pain, this is clearly detailed in the medical records.
was also apparent to observe at the hearing and conceded by the applicant that
at this time he does not suffer significant neck
pain nor limited neck function.
He accepted that he had free neck movement and his neck was not an ongoing
problem at this time.
His major complaint concerns a persistent headache which
on the evidence appears to be considered to be related in some way to his
condition. The applicant describes that he has suffered this headache
“like a weight pressing down on his head”
from the day after the
motor vehicle accident up until the present time. He said that the treatment he
has sought has been primarily
in respect of his headaches. He says that he has
not suffered headaches until the motor vehicle accident.
6 Dr Paton accepted
that symptoms from the degenerative spinal condition suffered by the applicant
can “wax and wane”.
He also conceded that given the symptoms and
need for radiological tests prior to the motor vehicle accident, this suggested
the applicant’s condition of spondylolisthesis had been activated
prior to the motor vehicle accident. He believed that the
motor vehicle
accident had caused a flare of these symptoms and they appeared more widespread
than before the motor vehicle accident.
He considered that the bone scan
identification of inflammation suggested a change in the underlying condition as
a result of the
motor vehicle accident. He held a doubt that the facet block
conducted in October 2012 had been effectively performed and he believed
repeat was warranted for diagnostic purposes. His understanding of the
applicant’s presentation was one of persistent neck
pain with referral
evidenced as temporal/occipital headache. He accepted the link between a neck
injury and headaches stating that
this was a common outcome in his
experience.
7 Dr Kapur, pain management specialist, is of the opinion that
given the degenerative changes in the applicant’s spine, and
the existence
of symptoms suffered prior to the motor vehicle accident that he did not believe
that the motor vehicle accident was
of any consequence in making the
degenerative condition symptomatic. Given that the motor vehicle accident
involved the applicant
running into the back of the car in front, Dr Kapur says
that this involves neck movement not accepted as whiplash (hyperextension)
discussed in medical research. He was not aware of any scientific evidence
supportive of the mechanism of neck movement occasioned
by the applicant running
into the vehicle in front of him, being accepted as causing injury. He
accepted, however, that a sharp
forward/back neck movement could cause injury;
however he would expect this to be to the front structures of the neck rather
those at the rear. He accepted that he could not exclude another type of
injury but says there is no clear correlation between the
mechanism in this
motor vehicle accident and injury. Dr Kapur conceded that if the applicant was
to describe neck symptoms that
were worse since the motor vehicle accident then
he would accept that the motor vehicle accident had made his neck condition
Dr Kapur did not assess the applicant until December 2013 and at that
time the complaint made by the applicant was of right-sided
neck pain and
continued headache. The headache was described to Dr Kapur as continuous and a
“dragging sensation”.
8 Noting discussion upon whether a formal
onus of proof exists in administrative style Tribunals (McDonald v
Director-General Social
[1984] FCA 57
and Withopf v Motor Accidents
Insurance Board
[2005] TASSC 47)
the Tribunal approaches its determination on
the basis that it must be satisfied that the evidence now before the Tribunal
establishes
an entitlement pursuant to the legislation to the applicant in
respect of the expense incurred for the subject medical consultation.
Tribunal needs to be persuaded that the applicant is entitled to receive the
claimed benefit.
9 In this regard there are two issues. Firstly was it a
reasonable and necessarily incurred expense for the applicant to attend Dr
in respect of his condition at that time and, if so, the second issue is whether
his condition at that time was as a result
of the motor vehicle
10 Although the applicant says that the existence of a persistent
headache has been his primary concern rather than neck pain, the
history taken
at the first consultations with both Dr Paton and Dr Kapur highlight the primacy
of neck pain with a comment as to
associated headaches. The evidence
establishes that the very nature of the applicant’s degenerative spinal
condition would
predispose him to episodes of symptoms, those episodes would be
expected to come and go. The applicant accepted as much in that
he agree he
suffered such episodes before the motor vehicle accident and also after that
11 However, there are points of distinction between the
applicant’s presentation before the motor vehicle accident as compared
after that accident. During 2011, his complaints of pain related to his back
and at times his back and neck and these were addressed
by medication, advice as
to pain management options and a radiological investigation which identified the
underlying degenerative
condition which, no doubt, was seen as the source of his
ongoing symptoms. The prescribing of analgesia is not recorded, nor is
consultation for neck pain from the end of 2011 until immediately after the
motor vehicle accident (although at a consultant
on 20 January 2012, there was a
complaint of ongoing back pain). Subsequent to the motor vehicle accident there
is a resumption
of a prescription of analgesia, the use for the first time of
Endone, and the description of pain is in more stark terms (example:
consultation of 21 June 2012). Also during this period the presentations are
recorded for neck pain rather than back and neck pain
or simply back pain as was
evidenced in the general practice notes relating to the period before the motor
vehicle accident. The
treatment subsequent to the motor vehicle accident
appears to have been more centred on the applicant’s neck which does not
appear to be the case prior to the accident. His symptomatology in relation to
his neck was obviously such that a referral was made
for orthopaedic opinion, a
referral made for facet block procedures and a further referral to a pain
management specialist, it was
obviously felt these referrals and treatment were
warranted. This was not the case prior to the motor vehicle accident. The
of headaches and their possible relationship to his neck condition was
not raised until subsequent to the motor vehicle accident.
12 When seen by
Dr Paton on 3 June 2013 the applicant reported persistent neck pain, right
sided, with referral to the occipital region
(headaches). At his consultation
with Dr Kapur on 19 December 2013, the applicant’s complaints were of
right sided neck pain
and continual headaches. There is then, unfortunately, a
gap in the contemporaneous record as to any presentations by the applicant
his general practitioner with the notes tendered to the Tribunal concluding as
of 7 January 2014. There is perhaps a lessening
in presentations to his general
practitioner for his complaint of neck pain and headaches during 2013. During
this period he was
dealing with a significant cardiac condition; however at a
consultation on 6 August 2013, he complains of neck pains. His presentations
from that time up until the end of the year related to what appears to have been
a significant chest infection and there is no record
of ongoing complaint of
back or neck conditions. However, as recorded previously, the applicant had
been provided advice as to self-help
actions he could take in respect of pain
management and in his evidence the applicant stated that the facet block
injections had
not assisted, medication had not assisted and in fact, he had
discontinued a form of analgesia due to addiction issues.
13 Upon an overall
assessment of the evidence, the Tribunal accepts that the applicant’s
pre-existing neck condition was in
some way aggravated or exacerbated by the
motor vehicle accident. This caused a flare of the effects including limitation
function and an increase in pain together with the suffering of
headaches. The Tribunal accepts that this was a different presentation
suffered by the applicant during 2011. His concerns subsequent to the motor
vehicle accident was more centred upon his neck
and headaches rather than more
generally to the back and, at times, the neck as was the case before the motor
vehicle accident.
He was referred to Dr Paton for pain management assessment
and assistance. This referral was as a result of his neck condition subsequent
to the motor vehicle accident. There was a significant gap in the time between
his initial assessment by Dr Paton and the date of
the subject attendance and
assessment. However the applicant maintains that there was a continuation of
symptoms from the date of
the motor vehicle accident; he reported this to be the
case at his presentation to Dr Paton on that date and previously when assessed
by Dr Kapur. The Tribunal accepts that the application suffered a change in the
condition of his neck as a result of the motor vehicle
accident, his symptoms
were as reported to Dr Kapur and Dr Paton and that these date from the motor
vehicle accident. The Tribunal
therefore accepts that the pain and loss of
function of his neck reported to Dr Paton at the subject consultation and
was suffered as a result of the motor vehicle accident. Given the
continuance of those symptoms it was reasonable that he seek advice
from a pain
management specialist in accordance with the referral made by his medical
treaters. Dr Kapur conceded that if there
was a worsening of neck symptoms
subsequent to the motor vehicle accident then he would accept that the motor
vehicle accident had
made the applicant’s neck condition worse. He also
accepted that if there were such a worsening of neck symptoms then it was
reasonable that the applicant seek advice about addressing his condition.
14 The Tribunal therefore accepts that the attendance upon Dr Paton on 26
November 2014 was reasonable and necessary and that such
attendance was as a
result of the motor vehicle accident.
CHAIRPERSON
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (94 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter