URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASSupC/1843/35.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:22:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R. v. Reed and others [1843] TASSupC 35 (2 October 1843)
R. v. Reed and others [1843]
bushranging, robbery, evidence, death recorded
Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land
Montagu J., 2 October 1843
Cornwall Chronicle
, 7 October 1843
Before His Honor, Mr. Justice Montagu and the following Jury:- Messrs. T. W. Townsley, T. Cox, G. Pyle, H. Harris, J.
Gerrard, J. Henty, J. Shaw, G. Gr[???]e, D. Rundle, D. McQueen, G. B. Smith, and W. Beveridge.
TRIAL OF THE BUSHRANGERS
Matthew Reed, Thomas Lancaster, James Glove,
, were indicted for feloniously putting in bodily fear, and stealing one knapsack, one rug, and one pair of boots, the property of
Isaac Biggs, on the 5th of February last.
The Attorney-General opened the case, pointing out to the jury the act under which the prisoners were indicted capitally,
and detailing the facts, which would be brought before them by evidence.
John Dunbull. - I am a ticket-of-leave man, and was in the service of Mr. Kennedy Murray on the 5th February last, at
a place called the Ball Room, 12 or 13 miles from Mr. Murray's residence; Isaac Biggs resided with me; on the 5th February, while
I was getting ready for breakfast, a man came inside the door and presented a double-barrelled gun, and desired me to stand; he said
the others were coming; the gun was capped and cocked; the prisoner Reed is the man; three other men then came up; they were not
armed; Lancaster and Glove are two of those men; I am not certain of the other man; the prisoner Lancaster came in and took a small
fowling-piece belonging to Mr. K. Murray; Reed was standing sentry over me, Biggs, and a man of the name of Bates; Glove was standing
outside the door; the other man, whom I do not recognize, was plundering the hut; they took a pair of trousers, and some powder and
shot; they took a kangaroo rug, belonging to Isaac Biggs, from the bed-room; it was a man, very much like Price that had the rug
in his hands; he put it into a knapsack; I do not know where he got the knapsack from; I carried the knapsack from the house myself;
they pressed me, and said I must go with them; there were other things in the knapsack besides the rug; they took a pair of boots
from Isaac Biggs, which they made him take off his feet; it was Reed that took the boots, and fitted them on himself; I let them
take the things through fear; took two pieces away with them from the hut; Lancaster told me he had thrown the musket without a lock
into the river.
Cross-examined. - Lancaster was the second person that came into the hut; he was the man who fetched the pieces out.
The prisoner Lancaster wished to put a question to the witness, as to the description given by him of the party at the
Police-office, Morven. His Honor would not allow the witness to answer the question, but subsequently allowed it with the consent
of the Attorney-General. The witness had described Reed as a dark-complexioned man, which he attributed to his being sun-burnt; the
prisoner Price, he stated, appeared to be more marked than the man he saw at the hut.
Isaac Biggs. - I was in the employ of Mr. K. Murray on the 5th February last, at a place called the Ball Room; I had been
to fetch some sheep with a man of the name of Bates; we were overtaken by a man with a double-barrelled piece, who ordered us to
stand; he presented the piece rather downwards; the prisoner Reed is the man; Reed called out to some others to come on, and the
three other prisoners made their appearance; to the best of my knowledge, the prisoners are the men; I am certain of the prisoner
Price, more so than the others; the reason I know him is, that he was the man that was packing up my things; the prisoners ordered
us to go on towards the hut; the prisoner Reed ordered one of the other men to keep with us as a guard; the whole of the prisoners
were not in the hut at one time; Price went into my bed-room; when we came into the hut, we were ordered to sit down; Dumbull, Bates,
and myself, were sitting down; Reed sat down close to the bed-room door, with a double-barrelled gun in his hand; I saw Price go
into the bed-room, and tumble the bed about; I saw him handling my rug and knapsack; several articles were taken away; to the best
of my recollection, I was ordered by Lancaster to take my boots off; I did, as I considered it safer to do so, one of them having
a double-barrelled gun; Reed put my boots on; the rug now produced is my property; the knapsack is also mine; I saw the rug taken
out of the hut by Lancaster; I saw the rug taken off the bed; I believe the boots now produced to be mine; there were two pieces
in the hut, besides an old musket without a lock; they were taken away; my hands were tied by the prisoner Glove; Bates was tied
at the same time; Price was outside at this time; Glove was ordered to tie me by the man with the double-barrelled piece.
Charles Bates. - I was in the service of Mr. J. Ralston on the 5th of February last, and was in the company of the last
witness on that day; we were stopped by the prisoner Reed, who had a double-barrelled gun in his hand; he asked me whose sheep they
were that we had with us; Reed then made a signal, and three other men came up; we then all went to the hut; Reed went in and was
followed by Lancaster, who brought out two pieces; I was ordered inside with Biggs and another man; Reed stood sentry over us; one
of the men then went into the bed-room, and brought out a rug and knapsack, and handed them to Lancaster; I was made to take my books
off; the prisoner Glove tied our hands by order of Reed; Dumbull was taken away to carry the things; witness could not swear to the
prisoner Price.
Cross-examined by Lancaster. I knew you in consequence of your having so much to say; you brought the pieces out of the
The witness was questioned by Glove as to their having been at Port Arthur together, when he (Glove) was overseer over
the witness.
Mr. William Jones. - I am superintendent of the prisoner's barracks, and know the prisoners at the bar; they were
in the prisoner's barracks on the 3rd of February last at half-past five in the morning; they did not return with the gang at
eight o'clock, nor at any time afterwards; there were no other men absconded between the 3rd and 5th of February.
John Turner. - Am a constable of the Fingal police; know the prisoner's Glove and Price; they were in my charge about
three weeks ago at Fingal; I escorted them from Fingal to Morven; I saw Reed and Lancaster on the 10th February last at Mr. Cowell's,
on the eastern coast; I assisted in their apprehension that night; the prisoner Glove was there; there were four bushranger's
at Mr. Cowell's that night; I do not know who the fourth man was; there was several shots fired that night; I had a scuffle with
Glove but he got away; I received a rug from Mr. Cowell; the fourth man had a dark jacket on; he was a short man, about 5 feet 5.
The witness was cross-examined by Glove respecting the attack on Mr. Cowell's house when Reed and Lancaster were taken,
but failed to shake his testimony.
The prisoner Reed made no defence.
Lancaster complained of the manner in which he had been identified at the gaol.
Glove and Price stated, that immediately on absconding he proceeded to Hobart Town for the purpose of making their escape
out of the country, but failing in their object they got employment. The prisoners also complained of the manner in which the witnesses
were brought out to be identified at the Police-office at Morven.
Mrs. Kennedy Murray. - Recollect seeing Glove and the witness, Isaac Biggs, at the Police-office Morven; Glove was standing
with three other men; Mr. Wales was present; Mr. Wales desired Biggs to see if he could identify any of the prisoners; Biggs then
immediately selected the prisoners Glove and Price; Mr. Wale desired Biggs to go and touch the man;
Mr. Wales threatened to flog Glove if he did not hold his tongue
; that was in consequence of the insolvent manner in which Glove conducted himself towards Mr. Wales.
Mr. Christopher Bonney. - Am a farmer, and reside at Richmond; the prisoners came to my employ about March; I see by a
memorandum that it was on the 27th of April, 1843, that an agreement was made; Glove and Price were with me some short time before
that period; the prisoners behaved very well during the fourth months they were with me.
The Attorney-General addressed the jury for the purpose of repudiating the statement of the prisoner Glove, respecting
Mr. Wales, having acted improperly when the prisoner was identified at Morven. The learned counsel also called upon the jury to thrown
from their minds any thing that had been said in his opening address respecting the statements made by the prisoners at the Morven
Police-office, as Mr. Wales the magistrate was not in attendance to give evidence respecting such statements.
The learned judge in summing up expressed his regret that Mr. Wales should under any circumstances have threatened to
flog a prisoner situated as Glove then was.
The jury without retiring found all the prisoners guilty.
His Honor then addressed the prisoners, alluding to the case of Lawrence Kavenagh who had been recently tried for a similar
offence to the one the prisoners were now convicted of. The executive power had thought proper to spare his life, and it appeared
that the measures of government were changed with regard to persons in the situation of the prisoners at the bar. His Honor said,
that he, as a judge of the territory had the power of passing a sentence accordingly; and he felt extremely glad to tell them, that
their lives would most probably be spared, and that he should recommend the Government to do so, mitigating the punishment of death
to transportation for life. His Honor then directed sentence of death to be recorded against the prisoners, and remanded them to
gaol, until the pleasure of His Excellency the Governor was ascertained.
R. v. Reed (No. 1)
, 1843. According to AOTSC 41/5, the men were charged with robbery being armed. Their sentences were commuted from capital punishment
to transportation for life beyond the seas.
The sentence of death recorded meant a formal sentence of death, without an intention that the sentence would be carried
out. Under (1823) 4 Geo. IV c. 48, s. 1, except in cases of murder, the judge had considerable discretion where an offender was
convicted of a felony punishable by death. If the judge thought that the circumstances made the offender fit for the exercise of
Royal mercy, then instead of sentencing the offender to death, he could order that judgment of death be recorded. The effect was
the same as if judgment of death had been ordered, and the offender reprieved (s. 2).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter