URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCAT/2025/198.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Wilson Retail Pty Limited T/A Red Herring Surf v KFQ [2025] TASCAT 198 (21 October 2025)
Wilson Retail Pty Limited T/A Red Herring Surf v KFQ
[2025] TASCAT
Personal Compensation
Wilson Retail Pty Limited T/A Red Herring Surf (Employer)
Hearing Date:
18 September 2025
Hearing Location:
Date of Orders:
21 October 2025
Date Reasons Issued:
21 October 2025
R E Chandler, Senior Member
Orders Made:
Weekly payments of compensation and the cost of benefits payable under
Division 2 of Part VI of the Act are not to be paid from the
date of this
Catchwords:
Workers compensation – Entitlement to compensation – whether
reasonably arguable case.
Legislation Cited:
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
Cases Cited:
St Helens Oysters Pty Ltd v Coatsworth
[2007] TASSC 90
Construction & Joinery Pty Ltd v Norton-Smith
[2016] TASSC
Lamont MRD Supermarkets Pty Ltd
[2016] TASSC 16.
Representation:
Worker: P Dordhain
Employer: W
Worker: Hall Payne Lawyers
Page Seager Lawyers
W/2025/1291
Publication Restriction:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication.
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
worker is employed as a store manager by a retail outlet trading in Launceston.
She has made a claim for compensation for psychological
injuries which she
asserts, via her claim form, have arisen in these circumstances:
Over the course of my employment, I have been subjected to multiple instances of
violent and threatening conduct by customers. The
development of symptoms has
been gradual over time. I only first realised the severity of the symptoms on 27
November 2024 when I
had suicidal thoughts and spoke to my friend about driving
off a bridge. This caused me to go to see my doctor. I cannot remember
the incidents which have lead me to feel this way. I am still working through
those. However, I remember the following:
3/7/2016 – a woman threatened to slit my throat after being caught
4/1/2018 – I was punched twice in the head by a teenage shoplifter. Police
19/6/2019 – A theft and confrontation in the same alleyway as the 2018
assault, which re-triggered trauma. Police attended.
7/1/2022 – A customer threatened to burn store down. Police attended.
13/10/2022 – Verbal abuse and intimidation by known shoplifters.
21/12/2022 – Threats from a customer’s family after a police photo
posted online.
31/3/2023 – Threats of physical violence by a known offender, including,
‘I will knock you out and slit you.’
worker’s claim documents include a workers compensation medical
certificate provided by Dr Alex Davies. Dr Davies saw the
worker on 3 July 2025.
He diagnosed her to be suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and
major depressive disorder
and certified her condition to be consistent with
having been caused by those events occurring in the workplace and set out
employer has elected to dispute liability for the worker’s claim and has
made this referral to the Tribunal pursuant to
s 81A(1)(c) of the
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
a s 81A(1)(c) referral the issue for the Tribunal to determine is whether a
reasonably arguable case exists concerning the liability
of the employer to pay
compensation. If such a determination is made it will follow that the employer
will be excused from the obligation
to pay compensation either by way of weekly
payments or the cost of any benefits payable under Division 2 of Part VI of the
However, such an outcome does not preclude the worker from pursuing her
claim by a referral to the Tribunal made under s 42 of the
well settled that the test to be applied in determining whether a reasonably
arguable case exists is properly described
by Evans J in
St Helens Oysters
Pty Ltd v Coatsworth
[2007] TASSC 90
where it was said at [10]:
The very notion of a ‘reasonably arguable case,’ like the notion of
a ‘prima facie case’ precludes a final
determination of a disputed
question of fact. On the face of s81A, a reasonably arguable case will exist
concerning the liability
of an employer to pay a worker if it is reasonably
arguable on the material available in relation to the claim or identified
deficiencies
or weaknesses in the claim that, following a contested hearing it
may be rejected.
employer’s case need not be strong nor compelling but must at least be
reasonably arguable. See
Vos Constructions and Joinery Pty Ltd v Norton-Smith
[2016] TASSC 38.
The employer bears the onus of establishing the existence
of a reasonably arguable case. See
Lamont v MRD Supermarkets Pty Ltd
[2016] TASSC 16.
The Employer’s Case
support of its position the employer has provided a statement signed by Mr
Anthony Wilson, its Managing director. In summary Mr
Wison asserts that:
(a) The employer acquired ownership of the Red Herring business on 30 June 2018
and became the worker’s employer from that
date. It was hence not the
employer of the worker at the time of those incidents occurring in 2016 and 2018
as described in the worker’s
claim form.
(b) The worker had never mentioned to the employer the 2016 incident.
(c) The worker had only mentioned the 2018 incident to the employer ‘in
passing’ and had never suggested that she needed
support with respect to
(d) The employer has no record of neither the 2019 incident nor the January 2022
incident and first became aware of them when the
worker made her claim. The
worker never completed an incident report with respect to either of them.
(e) The worker did not complete an incident report upon the incident occurring
on 13 October 2022 but had informed the employer of
it by email. However, she
had not suggested that she was affected or struggling because of the
(f) The employer was unaware of the incident occurring on 21 December 2022 until
the worker made her claim.
(g) The worker did not inform the employer of the events occurring on 31 March
2023 until a fortnight afterwards and then advised
that the offenders’ ban
from the store be shortened because they were young and had apologised.
(h) During 2024 the worker had significant periods off work for personal
reasons. For example, the worker advised that in March she
was unable to work
because of ‘insomnia and other health issues.’ She was unable to
work in June because of issues with
her personal health. In July her father was
hospitalised because of heart failure, and she had further time off work. In
the worker reported that she was having continuing issues with her own
health and her father’s health. In November she reported
that she was
having dizzy spells because of high blood pressure. Later that month she
reported that she was suffering from a ‘type
of positional vertigo which
makes the room spin.’
(i) Because of her personal health issues and the needs of her father, the
worker worked reduced hours from July to late November
2024. Her last day of
work was on 23 November 2024. At no time up to this date had the worker asserted
that any of her personal health
issues were related to her employment.
(j) A previous claim for compensation under the Act was made by the worker in
January 2025. It related to the incident occurring
on 4 January 2018. This claim
was disputed by the employer, and it was determined by the Tribunal that a
reasonably arguable case
existed with orders being made on 16 April 2025.
(k) Because of the worker’s ongoing absences from work the employer wrote
to the worker on 25 June 2025 setting out its concerns
upon the ability of the
worker to continue in her role and that there was potential for her termination.
Her written response was
sought by 2 July.
(l) On 4 July 2025 the employer received the worker’s claim for
compensation.
is the employer’s case, as I understand it, that the assertions made by Mr
Wilson mandate a reasonably arguable case finding
for one or more of these
arguable that the majority of those events listed in the worker’s claim
form did not occur and that the worker may fail
to establish a factual basis for
her illness and its association with her employment.
the extent that the worker’s PTSD is attributable to the events occurring
in 2016 and 2018 there can be no liability attaching
to the employer as it was
not the employer of the worker at these times.
the evidence upon the worker’s own health and issues arising from her
father’s ill-health make it arguable that those
matters are causative of
her psychiatric illness rather than those events in the workplace as described
in the worker’s claim
it is arguable that those steps taken by the employer in June 2025 with the
prospect of a termination of employment were causative
of the worker’s
illness, particularly given the near contemporaneous relationship between those
steps and the lodging of the
worker’s claim. The employer’s conduct
in this regard was arguably reasonable and avails it of a ‘defence’
to the claim pursuant to s25(1A) (a) and/or (c) of the
The Worker’s Case
reasons for the worker’s resistance to the employer’s referral are
set out in written submissions provided by the
worker’s counsel. There are
multiple documents attached to the submission including documentation from
Tasmania Police, screenshots
of Facebook pages, emails written by the worker and
the employer and medical reports.
the extent that the employer implies that those events set out in her claim form
did not occur the worker submits that the documentation
which she has provided
overwhelming supports their happening. With respect to these events, I
documentation from Tasmania Police shows that on 4 January 2018 the worker
reported being assaulted by a shoplifter. Police attended,
viewed CCTV footage
and later apprehended the offender. The worker provided a written statement to
police. In it she says she was
punched to the face and head 2 to 3 times with a
closed fist. The
“punches were really forceful, and they hurt
documentation from Tasmania Police shows that on 19 June 2019 the applicant
reported to police an incident whereby she pursued
and confronted two persons
who had stolen goods from the employer’s store. Police attended and viewed
the store’s CCTV
footage depicting the thefts. Again, the applicant
provided police with a written statement. There are also posts on the Launceston
Retail Watch Facebook page which appear to corroborate the event occurring.
Tasmania Police incident report shows that on 7 January 2022 the worker reported
an incident whereby
“a guy come into the shop and have an argument over
Afterpay. He has thrown his phone at a store worker for him to assist when
did not work he has stated that he would burn the building down.”
There is also a Facebook post made on the same day which appears to
corroborate the happening of this incident.
Tasmania Police documents show that on 13 October 2022 a report was received
from the worker of her confronting two customers
whom she suspected were
intending to steal items. The worker provided police with a written statement
detailing the event. There
is also an email reporting the event and forwarded by
the worker to the employer dated 19 October 2022. The email refers to the
“taunting me.”
police incident report shows that on 16 December 2022 the worker reported the
theft of clothing from the employer’s store
occurring two days previously.
The police documents also note that the suspects were identified
Red Herring put up a Facebook post asking for their identity...”
note that the police documents do not make any reference to the worker receiving
threats from the customers’ family arising
from this event as is asserted
in the claim form.
documents include a screen shot of a post made by the worker on the Launceston
Retail Watch Facebook page and dated 31 March 2023.
Herring here. Just had Josh Golding in here. Asked him to leave and he verbally
abused me and threatened to punch me out
and then spat on the window.”
The documents also include copies of an email exchange between the worker and
her employer referencing the event. Specifically, one
dated 19 April 2023 and
written by the employer’s Media and Marketing Co-Ordinator says in part,
“after talking to (the worker) and understanding the severity of the
threats and how dangerous this man could be, I’ve
decided to take the post
can make these observations upon the medical documentation provided on behalf of
the worker:
(a) General practitioner, Dr Tim Mooney has noted in his records an attendance
upon the worker on 17 December 2024;
“Long discussion re
depression-could = PTSD due to repeated attacks (verbal and threatening) from
shoplifters...”
(b) Clinical psychologist, Ms Ruth Paul, in a report provided to the
employer’s insurer on 24 March 2025 opines that the worker
“presented with Post Traumatic Stress Disorder resulting from traumatic
experiences of workplace violence. She reports a history
of exposure to criminal
violence in the workplace during the period: January 2018 – January
2025......”
(c) Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist, Dr David Lien provided a report to the
worker’s solicitors dated 29 July 2025 after having
examined the worker 6
days previously. In his opinion the worker suffers from post-traumatic stress
disorder (chronic), with delayed
recognition, secondary to cumulative
occupational trauma along with a comorbid diagnosis of major depressive
disorder, recurrent
episode, severe, without psychotic features. He further
“The condition did not arise from a single traumatic incident
but rather emerged cumulatively, with employment being the most
substantial
contributing factor to its development.”
As to whether factors
outside of her employment caused or contributed to the worker’s illness Dr
Lien states;
“Other life stressors, including bereavement and family
caregiving responsibilities, may have contributed substantial strain
but did not
appear to play a primary role in the development of her psychiatric
conditions.”
foregoing material leads to these submissions being made on the worker’s
(i) The allegation by the employer of a factual dispute relating to those
incidents listed in the claim form and their occurrence
is a fiction.
(ii) The suggestion by the employer that the worker’s illness may arguably
be attributable to personal matters separate from
her employment is not
supported by any medical evidence and is directly contradicted by the medical
evidence provided by the worker,
most notably the opinion of Dr Lien.
(iii) The submission made by the employer that the worker’s illness is
arguably attributable to those steps taken by the employer
to potentially
terminate the worker’s employment is not supported by any medical
evidence. In any event the submission is without
merit because the medical
evidence clearly shows that the worker had been diagnosed with her PTSD well
before those steps were initiated.
is noted that the worker has not challenged the assertion made by the employer
that those incidents occurring in July 2016 and
January 2018 preceded her
employment with the employer.
Consideration
will firstly address the issue related to the occurrence of those events as set
out in the worker’s claim form.
happening of those events identified by the worker to have occurred on 4 January
2018, 19 June 2019, 7 January 2022, 13 October
2022 and 31 March 2023 are all
supported by independent evidence, most notably police reports. Independent
evidence, again including
a police report, also indicate the occurrence of an
event on 14 December 2022 and it being posted on Facebook. Logically, it was
that event which led to the worker’s assertion that one week later she was
threatened by the offender’s family. Whilst
there is not in evidence a
police report or other material supportive of the event alleged by the worker to
have occurred on 3 July
2016 I am nevertheless satisfied, taking into account
all the relevant material before me, that I should reject the employer’s
submission that it is reasonably arguable those events listed in the claim form
did not occur and that the worker has not established
a factual basis for her
deal next with the employer’s submission that the worker’s illness,
is arguably attributable to personal issues separate
from her employment. For
this submission the employer relies solely upon the lay evidence of Mr Wilson.
That evidence is directly
contradicted by the evidence of Dr Mooney, Ms Paul and
Dr Liem. Most particularly, it is noted in his report that Dr Liem expressly
opines that matters outside the worker’s employment did not play a primary
role in the development of her illness.
a reasonably arguable case exists must be assessed upon the material available
at this time. On this basis I am not satisfied
that it is reasonably arguable
that personal matters, separate from her employment have been causative of the
worker’s mental
his consultation with the worker on 17 December 2024 Dr Mooney has postulated
that the worker’s depressed mental state may
equate with PTSD attributable
to events occurring at the worker’s workplace. In her report to the
employer’s insurer
dated 24 March 2025 Ms Paul expresses the view that the
worker suffers from PTSD arising from experience of workplace violence. Ms
Paul’s report shows that this diagnosis was made following her assessment
of the worker on 15 January 2025. Together this evidence
strongly suggests that
the worker was suffering from PTSD related to those incidents set out in her
claim form and that this condition
was present well before 25 June 2025 when the
employer initiated steps to review the worker’s ongoing employment. Given
matters I cannot be satisfied that it is reasonably arguable that the
worker’s illness of the mind was attributable to those
actions of the
employer taken in June 2025.
brings me to the employer’s remaining submission. It says that it did not
become the worker’s employer until 30 June
2018 and hence was not her
employer at the time of those incidents stated in the worker’s claim form
to have occurred in 2016
and January 2018. The worker does not dispute these
assertions.
the 2018 incident Dr Liem makes these observations in his report:
[The worker] recounted one particularly distressing incident in January 2018 in
which she was physically attacked by two girls, an
event she described as having
‘left a mark on me.’ While she did not immediately recognise the
psychological impact of
this incident, she reported that her symptoms worsened
progressively in the months and years that followed.
Over time [the worker] developed a chronic sense of fear and hypervigilance,
describing her daily experience at work as one of constantly
looking over her
shoulder and scanning her environment for potential threats. She described
entering the workplace each day in fear
of what might happen next.
comments made by Dr Liem do suggest that the incident occurring in January 2018
did have a significant impact upon the worker’s
psyche and it raises the
possibility that this event is the foundational event leading to the
worker’s subsequent diagnosis
of PTSD. In my view if, following a
contested hearing, the employer was able to establish that a diagnosis of PTSD
could not be
maintained absent the occurrence of that event in January 2018 it
may be able to avoid liability for the worker’s claim as
it was not her
employer at this time. In this circumstance a reasonably arguable case
determination should be made, and I determine
accordingly. There will be orders
pursuant to s 81A (3)(c) and (d).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.83 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter