URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASLPDT/2024/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:16:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v Stephen Fahan Dixon [2024] TASLPDT 7; (9 December 2024)
LEGAL PROFESSION DISCIPLINARY TRIBUNAL
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v Stephen Fahan Dixon
[2024] TASLPDT 7
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania Applicant
Stephen Fahan Dixon Respondent
FILE NO: 02/23DT
DELIVERED ON:
9 December 2024
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
9 July 2024
THE TRIBUNAL:
M. E. O’Farrell SC (Chairman)
Simon Gates (Member)
Eliza Jones (Member)
Being satisfied that the respondent has engaged in professional misconduct
the Tribunal orders that:
respondent is reprimanded.
respondent pay a fine of $5,000.00 to the applicant within 21 days of the date
of this order.
respondent is to pay the Board’s costs of and incidental to the
application to be agreed or taxed on the scale in part 1
of Schedule 1 of the
Supreme Court Rules 2000
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: K. Cuthbertson SC, on instructions from Tremayne Faye &
Rheinberger.
Respondent: D. Zeeman, Butler McIntyre & Butler.
Decision Number: [2024] TASLPDT 7
Number of paragraphs: 111
DETERMINATION
Introduction
an amended application accompanying a consent memorandum, dated 30 April 2024,
the applicant (‘the Board’) seeks a
determination that the conduct
complained of in the application amounts to professional misconduct, or
alternatively, unsatisfactory
professional conduct, and seeks orders that the
respondent:
(a) be reprimanded;
(b) pay a fine, in a sum to be determined; and
(c) pays the applicant’s costs of and incidental to the application.
the consent memorandum, the parties seek a determination pursuant to
Legal Profession Act 2007
(Tas), that the conduct of
the practitioner, as particularised in the amended application and when taken as
a whole, amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
the hearing, of these proceedings, the Tribunal allowed the amendment to the
application. It must, however, determine for itself
the question of how the
conduct of the practitioner should be characterised.
or about 4 July 2016, the respondent received instructions, prepared and
witnessed the execution of a will (‘the 2016 will’)
for Mr David
Lester Townsend (‘the deceased’).
appears that the practitioner had first been instructed to make a will for the
Deceased in November 2011. Prior to the 2016 will,
the deceased made four wills
with the practitioner, dated 22 November 2011, 28 February 2012, 21 December
2012 and 4 March 2014 respectively.
A record of each of them appears in the
practitioner’s strongroom records and each is noted to have been
‘revoked and
destroyed’.
2016 will appointed the respondent and the deceased's sister, Ms Margaret
Butler, as executors and provided a 9/10th share of
his estate to Ms Annabelle D
Pestano and a 1/10th share to Ms Butler. This was the first time Ms Pestano had
been the subject of
a will of the deceased.
practitioner was aware that the deceased had been divorced for over 30 years and
was estranged from his ex-wife and the 2 children
from that marriage, as well as
his family.
prepared the 2016 will, the practitioner continued to hold it on behalf of the
deceased, and later his estate. The record
of the strong room file records
‘WILL Dated 4/7/2016 (told need Drs. certif.)’ The words in
brackets appear to be in
the practitioner’s handwriting and are not
written by the person who wrote the initial entry, although nothing was made of
this at the hearing.
the time of preparing the 2016 will the practitioner had in excess of 40
years’ experience. Wills and probate were part
of his practice. In
evidence, he estimated he would have drafted about 50 wills a year, on average.
He had a strong room at his
offices in New Norfolk and held himself out as being
competent to draft wills and, on occasions, act as executor, as part of the
services offered by his practice.
practitioner considered he knew what was required to draft a valid will and that
a will maker was required to have testamentary
capacity. In cross examination
he agreed that the issue of capacity arose from time to time and was due to
various factors, including
age, ill health and mental health issues. He
understood that capacity required the will maker to understand the extent of
property, and to comprehend and appreciate the claims that might be made
against the estate. In that regard, he said that he had
‘indirectly’ been involved in claims under the
Testators Family
Maintenance Act 2010
in the past, but there were ‘very few’.
However, he understood the categories of people who could make claims, including
a will maker’s children.
paragraph 10 of the practitioner’s affidavit sworn in these proceedings he
deposed that he had doubts regarding the deceased’s
capacity to make a
will. In a letter to the applicant Board dated 13 May 2020, he said that the
deceased was ‘not in a good
state’. In a further letter to the
Board dated 9 September 2021, he stated that his concern was the
deceased’s history
of alcohol consumption. In cross examination he said
that was his ‘primary concern’ and that he knew ‘first
of other elements to allow him to make the general statement he was
not in a good state. He also said that the deceased was agitated,
shaking and
speaking rapidly. He said the deceased was not as he had presented on previous
occasions, when he had been calm and
lucid. He said the deceased was quite
different in his presentation.
practitioner’s observations of the deceased led the practitioner to tell
the deceased that he would need to get a doctor’s
certificate before the
practitioner would accept that the will he was preparing would be considered
valid. He said that he discussed
the doctor’s certificate with the
deceased, who volunteered to get it.
in cross examination, the practitioner described the doctor’s certificate
as a ‘fall back’ position. When
asked whether it was his
responsibility to ensure that a person has testamentary capacity, he said he
felt that it was inappropriate
for him to be the final determiner.
practitioner said that he took basic notes for the will, but no separate notes
instructions for a will are
those of 20 November 2011. There are no notes of the attendance of 4 July
practitioner already knew the extent of the deceased’s property and of
what he was disposing. He did not explore that with
the deceased. He did not
explore what, if any, gifts the deceased might make. He said that was because
he knew the deceased had
previously been involved in an
‘acrimonious’ divorce, and that his children had sided with their
mother. He did not
think it out of the ordinary for a testator not to leave
gifts to children.
reasons that remain largely unexplained the practitioner drew the 2016 will and
permitted the deceased to execute it. His recollection
was that the deceased
was ‘disturbed’ but was insisting on making the will, so the
practitioner ‘did it’.
When asked why he didn’t send the will
maker away, he said ‘I wish I had sent him away to see a doctor’.
number of lessons to be learned from this case, the first is that given
the practitioner’s doubts about the deceased’s
capacity, he should
have refused to allow him to execute the will, unless and until the medical
evidence had been produced.
his doubts, the executed will was filed in the practitioner’s strong room,
and the previous will he held for the deceased
was destroyed. In evidence, the
practitioner said he did not think that destroying the previous will might leave
no valid will at
all. He said he didn’t think through the
consequences.
practitioner says that he did not know at the time but subsequently became aware
in March 2019 that Ms Pestano lived in the Philippines.
Tragically,
the Deceased took his own life on 25 September 2017. There was a history of
mental illness for which he was being treated
by Dr David McDougall, a
psychiatrist, at Glenorchy and Northern Districts Adult Community Mental Health
Services prior to his death.
27 October 2017 the practitioner wrote to Dr McDougall asking him ‘to
indicate the deceased’s “‘competence’
in the text of the
Will...as at 4
July 2016”. Apart from indicating to Dr
McDougall that when taking instructions he had asked the Deceased for a note
his doctor to go with the will, the practitioner provided Dr McDougall with
nothing more to assist his task.
was a delay in obtaining the report. It appears it was necessary for the
practitioner to obtain a signed authority from Ms
Butler, which he did on 19
January 2018.
McDougall provided the practitioner with a report dated 8 February 2018. The
practitioner is not sure when he received it, but
he thought it was in March
2018. Nevertheless, Dr McDougall was careful to point out that he was not an
expert in assessing testamentary
capacity and he said that he could not
‘positively affirm’ that the Deceased possessed either intact
financial decision
making capacity nor testamentary capacity at the time the
will was made. It is clear from the document that Dr McDougall had sought
advice from the Tasmanian Health Service Medico Legal Advisor.
the practitioner's affidavit he says that because Dr McDougall’s response
was not definitive on the issue of the deceased’s
capacity he ‘took
the view that for that reason the will was invalid’, a view he now
concedes was incorrect.
a result of that mistaken view, the practitioner wrote to the Law Society on 7
March 2018 to place a notice for Will of Deceased.
In his affidavit, the
practitioner states that he did not receive any ‘advice’ from the
Law Society in relation to that
notice, but it is clear that he had received an
email from Justin McMullen Lawyers on 7 March 2018, confirming they held a will
19 April 2007.
Notwithstanding
Mr McMullen’s email, in May 2018 the respondent filed a Notice of
Intention to apply for Letters of Administration
in the names of the two
children of the deceased. He said he did so, because he regarded the wills that
the deceased had made after
2007 as having revoked the 2007 will and that
therefore the deceased had died intestate. It will be recalled that the
practitioner
had destroyed every one of the wills made after 2007 (with the
exception of the 2016 will).
McMullen wrote again to the respondent on 5 June 2018 advising he was holding a
will dated 19 April 2007 and noted the application
for letters of administration
on intestacy.
thereafter, on 15 June 2018, the respondent wrote to the co-executor, Mrs
Butler, advising he had obtained a medical opinion
that the Deceased was not
mentally competent when he made the 2016 will and that consequently the 2016
will was not effective. It
will be noted that the practitioner’s letter
does not accurately reflect Dr McDougall’s opinion.
2 July 2018 Mr McMullen again wrote to the practitioner seeking to resolve the
issue concerning the validity of the 2007 Will and
requested an undertaking that
the respondent would not lodge an application for a grant of letters of
administration until he had
responded to Mr McMullen. The practitioner failed
to respond to Mr McMullen. In the absence of a response, Mr McMullen filed a
caveat in the Probate Registry of the Supreme Court on 25 July 2018. Mr
McMullen advise the practitioner that he had done so by
letter 31 July
appears that in early September 2018 the practitioner provided his file to Mr
McMullen. On 24 September 2018 Ms Jack from McMullen
Lawyers wrote to the
practitioner telling him that they did not believe that Dr McDougall’s
letter proved that the Deceased
lacked testamentary capacity.
some time before 11 October 2018 the practitioner told Ms Jack that he was
seeking advice from Daniel Zeeman of Butler McIntyre
and Butler, Lawyers. In
his affidavit he deposes, however, that he consulted Mr Zeeman on 20 February
29 March 2019 the respondent received advice from Mr Zeeman that he ought to
apply for Probate in the normal way.
1 April 2019 the practitioner wrote to Mr Zeeman indicating that he intended to
apply for probate ‘in the normal way’;
however, he did not file
notice of his intention to do so until 11 June 2019.
31 July 2019 the practitioner wrote to Ms Butler with the application for Grant
of Probate and the supporting affidavit for her
execution. The documents were
finally sent to the Court on 13 August 2019. The gross value of the estate was
recorded as $441,183.16.
was granted on 27 August 2019.
main asset of the Deceased's estate was a property at 1 Berriedale Road,
Berridale (the Property). At the time of the Deceased’s
death, a friend
of his, Rob Harris, was living rent free at the Property purportedly with the
Deceased's permission.
the Deceased died, Mr Harris invited Ms Amy Prior and her children to also move
onto the Property and both remained living at
the Property rent free. There is
a question about whether Mr Harris charged Ms Prior rent, but that is immaterial
to the present
value of the property in the Probate documents was shown as $432,000.00. The
net value, of the estate, including deductions for
the estimated mortgage debt
was $291,489.08. It is accepted that the true value of the estate would not be
known until the assets
had been sold and the expenses paid.
at 12 April 2019 the mortgagee advised that estate’s account was
$118,047.87 in excess of the approve credit amount of $0.00.
In his evidence
the practitioner suggested that the debt was not of great concern to him in his
administration of the estate, because
there was sufficient equity in the
property to secure it. That is perhaps a surprising statement from an executor
who is acting
in the interests of beneficiaries.
Nevertheless,
on 2 August 2019, a notice of default was issued on behalf of the mortgagee, the
balance owing was $128,937.93, which
presumably included interest, and other
fees and charges.
Probate had been granted, the respondent requested that Mr Harris and Ms Prior
vacate. The practitioner wrote letters of demand
to Ms Prior on 17 September
2019 and Mr Harris on 18 September 2019. Notice to vacate was issued to Mr
Harris on 20 September 2019.
It appears that Mr Harris left the property in
November 2019, but Ms Prior refused to do so.
the same time, it appears that the premises were not in a good state. There was
a considerable amount of rubbish that needed to
be removed.
3 December 2019 the practitioner wrote another letter to Ms Prior instructing
her to vacate, but she remained at the property.
14 February 2020 the practitioner engaged solicitors to obtain an eviction order
from the Supreme Court. On 8 April 2020 the solicitors
wrote to Ms Prior
advising her of the application and requiring her to leave and indicating that
she would be evicted. The order
was made and Ms Prior was given until 17 May
2020 to vacate.
Prior vacated the property on about 14 July 2020.
21 August 2020 the respondent advised the Chief Executive Officer of the Board:
I have been completing the process of having the property prepared for sale,
which process involved; removing all junk and clearing
the property (inside and
outside), having vermin particularly rats exterminated, clarifying the insurance
position now that the property
is vacant, organizing Mekina fire security and
painting over the graffiti on the outside fence.
property was eventually sold on 4 November 2020 for $310,000.00. The amount
required to discharge the mortgage debt was $159,296.91.
the administration of the estate McMullen Lawyers sent the practitioner a number
of emails and letters (dated 27 February 2019,
4 March 2019, 29 July 2019, 3
January 2020, 22 February 2020, 24 March 2020 and 13 August 2020) seeking either
an update of what
he was proposing to do with the estate, or seeking payment of
an outstanding invoice in an amount of $159.54, relating to various
disbursements required for the work they did in relation to the estate. The
practitioner did not respond to these emails and letters
in a timely
administration of the estate was completed on 19 January 2021, with
distributions to Margaret Butler of $8,425.00 and Annabelle
$75,825.00. The practitioner’s fees on the conveyance were $1,050.41
(excl GST) and for the administration of the
estate were $3,011.67 (excl
The applicant’s contentions
particulars of the conduct alleged in the amended application relate to taking
instructions from the deceased and the administration
of the deceased’s
estate. Subject to the correction of the errors in the dates of the amended
application, para (ia), the
particulars are as follows.
(a) Failed to make any file note or any other record of the instructions
obtained or the circumstances surrounding his attendance
on Mr David Lester
Townsend (the Testator), when taking instructions for and witnessing the Will of
the Testator signed 4 July 2016
(the Will),
in circumstances where the
respondent later advised:
(i) The Testator was not in a good state when he attended the respondent to
provide instructions for the Will;
(ii) He was aware of the Testator's history of excessive alcohol consumption;
(iii) That there was a question over whether the Testator had the requisite
capacity to make a Will; and
(iv) He had told the Testator that he would not regard the Will as valid unless
and until he provided the respondent with medical
evidence of his mental
competence; and/or
(b) Delayed in the administration of the estate of the Testator who died on 25
September 2017 in that he:
(ia) Having indicated to McMullen Lawyers on for before 11 October 2018 that he
had sought or intended to seek advice from Mr Daniel
Zeeman concerning the
administration of the estate, failed to take steps to do so until 20 February
(i) Did not cause a notice of intention to apply for probate of the Will to be
published until 11 June 2019 in circumstances where
the respondent obtained a
medical report on or about 8 February or 7 March 2018 that did not definitively
conclude that the Testator
lacked the requisite testamentary capacity at the
time of making the Will and he had received independent advice from Mr Daniel
on or about 29 March 2019 that he ought to apply for probate in the
normal way;
(ii) Did not begin the process of securing vacant possession of the Testator's
property until or about 14 February 2020, with vacant
possession not able to be
secured until 15 July 2020, a period of approximately 8 months; in circumstances
where he identified on
or before 19 August 2019 that he would likely require a
court order to secure vacant possession and where Ms Prior had failed to
with a notice to vacate served on her on 17 September 2019.
(c) Treated the Will as if it was invalid, in spite of the presumption of
capacity and lack of evidence of invalidity.
Particulars
(i) At all material times the respondent held the Will.
(ii) On and from 8 February or 7 March 2018, the Practitioner held a medical
report which did not conclude that the Testator lacked
the requisite
testamentary capacity.
(iii) On or about 3 May 2018 the respondent caused a Notice of Intention to
apply for Letters of Administration on intestacy
in the names of the
children of the Testator to be published on the website maintained by the
Supreme Court of Tasmania.
(iv) On or about 15 June 2018, wrote to the Testator's sister, Margaret Butler
who was named co-executor in the Will, advising her
that he had obtained a
medical opinion that the Testator was not mentally competent at the time the
Will was made, that the Will
was not effective and that their appointments as
executors and trustees of the Testator's estate was likewise not effective.
(e) Failed to respond to another practitioner, Mr McMullen, on multiple
Particulars
The respondent did not respond to the following communications:
(i) Email on 7 March 2018 from Anna Djuric of Justin McMullen Lawyers to the
respondent advising they held a will dated 19 April
2007 (the 2007 Will).
(ii) Email on 5 June 2018 from Mr McMullen to the respondent noting the notice
of intention on behalf of the children to apply for
letters of administration on
intestacy and reminding the respondent that he was holding the 2007 Will. Mr
McMullen asked the respondent
to contact him to discuss how to proceed.
(iii) Email on 2 July 2018 from Mr McMullen to the respondent noting they had
spoken recently about the estate, referring to the
respondent's intention to
apply for letters of administration on intestacy, reminding the respondent that
he held the 2007 Will,
advising that he had no reason to believe the 2007 Will
was not valid or had been properly revoked by any later will and noting his
intention to lodge a caveat. Mr McMullen requested that the respondent contact
him to work out the correct application and sought
an undertaking that the
respondent would not lodge an application for a grant without first responding
(iv) Letter dated 31 July 2018 from Mr McMullen to the respondent enclosing copy
caveat he had filed noting he was compelled to file
because he had not received
a response and his duty as an officer of the Court required him to prevent an
imprudent grant in circumstances
where he believes he is holding a properly
executed and valid will.
(v) Email dated 11 October 2018 from Robyn Jack of Justin McMullen Lawyers to
the respondent asking if the respondent has obtained
advice from Daniel Zeeman
(vi) Multiple emails and letters (dated 27 February 2019, 4 March 2019, 29 July
2019, 3 January 2020, 22 February 2020, 24 March
2020 and 13 August 2020) to the
respondent seeking an update and payment of an outstanding invoice.
(vii) In the premises, the respondent's professional discourtesy in failing to
respond is capable of constituting unsatisfactory
professional conduct or
professional misconduct.
Practitioner’s concessions
his affidavit, the practitioner accepts that:
(a) his failure to record and keep notes of his instructions from the deceased
is not accepted as best practice and that the criticism
that he failed to do so
is justified;
(b) he caused delay in the administration of the deceased’s estate, but
asks the Tribunal to take into account the ‘complicating
factors in that
administration’;
(c) he should have sought specialist advice as to how to proceed with the estate
instead of applying for letters of administration,
thereby causing further
(d) he should not have treated the will as invalid, but he believed he was
acting correctly;
(e) it was discourteous of him not to respond to Mr McMullen.
the hearing the practitioner did not take any real issue with the Board’s
submissions, or characterisation of the facts.
While we note the level of
cooperation given by the practitioner in these proceedings, it has not always
been the case that the
practitioner has accepted the Board’s case, as his
response to the Board’s Murray’s case letter bears out.
terms ‘unsatisfactory professional conduct’ and ‘professional
misconduct’ are found in Chapter 4, Part
4.1, Division 1 of the LP Act.
Those expressions are defined as follows:
420 Unsatisfactory professional conduct
For the purposes of this Act –
unsatisfactory professional conduct
includes conduct of an
Australian legal practitioner occurring in connection with the practice of law
that falls short of the standard
of competence and diligence that a member of
the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably competent Australian legal
practitioner.
421 Professional misconduct
(1) For the purposes of this Act –
professional misconduct
(a) unsatisfactory professional
conduct of an Australian legal practitioner, where the conduct involves a
substantial or consistent
failure to reach or maintain a reasonable standard of
competence and diligence; and
(b) conduct of an Australian legal
practitioner whether occurring in connection with the practice of law or
occurring otherwise than
in connection with the practice of law that would, if
established, justify a finding that the practitioner is not a fit and proper
person to engage in legal practice.
(2) For finding that an Australian legal practitioner
is not a fit and proper person to engage in legal practice as mentioned in
(1), regard may be had to the suitability matters that would be
considered if the practitioner were an applicant for admission to
profession under this Act or for the grant or renewal of a local practising
certificate.
422 provides for non-exclusive categories of conduct. In the present case,
there is an express allegation of delay and, as
will be seen, conduct that
amounts to incompetence. In
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v
Brett J said:
Delay and neglect will always constitute conduct capable of amounting to either
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct. This is so under
the general law, but is also a consequence of
of the Act which prescribes conduct consisting of a contravention
of the Act, the regulations or the legal profession rules as conduct
constituting unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct. The
respondent was obliged under rules in
place during the period relevant to this
complaint to do his best to complete a client's business in a competent manner
a reasonable time.
the period 2016 to September 2020 during which many of the events took place, r
10(1) of the
Rules of Practice 1994
A practitioner must do his or her best to complete a client's
(a) in a competent manner; and
(b) within a reasonable time.
1 October 2020 the duty under r 8(c) of the
Solicitors Conduct Rules
, was to deliver legal services competently, diligently, and as promptly
as reasonably possible.
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v
Brett J said that the
task of determining conduct under ss 420 and 421:
...involves an evaluative assessment of the conduct, measured against the
standard of competence and diligence that a member of the
public is entitled to
expect of a reasonably competent Australian legal practitioner. The second step
is to determine whether the
unsatisfactory professional conduct amounts to
professional misconduct. In making this determination, an assessment must be
as to whether the conduct involved a substantial or consistent failure to
reach or maintain a reasonable standard of competence and
diligence. It is the
finding that the relevant failure has been substantial or consistent which is
critical to this determination.
A further observation which can be made about
the legislative scheme incorporated into this legislation is that the standard
competence and diligence required of a legal practitioner is to be evaluated
on the basis of what a reasonable member of the public
would be entitled to
expect of the practitioner. I think that this results in an important shift of
emphasis away from the formulation
which preceded this legislation, which
depended upon what practitioners of good repute and competency would reasonably
consider to
be conduct which could be described as disgraceful or dishonourable.
standard of proof to find unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct is the balance of probabilities. But
it is well recognised that the
standard requires the Tribunal to be reasonably satisfied, and that threshold is
not reached ‘by
inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect
inferences’.
proceed on that basis.
Solicitor’s duties
solicitor who takes instructions for a Will has a duty to ensure amongst other
things that the person giving instructions has testamentary
The duty calls for
‘sound, discriminating, and well-informed
client instructing a practitioner is entitled reasonably to expect that the
solicitor will approach the matter with nothing but
the interests of the client
The assistance that a
client is entitled to expect from the legal practitioner is to make a valid
A person making a will is
entitled to expect that a legal practitioner is competent to give advice on a
range of matters, some of
which may potentially be contrary to the interests of
the client.
While it is
undesirable to lay down hard and fast rules about how a solicitor should take
instructions, where capacity is potentially
in doubt, the practitioner should
‘take particular care to gain reasonable assurance as to the testamentary
capacity of the
there are doubts about the testator’s capacity it has been suggested that
the following procedures when taking instructions
will assist in avoiding
potential problems for the estate, as well as for the legal practitioner.
solicitor who is to draw the will should attend on the testator personally and
fully question the testator to determine capacity
- the questions should be
directed to ascertain whether the testator understands that he is making a will
and its effects, the extent
of the property of which he is disposing and the
claims to which he ought to give effect;
or more persons should be present, selected by the solicitor having regard to
their calibre as witnesses if required to testify
where the issue of capacity is
raised. Where possible, one of the witnesses should be a medical practitioner,
preferably the doctor
who has been treating the testator and is familiar with
him, who should in making a thorough examination of the testator's condition,
question him in detail and advise the solicitor as to the capacity and
understanding of the testator. The presence of other persons
at this time would
require the testator's consent;
detailed written record should be made by the solicitor, the results of the
examination recorded by the medical practitioner and
notes made by those
present. If after careful consideration of all the circumstances the solicitor
is not satisfied that the testator
does not have testamentary capacity he should
proceed and prepare the will. It is a good general practice for the solicitor
instructions to draw the will and be present on execution and this
practice should not be departed from in these circumstances. On
execution the
attesting witnesses should where possible, come from those persons (including
the solicitor) referred to above who
are present at the time of instructions
and, again as at every stage, detailed notes of the events and discussions
If those questions and the answers to them, leave the solicitor in real doubt as
to what should be done, other steps may be desirable.
This may include obtaining
a more thorough medical appraisal or, if the testator declines, considering
whether the will can be properly
drawn, should assurance on testamentary
capacity fail to satisfy the test just
have regard to the caution not to place too much reliance on
checklists,
and to carefully
assess the facts of the case before us. Nevertheless, the absence of notes
on the deceased when taking
instructions in circumstances of suspected incapacity is a matter of
considerable importance in our assessment.
practitioner’s client was also entitled reasonably to expect that in
assuring the testamentary capacity of the testator
he would know the relevant
law. It was not difficult to find it. In 2016, in Tasmania there was no need
to look beyond the eloquent
exposition by Wood J in
As her Honour
pointed out, ‘[o]rdinarily proof of capacity and proof of due
execution...creates an assumption of knowledge
and approval’. However, in
the context of capacity:
A duly executed will, rational on its face, is presumed, in the absence of
evidence to the contrary, to be that of a person of competent
understanding;
sanity is to be presumed until the contrary is
Characterisation of conduct
noted in the introduction, in its terms, the amended application seeks a
determination that the conduct complained of amounts to
professional misconduct,
or alternatively unsatisfactory professional conduct.
the consent memorandum filed with the application to amend the application
sought a determination that the conduct of the
practitioner, as particularised
in the amended application and when taken as a whole, amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
one view of the matter, the Board may have left open the possibility of a
finding of professional misconduct, notwithstanding its
agreement that at least
a finding of unsatisfactory conduct should be made. On the other hand, it may
signal a settled position
between the parties.
propose to approach the characterisation of the conduct as an agreed position,
viz., that, taken as a whole, it amounts to unsatisfactory
professional
Legal Services Commissioner v
the Queensland Civil
and Administrative Tribunal summarised the relevant law as
Legal Services Commissioner v
this Tribunal...questioned the applicability
of the proposition that, in determining civil penalty, a tribunal should not
from the position taken by both parties in relation to the orders to be
made, based on
NW Frozen Foods v Australian Competition and Consumer
Commonwealth v Director, Fair Work Building Industry
Inspectorate & Ors
Legal Services Commissioner v
. In the present case, the applicant referred to a statement by
Vice President Judge Hampel in
Victorian Legal Services Commissioner v
The High Court in
Commonwealth v Director Fair Work Building Industry
Inspectorate
set out the following principles which are
applicable here:
there is an
important public policy benefit in receiving, and if appropriate, accepting
agreed penalty submissions;
the decision of
the High Court in
Barbaro and Zirilli v The Queen
the inadmissibility of prosecution, or agreed penalty provisions in criminal
proceedings has had no application to cases of
upon persuasion
of the accuracy of the parties’ agreement as to facts and consequences,
and that the penalty the parties propose
is an appropriate one, it is a highly
desirable practice for the Court to accept the parties’ proposal.
It is clear that it is my duty to determine the level of conduct alleged, and to
impose sanctions. No agreement between a regulator
and a regulated practitioner
such as Mr Hyatt can supplant that duty. Subject to that overriding
responsibility, it is appropriate
for parties to put an agreed position before
the Tribunal. If satisfied the agreed penalty is an appropriate one, it follows
not lightly depart from that agreed position.
[32] The Tribunal accepts that, if satisfied of the accuracy of the agreement of
the parties as to the facts and their consequences,
it should not lightly depart
from the agreed position. That inevitably requires some consideration of the
relevant facts, in the
light of the principles relating to the Tribunal’s
powers to make orders on the determination of a discipline application.
note that these authorities discuss penalty, but we consider that the approach
discussed also relates to the parties’ agreed
assessment of the nature of
the conduct. We propose to proceed accordingly.
was common ground at the hearing that the conduct of the practitioner taken as a
whole amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Nevertheless, the
Tribunal must consider for itself the conduct alleged and determine whether it
amounts to unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct. We
do not take the parties’ agreed position lightly.
are a number of anomalies in the explanations provided by the practitioner.
First, the practitioner held the 2016 will in his
strongroom, apparently
believing that there were doubts about its validity, yet not taking any further
action to obtain medical evidence.
This admits of two possibilities. The first
is that the practitioner did not truly believe that the testator lacked
The second is that the practitioner did not properly understand the
law of capacity. Given the evidence and the way in which the
case was conducted
before us, we think the latter explanation is more plausible.
the previous will, executed in 2014, was destroyed, without the practitioner
having received evidence to confirm the testamentary
capacity of the deceased.
In his explanation to the Board, the practitioner said his client instructed him
to destroy the 2014 will.
Yet, given his concerns about the 2016 will it is
difficult to see why he would accept those instructions without first obtaining
the medical evidence.
aligned with these first two points is the practitioner’s answer in cross
examination that the medical report was a
‘fall back’ position.
That tends to indicate that at the time he thought the deceased had capacity,
but it was prudent
to have some evidence to confirm it. But that does not sit
well with his subsequent actions.
when asked about Mr McMullen’s claim to have a valid will executed in
2007, the practitioner responded that he considered
the wills that he had made
for the deceased after 2007 had, effectively, revoked the 2007 will. That
answer may have carried some
weight had the practitioner kept the subsequent
wills. However, the situation at the time the practitioner learned of the 2007
was that he believed the 2016 will to be invalid, and that he must have
known that the other wills he had made had been destroyed.
apparent confusion about these matters is all the more perplexing given the
practitioner’s experience, and professed expertise,
which we will come
no matter which way the coin lands, in our view, the answer sounds either in a
lack of diligence for the tasks he undertook, or
incompetence.
Lack of File notes
have already referred to the need for there to be a detailed written record of a
solicitor’s attendance on a client who is
thought potentially to lack
capacity. Ms Cuthbertson SC (as she then was) for the Board, referred us to the
Legal Services Commissioner v
While that case is
not binding on us, it makes the important observation that, in cases of lack of
capacity, the question is ultimately
for the Court to
Thus, the assessment
of a solicitor experienced in taking instructions from a person whose capacity
may be in doubt may become extremely
important. The importance of the notes
will vary, depending on the circumstances. But in a case in which a
practitioner is alert
to the possibility that the client may lack capacity, a
note taken at, or soon after the attendance is, in our view, indispensable.
should have included details of the questions that the practitioner asked in
order to determine whether the client lacked capacity.
Given’s case
the notes were inadequate. Here, they were
non-existent. In our view, that is sufficient, in itself, to constitute
unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Treating the will as invalid
propose to deal with this allegation before those relating to the delays in
administering the estate.
McDougall’s report did not conclude that there was a lack of capacity. He
gave a highly qualified opinion. It was because
Dr McDougall’s opinion
was not definitive that the practitioner concluded that the will was invalid.
It must follow that he
did not understand, or turn his mind to, the presumption
of capacity.
root cause of the delay in commencing the orderly administration of the
deceased’s estate was the practitioner’s failure
to understand, or
properly ascertain the law. However, as the anomalies previously identified
show, his actions were both incoherent
and contradictory. Regrettably, when he
received Dr McDougall’s letter, his misconception of the law, and in
particular the
invalidity of the 2016 will, crystallised.
practitioner’s letter to Dr McDougall is telling. It is devoid of any
suggestion that the practitioner had researched or
attempted to articulate the
correct legal tests in order to assist Dr McDougall with the task he was asked
to perform. His conduct
after receiving Dr McDougall’s report is
similarly telling. On the practitioner’s evidence he thought the report
sufficient to establish incapacity, which was carried through to his letter
to Mrs Butler telling her the will was ineffective and
so was her appointment as
executor. Then there is the subsequent notice to apply for letters of
administration on behalf of the
practitioner sought to lay off the effect of his misconception by suggesting
that he was not experienced in probate disputes.
We reject that explanation.
One need only ask what standard of competence a member of the public is entitled
to expect of a reasonably
competent Australian legal practitioner who held
himself out as being competent in making wills and in administering estates.
fields of law required him to understand the relevant legal principles.
Delays in administration
the time he informed McMullen Lawyers on 11 October 2019 that he was seeking
advice from Mr Zeeman, over a year had passed since
the deceased had passed
away. It should also be remembered that it was McMullen Lawyers that put him on
notice that Dr McDougall’s
report was insufficient to establish
incapacity. Yet, he took no steps to instruct Mr Zeeman until 20 February 2020,
some 4 months
Zeeman provided his advice on 29 March 2019. Three days later, on 1 April 2019,
the practitioner told Mr Zeeman he would apply
for probate in common form. Yet
he did not cause notice of his intention to do so to be published until 11 June
with probate granted on 27 August 2019, and having identified that he may
require a court order to secure vacant possession,
beyond writing letters of
demand, he did not instruct solicitors to obtain the order until 14 February
2020. At the latest he should
have done so by the end of September 2019 when it
was relatively plain that Mr Harris and Ms Prior had not vacated the premises.
The consequence was that vacant possession was not secured until 15 July 2020,
just short of eleven months after the grant of probate.
have noted the practitioner’s apparent lack of concern that even though
the mortgage continued to accrue interest until the
sale of the property in
October 2020, there was sufficient equity to secure the debt. It is difficult
to fathom this attitude.
The consequence of the delay in securing possession
and arranging the sale of the Property was that the mortgage debt accrued
in the order of $30,000.00 in interest between the grant of probate
and the eventual sale of the property. The estate was relatively
beneficiaries’ interests should have been given due weight.
of this nature amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct as a result of the
operation of s 422(1)(a), and r 10(1) of the
Rules of Practice 1994
Failure to respond to McMullen Lawyers
need say very little about this allegation. It is elementary that practitioners
ought to respond promptly to communications from
their colleagues, and clients.
It is discourteous not to do so. In this case, however, the lack of
communication relates to the
fact that McMullen Lawyers had told the
practitioner, on more than one occasion that they were holding the 2007 will,
following the
practitioner’s publication of the notice of intention to
apply for letters of administration.
he was told of the existence of the 2007 will the practitioner might have been
entitled to the view that it had been revoked
by wills he had previously made,
but which were no longer in existence. However, that is no excuse for not
to express that view. Instead the result of the
lack of communication was that Mr McMullen felt compelled to lodge a caveat,
we infer, was a catalyst for the practitioner to provide his file to him
for review. The costs arising from this were ultimately
borne by the estate,
thus further eroding the value of the distributions that the beneficiaries
ultimately received from it.
we do not take into account the positive results that might have ensued from an
early communication that exposed the practitioner’s
misconceptions about
Dr McDougall’s report, we observe that there was good reason for the
practitioner to respond.
Nevertheless,
while it may be conceded that one or two of the earlier communications may have
escaped disciplinary scrutiny, we consider
that the persistent and frequent
failures alleged are each sufficient to raise the allegation to the level of
unsatisfactory professional
Taken as a whole
those principles in mind, the real question for the Tribunal is whether we
accept the parties’ request to characterise
the conduct, when taken as a
whole, as unsatisfactory professional conduct or whether the conduct involves a
substantial or consistent
failure to reach or maintain a reasonable standard of
competence and diligence, such that it is elevated to professional
misconduct.
undertaking that task it is important to focus on the allegations put by the
Board. We agree that the alleged conduct amounts
at least to unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
conduct is not confined to neglect, or delay. It is more far reaching. It
involves a lack of diligence, or plain incompetence.
If the question is posed:
was there a failure to reach or maintain a reasonable standard of competence and
diligence, the answer
is clearly there was not. Thus, the real question is
whether the failure was substantial, or consistent.
phrase ‘substantial, or consistent failure’ does not connote a
failure occurring over a range of transactions. The
failure may occur in one
matter, involving one client.
delay in the administration of the estate was not a short delay, it was
sustained, and it was sustained for a number of reasons,
which we would
characterise as lack of diligence or incompetence. It was further exacerbated
by the fact that at least by October
2018 the practitioner needed to consult
another lawyer to ascertain the correct position, but he failed to do anything
until February
2019. Then, even after he obtained the advice, he failed to
apply for probate until 11 June 2019.
have already pointed out that the root cause of the events was precipitated by
the fact that the practitioner did not know and
did not attempt to ascertain the
law in a field in which he held himself out to practice. The events
(a) his failure to take a detailed file note of his attendance on the
(b) permitting the deceased to execute the will on the basis that the deceased
would obtain a medical certificate to establish his
(c) informing the deceased that he regarded the will as being invalid until the
medical certificate establishing his capacity was
(d) his subsequent misconception of the effect of Dr McDougall’s
(e) the notice of intention to apply for letters of administration on behalf of
the deceased’s children, and the incorrect
advice to his co-executor, Mrs
Butler; and
(f) the lengthy delays to which the administration of the estate was subject,
including his failure to seek timely advice from Mr
Zeeman, having informed Mr
McMullen he would do so.
(g) having received that advice, failing to take steps to apply for probate in a
timely manner; and
(h) failing to secure vacant possession of the Property in a timely manner.
also do not discount the seriousness of the allegations of lack of communication
with Mr McMullen. It was discourteous. It may
have yielded a more expeditious
outcome. It caused Mr McMullen to take unnecessary action by lodging the
caveat. While this may
not, of itself be sufficient to establish professional
misconduct it formed part of the practitioner’s conduct of the
administration
of the deceased’s estate.
accept that if we are satisfied of the accuracy of the agreement of the parties
as to the facts and their consequences, we should
not lightly depart from the
position agreed between them. However, we note that, despite the agreement, the
Board quite properly
elected to cross examine the practitioner in respect of a
number of anomalies in his evidence, some of which remain
unexplained.
circumstances, we are not satisfied that the agreement of the parties extends to
all of the facts and their consequences.
consider it inescapable that the circumstances reveal unsatisfactory
professional conduct that involves a substantial or consistent
failure to reach
or maintain a reasonable standard of competence and diligence. Accordingly, we
characterise the conduct as professional
misconduct.
Disciplinary response
purpose of disciplinary proceedings is well known. It was eloquently expressed
by Cosgrove J in
Dickens v Law
The powers to discipline a legal practitioner are entirely protective in
character and no element of punishment is involved. The
powers are to be
exercised for the purpose of, and in a manner seen to be likely to achieve, the
maintenance of that high standard
of conduct within the legal profession which
will continue its good reputation, and so protect, not only the future
profession, but
also protect its clients from harm. With this object in mind,
it is necessary to look to the future. Even if the practitioner's
misconduct is
relatively slight, he or she may yet be removed from the roll, if his or her
capacities and attitude have been revealed
to be such that [the
practitioner’s] continuance in practice constitutes a threat to the
profession or the public. On the
other hand, conduct which is itself more grave
in nature, may not warrant removal from the register, if it is seen as a
and explicable departure from the practitioner’s own high
standards. The objective is to uphold the standards of the profession.
Legal Profession Act 2007
, the Act, s471], provides for removal
from the roll, suspension, a fine, conditional registration, ...and a ...
reprimand. Insofar
as the exercise of any of these powers involves a
deprivation of one kind or another to the practitioner, the deprivation is
part of the exercise of the discipline of the profession. There is no
retributive element, no intention to express outrage, as there
sometimes is in
sentences for crime. The order to be made is the order that is necessary, and
no more than is necessary, to maintain
professional discipline and high
standards of conduct. A distinction is to be drawn between disciplinary action,
which is corporate
and self-respecting, and punishment, which is personal and
retributive.
adopt those principles.
Board applies for a reprimand, a fine to be determined by the Tribunal and an
order for the costs of the proceedings.
practitioner takes no issue with the requirement for a reprimand and accepts
that there should be a fine, but that should be limited,
having regard to his
current salary of approximately $300.00 per week and the fact that his former
practice was relatively modest.
practitioner has retired. Accordingly, we consider that a reprimand is both
necessary and no more than is necessary in the circumstances
of this case.
regard to the gravity of the conduct, we also consider a fine should be imposed
in addition to the reprimand. In setting the
quantum of the fine we note the
following matters:
(a) the maximum fine that the Tribunal is able to impose is 750 penalty units,
or $151,500.00;
(b) while the conduct amounts to professional misconduct, the conduct is not of
the most serious kind;
(c) the practitioner has been the subject of substantial financial impost, for
his own legal fees, in the sum of approximately $40,000.00
and for the proposed
order for the Board’s costs, which in total amount to $42,000.00, but may
be taxed or agreed at something
(d) we regard a reprimand as insufficient to mark the seriousness of the
practitioner’s conduct. There is a significant element
deterrence required in setting the disciplinary response;
(e) any fine we set should mark that seriousness of the conduct, but at the same
time be no greater than is necessary to maintain
professional discipline and
high standards of conduct.
take into account the respondent’s submissions in relation to the limit of
the fine. In our view, the fine should be in
an amount of $5,000.00.
Act, s 481(1) provides:
(1) The Tribunal must make orders requiring an Australian legal
practitioner whom it has found guilty of unsatisfactory professional
professional misconduct to pay costs (including costs of the Board and the
complainant), unless the Tribunal is satisfied
that exceptional circumstances
are no exceptional circumstances in this case. None have been drawn to our
attention and we are unable to discern any.
practitioner will be ordered to pay the Board’s costs of and incidental to
the application to be agreed or taxed on the
scale in part 1 of Schedule 1 of
Supreme Court Rules 2000
Simon Gates
Michael O’Farrell SC
Eliza Jones
Note the dates in this
paragraph in the application are 11 October 2010 and 20 February 2020
respectively. These are generally
inconsistent with the recitation of the
background facts in the application and the evidence, more generally.
, [11]; applied in
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v Glynn
[2023] TASFC 1
, [14] (Estcourt J, with whom Jago J and
Porter AJ agreed).
, [11]; applied in
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v Glynn
[2023] TASFC 1
, [14] (Estcourt J, with whom Jago J and
Porter AJ agreed).
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, 362 (Dixon J)
Romascu v Manaloche
[2011] NSWSC 1362
, [167] (Hallen
Ibid, [168], referring
Jarman on Wills
, Sweet and Maxwell, 8
Ed 1951, Vol 3, p
Pates v Craig; Estate
[1995] NSWSC 87
, [144] (Santow
Ibid, [147]
citing Mason & Handler's
Wills, Probate and Administration Service
(Butterworths) [at
[2011] TASSC 73
[55] to [65] (Wood J).
Principle 14 in:
Re Hodges; Shorter v Hodges
(1988) 14 NSWLR 698
704-707 (Powell J).
QCAT 371 (Hon.
Footnotes omitted.
Ibid, [98].
for example,
Berger v Council of the Law Society
[2019] NSWCA 119
[310]-[318] in relation to the failure to provide a client with costs
disclosure.
paras [71]ff.
[1981] TASSC
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (307 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter