URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCAT/2025/197.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
INQ (Application for Treatment Order) [2025] TASCAT 197 (15 October 2025)
INQ (Application for Treatment Order)
[2025] TASCAT 197
Mental Health Stream
INQ (the patient)
Dr BF (the Applicant)
Hearing Date:
12 September 2025
Hearing Location:
[An approved facility]
Date of Orders:
1 August 2025
Date Reasons Issued:
15 October 2025
A Cohen Presiding Member
S Auchincloss, Ordinary Member
(Psychiatrist)
K Steven, Ordinary Member
Orders Made:
Treatment order made for 6 months
Catchwords:
Mental Health Stream – Application for treatment order – Order
Legislation Cited:
Mental Health Act 2013
, Sch 1, Sch 4;
Tasmanian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Cases Cited:
B v Mental Health Tribunal
[2020] TASSC 10
CMB v Mental
Health Tribunal
[2021] TASFC 4
S v Mental Health Tribunal
Representation:
Mr Toby MacGregor, Tasmanian Legal Aid, as Separate Representative
2025/MHT012826
Publication Restriction:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
(the patient) is a 19-year-old woman.
the time of the application and hearing, INQ was an involuntary patient at [an
approved facility].
5 September 2025, Dr BF (the applicant) filed with the Tasmanian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (the Tribunal) an application
for a treatment order for
the patient pursuant to s 37 of the
Mental Health Act
2013 (the Act). In
his application, Dr BF provided the following circumstantial overview:
19 year old female, previously known to paediatric services with a single
admission in Feb 2022 for management of physical symptoms
of an eating disorder.
It is docimented (sic) that patient missusing (sic) substances and had an
emerging borderline personality
No past admission to the psychiatry wards
she is single unemployed woman, and has no dependent homeless, currently staying
with her father and his partner.
Collateral from her mother(she works as a social worker for RHH)
[The Patient] moved out from home when she was 14. She mixed up with the wrong
peer group in high school and started doing drugs.
She came home only when she
was in a crisis...
Current presentation:
She was brought in by PACER when her father called 000 due to her altered
behaviour. She earlier it (sic) the day before presentation
she presented to
Sexual Assault Unit to report that she was sexually assaulted, the clinician
there found her to be odd.
Patient was brought under a DFA with SASS concerned for psychosis, delusions,
with patient thinking her parents were replaced by
paedophile, she had bizarre
thoughts and stated that her boyfriend raped her. Her father suspected she had
used some substances.
On Assessment while in ED: [the Patient] was grossly thought disordered, and was
erratic in her behaviour and had bizarre thoughts
this presentation. She stated that her father was raped when she rang, also
thought that her father laced
her drink with some substances. her affect was
labile and fatuous, she was actively hallucinating but did not want to elaborate
her hallucinations.
BF sought an interim treatment order pursuant to s 38 of the Act. On 5 September
2025, a single Member of the Tribunal made an
interim treatment order, effective
until 3:13pm on 5 September 2025, in relation to the patient in the following
This Interim Treatment Order:
(A) is authority
for the patient to be admitted to and if necessary detained in an approved
facility for the purposes of receiving
(B) authorises a
combination of treatment settings and the admission or readmission of the
patient to those settings, including treatment
in the community; and
(C) authorises
the following:
patient is to take the following medication (depending on clinical
indication):
Antipsychotic
stabilising medication
Antidepressant
Benzodiazepine
Anticholinergic
medication for treatment of any extrapyramidal side effects from taking
antipsychotic medication
Medications may be administered orally and/or by intra-muscular injection and/or
by depot injection as prescribed by a treating psychiatrist
within clinical
guidelines, with dosages adjusted according to clinical response and
tolerability.
medical and/or blood, and/or urine tests and/or diagnostic radiological and
medical imaging tests, as clinically indicated
and as directed by the treating
Community Mental Health Service (ACMHS) appointments (inclusive of home visits
as arranged when being treated in the community.
5 September 2025, a single member of the Tribunal made an order under s 98 of
Tasmanian Civil and Administration Act
for INQ to be
separately represented in relation to the application for treatment order. Brief
reasons for that decision were provided.
In summary, it was INQ’s first
involuntary admission for the treatment of a mental illness and noting her age
and social demographics,
she would benefit from the assistance of a separate
representative to go through the documentation, provide her with advice
the legislation underlying the application and interim treatment
order, and support her through the hearing process.
Notice of Hearing was issued by the Tribunal advising that a hearing to
determine the application for a treatment order would be
held on 12 September
2025 before a three-member panel of the Tribunal.
hearing proceeded as scheduled on 12 September 2025 and a treatment order was
made. Brief oral reasons for the decision were given
at the hearing.
the hearing, INQ submitted a written request for reasons for the orders made on
12 September 2025. These are our reasons.
The Hearing
hearing was conducted by audio-visual link between the Tribunal Members and [an
approved facility]. INQ attended the hearing from
[an approved facility]. Dr QL
attended the hearing from [an approved facility] on behalf of the applicant and
the Patient’s
treating team, together with a nurse. Mr McGregor, the
separate representative, attended the hearing from the Tribunal’s premises
application and associated supporting documentation were filed by the applicant
and the patient’s treating team prior to
the hearing. No documentary
evidence or submissions were provided by the patient.
Legislation
39 of the Act provides the Tribunal with authority to make a treatment order:
39. Determination of application for treatment order
(1) The Tribunal may make a treatment order in respect of a person if, and only
if, it is satisfied that –
(a) an approved medical practitioner has applied for a treatment order in
respect of the person; and
(b) the requirements of section 37 have been met in respect of the application;
(c) the person meets the treatment criteria; and
(d) a treatment plan has been prepared for the person; and
(e) the requirements of section 53(2) appear to have been met with respect to
the treatment plan.
to s 39(1)(b), the Tribunal can be satisfied that a treatment order should be
made where the application has fulfilled the
requirements under s 37:
37. Application for treatment order
(1) Any approved medical practitioner may apply to the Tribunal for a treatment
order in respect of a person.
(2) The application may be made whether or not the person is subject to an
assessment order.
(3) If the person is subject to an assessment order, the application should only
be made if –
(a) the applicant has assessed the person under the authority of the assessment
(b) the applicant is satisfied from the assessment that the person meets the
treatment criteria.
(4) If the person is not subject to an assessment order, the application should
only be made if –
(a) the person has been assessed by the applicant and one other approved medical
practitioner, separately, within the preceding 7
(b) the applicant and the other approved medical practitioner are both satisfied
from their respective assessments that the person
meets the treatment
(5) The application in relation to a person is to be in accordance with section
195 and be accompanied by –
(a) a statement by the applicant affirming that (and explaining how) the person
meets the treatment criteria; and
(b) . . . . . . . .
(c) an indication as to whether an interim treatment order is needed; and
(d) if the person is subject to an assessment order, a copy of that order.
(6) The applicant is to –
(a) give a copy of the application to the person (together with a statement of
rights in a form approved by the President of the
Tribunal); and
(b) place a copy of the application (and accompanying documentation) on the
person's clinical record (ensuring that such a clinical
record is created if one
does not already exist).
we must be satisfied that the person the subject of the application meets the
treatment criteria provided under s 40:
40. Treatment criteria
The treatment criteria in relation to a person are –
(a) the person has a mental illness; and
(b) without treatment, the mental illness will, or is likely to, seriously harm
(i) the person's health or safety; or
(ii) the safety of other persons; and
(c) the treatment will be appropriate and effective in terms of the outcomes
referred to in section 6(1) ; and
(d) the treatment cannot be adequately given except under a treatment order;
(e) the person does not have decision-making capacity.
note that in relation to the requirement for a treatment plan, a treatment plan
is defined under s 50 of the Act as an instrument
which outlines the treatment
the patient is to receive and in accordance with s 52, must be in a form
approved by the Chief Civil
Psychiatrist. Section 39(1)(e) prescribes that the
Tribunal must be satisfied that the requirements of s 53(2) appear to have been
met in relation to a treatment plan:
53. Preparation of treatment plan
(2) In preparing a treatment plan, a medical practitioner –
(a) is to consult the patient; and
(b) may, after consulting the patient, consult such other persons as the medical
practitioner thinks fit in the circumstances.
in determining whether to make a treatment order pursuant to s 39, we need to be
cognisant of the objects of the Act in s
12. Objects of Act
The objects of this Act are as follows:
(a) to provide for the assessment and treatment of persons with mental
(b) to provide for appropriate oversight and safeguards in relation to such
assessment and treatment;
(c) to give everyone involved with such assessment and treatment clear direction
as to their rights and responsibilities;
(d) to provide for such assessment and treatment to be given in the least
restrictive setting consistent with clinical need, legal
and judicial
constraints, public safety and patient health, safety and welfare;
(e) to promote voluntary over involuntary assessment and treatment and the
making of free and informed assessment and treatment choices;
(f) to provide for all incidental and ancillary matters.
in exercising our responsibilities under the Act, we must refer to the mental
health service delivery principles set out
in Schedule 1 of the Act (s 15: see
B v Mental Health Tribunal
[2020] TASSC 10
CMB v Mental
Health Tribunal
[2021] TASFC 4
). Schedule 1 provides:
SCHEDULE 1 - Mental health service delivery principles
1. The mental health service delivery principles are as follows:
(a) to respect, observe and promote the inherent rights, liberty, dignity,
autonomy and self-respect of persons with mental illness;
(b) to interfere with or restrict the rights of persons with mental illness in
the least restrictive way and to the least extent
consistent with the protection
of those persons, the protection of the public and the proper delivery of the
relevant service;
(c) to provide a service that is comprehensive, accessible, inclusive, equitable
and free from stigma;
(d) to be sensitive and responsive to individual needs including, but not
limited to –
(i) needs relating to culture, language, age, religion, gender, gender identity,
sexual preference, sexuality or other personal factors;
(ii) in relation to patients who are Aboriginal persons or Torres Strait
Islanders, that there is a recognition of and response to
their distinct
cultural and identity needs; and
(iii) needs that require recognition of and response to relevant cultural and
identity needs generally; and needs related to trauma-informed
(e) to emphasise and value promotion, prevention and early detection and
intervention;
(f) to seek to bring about the best therapeutic outcomes, including the use of
evidence-based care, and promote patient recovery;
(g) to provide services that are consistent with patient treatment plans;
(h) to recognise the difficulty, importance and value of the role played by
families, carers, children and support persons of persons
with mental
(i) to recognise, observe and promote the rights, welfare and safety of the
children and other dependants of persons with mental
(j) to promote the ability of persons with mental illness to make their own
decisions, including decisions about the person’s
assessment, treatment
and recovery that involve a degree of risk;
(k) to involve persons receiving services, and where appropriate their families,
carers, children and support persons, in decision-making;
(l) to recognise families, and support persons, of persons with mental illness
as partners, with mental health service providers,
in the provision of their
treatment and care to the extent that this is appropriate and consistent with
their own wishes;
(m) to respect the wishes of persons receiving services, and the wishes of their
families and support persons, to the maximum extent
consistent with the health
and safety of those persons and the safety of others;
(n) to promote and enable persons with mental illness to live, work and
participate in their own community;
(o) to operate so as to raise community awareness and understanding of mental
illness and to foster community-wide respect for the
inherent rights, liberty,
dignity, autonomy and self-respect of persons with mental illness;
(p) to be accountable and to have robust clinical governance and quality and
safety processes;
(q) to recognise and be responsive to national and international clinical,
technical and human rights trends, developments and advances
and meet the
requirements to national accreditation;
(r) to ensure that persons receiving mental health services have their
medical and other health needs, including any alcohol and
other addiction
problems, recognised and responded to;
(s) to ensure that the best interests of
children and young persons are recognised and promoted as a primary
consideration, including
receiving services separately from adults, whenever
(t) to ensure that the needs, wellbeing and
safety of children, and other dependants, of persons receiving mental health
are recognised and protected;
(u) to ensure that staff working in mental
health services have access to the support, supervision and appropriate
training, including
cultural diversity training, required to maintain quality,
safety and a highly skilled workforce;
(v) to provide a mental health service
(i) is easily accessible, and safe; and
(ii) provides persons with mental illness with
timely treatment, care and support that is high quality and based on
contemporary best-practice
principles; and
(iii) promotes recovery in the least
restrictive manner that is consistent with the needs of persons with mental
(w) to ensure that people who require mental
health care and treatment have timely referrals, and access to specialist mental
services, when appropriate.
Matters other than the Treatment Criteria
accordance with the provisions outlined above, we must be satisfied of a series
of what are essentially important procedural matters
prior to determining
whether the patient meets the treatment criteria.
documents filed by the applicant and the patient’s treating team lead us
to conclude that the procedural matters had been
satisfied, specifically:
(a) the applicant is an approved medical practitioner pursuant to s 138 of the
Act (s 39(1)(a));
(b) in circumstances where the patient is subject to an assessment order, the
applicant has assessed the patient under the authority
of the assessment order
and is satisfied that the patient meets the treatment criteria (s 37(3)); and
(c) the application was: made on the approved form; included a statement by the
applicant explaining how the patient satisfied the
treatment criteria; indicated
that an interim treatment order was required; accompanied with an assessment
order; copies of the application
together with a statement of rights were
provided by the applicant to the patient; a copy had been placed on the
clinical records; and the applicant had made a note on the
patient’s clinical records of those actions (s 37(5),(6)); and
(d) a treatment plan has been prepared for the patient, such plan having been
prepared by Dr QL dated 9 September 2025, and that
the patient was consulted in
the course of preparing the plan (s 39(1)(d)(e) and s 53(2)), albeit the doctor
noted she had no insight
into her mental state and just wanted to leave the
Treatment Criteria
now turn to an examination of the evidence and submissions as to whether the
patient meets the treatment criteria.
The person has a mental
illness pursuant to s 40(a)
Act defines mental illness as follows:
4. Meaning of
mental illness
(1) For the purposes of this Act –
(a) a person is taken to have a mental illness if he or she experiences,
temporarily, repeatedly or continually –
(i) a serious impairment of thought (which may include delusions); or
(ii) a serious impairment of mood, volition, perception or cognition; and
(b) nothing prevents the serious or permanent physiological, biochemical or
psychological effects of alcohol use or drug-taking from
being regarded as an
indication that a person has a mental illness.
Dr BF’s application for the order, he opined that the patient was
suffering from a psychotic episode. He went on:
mostly Drug induced psychosis as collateral from both parents indicates on going
substance use and on and off psychosis and fluctuation
in her mood. and
behaviour over the years.
She may have a primary psychotic illness that was missed due to living away from
the family home and the repetitive nature of her
psychotic episodes. this may
need further monitoring and mental health follow up to be confirmed.
She is thought disordered,
She is mood disordered.
She has auditory hallucinations.
She has paranoid delusions whith (sic) believes that her father laced her drink
and may have sexually abused her in the past.
She has delusions of misidentification: believes both her parents has (sic)
different names and identities.
the hearing, Dr QL said that INQ was quite paranoid when at home, mostly about
the family. She said that INQ believes that her
stepmother, her mother and her
father are all actors, that she herself has many children, one of whom she keeps
in touch with but
the others have been taken away and also that her parents have
taken out her eggs (which have been “transformed” into
children). Dr QL stated that INQ was presenting with psychotic symptoms only, no
affective symptoms. She also said that
INQ’s urine drug screen had been
negative for substance use and the patient said she had not been using
substances while living
with her father.
the hearing, the patient did not wish to speak to this criteria. Mr MacGregor
said that INQ had expressed to him that she did not
wish to comment on the
medical evidence or the incidents leading to the admission.
is no evidential onus of proof on an applicant for a treatment order, or any
other form of order sought by an applicant to be
made by the Tribunal under the
Act. Rather, in light of the protective nature of the jurisdiction being
exercised, a commonsense
approach to evidence should be taken. The approved
medical practitioner as applicant, or other member of a patient’s treating
team supporting an application, must present evidence and information sufficient
to enable the Tribunal to conclude, having taken
account of the nature of the
order requested and the consequences which might flow to the patient, that on
the balance of probabilities
each criterion required to enable an order to be
made has been met.
BF, in his written application and Dr QL at hearing, provided cogent evidence
which explains why the view has been formed that
the patient has a mental
illness in the form of a psychosis. There was no dispute as to whether there was
a mental illness. The Tribunal
are satisfied to the requisite standard upon the
evidence and information provided by the treating team, that the criterion in s
40(a) of the Act is met. That is, the patient has a mental illness as defined by
Without treatment, the mental illness will, or is
likely to, seriously harm the person’s health or safety; or the safety of
other persons pursuant to s 40(b)
issue for us to decide on this criterion was whether we could be satisfied that
without treatment, the patient’s mental
illness will, or is likely to,
seriously harm the patient’s health and safety. This criterion has been
the subject of interpretation
by his Honour Blow CJ in two matters.
Health Tribunal
[2016] TASSC 34
his Honour said at [22]:
The thresholds for the satisfaction of the criteria in s 40(b) and (c) are
fairly low. To be satisfied as to (b), a medical practitioner
need not be
satisfied of any risk to other persons, nor of any risk to the safety of the
patient. It is sufficient if the practitioner
is satisfied that, without
treatment, the mental illness is likely to seriously harm the person's health,
which of course includes
the person's mental health.
Subsequently,
his Honour provided additional comments as to the interpretation of this
criterion in the matter of
B v Mental Health Tribunal
Section 40(b) is concerned with what is "likely". When that word is used in
legislation, it can have various meanings. It can mean
"more probable than not"
or "more than a 50% chance". It can refer to something that might well happen.
It can refer to a possibility
that is more than a remote or theoretical
possibility. The meaning of the word has been considered in a great many cases.
Boughey v The Queen
(1986) 161 CLR 10
Butcheries Pty Ltd v Australasian Meat Industry Employees' Union
(1979) 42 FLR 331
Cream Holdings Ltd v Banerjee
[2003] EWCA
[2003] 3 WLR 999.
Much depends on the legislative context. It is
significant that the principal purpose or object of s 40(b) is the protection of
ill persons and others from risks of harm. Having regard to the purpose
and context of the provision, I consider that "likely" should
be given a wide
interpretation. It should not be interpreted as meaning "more probable than
not". It must be interpreted as meaning
something more than a remote or
theoretical possibility. I think it should be interpreted as referring to
something that might well
happen. Having regard to the evidence that I have
referred to, I consider that it was open to the Tribunal to conclude that,
treatment, the appellant's mental illness was "likely" to result in her
killing herself.
the application, Dr BF set out the risks to the patient if she were not treated
as follows:
She is at risk of misadventure considering age and sex and homelessness while
mentally disordered.
Risk of further decline in mental state if goes untreated.
Risk of harming others as reported to have anger issues in the past
Risk of neglect and as episodically homeless with no contact with her parents.
hearing, Dr QL spoke further to the risk of harm to INQ if she were untreated,
explaining that her mental and physical health would
deteriorate without
treatment noting she was quite “dishevelled and disorganised” when
she came in. She also noted there
appeared to have been cognitive decline due to
her decline into psychosis over a long period of time. Dr QL also mentioned that
members of INQ’s family were quite fearful of her given past
behaviours.
patient did not wish to put anything forward regarding risk, nor did Mr
are satisfied that the evidence indicates that without treatment the
patient’s mental and physical health is likely to further
deteriorate,
placing her at risk of serious harm in the context of her disorganised thought
content and behaviours.
The treatment will be appropriate and
effective in terms of the outcomes referred to in s 6(1) pursuant to s 40(c)
determining whether to exercise the discretion to make a treatment order, we
must be satisfied that the outcome of the proposed
treatment is appropriate and
effective with regard to the meaning of “treatment” in s 6(1) of the
6. Meaning of treatment
(1) For the purposes of this Act, treatment is the professional intervention
necessary to –
(a) prevent or remedy mental illness; or
(b) manage and alleviate, where possible, the ill effects of mental illness;
(c) reduce the risks that persons with mental illness may, on that account, pose
to themselves or others; or
(d) monitor or evaluate a person's mental state.
the matter of
S v Mental Health Tribunal
his Honour Blow
CJ provided commentary as to the interpretation of this criterion at [22]
The thresholds for the satisfaction of the criteria in
s 40(b) and (c) are fairly low...
Although s 40(c) uses the words "the treatment will be appropriate and
effective", it is clear that the legislation is intended to
apply to mentally
ill individuals whose symptoms cannot be treated or ameliorated in any way. For
the purposes of s 40(c) treatment
will be "appropriate and effective" if it
is treatment directed towards the management of the ill effects of mental
illness, or even
just the monitoring of a person's mental state: s 6(1)(b)
the application, Dr BF outlines the current treatment to include antipsychotic
medication (Olanzapine) and benzodiazepine medication
(Diazepam), in an acute
inpatient unit setting. Future treatment will involve titrating the current
medication to clinical response,
monitoring the response and further testing for
a possible primary psychotic illness. Dr BF described this as evidence-based
for a recurrent psychotic illness with ongoing substance use. Dr BF
stated the following expected outcomes:
- Improvement in
mood, agitation and overall behaviour.
further psychotic relapses.
- Support around
maintaining sobriety.
the hearing, Dr QL said that INQ was doing much better since she had been
treated and contained in hospital. For example, whereas
in the past she was
constantly interrupting discussions around treatment, she was becoming more able
to engage in those discussions.
Dr QL also confirmed that a social worker had
been involved with INQ’s case. Dr QL also said that INQ had been more able
sleep, had been more cognisant and more organised in her thinking after
having treatment. She said that the treating team were continuing
to investigate
whether there is any organic cause for her symptoms.
MacGregor submitted that INQ had communicated to him that she does not believe
that the current medication is working well for
her and that she would like to
change from Olanzapine to Clonazepam, explaining that she has had Clonazepam in
the past and it has
“worked for her”.
to that issue, Dr QL stated that Clonazepam cannot replace Olanzapine as
Olanzapine is an antipsychotic medication. The Tribunal
notes that Olanzapine is
generally used for psychotic and mood disorders, whereas Clonazepam is a
benzodiazepine medication, generally
used for seizures and anxiety including
panic and muscle spasms.
MacGregor also said that INQ is happy to stay in hospital until she “finds
a safe place to go”, albeit she is not happy
staff speak to her, or that there is a camera in the hospital. She has expressed
that she would rather
not have leave from the hospital with her parents. The
patient herself shared with the Tribunal that she is just interested to know
she can go out on leave and if so, whether she can go out by herself.
accepted the evidence as to the professional opinions of Dr BF and Dr QL that
the treatment proposed in the application and being
administered was appropriate
and effective for the patient as defined in the Act and that such treatment
would be within accepted
treatment guidelines. The prescribed medications are
directed towards the management of the ill effects of the patient’s mental
illness, which currently can only be managed in an approved facility with
discharge to community management in due course. The Tribunal
noted also that
whilst Mr MacGregor put forward the patient’s views, he accepted that this
criterion was met if the treatment
is to continue but with continued
psychoeducation. This criterion is satisfied.
The treatment
cannot be adequately given except under a treatment order pursuant to s
the application for the treatment order, Dr BF provided the following opinion in
relation to this criterion:
[The patient] has no capacity or insight around her current illness and is a
risk of flight leaving her current living status with
her father. It is very
difficult to ensure compliance with any medication while in community with
current mental status.
QL, at the hearing, said that INQ cannot be treated without a treatment order
because she does not understand that she has a mental
health condition and needs
to be in hospital and needs treatment.
accepted the evidence of the treating team that the patient is not yet able to
understand her mental health condition and weigh
information in respect to it,
or the need to stay in hospital to receive treatment for it, we are satisfied
that the required treatment
cannot be currently given without the imposition of
a treatment order. The patient is currently unable to give informed consent or
be managed other than under a treatment order. We are satisfied that this
criterion is made out by the evidence.
The person does not
have decision-making capacity pursuant to s 40(e)
Act defines ‘decision-making capacity’ in s 7:
7. Capacity of adults and children to make decisions about their own
assessment and treatment
(1) For the purposes of this Act, an adult is taken to have the capacity to make
a decision about his or her own assessment or treatment
(decision-making
capacity) unless a person or body considering that capacity under this Act is
satisfied that –
(a) he or she is unable to make the decision because of an impairment of, or
disturbance in, the functioning of the mind or brain;
(b) he or she is unable to –
(i) understand information relevant to the decision; or
(ii) retain information relevant to the decision; or
(iii) use or weigh information relevant to the decision; or
(iv) communicate the decision (whether by speech, gesture or other means).
his application, Dr BF opined a view that the patient lacked decision making
capacity, due to “significant disturbance in
mood and thought
characterised by elevated mood, paranoid delusions and bizarre delusions”.
He said further:
[The patient] has limited insight into her condition or situation that she is
currently in. She does not understand the nature of
the problem, course of
events leading to admission and the rationale for treatment or management in the
She is not able to retain information despite several attempts to engage in
therapeutic conversation about the nature of the current
mental state, rationale
for the treatment and in-patient management.
[The patient] is unable to weigh or balance the information provided to her
She does not have any issues in communicating her decision.
the hearing, Dr QL stated that the most recent mental state examination had been
two days prior to the hearing and was conducted
with a consultant on the
treating team. She explained further that INQ has been observed to be quite
vague, quite perplexed and distracted.
She opined that INQ is unable to retain
or register information. She would ask the same question repeatedly and was
focused only
on going out of the hospital for a cigarette. She said that INQ was
not able to communicate a decision in respect to treatment due
to her ongoing
symptoms of psychosis. For example, most of the time, her answers to the
treating team’s questions were “no
comment”. She was not able
to be engaged. Dr QL opined that INQ is preoccupied and has both poverty of
speech and poverty of
thought. She also said that INQ was continuing to
experience delusional misidentification in respect to her parents.
Tribunal noted that at the beginning of the hearing, INQ stated to the Tribunal
that her father was using a fake name and that
her mother’s name was [a
renowned Hollywood actress’s name] and that her mother was also using a
MacGregor advised he did not take issue with any of the treatment criteria being
met at that time.
Tribunal received clear evidence that the patient’s capacity to make
treatment decisions was impacted by the symptoms of
her psychotic illness,
including poverty of thought, poverty of speech and delusions. As a result, she
is unable to understand or
use and weigh information in respect to her treatment
decisions, or retain information or communicate information respect to those
decisions. We accept the evidence of the treating team that the patient does not
have decision making capacity, as defined by the
Act, to make decisions as to
the assessment and treatment of her mental health. This criterion is
The discretion to make a treatment order
are satisfied that the patient meets the treatment criteria. We are also
satisfied that the other procedural matters have been
met with as outlined under
s 39 of the Act (see [18] above). Accordingly, we can proceed to decide whether
to exercise the discretion
to make a treatment order for the patient. We note
that in exercising our discretion we need to consider the objects of the Act (in
s 12) and the mental health delivery principles (in Sch 1).
have concluded that the patient has a mental illness in the form of a psychosis.
At present, we hold the view that the patient
requires a treatment order to
ensure that her mental illness is both treated and that she is kept under
observation for the purpose
of management of the illness. We deduced that INQ is
currently incapable of making autonomous decisions about the treatment she
for her mental illness. In expressing this view, we are guided by the
analysis of Pearce J in CMB v Mental Health Tribunal (supra)
Patients are to be subject to the least restriction, but only as far as is
consistent with public safety and patient health, safety
and welfare. Moreover,
the submission that the terms of the legislation favour "patient autonomy" carry
little weight when, at the
relevant time, the patient is incapable of making an
autonomous decision. In my view it is for the Tribunal to weigh the various,
sometimes competing, considerations and to reach the appropriate balance.
are satisfied that a treatment order should be made for the patient in the terms
sought by the applicant for a period of six months,
noting that unless the order
is discharged sooner, it will be reviewed by the Tribunal within 60 days. We
also note that without
further involvement of the Tribunal, in the event that an
approved medical practitioner assesses the patient as no longer meeting
treatment criteria provided in s 40 of the Act, then subject to s 49(3), the
practitioner must discharge the treatment order
we have made (s 49(2)) and has
the authority to do so (s 49(1)(a)).
treatment order, in the terms requested by the applicant, was issued on 12
September 2025 at 10.58am. The substantive provisions
of the order were in
identical terms to the interim treatment order made by the Tribunal on 5
September 2025 (see [4] above). The
order was issued on the approved form and
complied with the requirements under s 41 of the Act. The order will expire on
2026 unless discharged sooner, or renewed. The order has not been
replicated in its entirety in these reasons to ensure that the
identity of the
patient is not disclosed as mandated by cl 11 of Pt 2 to Sch 4 of the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.9 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter