URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFC/2024/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
GFR v SRP [2024] TASFC 2 (3 May 2024)
[2024] TASFC 2
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (FULL
[2024] TASFC
APPEALED FROM:
[2023] TASSC 15
DELIVERED ON:
HEARING DATE:
2 October 2023
Blow CJ, Porter AJ
Succession – Intestacy and distribution on intestacy – Tasmania -
Meaning of "spouse" under
Intestacy Act 2010
Whether respondent
in significant relationship with intestate at time of his death.
REPRESENTATION
R McTaggart SC
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Butler McIntyre &
Judgment Number:
[2024] TASFC 2
paragraphs:
Serial No 2/2024
File No FCA 1658/2023
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
of the Court:
of Holt AsJ set aside.
Serial No 2/2024
File No FCA 1658/2023
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
appeal concerns the estate of the late HMW. Mr W took his own life on 4
September 2021. He did not leave a will. The respondent,
SRP, lived with him
from 2015 until shortly before his death, but was not married to him. She claims
to be entitled to his estate.
She and the deceased had a child, who was born in
August 2019. The appellant, GFR, is the father of the deceased. He contends that
[the child] is entitled to the whole of the estate.
critical issue in this appeal is whether the respondent was the spouse of the
deceased at the time of his death for the purposes
Intestacy Act
of that Act provides as
A spouse of an intestate is a person –
(a) who was married to the intestate immediately before
the intestate's death; or
(b) who was a party to a registered personal
relationship, within the meaning of the
Relationships Act 2003
the intestate; or
(c) who, immediately before the intestate's death, was
a party to a significant relationship, within the meaning of
Relationships Act 2003
, with the intestate that –
(i) had been in existence for a continuous period
of at least 2 years; or
(ii) had resulted in the birth of a child."
respondent contends that immediately before the death of the deceased he and she
were the parties to a significant relationship
within the meaning of the
Relationships Act
that had resulted in the birth of a child; that
she was therefore his spouse for the purposes of that Act; and that she is
entitled to the whole estate pursuant to
appellant, who contended otherwise, commenced an action seeking a grant of
letters of administration of the estate to himself
and his surviving son for the
benefit of the child. The respondent defended that action. Holt AsJ conducted a
trial of the action
and found for the respondent:
[2023] TASSC
His Honour ordered that letters of administration be granted to the
respondent, saying that she was entitled to the whole of the
estate by reason of
intestacy. This is an appeal from that judgment.
The status of
the appellant
The respondent contends that the appellant, as the father of the deceased, was
not an appropriate person to bring an action seeking
a grant of letters of
administration of his estate. An argument to that effect was advanced in the
proceedings before the learned
associate judge, but his Honour did not rule on
that argument, and based his decision solely on a finding that the significant
relationship
between the deceased and the respondent continued until the death
of the deceased.
Administration and Probate Act
provisions as to the discretion of the Court to grant letters of administration.
That section reads as
Discretion of Court as to
persons to whom administration is to be granted and limitation of grant
In granting letters of administration the Court shall have regard to the
rights of all persons interested in the real and personal
estate of the deceased
person, or the proceeds of sale thereof and, in particular, administration with
the will annexed may be granted
to a devisee or legatee, and any such
administration may be limited in any way the Court thinks fit. Provided that
(a) where the deceased died wholly intestate as to
his real and personal estate, administration shall, if application is made for
that purpose, be granted to some one or more of the persons interested in the
residuary estate of the deceased; and
(b) if, by reason of the insolvency of the estate of
the deceased or of any other special circumstances, it appears to the Court to
be necessary or expedient to appoint as administrator some person other than the
person who, but for this provision, would by law
have been entitled to the grant
of administration, the Court may, in its discretion, notwithstanding anything
contained in
, appoint as administrator such person as it thinks expedient, and
any administration granted under this provision may be limited
in any way the
Court thinks fit."
Probate Rules
contains provisions as to the
priority of persons entitled to apply for letters of administration upon an
intestacy. That sub-rule
reads as follows:
Priority of persons
entitled to apply for letters of administration upon intestacy
(1) Subject to
, the person or persons entitled to apply for letters
of administration upon intestacy are to be determined in accordance with the
following order of priority:
(a) the spouse of the deceased;
(b) a child of the deceased;
(c) the issue of any child of the deceased, if –
(i) the child of the deceased has failed to survive the deceased; and
(ii) the issue is entitled to a share of the deceased's estate taking per
(d) the parents of the deceased;
(e) the brothers and sisters of the deceased, whether or not they have one or
both parents in common;
(f) the issue of any brother or sister of the deceased, if –
(i) the brother or sister has failed to survive the deceased; and
(ii) the issue is entitled to a share of the deceased's estate taking per
(g) the grandparents of the deceased;
(h) the aunts and uncles of the deceased;
(i) the issue of any aunt or uncle of the deceased, if –
(i) the aunt or uncle has failed to survive the deceased; and
(ii) the issue is entitled to a share of the deceased's estate taking per
(j) the State;
(k) the creditors of the deceased."
In r 3(1) of those rules, there is a provision that "spouse" has the same
meaning as in the
Intestacy Act
. If, as she contends, the respondent was
the spouse of the deceased until he died, she was entitled to apply for letters
of administration.
If she was no longer his spouse, it was not open to the child
of the couple to apply for letters of administration because
Administration and Probate Act
empowers the Court to grant letters of
administration only to a person aged 18 years or more.
Rule 19(1)(c)
inapplicable because the deceased did not have any grandchildren. The next class
of persons in order of priority was the parents
of the deceased: r 19(1)(d).
Thus, if the respondent was not the spouse of the deceased at the time of his
death, the individuals
with priority for the purposes of applying for letters of
administration were the appellant and the deceased's mother.
Counsel for the respondent relied on the fact that the appellant did not claim
to have any interest in the estate of the deceased,
even as a creditor. Reliance
was placed on authorities which establish a general rule that contentious
applications in the probate
or claim to have, a right which will be affected by the making or revocation of
a grant of representation:
Gardiner v Hughes
[2017] VSCA 167
, 54 VR 394;
German v Germantsis
[2022] VSCA 157
Nobarani v Mariconte
265 CLR 236
. But this was a case where, if there was no
significant relationship in existence at the date of death, the entire estate
to a child by virtue of
Intestacy Act
. The deceased
was the registered proprietor of some real estate. It was therefore necessary
for somebody to apply for letters of
administration. If, as the appellant
contends, the deceased was not survived by a spouse, the most appropriate
applicants were the
appellant and the deceased's mother, by virtue of r 19(1)(d)
Probate Rules
. If the whole of an intestate estate passes to a
child or children, that may be regarded as a special circumstance rendering it
or expedient to appoint some other person as administrator in
accordance with
Administration and Probate Act
Counsel for the respondent submitted that the only appropriate way for anyone
to dispute her contention that a significant relationship
continued to the date
of death was for proceedings to have been instituted by a litigation guardian on
behalf of the child. Counsel
relied on the decision of the Victorian Court of
German v Germantsis
(above). That concerned the estate of a
testator who made a will in 2013, made a second will in 2018, and then died. He
was survived
by a widow and three sons. The widow was incapacitated as a result
of Alzheimer's disease and dementia. The applicant in the proceedings
of the deceased who had been appointed as the executor of the 2013 will. The
widow was the sole beneficiary under the 2013
will. The applicant lodged a
caveat, seeking to prevent probate of the 2018 will being granted to one of his
brothers. Neither he
nor the widow were beneficiaries under the 2018 will. An
associate judge made an order dismissing the caveat, holding that the applicant
had no right to lodge the caveat on his own behalf since he had no claim to a
beneficial interest under the 2013 will, and that he
had no right to lodge a
caveat on behalf of his mother. The applicant applied for leave to appeal, but
the Court of Appeal refused
leave. At [52] their Honours observed that no
application had been made for the appointment of a litigation guardian to
the interests of the widow, and concluded that there was no basis on
which the applicant could purport to act on behalf of a non-party
purposes of establishing his own standing.
That case related to the validity of the caveat, not a contentious application
for a grant of letters of administration. If the
submissions of counsel for the
respondent are correct, the only appropriate course would have been for a
proceeding to have been
instituted in the name of the child by a litigation
guardian seeking an order that letters of administration be granted to a
In my view such a proceeding would have been unnecessarily
convoluted. Since there was a genuine question as to whether a significant
relationship existed at the time of death, and since the interests of the child
needed to be protected, I see no reason why an action
by the father of the
deceased seeking a grant of letters of administration was not an appropriate
course to take in the circumstances.
If there was no significant relationship at
the relevant time, the only appropriate course was to apply for letters of
administration.
Since there was a controversy as to the existence of a
significant relationship at the relevant time, it was entirely appropriate
the deceased's father to commence contentious proceedings seeking a grant of
letters of administration.
The relationship between the deceased
and the respondent
Relationships Act
does not contain a definition of "significant
relationship", but lists a number of circumstances that are to be taken into
in deciding whether a relationship between two people is a "significant
relationship" or not.
of that Act provides as
Significant relationships
(1) For the purposes of this Act, a significant
relationship is a relationship between two adult persons –
(a) who have a relationship as a couple; and
(b) who are not married to one another or
related by family.
(2) If a significant relationship is registered
, proof of registration is proof of the
relationship.
(3) If a significant relationship is not registered
, in determining whether two persons are in a
significant relationship, all the circumstances of the relationship are to be
into account, including such of the following matters as may be relevant
in a particular case:
(a) the duration of the relationship;
(b) the nature and extent of common
(c) whether or not a sexual relationship
(d) the degree of financial dependence or
interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between the
(e) the ownership, use and acquisition of
(f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared
(g) the care and support of children;
(h) the performance of household duties;
(i) the reputation and public aspects of the
relationship.
(4) No finding in respect of any of the matters
mentioned in subsection (3)(a) to (i) , or in
respect of any combination of them,
is to be regarded as necessary for the
existence of a significant relationship, and a court determining whether such a
relationship
exists is entitled to have regard to such matters, and to attach
such weight to any matter, as may seem appropriate to the court
circumstances of the case."
respondent and the deceased had a relationship as a couple. They were not
married to one another or related by family. Their
relationship was not
registered under
Relationships Act
It is therefore
necessary to consider the circumstances listed in
is uncontroversial evidence that led Holt AsJ to conclude that the parties were
in a "significant relationship" until at least
29 August 2021. On that day the
respondent told the deceased that she had been in a sexual relationship with
another man, and the
deceased then raped her anally. The next morning she took
the child, left the home, and went to stay with her parents. She was still
staying with them when the deceased took his life. The critical question is not
whether a significant relationship had existed, but
whether it still existed
immediately before the death of the deceased. Holt AsJ concluded that it had not
ended at that time.
uncontroversial aspects of the relationship prior to 29 August 2021 can be
summarised as follows:
The parties
lived together in a marriage-like relationship from March 2015, except for one
short separation. The respondent moved
out of the couple's home in late March
2021 but resumed cohabitation after about two months, having obtained some
relationship counselling
from a psychologist.
Initially they
lived together on a property that the deceased had owned since 2008. In 2016
that property was sold and the couple
moved into a flat below the respondent's
parents' home. They lived there for about 12 months rent-free. In late 2016 they
a block of land. Both contributed funds but it was purchased in the
name of the deceased alone. They built a cabin on that land and
started to build
a house, using finance from the Commonwealth Bank. They moved into the cabin in
May 2017, and into the house in
The couple had a
sexual relationship. It is clear from the evidence that each of them expected
the other not to engage in any sexual
activity with anybody else. Until the
final months of their relationship, it appears that it was an exclusive
relationship in that
financially interdependent. They each earned an income. They kept their
finances separate, but each of them contributed
to expenditure for their joint
January 2018 they were engaged to be married.
They both had
responsibility for the care and support of their child. They both hoped to have
a second child.
the autumn of 2021 the respondent had a sexual affair with a male friend. He
was married. The affair lasted about two months.
They kept the affair a secret.
In late July 2021, about three months after the affair ended, the deceased found
out about it. He
found some photographs and a Snapchat message on the
respondent's phone. He confronted her, and she told him that she had had an
"emotional affair" with the man, that it had ended in April 2021, and that she
had found comfort in the emotional support that the
man had provided to her. For
weeks afterwards the deceased was very upset about the respondent's relationship
with the other man.
She was about 7 weeks pregnant when the deceased found out
pregnancy should be terminated, and it was. The deceased asserted that the child
was not his. The respondent has given
unchallenged evidence that the child was
his. The couple decided to stay together and work on their relationship.
the night of Sunday 29 August 2021 the respondent told the deceased the truth
she gave a very
detailed account of the deceased's behaviour on that day prior to that
conversation. It appears that he was very
upset and had been drinking. The
respondent told him that she had had sex with the other man on five occasions,
and told him where
sex had taken place, but refused to give details of any
sexual acts. Their conversation took place when they were both in their bed.
deceased rolled the respondent over so that she was face down and raped her
anally, causing pain and bleeding.
that night the deceased apologised to the respondent. According to her
affidavit they talked civilly for some time, discussing
an amicable separation
and their finances. Before 6am the deceased left the house and went to the home
of the respondent's parents.
Her mother visited her at about 6am. The respondent
packed some things and went with the child to stay at her parents' home.
was five days later that the deceased took his life. During those days he and
the respondent each told a number of people that
their relationship was over.
However there was evidence that the deceased continued to love the respondent,
and that they had a number
of conversations about future arrangements. They
discussed property and financial arrangements and arrangements relating to the
There was also some talk about the possibility of the respondent
returning to the deceased.
learned associate judge gave detailed consideration to the evidence as to the
conduct of the couple from 29 August 2021 until
the death of the deceased. He
considered whether the deceased had ended the relationship by the time of his
death, examined the
relevant evidence, and concluded, at [31], that he had not.
He then considered whether the respondent had ended the relationship,
the evidence as to her conduct, and concluded, at [36], that that had not been
established.
Evidence relied on by the appellant
The appellant contends that the deceased and the respondent ceased to be in a
significant relationship prior to the death of the
deceased. He relies on some
notes written by the deceased on his computer prior to his suicide, text
messages exchanged between him
and the respondent, and the evidence of several
The deceased typed a five-page document that began with a history of the
couple's relationship. The second line of that document
read, "Started January
2015, Ended 29 August 2021". On the third page, he typed a detailed summary of
the conversation of 28 July
2021, beginning with, "Infidelity confirmed 28-7-21
by checking of messages and nude photos on ... Snapchat...". On the fourth page,
there is a detailed list of the respondent's "admissions" in relation to the
relationship with the other man.
The fifth page contains messages to the respondent, their child, and the
deceased's family and friends. The wording indicates that
he was thinking of
committing suicide and expecting that those messages would be read after his
death. To the respondent he wrote
the following:
"..., you were my
rock, one I was proud of to call you mine.
Please know I will love you for ever and always no matter what. You were an
amazing partner, fiancé, and mother.
This life was for us. Our future was supposed to start now.
Im forever sorry for any hurt I have caused you. You really do deserve
The appellant relies on evidence from a friend of the respondent named TMR. The
respondent sent a text message to her and another
close friend on Monday 30
August 2021 at 10.38am saying, "Just to let you guys know [HMW] and I are over.
I've moved out." In reply
to a question about what had happened, the respondent
wrote, "The truth I don’t want to talk about it. It's fucked. I hate
In her affidavit TMR gave evidence of a discussion with the respondent two days
later, on Wednesday, 1 September. She said that
the respondent described the
separation as "very definite, very permanent". She said that the respondent said
that she had packed
up and moved all of her things, and had left engagement ring
behind. She said that she wanted her son to have all of his things "to
separation less impactful on him". She discussed what assets and child support
she would be receiving, and said that she
and the deceased had discussed "the
financial side of their separation".
TMR described a conversation with the deceased that occurred on the following
day, Thursday, 2 September. She said that he described
the discussions he had
with the respondent about their financial separation, and that what he said
aligned perfectly with what the
respondent had told her. She said that she asked
the deceased, "Where are you now with the relationship, can you get over this?"
She said he replied, "She's done too much. I will never be able to forgive her,
there is no coming back from this, the relationship
A friend of the couple named MNS also swore an affidavit. She had a
conversation with the deceased on Monday, 30 August. He gave
her details of the
respondent's sexual relationship with her lover. MNS said that he appeared
shattered and lost, and was crying.
MNS had a conversation with the respondent on Thursday, 2 September. She said
that the respondent told her that the couple had separated,
that she had moved
back into her parents' home with their child, that they were organising shared
care of him, that she knew that
the deceased "was done with the relationship",
and that she had had a discussion with the deceased on the Monday morning about
including child support.
She described a conversation with the deceased on Friday, 3 September, the day
before he committed suicide. According to her affidavit,
the deceased discussed
custody, access and handover arrangements, as well as financial arrangements.
MNS said that he spoke about
the impact of the end of the relationship on family
and friends, that he told her about several mutual friends who had said that
they wanted nothing to do with the respondent because of what she had done, and
said, "He spoke about her
having thrown away what they had. He said their relationship had been reduced to
nothing. He said that
he had lost his family." Recordings of MNS conversations
with the deceased on 30 August and 3 September were in evidence.
In one of his affidavits, the appellant described a conversation with his son
on 3 September 2021. According to that affidavit the
deceased said that he and
the respondent were "done", that he felt totally humiliated and ashamed by her
admissions, that his relationship
with her was beyond repair, that he could not
trust her, and that he could not have her back after the affair, lies and deceit
she had inflicted on him and their son.
The deceased's mother swore an affidavit in which she described a conversation
with him on Monday, 30 August. According to that
affidavit, the deceased told
his mother that he told the respondent in the early hours of the Monday morning
that she had to go.
She said that on Thursday, 3 September he spoke to her by phone and said that
he had told someone at his work that his "Mrs and
kid" had left him, and that
that was all they needed to know.
This witness went on to describe a visit by the deceased over several hours on
the evening of Thursday, 2 September. She said that
he spoke about imagining
life as a single father, borrowing a sum of money that the respondent wanted,
finding weekly maintenance
money for the child, sharing custody of him 50/50,
and a plan by the respondent to move in with the other man. She reported that
said words to effect of, "I feel like I have been traded in."
A witness named NRS gave evidence of a phone conversation with the deceased on
the evening of Monday, 30 August. She said that he
said words to the effect that
his relationship with the respondent was "done over for good". She said the
deceased visited her for
a financial settlement, child support, and 50/50 custody.
The respondent's cousin HRL deposed to receiving a text message from the
deceased on Wednesday, 1 September about the relationship,
saying, "It's
obviously way beyond repair".
A friend of the deceased named YCR deposed to three conversations with him
during the last week of his life. His evidence of those
conversations was to the
following effect. On Monday, 30 August they talked in his car, and the deceased
confirmed that the couple's
relationship was over. On Tuesday, 31 August during
a period of some hours, the deceased said on multiple occasions that the
relationship
was over, said that the respondent was planning to start a new life
and family with the other man, discussed property settlement
and child support,
and stated that the respondent had given back the engagement ring. On Tuesday,
31 August he asked the deceased
if there was any chance of the couple sorting
out their relationship, to which he said, "No, we are done."
The appellant relied on a chain of text messages between the respondent and a
man named Stuart Hill. On Wednesday, 1 September she
sent messages that included
the following:
"Be there for
[HMW]. I hate that I have hurt him. But I will always make sure he has [the
child] as much as possible".
"I sacrificed
just as much as he did to now end up with nothing. That's been really
A witness named MMN deposed to four conversations with the deceased during the
last week of his life. His evidence was to the following
effect. On Monday, 30
August the deceased said that he and the respondent were "done", talked about
property settlement and child
maintenance, and talked about the respondent
starting to plan her future with the other man. The deceased spoke of the return
the engagement ring and said that confirmed to him that their relationship
was over. MMN visited the deceased on Monday, 30 August
and observed that all
the photos of the respondent had been removed from the walls and turned face
down. On Thursday, 2 September
he saw the deceased, who told him that he and the
respondent were "both in agreement that their relationship was now over for good
and neither of them had any desire to change that". The deceased told him that
the respondent had "checked out months ago" from their
relationship. He saw the
deceased again briefly on 3 September. There was no suggestion at that time that
the deceased's opinion
had changed as to the relationship being over.
A friend of the deceased named UGD swore an affidavit containing evidence to
the following effect. He visited the deceased on the
night of Tuesday, 31 August
and spent some hours with him. During that visit the deceased told him and
others that the respondent
had moved out, taking their child and their dog, and
had moved to her parents' place, that her father had been removing her stuff
from their home, and that she had had an affair, naming the other man. He did
not say anything to suggest that there was any chance
of them getting back
together. The deceased visited him on the evening of Friday, 3 September. He
spoke in detail about the respondent's
affair. He spoke about his future,
speaking in general about plans for his life after his life with the respondent,
his concern for
the child having to grow up in a broken family, and his concern
for how the ending of his relationship with the respondent would
impact on other
The evidence that I have referred to as to what the deceased said and wrote
after 29 August 2021 was unchallenged and uncontradicted.
Evidence relied on by the respondent
The respondent contends that, whilst there were occasions after 29 August 2021
when she and the deceased each made statements to
the effect that their
relationship was over, neither of them had permanently decided not to remain in
the relationship, and their
actions had not been sufficient to sever the
significant relationship.
The respondent swore an affidavit for the purpose of the trial and was
cross-examined. Her counsel relied on evidence from her to
the following
In her affidavit
she said that the main reason she left the house on the morning of 30 August was
the threat of violence from the
deceased and "his unstable mental state".
Although various
items belonging to the child were taken by the respondent to her parents' house
and made available by the deceased
for collection, there were other items that
remained at the couple's home, including household effects, furniture, the
respondent's
bicycle, and diving gear.
On 31 August the
deceased sent the respondent a text message reading, "Why are you leaving your
engagement ring? Dont you like it?"
The respondent replied, "I love it. But I
dont deserve it".
The respondent
and the deceased remained on speaking terms after 30 August. On Tuesday, 31
August the deceased sent the respondent
a message asking to see the child. She
took the child to the house at 10am. The deceased pinned her to the wall by her
and yelled at her angrily. She decided to de-escalate his emotions.
After a while he calmed down. She left at about lunchtime, leaving
with the deceased. It was at that time that she took off her engagement ring and
left it. She returned to collect the child
at 4pm. The deceased was crying. She
tried to calm him down by cuddling him, kissing him, and telling him that it
would all be okay.
He asked whether she would move back home with the child so
that they could be a family again. She replied that "we will work towards
but first, we needed to get him help and into rehab, and then we would consider
moving back in". On Wednesday, 1 September
the deceased came to the respondent's
parents' place, collected the child, and looked after him overnight. By
arrangement the respondent
collected the child on Thursday, 2 September at 5am.
The deceased got up, held her hand, walked with her to the living room, and
cried. She told the deceased "that we were not going to do anything with our
finances yet because things might work out between us
in time, and we could
continue with our relationship". He held her, and gave her a big hug and "a real
kiss". He said that he loved
her and the child very much. She brought the child
the deceased possibly seeing a psychologist or general practitioner. Later the
respondent phoned the deceased and told him that she
had spoken to a general
practitioner who was his sister-in-law. After that the respondent ceased direct
at the request of his mother.
The respondent
and the deceased had discussions about financial arrangements during the days in
question. Neither took any steps to
alter their financial or property
arrangements. In her affidavit the respondent said that she and the deceased
"did have discussions
decided during that last week that we would first try to get him help and there
was still a chance we would continue with our relationship".
The respondent
ensured that the deceased had time with the child. Apart from the daytime visit
on 31 August and the overnight visit
of 1 September, they spent the day together
on 3 September. There was an arrangement for the deceased to see the child on
the afternoon
of 4 September, but he did not arrive.
Although the deceased and the respondent each had discussions with lawyers
during the last week of the deceased's life, those discussions
appear to have
been preliminary discussions. The only evidence as to the deceased seeing a
lawyer came from MNS. She said that the
deceased had received advice not to
complete the house because a lower value would mean that the respondent would
get less. The respondent
spoke to a lawyer who was a friend of her brother on
Wednesday, 1 September. In an affidavit, that lawyer said that the respondent
told her that property advice "may be unnecessary anyway if they stay together".
In oral evidence, the lawyer said that she said
explained to the respondent how
arrangements for the child would work "if they were to fully separate". The
respondent told this
lawyer that the deceased had raped her, and the possibility
of going to the police was discussed. The lawyer said in her affidavit
respondent was "quite reluctant about this and she said that she would not
pursue this at the current time". The respondent
did not formally engage the
lawyer to act for her.
Counsel for the respondent submitted that she and the deceased "were reeling
from the events of the night of 29/30 August 2021";
that those events caused
them to question the future of their relationship, to take steps to give each
other space, and to gather
information about the legal and financial
ramifications of a permanent separation; but that none of those steps were
sufficient to
sever the persistence of the indicia of their longstanding
significant relationship.
Cessation of significant
relationships
Counsel for the appellant relied on a number of decisions of appellate courts
in other States in relation to the cessation of de
facto relationships. In
Hibberson v George
[1989] NSWCA 100
(1989) 12 FamLR 725
, the New South Wales Court of
Appeal had to decide whether a couple's de facto relationship was subsisting
De Facto Relationships Act
(NSW) commenced on 1 July 1985.
The defendant gave evidence that she left the couple's home with their two
children on 21 May 1985
and went to stay with her brother as she wanted time to
work things out and to think about her relationship away from the plaintiff.
Court held that the de facto relationship had ceased before the 1984 Act
commenced. Mahoney JA, with whom Hope and McHugh JJA
agreed, said the following
"There is, of course, more to the relevant relationship than
living in the same house. But there is, I think, a significant distinction
between the relationship of marriage and the instant relationship. The
relationship of marriage, being based in law, continues notwithstanding
of the things for which it was created have ceased. Parties will live in the
relationship of marriage notwithstanding that
they are separated, without
children, and without the exchange of the incidents which the relationship
normally involves. The essence
of the present relationship lies, not in law, but
in a de facto situation. I do not mean by this that cohabitation is essential to
its continuance: holidays and the like show this. But where one party determines
not to 'live together' with the other and in that
sense keeps apart, the
relationship ceases, even though it be merely, as it was suggested in the
present case, to enable the one
party or the other to decide whether it should
That paragraph was cited with approval by Dutney J, with whom McPherson and
Williams JJA agreed, in
[2004] QCA 449
[2005] 1 QdR 537
That case concerned an issue as to whether a couple were in a de facto
relationship when Part 19 of the
Property Law Act
1975 (Qld) commenced on
21 December 1999. The Queensland Court of Appeal held that the relationship had
deteriorated to such an extent
by the critical date that it was not then a de
facto relationship, even though one party wished it to continue. Dutney J said
following at [48]:
"Applying the passage of Mahoney JA
Hibberson v George
, which I set out earlier, a de facto
relationship ends when one party decides he or she no longer wishes to live in
the required
degree of mutuality with the other but to live apart. It does not
seem to me that it is necessary to communicate this intention to
the other party
providing the party that is desirous of ending the relationship acts on his or
her decision. I do not think it is
necessary that the other party agree with or
accept the decision. Once the parties cease to jointly wish to reside together
genuine domestic relationship, a situation usually ascertained by looking
objectively at the whole circumstances of the relationship,
the de facto
relationship ceases. The relationship ceases even though one party is still
anxious to try to save it."
Brett J referred to the judgment of Mahoney JA in
Hibberson v George
the judgment of Dutney J in
Brownell v Robinson
, saying this:
"The point being made by their
Honours is that a de facto relationship will depend for its existence on the
mutual consent of both
parties to be in that relationship. When that consent is
withdrawn by one party, the necessary element of mutuality is destroyed,
hence the relationship is no longer in existence. It is not the fact of
separation per se which is important, it is whether that
separation manifests an
intention on the part of one party to end the relationship, thereby withdrawing
the necessary consent required
for the existence of the relationship. In the
case of a marriage or a registered relationship, the relationship will continue
operation of law irrespective of the withdrawal of consent."
That case concerned a dispute as to whether a couple had been in a significant
relationship for a continuous period of two years
immediately before one of them
dying. They maintained separate households, but that was because the male was a
hoarder and the female
would have found life in the same house intolerable.
There had been periods when they had arguments and temporarily ceased speaking
to one another. Brett J held, at [55], that those separations could not be taken
to have manifested an intention to bring the relationship
to an end. An appeal
to the Full Court from his Honour's decision was unsuccessful:
[2017] TASFC 11.
Hibberson v George
both concerned legislation
in other States applying to "de facto relationships", whereas the concept of a
significant relationship
Relationships Act
is a somewhat wider
and more flexible concept. A significant relationship can be a homosexual
relationship, or a relationship between
two people who do not live together as
if they were husband and wife in a stereotypical marriage:
Wiggins v Public
[2020] TASFC 13
Counsel for the respondent submitted, correctly, that it is necessary to look
at all aspects of the couple's relationship in order
to determine whether a
significant relationship was subsisting at the critical time. He relied on a
comment of Williams JA in
at [9] as authority for the proposition
that the circumstances will dictate what is needed to establish a cessation of a
relationship.
He argued that it was implicit in the remarks of Dutney J in
that the formation of an intention to end a relationship was not itself
sufficient to bring the relationship to an end, but that
the party wishing to
end the relationship must act on that intention. That submission appears to have
been misconceived. In that
case the parties were living under the same roof in a
house that was divided into two self-contained sections, each with a separate
kitchen, separate living areas, a separate telephone service, a separate street
number, and a separate letter box. The relationship
had deteriorated as a result
of Mr S having a problem with erectile dysfunction, and as a result of him
denouncing Ms B as fat and
blaming the cessation of sexual activity on her
fatness. The couple had argued about the need to visit a psychologist to try to
their relationship. The end of the relationship appears to have been the
result of hostility, not action.
Had the significant
relationship ended?
It is clear from the evidence that, following the departure of the respondent
from the couple's home on the morning of 30 August
2021, the state of the
relationship was as follows:
They had been
together for about six years, but the relationship had been shaken by infidelity
and a rape.
They were no
longer sharing a common residence.
relationship had ended with the rape.
The couple had
always kept their finances separate. New arrangements were being planned by both
of them on the basis that they would
be living separately.
Both parties
contemplated a settlement whereby the deceased would pay the respondent money
and remain the sole registered proprietor
of the property where they had been
Reconciliation
remained a possibility, but neither party remained committed to a shared
Both parties
remained committed to the care and support of their child, but were planning
arrangements for the future based on them
living in two separate
households.
The sharing of
household duties had ceased.
Both parties had
told family members and friends that the relationship was done, finished or
over. The respondent was no longer wearing
the engagement ring, and had given it
It remained
possible that the respondent might report the rape to the police, and that the
deceased could go to prison as a result.
The respondent
had shown some degree of compassion towards the deceased as a result of him
being terribly emotionally upset. To a
degree she blamed herself for causing his
emotional problems by having been unfaithful to him.
The deceased
still loved the respondent but regarded her conduct as
unforgivable.
Having regard to those facts and circumstances, I am satisfied that the
significant relationship that existed between the deceased
and the respondent
ceased no later than the time when she returned to her parents' home on the
morning of 30 August 2021. The learned
associate judge erred in making a finding
that it was subsisting immediately before the death of the deceased, after
inviting further
submissions.
For these reasons I would allow the appeal, set aside the orders of Holt AsJ,
and make an order for letters of administration to
be granted to one or more
appropriate administrators.
Such orders might not bring an end to this litigation. It is possible that the
respondent will wish to claim damages for battery,
claim that she has an
equitable interest in the real estate of which the deceased was the registered
proprietor, and possibly pursue
a claim under the
Testator's Family
Maintenance Act
. If she chooses to pursue any or all of such claims, it
would be highly desirable for them to be resolved by mediation.
File No FCA 1658/2023
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
agree with the Chief Justice.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (198 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter