URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASGAB/2021/29.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SBE (Review of Administration) [2021] TASGAB 29 (24 May 2021)
SBE (Review of Administration)
[2021] TASGAB 29
HEARING DATE(S):
24 May 2021
DATE OF ORDERS:
24 May 2021
DATE OF STATEMENT OF REASONS:
16 June 2021
Mr A Mihal, Member
APPLICATION
Review of Administration
CATCHWORDS:
Statutory review of administration; variation of administration
order; unexplained accumulation of cash; promotion of represented
best interests; failure to consult with represented person; obligation to
actively manage estate; lack of evidence
of wishes of represented person; least
restrictive means; limited order allowing represented person to manage part
estate; plan for
administration of estate ordered
LEGISLATION CITED:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
CASES CITED:
T (Administration)
[2003] TASGAB 1
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication
STATEMENT OF REASONS
1. By an Application dated 15 April 2021, the Public
Trustee applied for a review of an Order made on 3 June 2016 under which it was
appointed as Administrator for SBE until 2 June 2021.
2. SBE is a 73 year old man who lives with his brother. He owns a third
share of his home in Ravenswood and is in receipt of the
aged pension. As at 31
March 2021, his estate included around $86,000.00 of cash, which increased by
around $9,000.00 in the preceding
eleven months. SBE’s sister assists him
and his brother with ‘budgeting and shopping’. The Public Trustee
been the administrator of his estate since 2002.
3. The Applicant sought the further continuation of the Order.
4. The Board found that the requirements of section 51 of the
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1995
(‘the Act’) were still satisfied in
relation to SBE and that the continuation of an Administration Order was
with the principles of section 6 of the Act.
5. The Board found that a variation of the order was warranted to allow SBE
to continue to manage part of his pension income, in order
SBE’s freedom of decision and action.
6. There was limited evidence concerning the promotion of SBE’s best
interest given the accumulation of assets and lack of expenditure
estate during the life of the order and no evidence as to SBE’s wishes in
respect of the order or the administration
of his estate. Accordingly the Board
determined to vary the order to include conditions addressing those matters.
7. The Board determined that the varied order would continue for a period of
six months to allow the Public Trustee time to consider
its obligations under
sections 6 and 57 of the Act and ensure it is in compliance with the same, and
to ensure the Board retains
8. The Public Trustee requested a written statement of reasons from the Board
on 11 June 2021.
9. The Board heard the Application on 24 May 2021.
The Application was represented by Ms Lauren Harvey who appeared by telephone.
SBE did not appear before the Board, nor did anyone else.
10. Ms Harvey could not add much evidence specifically about SBE in addition
to the documentary evidence because she was not the person
responsible for the
day to day administration of SBE’s estate (called the ‘account
manager’ by the Applicant),
which is no criticism of her personally. The
account manager was Ms Glenda Hohl who prepared a short report to which she
a statutory declaration verifying two pages of a statement of accounts
for the estate for the period 1 June 2020 to 31 March 2021
and a one page
statement of assets and liabilities as at 31 March 2021. Those documents were
put in evidence at the hearing.
11. Further documents that the Board considered were a copy of the
Administration Order under review, the written Application and
a Health Care
Professional Report (‘HCPR’) prepared by Dr Teck Teh, SBE’s
general practitioner.
Legislation
12. Section
67 of the Act provides for hearings to review Orders on application by, or on
behalf of a represented person or any other
13. Section 68 of the Act provides for the making of an Order as follows:
(1) On a review under
Board may vary or continue a guardianship order or administration order subject
to any conditions or requirements it considers
necessary or the Board may
revoke the order.
(2) The Board may make such further orders as it considers necessary in order
to give effect to an order made under subsection
14. In exercising the powers on a review, the Board must observe the
principles in section 6 of the Act, which are:
A function or power conferred, or duty imposed, by this Act is to be
performed so that –
(a) the means which is the
least restrictive of the proposed represented person's freedom of decision and
action as is possible in
the circumstances is adopted;
(b) the best interests of the proposed represented person are promoted; and
(c) the wishes of the proposed represented person are, if possible, carried into
15. On a review of an order appointing an administrator, the Board must
consider if the legislative requirements for making the appointment
can still be
met. In order to appoint an administrator, the Board must again observe the
principles in section 6 of the Act, and
needs to be satisfied, in accordance
with section 51 of the Act, that the proposed represented person, in this case
(a) is a person with a disability;
(b) is unable by reason of the disability to make reasonable judgements in
respect of all or any matters relating to all of part of
his estate, and
(c) is in need of an administrator of her estate.
16. Section 54 of the Act provides that the Board may appoint the Public
Trustee as an administrator.
17. In exercising its powers as administrator, the Public Trustee is required
to observe the principles in section 6 of the Act.
It must also comply with
section 57 of the action, which is as follows:
57. Exercise of power by administrator
(1) An administrator must act at all times in
the best interests of the represented person.
(2) Without limiting
, an administrator acts in the best interests of the represented
person if the administrator acts as far as possible –
(a) in such a way as to encourage and assist
the represented person to become capable of administering his or her estate;
(b) in consultation with the represented
person, taking into account as far as possible the wishes of the represented
T (Administration)
[2003] TASGAB 1
, the Board has
previously observed that:
Resulting from an order under section 54, an
administrator has specific instructions for the performance of his or her duty
57(2). These instructions are aimed at encouraging self-reliance
in the represented person and enabling consultation between administrator
represented person in all decisions.
Evidence of Disability and Incapacity
19. The opinion expressed in the HCPR was as follows. SBE has a mild
intellectual disability, which has been evident since childhood
and is static.
By reason of the disability, SBE has deficits in expressive communication,
receptive communication, planning and reasoning
skills and impulse control. The
disability affects SBE’s capacity to make reasonable judgements about day
to day financial
requirements, complex legal and financial decisions, legal
matters, where to live, medical treatment and healthcare, and what support
services he should access.
20. The HCPR writer relied on his ‘overall impression in monthly
interactions over the last four years as well as his medical
records which
clearly attest to his intellectual disability’. Those records were not
before the Board.
Evidence as to the Estate and its Management
21. Ms Hohl’s report, the statement of accounts and statement of assets
and liabilities showed that SBE’s estate consisted
of a third share in his
2021, cash of around $86,000.00,
most of which was invested in the Public
Trustee number 2 fund.
22. SBE’s expenditure in the eleven months between 1 June 2020 and 31
March 2021 amounted to around $17,000.00, including $1,100.00
on property
expenses, $592.58 on insurance and $1,100.00 on utilities, which were expenses
that SBE shared, presumably with his brother.
The sum of $1,855.04 was paid to
the Public Trustee for fees and commission. The balance was simply described as
‘allowances
and maintenance’, which included the $450.00 per
fortnight paid directly to SBE by the Public Trustee.
23. SBE’s income between 1 June 2020 and 31 March 2021 was from the
aged pension of around $22,000.00 and interest on securities
and investments of
around $4,000.00.
24. Ms Hohl’s report indicated that the Public Trustee paid SBE $450.00
per fortnight from his estate, which it called ‘an
allowance’.
SBE’s sister has told Ms Hohl that SBE spent those funds mostly on
tobacco, leaving ‘little for groceries
and incidentals’. The Public
Trustee recently ‘agreed to pay’ an additional $250.00 per fortnight
for that purpose,
but it was not clear to whom those funds were paid.
25. There was no other evidence as to how SBE spent his
‘allowance’ and Ms Harvey’s evidence was that once the Public
Trustee determines to pay an allowance to a represented person, the spending of
the allowance is left entirely to the represented
person’s discretion
without ‘looking for receipts’.
26. When the Board foreshadowed varying the order to allow SBE to manage
$450.00 per fortnight from his aged pension, Ms Harvey agreed
that such an order
would be appropriate, although ‘not usual’.
27. There was no evidence as to why it was in SBE’s best interest that
so much of his income in the eleven months before 31
March 2021 was not spent
nor as to why it was in SBE’s best interest that cash was allowed to
continue to accumulate in his
estate. There was no evidence as to his lifestyle
other than that he lived simply, nor as to whether or not additional spending
from his estate could improve his lifestyle.
28. When asked if there was a plan to expend more of SBE’s funds for
his benefit in view of his advancing age, Ms Harvey said,
The funds [SBE] has got here are for his quality of life... to insure he gets
the best quality of life that he can and he is doing
the things he needs to do
and he is enjoying it. There is no reason for us to be building it up but if
there is no need for him
or no additional requests we don’t go chasing up
the family saying here you need to spend some more funds.
29. Ms Hohl’s report did not disclose that she has had any direct
the management of his
estate. She wrote that SBE’s sister, ‘contacts Public Trustee to
request additional funds, which
is not very often’.
30. The Board found on the basis of the medical
evidence contained in the HCPR that SBE is a person with a mild intellectual
which is static. The Board also found that by reason of that
disability, SBE is unable to make reasonable judgements in respect
related to his estate including day to day financial matters except to the
extent that he is currently managing those
matters, and decisions in respect of
the management of his not insignificant savings.
31. Taking into account the evidence about the extent of SBE’s estate
and the considerations set out in subsections 51(2) and
(3) of the Act, the
Board was satisfied in all the circumstances that the need for the appointment
of an administrator of SBE’s
estate continues. In particular, SBE has
invested funds which require management, has living expenses and utilities to be
has a one third part ownership in a real property and is in receipt of a
pension which needs to be managed.
32. The means least restrictive of SBE’s freedom of decision and action
is to allow him to continue to manage the $450.00 per
fortnight that the Public
Trustee is currently allowing him to manage informally without any oversight.
If he is spending those
funds mainly on tobacco, that would indicate a likely
packet a day habit or less, which if he wishes to smoke, does not seem
unreasonable.
33. The Board was concerned about the lack of evidence about how the Public
Trustee is discharging its obligations under section 57
of the Act. The Public
Trustee is required to consider and act in the best interests of SBE at all
times, and not just when its
account manager hears from a support person for
34. Acting in SBE’s best interests not only includes ensuring that he
receives maximum income entitlements, that assets are
prudently managed and
debts and expenses are responsibly controlled. There is also an obligation to
actively ensure income and accumulated
funds are being expended to improve
SBE’s quality and enjoyment of life. It appears on the limited available
evidence that
SBE’s basic needs are being met but no more, and instead
funds are being allowed to accumulate by default.
35. There should be a proper plan to expend those funds appropriately for
SBE’s benefit having regard to his life expectancy,
noting his advancing
years, or a positive decision made to allow funds to accumulate if that is in
fact in SBE’s best interests.
It may be that SBE’s wishes are to
ensure that he leaves a substantial legacy for the beneficiaries of his estate
dies, and that he wishes to maintain his current lifestyle to allow
that to happen. It may be that an amount should be held back
contingencies.
36. If there is no direct communication between the Public Trustee’s
account manager and SBE, it is difficult to see how the
Public Trustee could be
discharging its obligation to act in consultation with SBE and to take his
wishes into account in relation
to the administration of his estate, and thereby
acting in his best interests. The Public Trustee should instigate regular
communication
with SBE that would allow the Public Trustee to understand
SBE’s wishes, particularly as to expenditure that might improve
quality of life.
37. Finally, the administrator has a positive obligation to encourage and
assist SBE to become capable of administering his own estate.
SBE has a mild
intellectual disability. There may be significant steps that the Public Trustee
could undertake to improve SBE’s
capacity to manage his own estate in
furtherance of his best interests, and freedom of decision making and action.
Those formulating
a plan for the administration of SBE’s estate must
consider such steps.
38. Accordingly, the Board orders that:
1. The Administration Order for SBE made on 3 June 2016 has been reviewed and
varied and from this day the Order is:
Public Trustee (Tas) is appointed as Administrator of the estate of SBE.
may continue to be responsible for $450.00 of his pension entitlement each
fortnight including any matters relating to the review,
management or
expenditure of that amount.
2. The Administrator is to prepare and submit to the Board before the expiry
of this Order, a plan for the administration of the estate
of SBE which includes
greater expenditure to promote the represented person’s best interests,
having regard to the represented
person’s life expectancy and the
retention of an appropriate sum to allow for contingencies or an explanation as
is not in SBE’s best interest to increase the expenditure from
his estate.
3. The Administrator is to submit to the Board on any further Application for
the review of this Order, evidence of SBE’s wishes
Administration of his estate.
4. This Order remains in effect until 23 November 2021.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (149 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter