URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASSC/2025/61.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:21:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Director of Public Prosecutions v Woods [2025] TASSC 61 (17 October 2025)
[2025] TASSC 61
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA
of Public Prosecutions v Woods
[2025] TASSC
: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
WOODS, Keith
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
26 September
JUDGMENT OF:
Criminal Law – Sentence – Post-custodial orders – Other
Application for
high risk offender order – Respondent sentenced to 3-year custodial term
– Earliest release date 20 October
2025 – Long history of family
violence offending- mental health and addiction issues – Respondent would
be denied the
support he needs and his re-integration with the community would
be put at significant risk in absence of order – Respondent
unacceptable risk of committing another serious offence unless a high risk
offender order is made – Order made.
Aust Dig Criminal Law [3425]
Legislation:
Dangerous Criminals and High-Risk Offenders Act
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Office of Director of
Public Prosecutions
Respondent:
Tasmania Legal
Judgment Number:
[2025] TASSC 61
paragraphs:
Serial No 61/2025
File No 728/2025
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS v KEITH WAYNE
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT JAGO J
17 October 2025
Director of Public Prosecutions, by application made 21 August 2025, applies for
a High Risk Offender Order in respect of the
respondent, Keith Wayne Woods, who
is aged 33.
The application is made pursuant to
Dangerous Criminals and
High Risk Offenders Act 2021
The application is made whilst Mr Woods is
serving a custodial sentence for the crimes of Criminal Code assault and
wounding, both
of which are serious offences within the meaning of the Act. Mr
Woods is due for release on 20 October 2025. The respondent is
therefore a
relevant offender as he has attained the age of 18 years and has been convicted
of a serious offence and is currently
serving a custodial sentence for that
serious offence as at the time the application is made.
I may only make a High Risk Offender Order in relation to Mr Woods if I am
satisfied to a high degree of probability that the offender
unacceptable risk of committing another serious offence unless a High Risk
Offender Order is made: s 35(2).
Section 36 of the Act provides for the matters to be considered in determining
whether to make a High Risk Offender Order. The
safety of the community is the
paramount consideration in determining in whether to make such an order: s
36(1). Further, I must
have regard to the matters satisfied in s 36(2). To
that end, I have considered a behaviour and management report, prepared by the
High Risk Offender's Assessment Committee, and dated 22 May 2025. I have also
considered an addendum High Risk Offender Order report,
prepared by Community
Corrections and dated 24 September 2025. I have considered a Risk Assessment
Report, prepared by Dr Georgina
O'Donnell and dated 19 August 2025. I have also
considered the respondent's record of prior convictions and, in particular, have
had reference to Comments on Passing Sentence, dated 5 February 2018. These
were sentencing comments of Pearce J in respect to one
count of Criminal Code
assault. It was a family violence crime committed on 7 June 2016. I have also
had regard to Comments on
Passing Sentence of myself, dated 22 January 2024,
where I sentenced Mr Woods for the crime of Criminal Code assault and wounding.
These crimes were also committed in a family violence context.
My consideration of this material satisfies me as to the following:
The respondent
is 33 years of age. He has been in and out of custody since the age of 12.
Many of his offences as a youth were for
matters of dishonesty and offences
against good order. They included offences against police.
Since 2010, the
respondent has been convicted of numerous counts of common assault,
predominately in a family violence context.
Since 2015, he
has been sentenced to terms of imprisonment of increasing severity for violent
offending, predominately offences of
common assault.
In particular, I
note in February 2015, he was sentenced to six months' imprisonment, three
months of which was suspended for three
counts of common assault, two counts of
breach of interim family violence order, and one count of breach police family
violence order.
In 2016, the suspended portion of that period of imprisonment
was activated following further violent offending, which included
police office, resist a police officer and use abusive language to a police
officer. In September 2016, he was again sentenced
to a period of imprisonment
for the offence of common assault.
In February
2018, he was convicted in the Burnie Supreme Court of the crime of Criminal Code
assault and sentenced to one year and
three months' imprisonment. That sentence
of imprisonment was wholly suspended. That crime occurred in a family violence
He later breached the terms of that suspended sentence by re-offending,
including by further assaulting the same complainant. The
sentence was
activated on 22 May 2018.
In 2019, he was
again sentenced to a period of imprisonment for a matter of common assault.
This offence was committed against another
prison whilst he was in custody.
Additionally, the respondent has been convicted of numerous counts of breaching
the terms of family
violence order.
In August 2021,
the respondent was sentenced to nine months' imprisonment, four months of which
was suspended for six counts of common
assault and various other offences.
Several of these counts also occurred in a family violence context. The
four-month portion
of that sentence, which was suspended, was subsequently
activated in October 2021, following the respondent's conviction for several
counts of breaching family violence orders and breaching bail, amongst other
It would be fair to say the respondent has a terrible history for offending
generally, and a particularly poor history for violent
offending in a family
violence context.
I take into account the respondent's personal circumstances. There is no
question he has had a very disadvantaged childhood. He
was taken into
departmental care at the age of 12 because of neglect and violence within his
family home. Once in departmental care,
he was subject to further abuse and
violence. The respondent commenced using illicit drugs at about the age of
eight, and drug addiction
has been an ongoing difficulty for all of his life.
The respondent has experienced significant difficulties with homelessness.
has been exacerbated by his history of being regularly incarcerated. An
evaluation of his record of prior convictions reveals
that since 2015, the
respondent has been constantly incarcerated, save for a period of about four and
a half years.
The respondent suffers from Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, Bi-polar
disorder and has an intellectual disability. He
receives NDIS support.
The behavioural and management reports indicate that upon the respondent
arriving in custody in October 2022, he displayed a poor
attitude and his
behaviour was dysregulated. That necessitated him being housed in maximum
security. Over time, however, his behaviour
has settled and since May 2024, he
has been housed in minimum security.
The respondent has completed some programmes whilst incarcerated. In May 2023,
he completed the Resilience Programme. In July
2023, he was offered the
opportunity to participate in the Family Violence Offender Programme but failed
to attend the appointments
and was thereafter removed from the programme. He
has also participated in some alcohol and drug counselling.
The respondent has held various employment positions whilst incarcerated, but
many of them have been terminated as a consequence
of poor performance or
disciplinary charges.
A level of service/case management inventory was conducted in respect to Mr
Woods in June 2024. This is an assessment that measures
the risk and need
factors of adult offenders. The respondent was assessed as requiring a very
high level of intervention.
The report also indicates the respondent has been subject to various community
correction orders since 2011. The respondent has
frequently re-offended whilst
subject to community-based orders. This includes a drug treatment order for
which he was sentenced
in August 2011, but it was cancelled due to
non-compliance. Whilst working with Community Corrections, the respondent has
expressed his reluctance to engage in programmes directed at addressing
his risks and needs.
The report indicates the respondent is considered at high risk of committing
further family violence, given his past history and
his apparent unwillingness
to commit to engaging in programmes that might address the issues which underly
his offending.
I note the addendum behaviour and management report attaches an occupational
therapy report, which provides information pertaining
to the respondent's NDIS
funding. He has received funding for psychological support, occupational
therapy, and assistance in managing
and developing day to day living and life
skills. The occupational therapy report discloses that the respondent scores
severe" in terms of anxiety, depression and stress, and indicates
that the respondent has difficulty in maintaining routines and
performing tasks
independently as a result of his various conditions. It also notes that he has
a reduced capacity to develop and
maintain relationships, is at risk of others
taking advantage of him, and has difficulty in accessing the community and
interacting
in unfamiliar settings. Continual use of illicit substances whilst
in the community, is also noted as an ongoing concern. The recommendation
that the respondent be referred to alcohol and drug counselling upon his
ultimate release.
The risk assessment conducted by Dr Georgina O'Donnell, in accordance with s 29
of the Act, notes that the respondent has been involved
on several occasions in
serious family violence, including the use of a weapon. Dr O'Donnell notes the
seriousness of this offending
has escalated over time. Dr O'Donnell notes that
the respondent's engagement with service providers within the community, has
poor and whilst the respondent has a NDIS plan in place, there remains a
high risk that he will not properly engage with such services
community. Dr O'Donnell notes that a general violence risk assessment was
conducted and the respondent presented with
a high number of risk factors for
further violent offending. An intimate partner risk assessment was also
conducted. Again, the
respondent presented with a high number of risk factors.
Indeed, Dr O'Donnell notes that nearly all risk factors were present, save
those relating to victim vulnerability, which did not apply because the
respondent is not currently in the community. In summary,
Dr O'Donnell
concluded that the respondent is likely to commit another serious offence unless
a high-risk offender order is in place.
Further Dr O'Donell concluded the
imposition of a high-risk offender order may positively contribute to risk
management and enhance
his opportunity for successful change. The report
confirms Mr Woods level of need is high, his history of compliance with
supports is very poor and he has been engaged in a strong cycle of
recidivism since the age of 12. Without conditions which are directed
managing Mr Woods within the community and targeting his multitude of risk
factors, it is highly probable that he will commit
a further serious offence.
The material to which I have had regard, satisfies me of the following
(i) There has been an increase in the severity of the respondent's violent
offending. Increased periods of imprisonment do not seem
to have deterred the
respondent from such offending.
(ii) The violence offending has spanned multiple intimate relationships.
(iii) The respondent has not engaged in any meaningful interventions to address
his underlying issues and thereby address the risk
of further family violence
(iv) Substance abuse remains a significant risk factor for the respondent. His
history of illicit substance abuse, particularly
within the community, is
(v) The respondent's personal circumstances, including his trauma history, his
intellectual disability, his ADHD, his Bi-polar condition,
his unstable
accommodation, and his limited pro-social network are all risk factors in terms
of him returning to illicit substance
(vi) The risk assessments conclude that the respondent possesses a high number
of on-going risk factors indicative of a high risk
of further violent offending.
I am satisfied on the basis of the material available to me, that there is a
high degree of probability that the respondent poses
an unacceptable risk of
committing another serious offence, unless a High-Risk Offender Order is made.
It is, therefore, appropriate
that I make a High-Risk Offender Order in relation
to Mr Woods. I note that Mr Woods did not contest the making of a high risk
order, but opposed the imposition of some conditions, particularly the
electronic monitoring condition and the curfew condition.
Taking into account
all of the material I have referenced I am satisfied both of those conditions
should be imposed, but I will craft
them in a way which allows his probation
officer to respond to an increase or decrease in risk factors and allow for
exceptions to
the operation of those conditions. This is in keeping with the
recommendations of Dr O'Donnel. She was of the view that stringent
were necessary as Mr Woods reintegrated into the community given his long
history of non-compliance with community services,
and his past reluctance to
engage in programmes that might assist him to change. I note that Mr Woods is
currently displaying a positive
attitude and expressing a desire to make change,
but his resolve is yet to be tested in the community. He will be living in
circumstances (in a caravan). There is a high likelihood he will
associate with anti-social individuals and drug users in this environment.
intellectual impairment increases his vulnerability and decreases his capacity
to resist "peer pressure". His is susceptible
to the influence of others. Given
all these considerations, I am satisfied it is appropriate that a curfew and
electronic monitoring
condition be imposed, but with a discretion being
available to his probation officer to make appropriate allowances.
I make a High risk offender order for a period of 5 years from his date of
release from custody. The order will include, as it must,
all of the conditions
set out in s 38(1) of the Act. He is to report to a probation officer at
Community Corrections, Liverpool
Street, Hobart by close of business on Monday,
20 October 2025
In addition, with reference to s 38(2) of the Act, I
impose the following additional conditions:
The respondent
must not consume or possess any illicit drugs;
The respondent
must not consume alcohol;
The respondent
must, when directed to do so by a police officer, probation officer or
prescribed officer, submit to a breath test,
or other test, and provide a valid
sample to enable testing for the presence of alcohol, or illicit drugs;
respondent must not enter or remain within a licenced premise, that is a bar,
pub or nightclub, unless prior approval is
obtained from a probation
respondent must engage in any psychiatric, psychological, therapeutic or
counselling interventions as reasonably directed
by a probation officer;
respondent must, during the operational period of the order, submit to
electronic monitoring, by wearing an electronic monitoring
device, unless
otherwise determined by a probation officer;
respondent must not remove, tamper with, damage or disable any device or
equipment used for the purpose of electronic monitoring,
and the respondent must
not allow anyone else, except for a probation officer, police officer or
prescribed officer, to remove, tamper
with, damage or disable, any device or
equipment used for the purpose of electronic monitoring; and
respondent must, between the hours of 10pm and 6am daily, be at premises
approved by a probation officer, and present himself
to police during those
hours if required to do so, save and except if the respondent is not, for a
relevant reason as defined by
s 38(3) of the Act, at the premises, or if the
respondent has the prior approval of a probation officer to be absent from those
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (109 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter