URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCCA/2025/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Director of Public Prosecutions v Whiteroad [2025] TASCCA 3 (4 June 2025)
[2025] TASCCA 3
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (COURT OF CRIMINAL
Director of Public Prosecutions v Whiteroad
[2025] TASCCA 3
: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
PROSECUTIONS
WHITEROAD, Braydon Leigh
DELIVERED ON:
4 June 2025
HEARING DATE:
11 April 2025
Estcourt J, Brett J, Cuthbertson J
Criminal Law – Appeal and new trial –
Appeal against sentence – Grounds for interference – Crown appeal
Sentence manifestly excessive or inadequate – Inadequacy the sole
ground of appeal – No specific error alleged –
Sentence must be so
manifestly wrong that it could only be the result of some undefinable error in
the exercise of judicial discretion
– Sentencing judge did not fail to
give adequate weight to relevant sentencing factors – The sentence was
very wide discretion available to the sentencing judge –
Sentence imposed not unreasonable or plainly unjust – Appeal
Aust Dig Criminal Law [3521]
Legislation:
Criminal Code Act
Bresnehan v The Queen
[1992] TASSC
Dinsdale v The Queen
[2000] HCA 54
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Acting) v Pearce
[2015] TASCCA 1
Director of
Public Prosecutions v Foster
[2019] TASCCA 15
30 Tas R 217
of Public Prosecutions v Johnson
[2020] TASCCA 4
Director of Public
Prosecutions v Karklins
[2018] TASCCA 6
29 Tas R 373
Director of
Public Prosecutions v King
[2024] TASCCA 8
Gregson v Tasmania
[2018] TASCCA 14
Hardwick v Tasmania
[2020] TASCCA 2
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Palmer v State of
[2024] TASCCA 6
Price v Tasmania
[2016] TASCCA 22
R v Ackland
[2019] NZHA 312, referred to
The Queen v De
(1981) 147 CLR
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Director of Public
Prosecutions
Respondent:
Fran McCracken
[2025] TASCCA 3
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 3/2024
File No CCA 2594/2024
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS v BRAYDON LEIGH
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
CUTHBERTSON J
Orders of the Court:
Appeal dismissed
Serial No 3/2024
File No CCA 2594/2024
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS v BRAYDON LEIGH
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
4 June 2025
This is a Crown appeal against a sentence imposed by Jago J on 3 September
2024. The respondent pleaded guilty to two counts of
assault on his female
domestic partner. The respondent was convicted and sentenced to five months'
imprisonment, the execution of
which was suspended on condition that he commit
no offence punishable by imprisonment for a period of two years.
sole ground of appeal is that the sentence was manifestly inadequate.
The principles relevant to such an appeal were summarised by Pearce J in
Director of Public Prosecutions (Acting) v Pearce
[2015] TASCCA 1
[2015] TASCCA 1
28 Tas R 1.
An appellate court only sits to rectify a genuine error:
Dinsdale v The Queen
[2000] HCA 54.
Where no specific error is alleged,
the court must be persuaded that the sentence imposed is "unreasonable or
plainly unjust":
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499.
This requires
something beyond being too lenient or too harsh. It must be established that
the sentencing order is so manifestly
wrong that it could only be the result of
some undefinable error in the exercise of judicial discretion:
Bresnehan v
[1992] TASSC 55.
to Crown appeals, this Court said in
Director of Public Prosecutions v
[2024] TASCCA 8
"38 The primary purpose of
Crown appeals against sentence is to lay down principles for the governance and
guidance of courts having
the duty of sentencing offenders. They also serve to
maintain confidence in the administration of justice by an intervention of an
appellate court in the case of a manifestly inadequate sentence:
Green v The
[2011] HCA 49
244 CLR 462
Everett v The Queen
[1994] HCA 49
(1994) 181 CLR 295
Director of Public Prosecutions v Swan
appellant needs both to persuade this Court of error in the exercise of the
discretion, and to negate any reason the residual
discretion of this Court not
to interfere should be exercised:
CMB v The Attorney-General (NSW)
256 CLR 346
The essence of the appeal is that the learned sentencing judge took "an unduly
individualised approach" to sentencing the respondent
and failed to give
appropriate weight to denunciation, general deterrence and
vindication.
Comments on passing
In sentencing the respondent, the learned sentencing judge made the following
"Mr Whiteroad, you have pleaded guilty to two counts of
assault contrary to s 184 of the Criminal Code. The victim of your crimes
your partner, whom I shall refer to as 'S'. You and S formed a relationship in
May 2019. You lived together from 2021. In
December 2021 you had a child
together. Following the birth of that child S suffered with post-natal
depression and some issues
arose within the relationship. These issues were
exacerbated by you and S finding yourselves without stable accommodation and
a newborn. It was a stressful time and from early 2022, the relationship
became quite volatile. Arguments became frequent and you
began to display
abusive behaviour towards S. The matters to which you have pleaded guilty are
not isolated incidents.
On 1 May 2022, when you and S were living at a residence in Sisters Creek, S
became upset and started talking about suicide. I infer,
it was most likely a
reflection of the difficulties she was experiencing with her post-natal
depression. Rather than being supportive,
your response was simply cruel and
nasty. You said to her, "Here's a fucking rope, here you go" and you placed a
dog lead around
her neck. This constitutes the first count of assault.
On the evening of 30 May 202, you and the complainant argued. You began to
pack your things intending to leave the residence. There
was verbal abuse
exchanged between the two of you. As you went to exit the home, S stood in
front of the door. You grabbed her
by the arms and shirt and grabbed her by the
shoulder and pushed her around. You then grabbed her by the throat with both
and squeezed. You squeezed her throat for up to ten seconds. She felt
dizzy and light headed and was unable to breathe properly.
She thought she was
going to black out. You desisted, let her go and left the residence.
Afterwards, the complainant's neck started swelling. She went to her
father's home. She was very distressed. He observed bruising
and marks on her
neck. Police and ambulance were called. Attending police also noted bruising
to both sides of S's neck and when
ambulance personnel arrived they noted that
she appeared scared and also observed visible bruising, redness and swelling to
her throat.
She also had redness to her chest and bruising to her left, lower
leg. She had a wheeze and a raspy voice.
S was taken to the hospital where the medical staff documented bruising on
the left side of the neck, mild bruising on the right side
of the neck, a red
line around her neck consistent with a necklace being pulled, tenderness to the
left forehead and bruising to
both knees, her left calf and both thighs.
You were subsequently arrested. You were interviewed by police. In respect
to the dog lead incident, you admitted that you had said
words to the effect of
"Here's a fucking rope, there you go". You agreed you threw the rope at her and
"probably" put the lead over
her neck but could not clearly recall.
In respect to the incident on 30 May, you agreed that there had been a
significant argument and that you were trying to leave. You
admitted grabbing S
by the arms and shoulder and "throwing her around a bit". You admitted that you
had placed your hands around
her neck and held her by the throat for about five
seconds. You denied, however, that you had used sufficient force to cause the
injuries that S sustained. You now accept that you did, in fact, cause those
injuries. I infer from the injuries caused that the
pressure you applied to her
neck was far from insubstantial.
After these incidents, you and S separated for a period. The relationship
has since resumed. S has declined to provide a victim
impact statement. That,
of course, does not mean she was not badly impacted by your crimes. Whilst I
accept the first incident
resulted in no injury, it was, as I have commented, a
nasty and cruel act and was particularly demeaning and unsupportive of her.
second act resulted in serious injury and her demeanour, as observed by others
after the incident, clearly demonstrates that
she was scared and upset by your
You are 27 years of age. You have no prior convictions of relevance. The
only matters recorded on your criminal history are some
traffic infringement
matters. You have a strong industrial record. You have worked as a chef and as
a fly in/fly out contract worker.
You are currently working as an arborist.
You have worked your way up to a team leader position in that field and you are
regarded by your employer. I am told you have prospects of further
advancement in that field of employment.
To your credit, you and S have worked hard on addressing issues within your
relationship. After these incidents occurred, there was
a Family Violence Order
in place. You complied with the terms of that Family Violence Order. S, in
fact, sought variations of that
Family Violence Order during its currency to
allow for there to be contact between you and her. Once the Order permitted it,
two of you resumed living together and I am told there have been no further
difficulties within the relationship. The Family Violence
Order expired in May
2023. Both you and S have worked hard to resolve the issues within your
relationship. Each of you has undertaken
counselling, and I am told the way you
now communicate with each other over issues that may arise is much improved.
The fact that
there has been no further offending since May 2022, so a period of
more than two years now, counts in your favour and is indicative,
in my view,
that these incidents were out of character and arose during a difficult period
within the relationship. I am satisfied
they are unlikely to be repeated and
therefore specific deterrence does not attract significant weight in this
sentencing exercise.
I take into account your pleas of guilty. Whilst it could not be said that
they were entered at an early stage, it is noteworthy
that you were originally
charged with additional offences. They have not been proceeded with and you
have pleaded guilty to matters
which are largely consistent with the admissions
you made to police on interview. The pleas of guilty still retain mitigatory
because S has been spared the ordeal of giving evidence in circumstances
where I suspect, for several reasons, it would have been
difficult for her to do
Family violence crimes are always serious. They inherently involve a breach
of trust and are typically committed against vulnerable
complainants. S was
having significant difficulties at the time these crimes occurred. She deserved
your support and assistance
but instead, you reacted to her with violence.
Courts have on many occasions emphasised the need to condemn family violence and
in sentencing such matters, general deterrence, denunciation, punishment, and
protection of victims are paramount sentencing considerations.
That said, the
Court must also recognise the individual circumstances of the criminal
offending. As noted, I am satisfied that
this was out of character for you,
given your lack of prior convictions and the fact that there has been no further
offending since
May 2022. You have recognised your wrongdoing and you have
worked hard to develop new skills and understanding to ensure that this
behaviour is not repeated. In all the circumstances, I am of the view that the
seriousness of your behaviour warrants a
period of imprisonment, but given the
individual circumstances pertaining to you, and what I assess to be solid
prospects of reform,
it is appropriate that the period of imprisonment be wholly
suspended. You need to very clearly understand however, Mr Whiteroad,
you are foolish enough to breach the terms of the suspended sentence, a Court
must activate it and require you to serve it
unless it is unjust to do so."
The appellant's submissions
Counsel for the State, Mr Ogden, in the appellant's written submissions,
submitted that recent decisions of this Court have clearly
stated that family
violence must be condemned and discouraged (see
Palmer v State of
[2024] TASCCA 6
Director of Public Prosecutions v Foster
[2019] TASCCA 15
30 Tas R 217
Director of Public Prosecutions v
[2018] TASCCA 6
29 Tas R 373
and that family violence continues to
be a matter of community concern (see
Gregson v Tasmania
[2018] TASCCA 14
per Martin AJ).
Counsel noted that in May 2022 Parliament enacted a standalone offence of
strangulation, contrary to s 170B of the
Criminal Code
and that prior to
that, acts involving choking, suffocating and strangling were charged as
assaults (summary or indictable), crimes
against s 170 of the Code, or
attempting to commit murder, depending on the facts of the particular case. He
noted that count 2 on
the indictment on which the respondent was arraigned,
occurred one week prior to the enactment of strangulation as a standalone
and that as the crime of strangulation was not made retrospective by
Parliament, the respondent could not be charged with strangulation
accordingly a charge of assault was pursued on indictment.
Counsel for the State submitted that as strangulation was not a crime at the
relevant time, there could be no breach of the rule
The Queen v
(1981) 147 CLR 383
by sentencing the respondent on the basis that
his conduct would now be charged as strangulation, that is, that he intended to
suffocate or strangle the complainant, and that he did in fact do
Counsel for the State submitted that prior to the crime of strangulation being
enacted, clear statements were made by this Court
in a number of cases to the
effect that assaults involving acts of strangulation constitute extremely
serious criminal conduct, particularly
when they are committed in the context of
family violence (see
Price v Tasmania
[2016] TASCCA 22
31 Tas R 218
per Estcourt J;
DPP v Foster
(above) at [26];
Hardwick v Tasmania
[2020] TASCCA 2
32 Tas R 62
Director of Public Prosecutions v
[2020] TASCCA 4
per Geason J at [33] with whom Wood J agreed).
Counsel for the State submitted that strangulation is no less insidious than
assaults by punching and kicking. As was said in
DPP v Foster
[26] per Estcourt J:
"Strangulation is a form of power and control
that can have devastating psychological long-term effects on its victim, in
to a potentially fatal outcome...Choking can cause loss of
consciousness and can cause death quickly. It has been suggested that
occur within seven to 14 seconds."
Counsel went on to submit that courts now have an increased understanding that
choking of female victims by their male partners
is a prevalent and dangerous
feature of family violence (
Hardwick v Tasmania
(above) [49]-[53] per
Martin AJ), and that it can be a form of coercion and control within domestic
relationships (
DPP v Foster
(above ) per Estcourt J at [26]-[27];
(above) at [33] per Geason J).
As to comparable sentences in other cases, counsel for the State
"Whilst it is accepted there is often limited utility in
appellate courts comparing sentences for other cases of the same crime or
offence, a 2021 Sentencing Advisory Council Research Paper titled 'Sentencing
for non-fatal strangulation' found that between 2010
and 32 October 2020, there
were 74 cases heard by the Tasmanian Supreme Court that involved non-fatal
strangulation as a basis or
an aspect of the charge. Fifty-one of those cases
were family violence related, the vast majority of which (40) were charged as
contrary to s184 of the Criminal Code. The median sentence of
imprisonment for assaults involving strangulation was 24 months (more
double the median for assault, which was 10 months). The shortest sentence for a
case involving intimate partner violence was
8 months. It is submitted that in
general terms, this trend has continued since 2020 with the majority of
sentences for instances
of assault involving strangulation or non-fatal
strangulation contrary to s 170B of the Criminal Code being in the range of 9 -
months imprisonment, wholly suspended.
The appellant submits the above analysis demonstrates that the sentence
imposed upon the respondent sits at the far end of the range,
submission of the respondent, is so lenient as to be plainly wrong."
Counsel for the State relied upon a New Zealand decision of
R v Ackland
[2019] NZHA 312 in which Cooke J identified at [26] a number of well understood
factors that are relevant in assessing the objective
seriousness of assaults
involving strangulation and said at [30]:
"At the lower end would be
offending involving strangulation as an intentional result of pressure being
applied to the throat for
a brief period, potentially without any of the above
factors being present. Such offending might attract a starting point of six
months to two years' imprisonment."
Counsel for the State submitted while some of the factors outlined in
are not present in this case, many were present, along with other
aggravating features including:
The assaults
were committed in a family violence context and were therefore a breach of
The second count
of assault involved pressure being applied to the complainant's throat for up to
ten seconds, to the point that she
felt she was beginning to lose consciousness.
The complainant was unable to breathe, became lightheaded and her arms and legs
tingly; she sustained actual injury in the form of bruising on both sides
of the neck, swelling of the neck and redness to the neck
that looked like a
necklace being pulled.
Count 2 on the
indictment was not an isolated incident and was a continuation of degrading and
abusive behaviour on the part of the
respondent towards his partner.
The conduct
involved other violence (the respondent grabbing and pushing the
complainant).
The complainant
was particularly vulnerable following the birth of a child and was experiencing
post-natal depression.
The offending
occurred in the complainant's home where she was entitled to feel
Finally, counsel for the State submitted that whilst the complainant was not a
willing witness and continued the relationship with
the respondent, that is not
an unusual scenario in family violence matters and does not detract from the
need to impose a sentence
that gives sufficient effect to the principles of
general deterrence, denunciation and vindication of the complainant (see
(above) per Geason J at [73]-[79]).
and disposition
Whilst I accept each of the statements of legal principle advanced by counsel
for the State, and whilst I detect no error in his
adumbration of the
aggravating features of the facts of this case, I cannot agree that the learned
sentencing judge imposed a sentence
that was manifestly inadequate. In my view,
having regard to the reasons set out in her Honour's comments on passing
sentence, she
did not take "an unduly individualised approach" to sentencing the
respondent and she did not fail to give appropriate weight to
denunciation,
general deterrence and vindication.
Her Honour recognised that family violence crimes are always serious, that they
inherently involve a breach of trust and are typically
committed against
vulnerable complainants. Her Honour expressly acknowledged that courts have, on
many occasions, emphasised the
need to condemn family violence and in sentencing
such matters, general deterrence, denunciation, punishment, and protection of
are paramount sentencing considerations. However, her Honour was also
aware that she was obliged to recognise the individual circumstances
criminal offending. She noted that:
The offences
were out of character for the respondent, given his lack of prior convictions
and the fact that there has been no further
offending since May 2022;
recognised his wrongdoing and had worked hard to develop new skills and
understanding to ensure that this sort of behaviour
was not repeated;
The respondent
had solid prospects of reform; and
offending was not likely to occur again.
Her Honour had a difficult balancing exercise to undertake in sentencing the
respondent in unusual circumstances. Her Honour had
to take into account that
both the respondent and his partner had worked hard on addressing issues within
their relationship; that
after the offences occurred there was a family violence
order in place with which the respondent complied; that his partner sought
variations of that family violence order during its currency to allow for there
to be contact between her and the respondent and
that once the order permitted
it, the two of them resumed living together without further difficulties within
the relationship. Her
Honour also had to take into account that each of them had
undertaken counselling and the way in which they communicated with each
over issues that might arise between them was much improved.
I am satisfied that while her Honour might easily have imposed a somewhat
longer suspended sentence, the sentence she settled upon
was within the very
wide discretion she had to exercise. I am not satisfied that the sentence
imposed is unreasonable or plainly
unjust. Comparable sentencing data are
instructive, but I do not find them to be determinative in this case given the
uncommon concatenation
of reassuring features about the respondent and his
partner and their relationship.
I would dismiss the appeal.
File No CCA 2594/2024
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS v BRAYDON LEIGH
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
4 June 2025
I agree with the reasons stated by Estcourt J. For those reasons, I joined the
order dismissing the appeal.
File No CCA 2594/2024
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS v BRAYDON LEIGH
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
CUTHBERTSON J
4 June 2025
I also agree with the reasons stated by Estcourt J. For those reasons, I joined
the order dismissing the appeal.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (133 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter