URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMACT/2014/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sharman v Motor Accidents Insurance Board (Ref No. 18/2013) [2014] TASMACT 2 (9 July 2014)
[2014] TASMACT 2
MOTOR ACCIDENTS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
H30018/2013
HEARING DATE(S):
SHARMAN Andrew
RESPONDENT:
Motor Accidents
Insurance Board
DELIVERED ON:
21 July 2014
Member: R E
DETERMINATION:
Tribunal’s order of 14 January 2014 be revoked.
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Page Seager
[2014] TASMACT 2
Member: R E Chandler
INTRODUCTION
1 In August 2013 the applicant filed a reference with the
Tribunal seeking to challenge a decision of the Motor Accidents Insurance
(‘the Board’) to terminate his disability allowance. At that time
he was represented by solicitors, Fairley &
Associates. However, on 9
December 2013 that firm wrote to the Tribunal and advised that it was no longer
acting for the applicant
and that he had instructed them to close his file. On
14 January 2014 the Tribunal conducted a telephone conference with the parties.
The applicant appeared in person. He confirmed that he had dismissed his
solicitors. He said that he had done so because he could
not afford legal
representation. He said that he did not want to proceed with his reference. It
was his understanding that the
Board would not seek costs if his reference did
not proceed. However, this was not the Board’s position. Its counsel
that it was content for the reference to be dismissed but that it
required an order for costs. This led to orders being made, firstly
reference be dismissed and, secondly that costs be reserved. These orders were
then incorporated in a formal determination
of the Tribunal and distributed to
the parties. That determination is dated 14 January 2014 and is expressed as
“Upon hearing the
parties herein I make the following Orders:
1. That this reference be dismissed.
2. That costs be
2 Later the Board sought to pursue its costs and its
application was set down for hearing on 20 March 2014. On that day Mr S G
of Wright Gilmour appeared for the applicant. He said that he was now
representing the applicant and that he was instructed to “seek
reinstatement” of the applicant’s reference, notwithstanding the
Tribunal’s determination that it be dismissed.
The Board resists this
course. This leads to the issue to be determined, that is whether the Tribunal
is permitted to disturb its
orders made in January.
3 The legislation which
is relevant to this matter is the Motor Accidents (Liability and Compensation)
Act 1973 (‘the Act’)
and the Motor Accidents Compensation Tribunal
Regulations 2009 (‘the Regulations’).
SUBMISSIONS
4 For the applicant it is said that the Tribunal is a statutory
authority to which s20(a) of the Acts Interpretation Act 1931 applies.
it has the power to revoke its order dismissing the applicant’s reference.
This would be just as it would permit the
applicant’s grievance arising
from the Board’s termination of his disability allowance to be heard and
determined upon
its merits. Revocation of the order, it is said, would not
cause prejudice to the Board.
5 On the other hand counsel for the Board
submits that the Tribunal is a quasi-judicial body and not a statutory authority
s20(a) of the Acts Interpretation Act 1931 has application. If the
applicant is aggrieved by the Tribunal’s determination
made on 14 January
then his remedy is to appeal that determination to the Supreme Court. There is
not, it is submitted, jurisdiction
in the Tribunal to revoke its own order.
Further, it is asserted that if the Tribunal does consider that it has
revoke its previous decision it should not do so because its
determination was consented to by the applicant, it was a final and
interlocutory determination and that the Board is entitled to treat the
determination to be final and to have put an end to the
issue raised by the
6 The first port of call in considering whether the Tribunal is
empowered to revoke its previous determination is s20(a) of the Acts
Interpretation Act 1931. It provides:
“S20 Where an Act
confers a power or imposes a duty, the power may be exercised and the duty shall
be performed-
(a) from time to time as occasion may require;”
7 In Purton v Jackson
[2012] TASFC 2
and [21], (and
followed in Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v XYZ
[2014] TASSC 33
the Full Court held that by virtue of s20(a) any statutory authority or decision
maker must be regarded as having the power to
vary or reverse a statutory
decision unless the relevant legislation expressly or impliedly indicates that
there is no such power.
8 In my view s20(a) of the Acts Interpretation Act
1931 does apply to the Tribunal. It follows, in accord with the Supreme Court
authorities, that it is empowered to reverse a previous decision subject to the
relevant legislation neither expressly or impliedly
indicating the absence of
that power. There is not any provision in the legislation which expressly
denies the Tribunal the power
to reverse a previous decision. The question
therefore becomes whether the legislation, by implication, denies it that power.
requires me to consider whether the scheme of the legislation is such that
a decision of the Tribunal must be regarded as irreversible.
Profession Board of Tasmania at [7].
9 The primary purpose of the Act, as
its preamble makes clear, is inter alia, to make provision for the discharge of
liabilities in
respect of deaths and bodily injuries arising from motor
accidents and for the payment of compensation in respect of those deaths
bodily injuries. By s14 the Board is bound to indemnify a person owning or
using a motor vehicle, or his legal representatives
in respect of any liability
for damages. By s22(1) any action in which damages are sought shall be heard
before a court without
a jury. The Act also makes provision for payment of
statutory compensation generically described as scheduled benefits. The types
of scheduled benefits payable are set out in Schedule 1 of the Motor Accidents
(Liabilities and Compensation) Regulations 2010 (‘the
Compensation
Regulations’). They include a disability allowance which is the
compensation sought by the applicant in this
instance. Unlike damages, a claim
for a scheduled benefit(s) does not require a court action. Rather the
legislation has put in
place a statutory mechanism to govern the mode of claim
and its determination. Firstly, a claim for a scheduled benefit(s) cannot
brought unless the Board has received written notice of the accident giving rise
to the claim within one year of the accident
and the claim is bought either
within one year of the date of death or the date on which the loss or expense
was incurred or a gratuitous
service was provided. R8 of the Compensation
Regulations. By s28(1) of the Act the Board then determines whether a claim
be met and the amount to be paid. A disputed claim can then be referred
to the Tribunal by either an aggrieved claimant or by the
Board. s28(2) and (3).
10 The Tribunal’s progenitor is s12 of the Act. It provides:
shall be established a tribunal to be known as the Motor Accidents Compensation
(2) The members of the Tribunal shall be appointed by the
(2A) A person is not qualified for appointment as a member of the
Tribunal unless he holds the office of a judge, a magistrate, or
Associate Judge
of the Supreme Court, and a member who ceases to be so qualified ceases to hold
office as a member of the Tribunal.
(3) The Governor may appoint a member of
the Tribunal to be the chairman thereof.
(4) The members of the Tribunal who
are to constitute the Tribunal for the purposes of any proceedings or class or
group of proceedings
under this Act shall be selected by the chairman of the
(5) Where 2 or more members are selected to constitute the Tribunal
for the purposes of any proceedings the chairman of the Tribunal
shall, if he is
one of those members, be president of the Tribunal for the purposes of those
proceedings, and, if he is not, such
one of those members as he may select shall
be president of the Tribunal for the purpose of those proceedings.
for any reason, the chairman of the Tribunal is unable or unwilling to make a
selection for the purposes of subsection
(4) or subsection (5), the selection
may be made by any other member of the Tribunal appointed by the chairman of the
Tribunal for
the purpose.
(7) Section 8 and Part 3 of the Commissions of
Inquiry Act 1995 apply to matters referred to the Tribunal as if –
(a) The Tribunal were a Commission established under section 4
of that Act; and
(b) The matter were the matter into which the Commission had
been directed to inquire under the Act.
11 Part 3 of the Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995 makes
provision upon a range of matters which apply to the Tribunal. Notably it
empowered to control its own proceedings (s12(1)(a)) and is not bound by any
rule of law which relates to evidence in judicial
proceedings (s20(1)).
12 The Regulations are specific to the Tribunal. They are not particularly
comprehensive. Proceedings in the Tribunal are to be
initiated by a reference
which is to be accompanied by a copy of all relevant documents in possession of
the party making the reference
(r4(1) and (2)). If an aggrieved person is
making the reference he/she must do so within 14 days of becoming aware of a
determination
or refusal of the Board to make a payment by way of a scheduled
benefit (r4(3)(a)). Parties are required to be given at least 14
notice of a Tribunal hearing (r7) and its secretary is to serve on each party a
copy of the Tribunal’s determination
along with its reasons (r8). By its
own motion the Tribunal may require an injured party to undergo a medical
examination and is
required to ensure that a copy of a resultant medical report
is given to each party (r11). Subject to the Act and the Regulations
Tribunal is empowered to regulate its own procedure (r13). It may order costs
(r14) and references to it may be discontinued
or dismissed for want of
prosecution in accord with Supreme Court practice (r15). It is pertinent for me
to note that neither the
Act nor the Regulations provide for a
‘slip’ rule nor do they include a provision expressly permitting the
Tribunal to
vary or revoke a previous order or determination.
opinion the scheme put in place by the Act to financially compensate victims of
motor vehicle accidents does not reveal any
elements which lead to the
implication that a decision of the Tribunal, whether it be interlocutory or
final, is irreversible. In
fact the opposite is the case. It is clear, in my
view, that the Tribunal has been created in a form which enables it to operate
with less procedural formality and more flexibility than is available to a
court. This recognises that disputes related to scheduled
benefits invariably
concern the treatment of injuries or the entitlement to income during the
recuperative phase. These are matters
which often require a speedy resolution
and can be best achieved by a body which is able to operate largely free of
formal legal
restraints, but of course subject to its over-arching obligation to
afford the parties procedural fairness. It is in this context
that I am of the
view that the Tribunal should be able to set aside or vary a previous order, if
it is just, as between the parties
to do so. This brings me to the question
whether the order made by the Tribunal on 14 January 2014 should be revoked?
14 I have set out in the introduction those circumstances which led to the
impugned order. The applicant’s circumstances have
since apparently
changed so that he can now afford legal representation. He thus wishes to
proceed with his reference and have it
determined on its merits. I recognise
that ordinarily the Board is entitled to believe that orders made by the
Tribunal are final
and bring a matter to an end. Nevertheless, I am of the view
that in this instance the order made on 14 January 2014 should be
revoked and
that the applicant have an opportunity for his reference to be heard and
determined on its merits. Any prejudice to
the Board in terms of costs which
may be arise from this outcome can be considered separately.
reasons stated there will be an order revoking the Tribunal’s earlier
order. The effect is that the applicant’s
reference has been re-instated.
The Tribunal will be in contact with the parties shortly to deal with any
preliminary matters prior
to the reference being set down for hearing.
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (98.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter