URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASPComm/2025/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:19:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tasmanian Planning Scheme - Latrobe amendment 1-2025 [2025] TASPComm 19 (10 September 2025)
Tasmanian Planning Scheme - Latrobe
Planning authority
Latrobe Council
Plan Place Pty Ltd for Letrasak Pty Ltd.
Date of decision
10 September 2025
The draft amendment is modified under
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
as set out in
Annexure A and is approved under
section 40Q.
John Ramsay
Executive Commissioner
REASONS FOR DECISION
draft amendment proposes to rezone 200 Parkers Ford Road, Port Sorell (folio of
the register 213993/1) and the adjoining Crown
owned road reserve from Rural
Living D to Rural Living A.
Site information
The site is located in the Port Sorell hinterland,
approximately 2km south-west of Port Sorell’s main settlement. The site is
bounded by Parkers Ford Road to the east and by the Panatana Rivulet to the
west. The site comprises a total land area of 20ha, excluding
a reserved road
casement that traverses the northern part of the site.
The site consists predominantly of pasture, with existing development
comprising of a 300m
dwelling and two sheds.
The surrounding area to the north, east and south of the site consists of
established rural residential development, on lots varying
in size from
to 6.6ha. The land situated to the west of the subject site
is used for low intensity and small non-commercial grazing uses and associated
residential purposes.
The surrounding land to the north, east and south are zoned Rural Living
while the adjoining land to the west is zoned Agriculture.
The Bushfire-Prone Areas and Flood-Prone Areas codes apply to the site. The
natural values of the Panatana Rivulet on the western
boundary of the site are
protected under the application of the Natural Assets Code (Priority Vegetation
Area and Waterway and Coastal
Protection Area overlays).
The site is serviced by power and reticulated water.
Issues raised in representations
The draft amendment was referred to TasWater under
section 56S
Water and Sewerage Industry Act 2008
. In response
TasWater made a representation raising no objection to the draft amendment and
that TasWater did not wish to attend
any hearing.
Planning authority’s response to the
representations
The planning authority considered the representations
and recommended:
Section 38(2)
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
to the amendment and prepare the draft amendment to the Latrobe Local Provisions
Schedule subject to the following modification:
(a) Include the adjoining Crown road reserve that bisects the site in the draft
amendment by rezoning to Rural Living zone, as indicated
in the certification
section 40F
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
that the modified draft amendment meets the LPS Criteria; and
draft amendment L-PS001/2025 on public exhibition for a period of 28 days,
pursuant to
sections 40G
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act
Consideration of the draft amendment
section 40M of the
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
the Commission is required to consider the draft amendment to the Local
Provisions Schedule (LPS) and the representations,
statements and
recommendations contained in the planning authority’s section 40K report
and any information obtained at a hearing.
opposing representations were received and the Commission dispensed with holding
a hearing in accordance with 40L(2) of the Act.
Commission must also consider whether the draft amendment meets the LPS criteria
as set out under section 34(2) of the Act:
(a) contains all the provisions that the SPPs specify must be contained in an
(b) is in accordance with section 32; and
(c) furthers the objectives set out in Schedule 1; and
(d) is consistent with each State policy; and
(da) satisfies the relevant criteria in relation to the TPPs; and
(e) as far as practicable, is consistent with the regional land use strategy, if
any, for the regional area in which is situated
the land to which the relevant
planning instrument relates; and
(f) has regard to the strategic plan, prepared under
Government Act 1993
, that applies in relation to the land to which the
relevant planning instrument relates; and
(g) as far as practicable, is consistent with and co-ordinated with any LPSs
that apply to municipal areas that are adjacent to the
municipal area to which
the relevant planning instrument relates; and
(h) has regard to the safety requirements set out in the standards prescribed
Gas Safety Act 2019
Residential supply and demand
Commission’s decision on the Latrobe LPS, dated 16 March 2023, determined
that the site be zoned Rural Living (subdivision
category D) to limit
subdivision within the zone, until further strategic planning work to support
the intensification for use of
land for rural residential purposes, is
the LPS decision, Latrobe Council engaged REMPLAN to undertake further strategic
work in the form of a Residential Demand and
Supply Study (REMPLAN Study). The
REMPLAN Study was finalised in July 2024.
REMPLAN study analyses land and demand supply of the Latrobe local government
area, identifying projected population growth and
the supply required to respond
to anticipated demand to meet housing needs.
REMPLAN Study found that the identified land supply in Port Sorell’s
hinterland would be exhausted in around 12 or 13 years,
noting that land zoned
Rural Living was excluded from supply as further work needed to be completed to
establish infrastructure requirements
and minimum lot sizes.
its supporting report, the applicant submitted that the REMPLAN Study identifies
the need for additional land in the Port Sorell
hinterland for rural residential
development and provides the strategic intent to underpin the draft
Commission consideration
Commission notes the findings of the REMPLAN study, in particular the demand for
additional land in the Port Sorell hinterland
for rural residential
development.
Commission is satisfied that the REMPLAN study establishes that there is demand
for additional rural residential lots and the
increase density provided through
the draft amendment will go some way to satisfying this demand.
Application of Rural Living Zone A
its supporting report, the applicant submitted that the proposed application of
the Rural Living Zone (subdivision category A):
responds to the
findings of the REMPLAN Study; and
would allow for
the intensification of the site for use of land for rural residential purposes.
regard to the application of the Rural Living Zone, the applicant stated that:
the controls provide for a development pattern that allows for setbacks from
frontages, and side and rear boundaries. Under the subdivision
category A,
setbacks as required by the Acceptable Solutions A2 and A3 of Clause 11.4.2 can
be comfortably achieved.
applicant addressed the requirements of Guideline No. 1 Local Provisions
Schedule (LPS) zone and code application (the Guidelines)
made under the section
8A of the Act and submitted that the draft amendment met Guidelines RLZ 1, 2, 3
its supporting report, the planning authority considered it prudent to modify
the draft amendment to include the Crown road reserve
in the proposed extent of
the change to the Rural Living Zone (subdivision category A), as the Crown road
reserve will inevitably
be considered as part of any future subdivision of the
Commission consideration
Commission agrees with the applicant that the draft amendment responds to the
findings of the REMPLAN Study by allowing the site
to be developed for rural
residential purposes at a density envisaged by RLZ3.
Commission notes that the draft amendment application was accompanied by a
Concept Plan. The Concept Plan, for indicative purposes
only, provides a
potential 17 lot subdivision layout and road structure of the site to
demonstrate development outcomes that would
be consistent with the intended
rezoning from Rural Living (subdivision category D) to Rural Living (subdivision
category A).
Commission further notes that the draft amendment does not include an
application for a permit to subdivide the site. The Concept
Plan is attached at
Annexure B.
conceptual, the Commission considers that the plan demonstrates that the site
could likely facilitate future development that
met the Acceptable Solutions of
the Rural Living Zone for buildings setbacks.
Commission is satisfied that the Rural Living Zone (subdivision category A)
should be applied to the site in accordance with Guideline
Commission agrees with the planning authority’s decision to include the
Crown Road Reserve for consistency in land use regulation.
Suitability of the Site
Natural values
applicant and planning authority submitted that natural values are located
within the western area of the site adjacent to the
Panatana Rivulet, and noted
the natural
values of the site will be protected under the application of the Natural Assets
any vegetation
removal will be addressed under the application of the Priority Vegetation Area
overlay of the Natural Assets Code;
any storm water
discharge and associated impacts on watercourses will be addressed under the
application of the Waterway and Coastal
Protection Area overlay of the Natural
Assets Code.
applicant and planning authority also submitted that the potential residential
development of the site in accordance with the
Rural Living Zone (subdivision
category A) will:
provide building
areas well outside of the areas where the Natural Assets Code applies; and
impact upon the ecological processes or natural values of the
Bushfire management
applicant and the planning authority noted the future subdivision of the site
would require assessment against the Bushfire-Prone
Areas Code and the
preparation of a bushfire hazard management plan.
applicant submitted bushfire management advice prepared by Livingston Natural
Resources Services, dated 5 December 2024, to support
the draft amendment.
on potential development of the site as show in the Concept Plan, Livingston
Natural Resources Services considered that:
future lots,
unless unusually narrow, of 0.8ha or more, as allowed under the performance
criteria of the Rural Living Zone, could
accommodate a bushfire attack level of
19 building area without any reliance on fuel management on adjacent lots;
there are no
potential difficulties in meeting the Bushfire-Prone Areas Code requirements for
hazard management, access or water supply,
noting a minor modification to the
shared boundary of lots 5 and 6 would be required to provide a 10m Hazard
Management Area from
the existing lot dwelling at lot
applicant noted that the western area of the site, at the Panatana Rivulet, is
subject to the application of the Flood-Prone Hazard
applicant stated that:
The SPPs of the TPS contain adequate controls to mitigate flood risk. An
application for subdivision will trigger an assessment against
the Flood-prone
Hazard Areas Code of the SPPs. A flood hazard report may be required to support
a proposed lot layout and demonstrate
that each lot has a tolerable risk from
flood. The planning authority cannot approve an application for subdivision
without demonstrating
that an acceptable level of risk can be achieved.
Site capacity for agricultural use
applicant submitted an Agricultural constraint analysis report (Agricultural
report) prepared by Pinion Advisory, dated 6 December
2025, to support the draft
the Agricultural Report, Pinion Advisory examined the various aspects of
agricultural land activities associated with the site
and its surrounds.
Advisory concluded that:
majority of the site has a very low level of agricultural suitability due to
significant land capability limitations;
the agricultural
suitability of the adjoining properties to the west of the site is severely
constrained; and
potential to negatively impact on adjoining agricultural land is mitigated by
the presence of the Panatana Rivulet and the associated
native vegetation which
forms the western boundary of the site.
applicant submitted that adequate separation is achieved between future
sensitive uses and adjacent agricultural activities to
the west and
Transport Network
applicant submitted a Traffic Impact Assessment prepared by Midson Traffic,
dated November 2024, to support the draft amendment.
Traffic Impact Assessment analysed the potential impacts that a development
proposal, as shown in the Concept Plan, is likely
to have on the operation of
roads and transport networks.
Traffic concluded that, based on the potential development of the site as shown
in the Concept Plan:
the traffic
generation is likely to be 126 vehicles per day with a peak of 13 vehicles per
generation can be absorbed in the surrounding road network at a high level of
efficiency and safety; and
the traffic
generation at the access junction with Parkers Ford Road satisfies the
requirements of Performance Criteria P1 of Clause
C3.5.1 of the Planning
planning authority submitted that Latrobe Council’s Manager of
Infrastructure and Assets is satisfied that a suitable road
providing access
from Parkers Ford Road to future residential lots can be accommodated on the
subject site and its interface with
Parkers Ford Road.
capacity for wastewater and stormwater management
applicant submitted that the site is not located within an area serviced by a
reticulated sewer system and therefore relies on
onsite wastewater
management.
applicant submitted a land capability assessment prepared by Tasman Geotechnics,
dated 17 December 2024, to support the draft
land capability assessment demonstrated the site’s capacity for onsite
wastewater and stormwater management, based on the
potential development of the
site as shown in the Concept Plan.
Geotechnics concluded that, based on the potential development of the of the
site as shown in the Concept Plan:
the site could
accommodate and connect to an onsite wastewater system adequate for the future
use and development of the site; and
a sustainable
stormwater management system could be designed to meet the needs of all
potential lots.
applicant submitted that onsite wastewater and stormwater management can be
achieved for the proposed lot density as shown in
the Concept Plan, and in
accordance with the controls of the SPPs for subdivision category A of the Rural
Living Zone.
Other infrastructure Services
respect to reticulated water infrastructure, the applicant submitted an
Infrastructure Plan prepared by Taswater to support the
draft amendment.
Infrastructure Plan indicated that the Taswater reticulated water infrastructure
was located at the frontage of the site at Parkers
applicant submitted that Taswater had confirmed that:
the site can be
connected to water service as required by Acceptable Solution A1 of Clause
11.5.3 of the SPPs; and
sufficient pressure and flow in the network to serve the the potential
development of the site as shown in the Concept Plan,
provided that a compliant
design is produced by a hydraulic consultant.
respect to electricity infrastructure, the planning authority stated that:
Overhead electricity infrastructure exists along Parkers Ford Road. The
application was referred to TasNetworks, who advised that
apart from the
existing dwelling’s electricity supply needing to be relocated and
resupplied with new infrastructure to accommodate
any new subdivision, that the
amendment and any future subdivision was unlikely to adversely affect
TasNetworks’ operations.
Commission consideration
Commission is satisfied that, based on the Concept Plan and the evidence
provided, the site is suitable for residential development
in accordance with
the Rural Living Zone (subcategory A), as;
the natural
values of the site at the Panatana Rivulet are protected under the controls of
the Natural Assets Code;
the site has the
capacity to be developed in accordance with the Rural Living Zone (subcategory
A) and not unduly impact upon the
natural values of the site;
the site has the
capacity to be developed in accordance with the Rural Living Zone (subcategory
A) and meet the requirements of the
Bushfire-Prone Areas and Road and Railway
Assets codes;
any flood risk
of the site will be managed by the application of the Flood-Prone Hazard
the agricultural
suitability of the site and its adjoining land to the west is severely
constrained for agricultural use;
the potential
for development in accordance with the Rural Living Zone (subcategory A) to
negatively impact on adjoining agricultural
land is mitigated by the presence of
the Panatana Rivulet and the associated native vegetation which forms the
western boundary of
the site has the
capacity to be developed in accordance with the Rural Living Zone (subcategory
A) and achieve adequate onsite wastewater
and stormwater management; and
the site is
within servicing capacity for power and reticulated
water, allowing future development to be
accommodated through service upgrades.
Regional land use strategy
relevant regional land use strategy is the Cradle Coast Regional Land Use
Strategy 2010-2030 (regional strategy).
its supporting report, the applicant assessed the draft amendment against the
regional strategy and submitted that the regional
strategy’s policies
relating to use of resources, economic activity, rural-residential settlement
areas, housing land and road
transport are relevant to the draft amendment.
applicant submitted that the draft amendment is consistent with the regional
strategy, as it will facilitate infill development
within an established Rural
Living area, ensuring efficient use of the land as intended.
its supporting report, the planning authority noted that regional
strategy’s policies of Section 4.3.2, Rural-Residential
Settlement Areas,
provides the most relevant direction to the draft amendment. The planning
authority stated that:
The draft amendment demonstrates through the application documentation and from
referral agencies that existing infrastructure and
services can accommodate a
future residential subdivision as a result of a rezoning to the subject land.
The subject site is located
within an established rural-residential area that is
unable to be serviced to urban specification. Mitigation from natural hazards
such as bushfire and inundation, and protection of natural values along the
Panatana Rivulet, are subject to the provisions of the
Tasmanian Planning Scheme
which achieve the desired development outcomes outlined in this principle.
Commission consideration
Commission is satisfied with the justification provided by the applicant and
planning authority, in that the draft amendment provides
for future infill
development through increased density within an established rural residential
Commission finds that draft amendment provides for appropriate economic
development in facilitating additional housing sites within
close proximity to
activity centres, consistent with the regional strategy.
Local Strategic Framework
relevant strategic document is the Latrobe Strategic Plan 2020-2030 (Latrobe
Strategic Plan).
its supporting report, the applicant submitted that a series of local strategies
further support the Latrobe Strategic Plan, noting
that Port Sorell &
Environs Strategic Plan 2008 (Port Sorell Strategic Plan 2008) is a local
strategy most applicable to the
draft amendment.
Port Sorell Strategic Plan 2008; a strategic plan that provided a framework for
future use and development of Port Sorell region,
identified the site as land
for future rural residential development.
its supporting report, the planning authority assessed the draft amendment
against the relevant principles the Port Sorell Strategic
2016, Latrobe Council resolved to review the Port Sorell Strategic Plan 2008, to
test if its use and development framework was
still applicable and provided
further guidance regarding rural residential development.
Port Sorell and Environs Strategic Plan Review 2019 (the Review 2019):
recommended the
site be retained as future rural residential land as identified in the Port
Sorell Strategic Plan 2008; and
noted that the
site was yet to be rezoned.
applicant and the planning authority submitted that the proposed amendment align
with the Latrobe Strategic Plan, the Port Sorell
Strategic Plan 2008 and the
Review 2019, noting that Objective 4.1.3 of the Latrobe Strategic Plan
identifies that in order to effectively
manage land use planning, the
recommendations of the Port Sorell and Environs Strategic Plan Review 2019
should be implemented.
Commission consideration
Commission notes a range of strategies are relevant to the purpose of the
proposed amendment.
Commission agrees that the draft amendment has regard to the local strategies as
it facilitates appropriate development within
an area identified for future
rural residential development.
Commission finds that the draft amendment aligns with the strategic direction
for the future land use of the site, as identified
in the Latrobe Strategic Plan
and various relevant local strategies.
State Policies
State Coastal Policy 1996
applicant and planning authority considered that the State Coastal Policy is
relevant to the draft amendment.
its supporting report, the planning authority assessed the draft amendment
against the relevant principles of the State Coastal
applicant and planning authority submitted that the development standards of the
Tasmanian Planning Scheme will ensure desired
development outcomes are achieved
in mitigating risk from natural hazards and minimizing impacts on coastal water
environments.
State Policy on Water Quality Management
applicant and planning authority considered that the State Water Quality
Management Policy is relevant to the draft amendment.
its supporting report, the planning authority assessed the draft amendment
against the relevant outcomes and actions of the State
Policy on Water Quality
Management.
applicant and planning authority submitted that the regulatory assessment
process for development would ensure the requirements
of the State Policy on
Water Quality Management are upheld.
State Policy on the
Protection of Agricultural Land 2009
applicant and planning authority considered that the State Policy on the
Protection of Agricultural Land
(PAL Policy) is relevant to the
draft amendment, they do however, note that the site is not prime agricultural
its supporting report, the planning authority assessed the draft amendment
against principles 1 and 8 of the PAL Policy, making
reference to the relevant
findings of the expert consultant in the Agricultural Report.
applicant submitted that the draft amendment was consistent with the PAL
National Environment Protection Measures
planning authority considered that the
National Environment Protection
as State Policy do not have application to the draft
Commission consideration
Commission finds that the draft amendment is consistent with the relevant State
Policies. The Commission is satisfied that the
management of water quality and
the protection of coastal values associated with the site, can be managed
through future development
applications.
Resource Management and
Planning System Objectives
applicant and the planning authority considered that the draft amendment
furthers the Objectives of the Resource Management and
Planning System.
its supporting report, the planning authority responded to each of the
Objectives as set out in Parts 1 and 2 at Schedule 1 of
Commission consideration
Commission is satisfied that the draft amendment furthers the Objectives of the
Resource Management and Planning System at Schedule
1 of the Act.
Modifications required to draft amendment
section 40M of the Act the Commission must consider whether modifications to a
draft amendment of an LPS ought to be made.
Commission modifies the draft amendment by:
amending the
zone mapping to extend the Rural Living A Zone to the centreline of Parkers Ford
Road for compliance with the Commission’s
drafting practices; and
making a minor
change to the description of the draft amendment for
as set out in Annexure A.
Decision on draft amendment
to the modifications described above, the Commission is satisfied that the draft
amendment meets the LPS criteria and gives
its approval.
Attachments
Annexure A – Modified Amendment
Annexure B – Concept Plan
Modified amendment 1/2025 - Tasmanian Planning
Scheme - Latrobe
200 Parkers Ford Road, Port Sorell (folio of the Register 213993/1) and the
adjoining Crown road reserve from Rural Living
Zone D to Rural Living Zone A, as
shown below.
Concept Plan - 200 Parkers Ford Road, Port Sorell
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (37.8 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter