URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASPComm/2025/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:19:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tasmanian Planning Scheme - Latrobe amendment 2-2024 [2025] TASPComm 17 (1 September 2025)
Tasmanian Planning Scheme - Latrobe
2/2024 - Amend the LAT-1.0 Bellfield Industrial Specific
LDA-063/2024 - Demolish existing buildings and install internal
services and access infrastructure at 16 Port Sorell Road and 6183
Road, Wesley Vale
Planning authority
Latrobe Council
6ty° Pty Ltd
Date of decision
1 September 2025
The draft amendment is modified under
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
as set out in
Annexure A and is approved under
section 40Q.
It is determined that the permit cannot be considered by the Commission under
section 42A
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
as it is not
a request to which
section 40T(1)
Kevin Hazell Dan Ford
Delegate (Chair) Delegate
REASONS FOR DECISION
draft amendment proposes to amend the LAT-1.0 Bellfield Industrial Specific Area
Plan (SAP) by:
inserting a new
precinct, Precinct D, which applies to 16 Port Sorell Road, Latrobe (the
amending the
LAT-S1.1 Plan Purpose statements to acknowledge Precinct D;
additional qualifications in the SAP to limit the range of allowable uses in the
additional use standards for Precinct D relating to use area, stormwater
management and hours of operation, and
additional development standards relating to setbacks to the Bass Highway,
stormwater infrastructure, and landscaping requirements.
The permit application provides for the construction
of service infrastructure, including the upgrade of an existing vehicle access,
extension of a shared private roadway, and provision of stormwater and
electricity infrastructure.
Site information
The site is comprised of one title, located at 16
Port Sorell Road, Latrobe (folio of the Register 135671/1). The site has an area
of 13.87ha and contains a concrete batching plant, single dwelling, associated
outbuildings and a dam. The remaining area of the
site is used as a paddock. The
site has frontages to Port Sorell Road to the north-west, Bass Highway to the
south-west and Thompsons
Road to the east. The site has direct access to Port
Sorell Road.
Additionally, access to Frankford Road is provided via a right of way through
6183 Frankford Road (folio of the register 145641/4)
and there is an existing
drainage easement parallel to the northern boundary of variable width (1.5m west
and 3.0m east of the right
of way access).
The site is in the Rural Zone and contains the following overlays:
Bushfire-prone
Airport obstacle
limitation area (51.5m AHD)
Electricity
transmission corridor
vegetation area, and
Waterway and
coastal protection area.
The site adjoins the existing SAP area
which applies to properties to the north, which are also in the Rural Zone. The
existing SAP
has an area of 16.3ha. The draft amendment proposes to expand the
SAP area to include the site as Precinct D, which would increase
the size of the
SAP area to 30.17ha.
Surrounding land is in the Rural Zone, Agriculture Zone and Rural Living
Zone, and is characterised by a combination of commercial,
residential and
agriculture land uses. Opposite the site (to the north west of the Port Sorell
Road/Piping Lane junction) is the
LAT-P4.0 Particular Purpose Zone - Piping Lane
Business Park, which aims to provide for a mix of industrial and commercial
activities.
Issues raised in representations
Two representations were received. One was from the
applicant, which proposed changes to the following clauses of the draft
LAT-S1.6.2 Precinct D – Use Area
LAT-S1.6.3 Stormwater Management within Precinct D
LAT-S1.6.4 Hours of Operation within Precinct D
LAT-S1.7.5 Landscape Buffering within Precinct D
LAT-S1.7.6 Stormwater Management within Precinct D
representation the applicant also provided comments on condition 3 of the draft
The second representation raised concerns regarding traffic generated by
future development allowable under the draft amendment and
whether the site
would be connected to reticulated services.
The planning authority advised that the draft amendment was referred to
TasWater under
sections 56S
Water and Sewerage Industry Act
. TasWater did not provide a response.
Planning authority’s response to the
representations
The planning authority considered the representations
at its meeting on 12 August 2024 and made the following resolution on the draft
amendment and permit:
as the Planning Authority report, pursuant to Section 40K of the Land Use
Planning & Approvals Act 1993 relating to Amendment
2/2023 and Draft Permit
LDA-063/2024;
delegate to the General Manager its powers and functions to:
a) modify the report submitted under Recommendation 1 if a request or a
direction for further information is received from the Tasmanian
Commission; and
b) represent the planning authority at hearings of the Tasmanian Planning
Commission pursuant to Section 40L of the Land Use Planning
& Approvals Act
Date and place of hearing
The hearing was held at the Latrobe Council office at
170 Gilbert Street, Latrobe on 3 December 2024.
At the request of the parties, a reconvened hearing was held at the
Commission’s office at 144 Macquarie Street, Hobart on 8
August 2025.
Appearances at the hearing
Planning authority: Ms Jo Oliver, Consultant Town
Applicant: Mr Ashley Brook, 6ty° Pty Ltd
Applicant’s experts: Mr Mark Walters, 6ty° Pty Ltd
(Stormwater)
Mr Michael Tempest, RMCG (Agriculture)
Ms Anne Foster, Geoton Pty Ltd (Wastewater)
Mr Richard Burke, Traffic and Civil Services (Traffic)
Landowner: Mr Rick Bellchambers, RPRJ Pty Ltd
Representors: Mrs Tracey Bell, Sputco Pty Ltd
Mr Buz Green, Sputco Pty Ltd
Appearances at the reconvened hearing
Planning authority: Ms Jo Oliver, Consultant Town
Applicant: Mr Ashley Brook, 6ty° Pty Ltd
Applicant’s experts: Mr Mark Walters, 6ty° Pty Ltd
(Stormwater)
Landowner: Mr Rick Bellchambers, RPRJ Pty Ltd
Representors: Mrs Tracey Bell, Sputco Pty Ltd
Consideration of the draft amendment
section 40M of the
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
the Commission is required to consider the draft amendment to the Local
Provisions Schedule (LPS) and the representations,
statements and
recommendations contained in the planning authority’s section 40K report
and any information obtained at a hearing.
hearing was convened to assist the Commission in considering the issues raised
in the representations.
Commission must also consider whether the draft amendment meets the LPS criteria
as set out under section 34(2) of the Act:
(a) contains all the provisions that the SPPs specify must be contained in an
(b) is in accordance with section 32; and
(c) furthers the objectives set out in Schedule 1; and
(d) is consistent with each State policy; and
(da) satisfies the relevant criteria in relation to the TPPs; and
(e) as far as practicable, is consistent with the regional land use strategy, if
any, for the regional area in which is situated
the land to which the relevant
planning instrument relates; and
(f) has regard to the strategic plan, prepared under
Government Act 1993
, that applies in relation to the land to which the
relevant planning instrument relates; and
(g) as far as practicable, is consistent with and co-ordinated with any LPSs
that apply to municipal areas that are adjacent to the
municipal area to which
the relevant planning instrument relates; and
(h) has regard to the safety requirements set out in the standards prescribed
Gas Safety Act 2019
Specific Area Plan
section 32(4) of the Act, a LPS may only include a specific area plan
(a) a use or development to which the provision
relates is of significant social, economic or environmental benefit to the
a region or a municipal area; or
(b) the area of land has particular environmental,
economic, social or spatial qualities that require provisions, that are unique
to the area of land, to apply to the land in substitution for, or in addition
to, or modification of, the provisions of the SPPs.
applicant prepared a Planning Submission - Section 37(1) and 40T(1) Application,
July 2023 by 6ty° (planning submission)
in support of the draft amendment
and permit. In this document, it considered that extending the SAP to include
the site would provide
significant economic benefit to the region. It further
stated that:
the expansion of
the SAP would assist with demand for warehouses in the eastern part of the
the site is
adjacent to strategic transport networks, including the Tasmanian 26m B-double
Network and Bass Highway; and
new provisions
in the SAP would constrain the uses at the site to those that are dependent on
the State Road network and proximity
to the airport, port and railyard in
the planning authority's report supporting the draft amendment dated 11 June
2024 (supporting report), it agreed that the draft
amendment would provide
significant economic benefit for the region.
stated that:
It is a well-established economic principal that industry is best served close
to settlements, employment centres and arterial transport
routes in order to
draw potential employees and to reduce the transaction costs of freight
movement. (p. 43)
the hearing, it was noted that the planning authority considered the benefits of
the draft amendment to be at a sub-regional level.
Ms Jo Oliver, consultant
planner for Latrobe Council, considered that this meets the section 32(4)
criteria, as it relates to a municipal
Ashley Brook from 6ty° also advised that the draft amendment is looking to
satisfy demand for transport related industries.
That is, uses that require
large areas of land close to freight networks. It was considered that the SAP
allows for this type of
development.
the hearing, the Commission queried whether the SAP should apply over the Rural
Zone or an industrial zone, as the intent of the
draft amendment appeared to be
for industrial related uses that aren’t necessarily required for rural
activities.
Brooks advised that qualifications on certain use classes, such as Bulky Goods
Sales, would limit uses to those that support agricultural
activities.
the reconvened hearing, Ms Oliver advised that the SAP is required because the
site is un-serviced. Ms Oliver submitted this is
unique and sets this area apart
from other industrial areas. Ms Oliver emphasised the importance of managing
stormwater and wastewater
within the proposed Precinct as a basis for the
planning authorities continued support for the amendment proceeding.
Commission consideration
Commission accepts the justification from the planning authority that a SAP is
required for the site to cater for its unique characteristics.
That is, historic
industrial development on un-serviced land in a rural area with good access to
road, airport, port and rail networks.
Commission notes that the key SAP purpose statements relate to on-site
stormwater and wastewater management systems to cater for
industrial use and
development.
Commission finds that the draft amendment is consistent with section 32(4)(b) of
Specific Area Plan – Plan Purpose
the hearing, the plan purpose statements of the SAP were discussed. It was noted
that some of the plan purpose statements do not
further the section 32(4)
justification provided by the applicant and planning authority. Furthermore, the
SAP purpose statements
were originally drafted to reflect the Rural Resource
Zone of a previous planning scheme.
Commission issued a direction to the planning authority and applicant requesting
information on how the SAP purpose statements
reflect the section 32(4)
justification, how the objectives reflect the purpose statements and how the SAP
standards further the
stated objectives.
a submission dated 23 June 2025, the planning authority, with support from the
applicant, advised that the plan purpose statements
have been modified to align
with the provisions of the SAP. The planning authority stated that despite a
desire to improve the SAP,
there are limitations to the extent the SAP could be
modified, as changes could have implications for the existing precincts subject
to the SAP, with landowners not having been involved in the process to date.
Therefore, suggested modifications are focussed on clarifying
existing SAP
purpose statements and including specific statements for Precinct D.
its submission, the planning authority recommended the following modifications
to the purpose statements:
to provide for
limited opportunities for industrial use and development that is reliant on
access to freight networks, a distance
from sensitive use, or associated with
uses in the SAP area
to provide for
industrial use and development that require large operational areas
to provide for
coordinated access, infrastructure, location of buildings and landscaping
on-site services, and
minimise land
use conflict.
Commission consideration
Commission acknowledges that the plan purpose statements for the SAP were
unusual, given it was originally drafted for the Rural
Resource Zone of a
previous scheme and was not subject to section 32(4) criteria.
Commission considers that focussing the plan purpose statements on the matters
unique to the site, such as the need for on-site
wastewater and stormwater
management, and the site’s strategic location is required to support the
section 32(4) justification
Commission finds that the modified plan purpose statements provided by the
planning authority on 23 June 2025 are appropriate
for the intent of the SAP.
Specific Area Plan – Use Standards
draft amendment proposes to introduce new use standards for land in Precinct D
relating to discretionary use, area of use, stormwater
and wastewater
management, hours of operation, and Frankford Road upgrades.
the supporting report, the planning authority stated that the use standards for
discretionary uses and area of use were required
to ensure that new permissible
uses at the site would not displace uses that would otherwise be located in
existing industrial land
at Latrobe and Devonport. It stated that without these
use standards, there are no planning provisions that would confine the
establishment
of multiple, smaller tenancies of the same use class. There would
also be no provisions relating to scale, that would distinguish
the reliance of
a use on the site for size or location.
its submission, the planning authority suggested modifying clause LAT-S1.6.1
Discretionary use standards by removing ambiguous
text from the objective and
performance criteria. It considered that this better aligns the SAP with the
Rural Zone and reiterates
the intent for the SAP. It also suggested modifying
the performance criteria relating to Precinct D, to describe in more detail the
aspects that warrant a larger area for industrial use.
planning authority advised that clause LAT-S1.6.2 Precinct D – Use Area
sets a minimum standard of what is considered a
large area in an industrial
context. It stated that the standard relied on the definition of
‘development area’ in the
State Planning Provisions (SPPs), which
includes the extent of activities expected for use and development. It
considered that including
an operational relationship with another use, or uses,
established in the Bellfield Industrial Specific Area Plan also provides clarity
in what uses are considered appropriate to co-locate at the site.
the supporting report, the planning authority considered that the use standards
relating to wastewater and stormwater management
are required because there is
potential downstream impact from emissions caused by the range of uses allowable
at the site. The use
standards would require appropriate mitigation measures for
all stormwater and wastewater discharge in Precinct D at the site.
its submission, the planning authority advised that modifications to clause
LAT-S1.6.3 Stormwater Management within Precinct D
are proposed to clarify the
objective, acceptable solution and performance criteria. It considered that
linking the use standards
to the stormwater and wastewater management plan
required in the development standards provides a measurable standard for
treatment types and devices as it will be listed in the plan.
Commission queried why the planning authority included stormwater and wastewater
management provisions in both the use and development
standards, as usually
these provisions are only related to development standards.
planning authority stated that the reason for the apparent duplication of the
provisions was necessary because there are some
aspects of stormwater and
wastewater quality and volume that is directly associated with use, not
development. At the hearing, Ms
Oliver provided an example of a use that
requires the wash down of machinery, which may use detergents and chemicals. Ms
Oliver submitted
that the use standards would ensure that adequate wastewater
treatment is applied before the water containing the detergents and
enters the waterways.
the supporting report, the planning authority stated that the use standards for
hours of operation are required to preserve the
amenity of the dwellings on the
opposite side of Thompsons Road, which is adjacent to Precinct D. The planning
authority advised
that the 50m amenity buffer was drawn from the standards in
the Light Industrial Zone of the SPPs.
its submission, the planning authority advised that a standard for the upgrade
of Frankford Road was included following discussions
at the hearing which
highlighted the need for the road to be upgraded. The planning authority stated
that the standard will ensure
that upgrades to Frankford Road are completed
before the commencement of any new use, excluding Utilities, in Precinct D.
applicant advised in an email dated 23 June 2025 that it agrees with the matters
raised in the planning authority’s submission
mentioned above.
Commission consideration
Commission finds that the use standards relating to the area of land occupied by
each use is appropriate and links the SAP provisions
to the justification
provided by the applicant under section 32(4) of the Act.
Commission notes that use standards relating to stormwater and wastewater
management are unusual. In this instance, the Commission
is satisfied with the
justification provided by the planning authority for including the use standards
in the SAP. This is due to
the site being un-serviced with stormwater and
wastewater infrastructure. The Commission notes that generally, industrial use
be located on serviced land where there are adequate treatments for
stormwater and wastewater through physical infrastructure. The
Commission finds
that including stormwater and wastewater management use standards is
appropriate.
Commission considers that the inclusion of use standards relating to upgrades to
Frankford Road are required, as it was stated
at the hearing that the upgrades
must occur to facilitate traffic increase caused by future use at the site.
Commission finds that the use standards are appropriate for the site and further
the plan purposes statements of the SAP.
Specific Area Plan – Development Standards
draft amendment proposes to introduce new development standards for land in
Precinct D relating to vehicle access, landscape buffering,
stormwater and
wastewater management, and the development plan. Modifications specific to
Precinct D were also made to the existing
development standards.
the application report, the applicant stated that the provisions for vehicle
access were proposed as the future development of
the site is intending to be
divided through a strata scheme. It stated that:
The SAP requires vehicular access to be from Frankford Road, and in any event
there would be significant constraints in obtaining
access for industrial
development from Port Sorell Road, Thompsons Road or the Bass Highway. (p. 17)
applicant engaged Traffic and Civil Services to complete a Traffic Impact
Assessment, January 2022 (TIA) for the site.
TIA advised that the local transport system includes the Bass Highway, Port
Sorell Road and Frankford Road, which are all state
roads, and Thompsons Road
which is a council road.
private road connects the site to Frankford Road. This road forms part of a
seven lot strata title property located just north of
the site and within the
SAP. The road is designed for 26m B-double access.
TIA identified that access via the private road would be the best option for
access. This is predominantly due to sight lines.
Two other options are
available but unlikely to be viable. These include access to Thompsons Road,
which is too narrow for heavy
vehicles, or Port Sorell Road, which is too steep
for the safe access of heavy vehicles.
TIA further identified that upgrades to the Frankford Road/Port Sorell Road
junction area are required to facilitate the potential
traffic increase caused
by use facilitated by the draft amendment.
the hearing, the upgrades to the junction and private road were discussed with
parties. Mr Richard Burk of Traffic and Civil Services
advised that the junction
is currently substandard and should contain a turning lane.
Commission queried what would trigger the road upgrades, as the SAP does not
include any provisions relating to this requirement.
Rather, future development
applications would be assessed against the Parking and Sustainable Transport
Code, which contains provisions
for traffic generation from each site. If each
use is under the threshold, it appears that no upgrades would be required under
Burk advised that he was unsure how the costs of upgrading the junction would be
equitably distributed and what mechanisms are
available to require these
Oliver advised that there are no provisions in the SPPs to require these
upgrades if the traffic generation threshold is not exceeded.
the hearing the Commission issued a direction to the planning authority and
applicant to provide a submission on the external
road upgrades. Particularly,
it requested details on the mechanisms (if any) to ensure roads are upgraded for
the anticipated future
use and development intensity that the SAP allows for.
Additionally, details were requested on who will be responsible for the works,
trigger points and how the upgrades will be funded.
its submission, the planning authority advised that including a standard
requiring the upgrade to Frankford Road in the SAP ensures
that the upgrades
will be completed prior to additional use operating at the site. The planning
authority advised that it is the
landowner or developer’s responsibility
to fund the road and access upgrades.
is an existing landscape buffer provision in the SAP at clause LAT-S1.8.1 A3.2,
that applies to applications for subdivision.
The applicant advised that the
insertion of a new development standard for landscaping buffers was included
because the existing
standards are unlikely to apply to the site, as the
intension was to create strata titles through a strata scheme, rather than a
subdivision.
its supporting report, the planning authority considered that the development
standards relating to stormwater and wastewater management
are required as the
site is not serviced by reticulated stormwater and wastewater infrastructure,
and surface water drains downstream
into a watercourse.
the hearing, the Commission noted that the stormwater and wastewater management
provisions did not establish quantifiable parameters
for what is an acceptable
measure for stormwater and wastewater management.
its submission, the planning authority advised that ‘there is not an
alternate way of achieving the required detention through
performance criteria,
as the detention requirement is absolute’ (p.7). It advised that it is
only the distribution of detention
that is unknown, which should not be a
trigger for discretionary assessment as it may weaken stormwater management.
Nevertheless,
modifications are proposed to the standard to provide clearer
guidance in detailing the components to be included in the stormwater
wastewater management plan.
modified provision includes two measurable aspects, including:
the requirement
for a stormwater and wastewater management plan, that requires approval from the
stormwater authority, and
the technical
components to be included in the stormwater and wastewater management plan are
changed to be either numerically measurable
and calculable or are items to be
development standards were discussed at the hearing and a direction letter was
sent to parties requesting consideration of including
a Precinct D development
plan in the SAP with corresponding objectives, acceptable solutions and
performance criteria.
its submission, the planning authority provided a clause and figure relating to
a development plan for the SAP. The development
plan provides a spatial
representation of what is intended for Precinct D, including the linear
detention basin, vehicle access,
setbacks, amenity and landscape buffers, and
the electricity transmission corridor.
Commission consideration
Commission is satisfied with the justification provided by the planning
authority and applicant for the inclusion of the development
Particularly,
the Commission acknowledges that vehicle access is required to the site from an
existing access between Precincts A
and C. The Commission finds that including
vehicle access standards in the SAP is an appropriate way to regulate specific
requirements for the reasons identified by the planning authority.
Commission further notes that development standards for stormwater and
wastewater management are required to ensure adequate treatment
is provided on
site. The Commission finds that the development standards achieve this.
Commission considers that the requirements relating to a landscape buffer should
also apply to the Utilities use class as the
works may have visual impacts when
viewed from surrounding roads.
Commission finds that the development standards further the clause objectives
and plan purpose statements, and the overall intent
of the SAP.
Commission appreciates the planning authority and applicant’s openness to
include a development plan in the SAP. This has
enabled the key spatial elements
of the SAP to be shown visually, aiding the interpretation of the written
elements of the SAP.
Regional land use strategy
relevant regional strategy is the Cradle Coast Regional Land Use Strategy,
2010-2030 (regional strategy).
its planning report, 6ty° considered that the draft amendment is consistent
with the regional strategy for the reasons detailed
considered that the draft amendment provides opportunities for transport,
warehousing and related uses in the region, which
is intended for export
orientated industries. It stated that the site characteristics are suitable for
providing employment land.
These characteristics include:
the topography,
which has a gentle fall;
the location,
which is near the State freight road network, Devonport Airport, the Port and
the feeder and
private roads accessible to the site, which accommodate 26m B-double
the proximity to
the Devonport and Latrobe settlement areas;
vegetation; and
separation from
adjacent agricultural land.
stated that the draft amendment is consistent with the agricultural production
policies as the draft amendment is intended
to provide use and development
opportunities that support agricultural production, such as rural supplies.
further considered that the site is small and isolated from surrounding
agricultural land, making the agricultural potential of
the site limited. It
advised that the site is not a significant local or regional agricultural estate
and the loss of this land for
agricultural activities is minor. Further
justification on the agricultural viability of the site is discussed under State
the manufacturing and processing policies of the regional strategy, 6ty°
claimed that:
The relatively targeted range of uses proposed ensure that the subject site
would not directly compete with future industrial development
identified regionally significant precinct... (p. 36)
was considered important to ensure that manufacturing is clustered together in
locations that have an advantage for industry.
It is also directly related to
the road transport policies. 6ty° stated that the draft amendment would
expand an existing industrial
area that has access to major freight routes. It
considered that this is preferable over sites that have limited access.
the supporting report, the planning authority agreed with the statements from
6ty° about the policies relating to economic
activity and jobs. In addition
to this, the planning authority considered that the draft amendment is
consistent with policies relating
to water management, land, and integrated land
use and infrastructure planning. It made the following comments:
the inclusion of
a provision for stormwater in Precinct D would ensure appropriate management for
the quantity and quality of stormwater
entering the downstream watercourse;
a landscape
buffer along the Bass Highway frontage provides an opportunity for reusing
wastewater and stormwater;
amendment would allow for the best economic use of a highly modified site. This
also consolidates economic activity in an
area close to a major freight
amendment would not result in a ‘regional level activity’, as the
economic extent does not impact the whole
the land does
not have agricultural values that are significant to the region; and
amendment restricts uses to ensure that uses at the site are those reliant on
the location of the site.
addition to these policies, section 5.2 of the regional strategy focuses on
building an efficient and effective road, rail, air
and sea transport system to
move freight for economic activity.
site is strategically located adjacent to the Bass Highway, which is a Category
1 Trunk Route under the Tasmanian State Road Hierarchy
2006. The site has access
to this highway via Port Sorell Road, which is a Category 4 Feeder Road. This
supports uses that require
access to freight networks.
Commission consideration
Commission is satisfied with the justification provided by the applicant and
planning authority.
Commission finds that the draft amendment is, as far as practicable, consistent
with the regional strategy.
Strategic plan
relevant strategic plan is the Latrobe Council Strategic Plan 2020-2030
(strategic plan).
the planning report, 6ty° considered that the draft amendment has regard to
the community and economic development, infrastructure
and assets, and
development and regulatory objectives of the strategic plan for the following
amendment would provide opportunities for economic development by expanding an
existing industrial area
the upgraded
drainage infrastructure along the northern boundary of the site has been
constructed to accommodate stormwater runoff
from future development at the
expanding the
SAP is consistent with the regional strategy, state policies and other
requirements of the Act.
the supporting report, the planning authority considered that the draft
amendment meets the objectives of the strategic plan. This
is primarily due to
the lack of industrial land available in the area identified by 6ty°.
planning authority considered that the draft amendment has regard to the
following objectives and strategies of the strategic
support business
growth and development
emphasise the
municipality’s strategic locational advantages, and
resilient local economy.
planning authority states in its supporting report that:
The growth of an established precinct adjacent to a major arterial freight
route, to meet the specific demands for larger land areas
serving particular
industry sectors, directly supports the objective and strategies of the
Strategic Plan (p. 59)
Commission consideration
Commission is satisfied with the justification from the applicant and planning
Commission finds that the draft amendment has had regard to the strategic
State Policies
State Policy on the Protection of Agricultural
site is included in the agricultural land mapping, which means the
Policy on the Protection of Agricultural Land 2009
(PAL Policy) applies.
applicant engaged RMPC Pty Ltd to prepare an agricultural assessment of the
site. RMPC completed a site visit on 9 December 2020.
key findings of the agricultural assessment identified that the site is limited
by isolation, as it is not adjacent to other agricultural
land and there is no
irrigation available at the site. The report stated that it is highly unlikely
that the site would be developed
for a standalone commercial agricultural
enterprise or be farmed in conjunction with other agricultural land.
the hearing, Mr Michael Tempest of RMCG, considered that the site is classified
as 10.3ha of Class 3 land, 2.8ha of Class 5 land,
and just under 1ha of land
which is unmapped. Mr Tempest advised that there is just under 10ha of land that
could be used for agricultural
activities, but this is restricted due to the new
concrete batching plant at the site. The agricultural uses likely to occur at
site would be limited to dry land grazing or dry land cropping, such as
wheat crops. In summary, Mr Tempest advised that the site
contains very
restricted agricultural land, which has capacity for hobby scale, dry land
activities.
the hearing, the Commission asked the applicant and planning authority how the
draft amendment is consistent with Principle 9 of
the PAL Policy. Ms Oliver and
Mr Brook both advised that they considered Principle 9 to not apply. However,
they suggested that Resource
Development could be inserted in the use table to
ensure the use is not prohibited.
the hearing, the Commission requested a submission from the applicant and
planning authority on Principle 9 of the PAL Policy.
its submission, the planning authority suggested that the SAP be modified to
include Resource Development as a permitted use.
State Policy on
Water Quality Management 1997
its supporting report, the planning authority stated that:
... the site does drain directly to a watercourse that traverses a number of
agricultural properties before merging with Pardoe Creek,
which discharges to
Pardoe Beach on the northern coast (p. 44).
the site drains directly into a watercourse, the
State Policy on Water
Quality Management 1997
(Water Quality Policy) applies to the site.
the planning report, 6ty° stated that the provisions of the Water Quality
Policy are reflected in the Natural Assets Code
of the SPPs. It considered that
future development and works would be assessed against this code, and therefore
the draft amendment
is consistent with the Water Quality Policy.
the supporting report, the planning authority considered that surface water
runoff associated with future development can be managed
through conditions on
any planning permit granted, in accordance with section 6.11.2 of the SPPs.
Furthermore, it stated that including
SAP provisions relating to the discharge
of water was prudent to set appropriate parameters for future development. It
by stating that there are no circumstances where future development at
the site could not manage surface water quality.
site is not connected to public stormwater or wastewater infrastructure. As
such, the applicant engaged Geoton Pty Ltd to prepare
an on-site wastewater
management assessment, and 6ty° to prepare a stormwater review.
its planning report, 6ty° proposed stormwater management provisions for
Precinct D within the SAP. However, prior to certifying
the draft amendment, the
planning authority modified the stormwater management provisions and included
provisions relating to wastewater
to mitigate impacts on the watercourse.
the hearing, Mr Mark Walters of 6ty° advised that the whole area has
shallow and gently flowing paths. Mr Walters advised
that Thompsons Road is a
raised causeway, which results in the whole site acting as an unintended
retention basin. Stormwater infrastructure
has since been installed at the site
to mitigate this issue.
Walters further advised that when assessing stormwater that flows into natural
watercourses, the quality rather than quantity is
important. For example, a land
use that incorporates oil may result in stormwater requiring treatment prior to
being discharged into
the watercourse.
Commission raised concerns that the acceptable solution in the SAP is not a
quantifiable provision. Discussions at the hearing
also indicated that it is not
just stormwater at the site that requires assessment. Rather, it’s about
the drainage water quality.
the hearing, Ms Anne Foster from Geoton Pty Ltd advised that due to the nearby
watercourse, wastewater systems adjacent to the
drainage line must be setback at
Foster advised that an area of 400m² would be required on each lot to
accommodate a suitable wastewater system, which must
be free of development and
hardstands.
the hearing the Commission queried whether water coming from industrial uses
would also be treated through the wastewater treatment
system. Mr Walters
advised that industrial water would be treated separately through a different
process that recycles the water.
That is, it would not form part of the
wastewater treatment system or be discharged directly to the drainage line.
the hearing, the Commission requested a submission from the planning authority
and applicant on the provisions relating to stormwater
and wastewater in the SAP
and whether any changes are required.
its submission, the planning authority provided modified standards for
stormwater and wastewater management, as discussed under
the use standards and
development standards section.
State Coastal Policy 1996
site is more than 1km from a coastal zone. Therefore, the State Coastal Policy
1996 does not apply.
Commission consideration
Commission disagrees with the applicant and planning authority’s
assessment of the PAL Policy, which focussed primarily
on the agricultural
assessment prepared for the site rather than the principles of the policy.
Commission notes that part of the site is currently used for low scale
agricultural activities and as certified, the SAP would
make this a prohibited
Commission accepts the modified SAP that includes Resource Development in the
use table would satisfy this element of the policy.
Commission is satisfied with the justification provided from the applicant and
planning authority on the Water Quality Policy.
The Commission finds that the
provisions included in the SAP are appropriate for mitigating surface water at
Commission finds that the draft amendment is consistent with the PAL Policy and
Water Quality Policy. The Commission finds that
no other state policies apply to
Resource Management and Planning System
its planning report, 6ty° considered that the draft amendment furthers the
objectives of the Act. It stated that the draft
amendment extends an existing
SAP which allows for alternate economic use of agricultural land.
its supporting report, the planning authority considered that the site was
previously cleared for agricultural use, and therefore
does not contribute to
natural environmental value. However, as the site drains into a watercourse, the
planning authority considered
that the SAP needs to include adequate provisions
for stormwater management to ensure no negative impacts are caused to
environmental
values downstream of the site.
further considered that the draft amendment represents fair, orderly and
sustainable use and development as it supports the freight
and logistics sector.
To assist with this, clause LAT-S1.6.1 includes an objective for Precinct D,
which ensures that use and development
must rely on the strategic attributes of
land size or location. The planning authority advised that this objective is
required to
ensure certain uses allowable under the SAP are reliant on the
locality, which promotes the fair, orderly and sustainable use of
zoned land.
2(c) of the Objectives states:
To ensure that the effects on the environment are considered and provide for
explicit consideration of social and economic effects
when decisions are made
its supporting report, the planning authority stated that the economic rationale
for the draft amendment was formed as part of
the supply and demand of
industrial land in the Latrobe municipality.
the hearing, the Commission asked the planning authority whether this area is
intended for rural related or industrial related
activities, as it is unclear
from the underlying zone and the SAP purpose.
its submission, the planning authority advised that the modified plan purpose
statements provide clarity in the SAP, in that it
is for limited industrial use
that is reliant on the location of the site.
Commission consideration
Commission is satisfied with the justification provided at the applicant and
planning authority.
Commission finds that the draft amendment furthers the Objectives of the
Modifications required to draft amendment
section 40M of the Act the Commission must consider whether modifications to a
draft amendment of an LPS ought to be made.
Commission notes that the drafting of the SAP is unusual as it was drafted for
the Rural Resource Zone of a previous scheme and
has been modified to more
successfully integrate with the Rural Zone of the SPPs.
Commission finds that modifications are required to the SAP to align with the
SPPs, be consistent with drafting standards, clarify
various matters and provide
clear direction for applicants and assessing officers. The Commission finds that
as these modifications
do not change the intent of the SAP or the existing use
and development rights of the established Precincts A, B and C, they do not
constitute a substantial modification.
Decision on draft amendment
to the modifications described above, the Commission is satisfied that the draft
amendment meets the LPS criteria and gives
its approval.
Consideration of the permit
section 42A of the Act, the Commission must consider the permit and, under
section 42B, review the planning authority’s
decision as reported under
section 42.
Validity of permit application
the hearing, the Commission asked parties what use class applies to the proposed
works. Ms Oliver considered that the works are
minor utilities, which is a No
Permit Required use in the Rural Zone use table. Mr Brooks considered the use
class to be that relating
to the future industrial use of the site, which is
prohibited in the Rural Zone.
Commission has considered the two opinions from the planning authority and
applicant and agrees with the planning authority that
the permit could be
considered under the Utilities use class. This use class can be assessed through
the exemptions and Rural Zone
provisions of the SPPs without an amendment to the
planning scheme.
Commission considers that the works are therefore not prohibited, and approval
of the permit application is not dependent on approval
of the draft amendment as
required by section 40T of the Act.
Decision on permit
is determined that the permit cannot be considered by the Commission under
section 42A
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
as it is not
a request to which
section 40T(1)
Attachments
Annexure A – Modified amendment
Modified amendment 2/2024 to the Tasmanian Planning Scheme - Latrobe
the Bellfield Industrial Specific Area Plan overlay to 16 Port Sorell Road,
Latrobe, as shown below.
the text for LAT-S1.0 Bellfield Industrial Specific Area Plan and replace with
the following text.
LAT-S1.0 Bellfield Industrial Specific Area
LAT-S1.1 Plan Purpose
The purpose of the Bellfield Industrial Specific Area Plan is:
LAT-S1.1.1 To provide limited opportunities for industrial use and
development in a rural location that:
(a) relies upon the site’s locational advantage in proximity to the State
Highway and rail networks and the Devonport air and
seaports; or
(b) for Precinct D:
(i) does not compromise adjoining and nearby sensitive uses; or
(ii) may capitalise on co-location and association with uses in the Bellfield
SAP precincts.
LAT-S1.1.2 To provide for industrial use and development in Precinct D that
requires larger operational areas due to the nature and
scale of the use.
LAT-S1.1.3 That sites are only accessed from a constructed access to
Frankford Road. In Precinct D, to provide for access, location
of buildings,
landscaped visual buffers and infrastructure in accordance with the Bellfield
Development Plan.
LAT-S1.1.4 In Precinct D ensure that on-site management of stormwater
drainage and wastewater for new development areas protects the
environment.
LAT-S1.1.5 Use and development does not adversely impact views from the State
road network or adjacent land.
LAT-S1.2 Application of this Plan
LAT-S1.2.1 The specific area plan applies to the area of land designated as
Bellfield Industrial Specific Area Plan on the overlay
maps and in Figure
LAT-S1.2.2 In the area of land this plan applies to, the provisions of the
specific area plan are in substitution for, and are in
addition to, the
provisions of the Rural Zone, as specified in the relevant provision.
LAT-S1.3 Local Area Objectives
This clause is not used in this specific area plan.
LAT-S1.4 Definition of Terms
LAT-S1.4.1 In this specific area plan, unless the contrary intention
means the area shown in LAT-S1.1 as ‘A’.
means the area shown in LAT-S1.1 as ‘B’.
means the area shown in LAT-S1.1 as ‘C’.
means the area shown in LAT-S1.1 as ‘D’.
LAT-S1.5 Use Table
This clause is in substation for Rural Zone – Clause 20.2 Use
Qualifications
No Permit Required
Resource Development
If no new buildings.
Equipment and Machinery Sales and Hire
If in Precinct A or Precinct B.
Manufacturing and Processing
If in Precinct A, Precinct B or Precinct C.
Research and Development
If in Precinct C.
Resource Development
If not No Permit Required.
Service Industry
If in Precinct A.
Transport Depot and Distribution
If for minor utilities.
Discretionary
Bulky Goods Sales
(a) in Precinct B, Precinct C or Precinct D; and
(b) for wholesale of building materials, construction aggregates, garden and
landscape materials or rural supplies.
Equipment and Machinery Sales and Hire
If in Precinct D.
Manufacturing and Processing
If in Precinct D.
Service Industry
(a) not Permitted; and
(b) in Precinct B or Precinct D.
If not listed as Permitted.
All other uses
LAT-S1.6 Use Standards
LAT-S1.6.1 Discretionary use
This clause is in substitution for Rural Zone – clause 20.3.1
Discretionary Use A2 and P2.
That uses listed as discretionary:
(a) in Precincts A, B and C is to be without competition, displacement, conflict
or interference from other use within the rural
(b) in Precinct D:
(i) are appropriate for the rural location and rely upon proximity to the State
Highway and Devonport air and sea ports;
(ii) do not confine or restrain the operation of uses on adjacent properties;
(iii) require a larger area for industrial use and development, or relies on an
operational relationship with an established use
or requires a location distant
from sensitive use.
Acceptable Solutions
Performance Criteria
No Acceptable Solution.
A use listed as Discretionary must:
(a) be appropriate for the location, having regard to:
(i) nature, scale, and intensity of the use;
(ii) operational characteristics;
(iii) likely impact of traffic composition, volume, and frequency on operation
and safety of the road network;
(iv) measures to minimise likely adverse impact on existing and
manufacturing,
processing, service, storage, and transport activities on land within the
boundaries of the Bellfield Industrial Specific
Area Plan; and
of land beyond the boundaries of the Bellfield Industrial Specific Area Plan;
(b) in Precinct D, rely on:
(i) a larger area of land to accommodate:
storage and display;
and unloading;
emissions, including any buffers to emissions, or
manoeuvrability
of large/heavy vehicles; or
(ii) support another use, or uses, established in the Bellfield Industrial
Specific Area Plan; or
(iii) a location distant from sensitive uses.
LAT-S1.6.2 Scale of use within Precinct D
This clause is in addition to Rural Zone – clause 20.3 Use
That each use of land within Precinct D, excluding Resource Development,
relies on larger development areas, relies on locational
advantages, or supports
other uses in the Bellfield Industrial Specific Area Plan.
Acceptable Solutions
Performance Criteria
Development area in Precinct D, excluding minor utilities and Resource
Development, is not less than 5000m².
A use in Precinct D must require a development area that is
appropriate for the use, having regard to:
(a) operational characteristics, nature and scale of the use, and the need to
locate in close proximity to primary freight routes;
(b) whether the use supports another use, or uses, established in the Bellfield
Industrial Specific Area Plan; or
(c) the need for a location distant from sensitive uses.
LAT-S1.6.3 Stormwater and wastewater management within Precinct D
This clause is in addition to Rural Zone – clause 20.3 Use
Stormwater, wastewater and drainage runoff is to be managed to provide for
appropriate quality of water discharged from the site into
watercourses.
Acceptable Solutions
Performance Criteria
A use in Precinct D must be accompanied by a stormwater and wastewater
management plan approved by the planning authority.
The stormwater and wastewater treatment system is consistent with the
approved plan.
That uses incorporate treatment systems and devices to manage stormwater
runoff and drainage water quality, including wastewater,
for sediment and
pollutants relevant to the specific use.
Use must manage the treatment of stormwater, drainage and wastewater
particular to the use having regard to:
(a) the type and quantity of emissions;
(b) the degree of exposure to weather;
(c) the type of treatment;
(d) processes for waste storage and removal; and
(e) management processes if utilising land outside of the development area.
LAT-S1.6.4 Hours of operation within Precinct D
This clause is in addition to Rural Zone – clause 20.3 Use
That uses within Precinct D do not cause an unreasonable loss of amenity to
existing residential uses.
Acceptable Solutions
Performance Criteria
Hours of operation of a use in Precinct D, excluding minor utilities,
within the amenity buffer measured 50m from adjacent lots containing
residential
uses, shown in Figure LAT-S1.2, must be within the hours of:
(a) 7.00am to 9.00pm Monday to Saturday; and
(b) 8.00am to 9.00pm Sunday and public holidays.
Hours of operation of a use in Precinct D, excluding minor utilities, must
not cause an unreasonable loss of amenity to residential
use, having regard
(a) the timing, duration or extent of vehicle movements; and
(b) noise, lighting or other emissions.
LAT-S1.6.5 Frankford Road Upgrade for Precinct D
This clause is in addition to Rural Zone – clause 20.3 Use
To require upgrades to Frankford Road and the vehicle crossing to be
undertaken prior to the commencement of a use within Precinct
Acceptable Solutions
Performance Criteria
A use within Precinct D, excluding minor utilities and Resource
Development, must be:
(a) accessed from Frankford Road; and
(b) the access and the vehicle crossing works must have been completed generally
in accordance with Figure LAT-S1.3 and Figure LAT-S1.4;
(c) The upgrades to Frankford Road and the vehicle crossing, generally
accordance with Figure LAT-S1.3 and Figure LAT-S1.4, must
be completed to the
satisfaction of the road authority prior to the commencement of the use.
A use within Precinct D, excluding minor utilities, must be subsequent to
upgrades to Frankford Road and the vehicle crossing, and
must minimise any
adverse effects on the road and vehicle crossing, having regard to:
(a) any increase in traffic caused by the use;
(b) the nature of the traffic generated by the use;
(c) the nature of the road;
(d) traffic interactions at the vehicle crossing;
(e) any traffic impact assessment; and
(f) any advice received from the road authority.
LAT-S1.7 Development Standards for Buildings and Works
LAT-S1.7.1 Development plan
This clause is in addition to Rural Zone – clause 20.4 Development
Standards for Buildings and Works.
That development provides for:
(a) vehicular circulation and access in Precinct D is suitable for its intended
(b) an appropriate setback of buildings to roads and adjoining land; and
(c) includes suitable landscape buffering and screening along Precinct D
Acceptable Solutions
Performance Criteria
Vehicular access to and from land within Precinct D must be provided by
means of an extension of the existing right of way at a minimum
of 9m width,
located within Precinct A.
No Performance Criterion.
The private access way within Precinct D is in accordance with:
(a) Figure LAT-S1.2 Development Plan; or
(b) an alignment that includes:
(i) a minimum width of 8m; and
(ii) a turning circle with a minimum outer diameter of 30m for a turning circle
on a dead-end section.
No Performance Criterion.
Each individual development area with Precinct D, excluding for minor
utilities, must abut the private access way for a minimum width
Each individual development area within Precinct D, excluding minor
utilities, must connect with the private access way to provide
convenient, safe
and efficient vehicular access, having regard to the ability for vehicles to
manoeuvre on-site.
The walls of a building must be in accordance with the setbacks identified
in Figure LAT-S1.2.
The walls of a building must be sited having regard to:
(a) prevailing setbacks of existing and approved buildings;
(b) separation between the road and the building to provide a sufficient buffer
or screen the site from a road; and
(c) include measures to screen and attenuate visual impact of the site to view
from a road and from land outside the boundaries of
the land to which the
Bellfield Industrial Specific Area Plan applies.
In Precinct D, a 7.5m wide landscape buffer in accordance with Figure
LAT-S1.2 must:
(a) be planted in its entirety, concurrent with the establishment of a
development area;
(b) be landscaped with vegetation to screen views into the site from the
adjacent road; and
(c) achieve a height of not less than 6 metres, except for that part of the
buffer that is within the Electricity Transmission Corridor
Protection Area, where the height must not be less than 3 metres.
No Performance Criterion.
LAT-S1.7.2 Appearance of development
This clause is in substitution for Rural Zone – clause 20.4.1 Building
height, and clause 20.4.2 Setbacks A1 and P1.
That development has minimal visual impact when viewed from the road
network beyond the boundaries of the Bellfield Industrial Specific
Acceptable Solutions
Performance Criteria
Building height must be not more than 12m.
The visual impact of building height is minimised, having regard to:
(a) the degree of screening provided by the landscape buffer shown in Figure
LAT-S1.2 or any existing or additional vegetation screening;
(b) the degree to which development impacts the skyline;
(c) mitigation provided through materials and finishes;
(d) topography; and
(e) the degree to which the development integrates with other buildings within
the Bellfield Industrial Specific Area Plan.
Site coverage of a development area must be not more than 50%.
No Performance Criterion.
Electricity reticulation and site connections must be installed
underground.
It must be impractical or unreasonable to install electricity reticulation
and site connections underground.
External materials other than natural stone, earth, timber or glass must be
finished in 1 or more of the following colours as defined
Standard AS 2700 – 1996, Colour Standards for General Purposes
(a) B53 Dark Blue Grey;
(b) G63 Deep Bronze Green;
(c) N65 Graphite Grey;
(d) N52 Mid Grey;
(e) N54 Basalt;
(f) Y61 Black Olive;
(g) G15 Rain Forest Green; or
(h) N64 Dark Grey.
External colours must complement the surrounding environment.
LAT-S1.7.3 Lighting
This clause is in addition to Rural Zone – clause 20.4 Development
Standards for Buildings and Works.
External lighting is not to cause loss of amenity to road users, the
Devonport airport, or of a use on adjacent land.
Acceptable Solutions
Performance Criteria
External lighting must be hooded and directed so as not to cause:
(a) overspill onto adjacent land or onto Port Sorell Road, Bass Highway or
Frankford Road; and
(b) interference to air safety at Devonport Airport.
No Performance Criterion.
LAT-S1.7.4 Stormwater and wastewater management within Precinct D
This clause is in addition to Rural Zone – clause 20.4 Development
Standards for Buildings and Works.
Stormwater and wastewater is to be treated to:
(a) prevent nuisance downstream of the discharge point; and
(b) manage water quality to protect the downstream environment.
Acceptable Solutions
Performance Criteria
A Stormwater and Wastewater Management Plan for the full extent of Precinct
D, is prepared by a suitably qualified person and approved
by the planning
authority, that provides for:
(a) on-site detention of stormwater from development meeting the following
parameters:
(i) the discharge rate is no greater than the pre-development flow rate for
events between the 20% and the 1% AEP storm event; and
(ii) all development areas are serviced by:
shared private system consisting of a linear detention basin as shown in Figure
LAT-S1.2 and pipe network, catering for each development
area being developed up
to 85% coverage of the land by buildings and hardstands; or
combination of a shared private system and detention within individual
development areas to a total 85% coverage of the land by
buildings and
hardstands;
(b) treatment systems and devices to manage stormwater runoff and drainage water
quality, including wastewater, for sediment and
specified pollutants anticipated
for the range of uses, prior to discharge from the overall site, and
(i) gully/sediment traps;
(ii) triple interceptors;
(iii) proprietary interceptors for fuel and oil;
(iv) proprietary interceptors for detergents;
(v) on-site wastewater treatment confined to each development area; and
(c) ongoing management and maintenance of on-site stormwater and water quality
No Performance Criterion.
Development in Precinct D is consistent with the approved Stormwater and
Wastewater Management Plan for:
(a) shared, or combined shared and development specific stormwater detention;
(b) where the area of building and hardstand for an individual development is
less than the approved Stormwater Management Plan,
stormwater detention storage
is provided so that the discharge rate from the development area is no greater
than the pre-development
flow rate for events between the 20% and the 1% AEP
storm event; and
(c) treatment systems and devices for management of sediment and pollutants.
Development in Precinct D that is not consistent with the approved
Stormwater and Wastewater Management Plan must independently manage
and dispose
of stormwater runoff through treatment systems and devices incorporated into the
development area, designed by a suitably
qualified person, that provides
(a) additional stormwater detention storage so that the discharge rate from the
development area is no greater than the pre-development
flow rate for events
between the 20% and the 1% AEP storm event; and
(b) appropriate surface drainage to prevent nuisance on adjoining development
Within Precinct D treatment systems and devices are incorporated into the
development area to manage the quality of stormwater, wastewater
and drainage
runoff quality for pollutants relevant to the specific use, prior to discharge
to the private stormwater pipe network
or surface drainage, to mitigate adverse
downstream environmental impacts.
LAT-S1.8 Development Standards for Subdivision
LAT-S1.8.1 Lot design
This clause is in substitution for Rural Zone – clause 20.5.1 Lot
The minimum properties of each lot, or a lot proposed in a plan of
subdivision are to:
(a) provide a suitable development area for the intended use; and
(b) provide access from a road.
Acceptable Solutions
Performance Criteria
Each lot, or a lot proposed in a plan of subdivision, must have an area of
not less than 5000m².
No Performance Criterion.
There must be no new access onto Frankford Road.
No Performance Criterion.
Each lot, or a lot proposed in a plan of subdivision, must:
(a) provide a landscape buffer area with a width of not less than 7.5m along a
frontage; and
(b) provide a landscape buffer area with a width of not less than 10m along any
boundary to land to which the Bellfield Industrial
Specific Area Plan does not
The landscape buffer area must be landscaped and treated to assist
screening of development to view from a road or from land to which
the Bellfield
Industrial Specific Area Plan does not apply by retention, replacement, or
provision of trees or plantings of a type
consistent with the established
vegetation character of adjacent land.
No Performance Criterion.
LAT-S1.9 Tables
This clause is not used in this specific area plan.
Figure LAT-S1.1 Bellfield Industrial Specific Area Plan
Figure LAT-S1.2 Bellfield Development Plan
Figure LAT-S1.3 Frankford Road upgrade
Figure LAT-S1.4 Vehicle crossing upgrade
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (45.5 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter