URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASRPDComm/2009/26.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:20:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Clarence Planning Scheme 2007 Amendment A-2008/30 [2009] TASRPDComm 26 (18 June 2009)
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Land Use Planning and Approvals
Resource Planning and Development
Commission Act 1997
DECISION AND REASONS FOR DECISION
PLANNING SCHEME
Draft Amendment
A draft amendment to rezone land at 17-17A, 19, 21, 23, 25, 27 and 29 Gordons
Hill Road, Bellerive from Residential to Local Business.
In accordance with its decision dated 20 April 2009 and pursuant to Section 8 of
Resource Planning and Development Commission Act 1997
, the Commission
delegated to Mr Robin Nolan:
powers and functions under
sections 40
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
in relation to draft amendment
A-2008/30 to the Clarence Planning Scheme 2007; and
connection with the exercise of those powers in performance of those functions,
its powers under Part 3 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Date and Place of
Date of Hearing:
Tuesday, 19 May 2009
Hearing Room 1, Resource Planning and Development Commission,
Floor, 144 Macquarie Street,
Representations
Representations were received
H Glidden, on behalf of Housing Tasmania
L Murray, on behalf of Housing Tasmania
P & S Hyland
A Ellis & E Devine
T Pain & H Gan-Pain
Attendance at the Hearing
Mr D Ford represented Clarence Council.
Mr M Clark of JMG Engineers and Planners represented Hi-lite Plaster Pty
Representors
Mr T Pain represented T Pain & H Gan-Pain
Issues raised in the representations
− Properties are strategically located for residential use close to all
− Local Business zoning will affect the ability for residential
redevelopment.
− Local Business zoning will restrict further development of existing
consulting rooms.
− The amendment will undermine business confidence for recent decisions
made under Residential zoning.
− Any future development would be more expensive.
− The affect of permissible use or development under local business zoning
on residential amenity.
Council’s Response to the Representations
Council resolved to advise that it considers the merits of the representations
do not warrant modification to the draft amendment.
Commission’s assessment of the draft amendment
The Draft Amendment
The draft amendment proposes to rezone land at 17 – 17A, 19, 21, 23, 25,
27 and 29 Gordons Hill Road, Bellerive from Residential
The application to Council to initiate the draft amendment was in the form of a
request for Local Business zoning for 7 titles but
principally to change the
zoning of 19 Gordons Hill Road. Council initiated the amendment under s.34 of
LUPAA partly of its own
motion as not all property owners consented to the
application being made.
Site and locality
The subject land of 0.56ha consists of seven lots situated in Bellerive, as
detailed below:
17 – 17A Gordons Hill Road, Bellerive
Consulting rooms
T D Pain & H J Gan-Pain
19 Gordons Hill Road, Bellerive
(residential) Plaster business
Hi-Lite Plaster Pty Ltd
21Gordons Hill Road, Bellerive
Residential
Director of Housing
23 Gordons Hill Road, Bellerive
Residential
Director of Housing
25 Gordons Hill Road, Bellerive
Residential & canvass repair
P M & S L Hyland,
27 Gordons Hill Road, Bellerive
Residential
29 Gordons Hill Road, Bellerive
Residential
Director of Housing
The land is located in a residential area where the principal use is
residential. The principal non residential use is a recently
established use
for consulting rooms that are allowable under Residential zoning and prohibited
under Local Business Zoning. The
land has a frontage to Gordons Hill Road of
some 165m between Mildura and Bligh Streets.
On the opposite side of Gordons Hill Road is the Rosny Park commercial district
with Commercial zoning. Gordons Hill Road currently
defines the extent of the
Rosny Park commercial area except for a section of Local Business zoning to the
north of the current application
comprising a former service station site and
shops fronting 31-37 Gordons Hill Road between Bligh Street and Cumberland
Part 2 of the planning scheme provides the Planning Policy Framework that refers
to the reinforcement of Rosny Park as the prime
retail and commercial centre and
to not support rezoning of land for retail purposes on freestanding sites
separated from existing
The strategy for local business zoning is stated as:
‘Applying the Business Zone to existing retail areas and to limited
areas which adjoin these areas so as to provide for expansion
which reinforces
the retail hierarchy and applying the Local Business Zone to existing service
business areas and to local shopping
The subject land is not an existing service business area or a local shopping
centre. The draft amendment is not supported through
the strategies in the
planning policy framework.
Clause 6.7.1 of the planning scheme states that the purpose of the Local
Business zone is:
(a) To implement the Planning Policy Framework.
(b) To provide for business activities that meet the daily needs of the local
community, in a manner that does not affect the safety
and amenity of the
It has not been established that rezoning to Local Business is required to
provide for the daily needs of the local community. It
will compete with or
effectively extend the adjoining Rosny Park business area, which includes uses
that provide for the daily needs
of the nearby community, including the subject
land, such as supermarkets, newsagents and other shops. The matter of safety
Local Business zoning has not been addressed in the submissions and Local
Business zoning has the potential of being adverse to the
amenity of adjoining
residential areas by a commercial use interface which would now share a common
boundary with residences and
not be separated by Gordons Hill Road as is the
current case.
Mr Pain raised concerns that the draft amendment would result in pressure for
Local Business zoning of residential land in Gordons
Hill Road between Mildura
Street and Cambridge Road leading to additional encroachment on residential
Mr Clark contended that Gordons Hill Road was not an effective buffer between
the current Commercial and Residential zones because
of the impacts of traffic
and the commercial outlook for dwellings fronting the road. He further
submitted that the proposed Local
Business zone was a transition zone providing
a buffer for Residential zoned land to the east.
Mr Pain’s counter submission was that the width of the road, front
setbacks and dwellings provided an effective buffer to the
rear private open
space of dwellings on the subject land and to other Residential zoned land to
the east. He submitted the draft
amendment would allow use and development that
would result in no buffer between the subject land and the rear open space of
adjoining Residential zoned land.
On balance, the views of Mr Pain are preferred.
The draft amendment will also result in the recently approved consulting rooms
at 17 – 17A Gordons Hill Road becoming a non-conforming
use. Mr Pain
expressed concern that plans for further development of the consulting rooms
would be unreasonably restricted by the
Arguments for a Local Business zoning to form a transition between Commercial
and Residential zoning are not accepted. The planning
scheme strategy does not
contemplate this as a function of the zone and in this case Gordons Hill Road is
a defining boundary between
Commercial and Residential zoning. It is concluded
that the certified draft amendment lacks a strategic base.
Use and development
The Local Business zone does not contain any development standards for building
setback and the draft amendment will allow for a
variety of permitted and
discretionary commercial developments up to 8.0m in height to be built to the
rear boundary of adjoining
residential land. This will lead to the potential of
overshadowing and other land use conflicts that may affect the safety and
of the area, contrary to the purpose of the Local Business
Turning to the specific case, the draft amendment was designed primarily to
allow the continuation of an illegal use for a plaster
supply business. The
evidence was that a prohibited use operated under various temporary permits
under the previous planning scheme
in the residential zone. Mr Ford advised no
existing use rights had been established when the 2007 Planning Scheme took
the use was an intensification beyond the extent of existing temporary
Clause 3.1.5 of the planning scheme provides that all use or development, other
than subdivision, must be categorised in accordance
with one or more of the uses
Section 4.3
of the planning scheme.
Where a use class is not substantially described by one of the defined uses then
it is undefined and must
be considered a discretionary use in all zones, other
than the Special Use zone.
Clause 3.5.1 provides that a use may have ancillary uses that are subservient to
a principal use, while clause 3.5.2 provides that
where a use does not fall into
a single use category and it is not an integral and subservient part of an
existing or proposed use,
each part must be defined separately.
The documents provided to the Commission did not consider the matter of land
use. At the hearing there was no agreement as to the
appropriate use
classification of the Hi-lite Plaster Pty Ltd business at 19 Gordons Hill Road.
Both Mr Clark and Mr Ford felt that
the business should have a mixed-use
classification for the separate components of shop, office and storage.
The relevant use classes, definitions and status in the Local Business zone are
as follows:
Use definition
Use status in the Local Business zone
Land used for administration, or clerical, technical, professional or other like
business activity. No goods or materials intended
for manufacture, sale, or
hire may be stored on the land
Discretionary
Land used to sell goods or services, or to hire goods, but does not include uses
defined elsewhere in this clause.
Discretionary
Land used to store or display goods. It may include the distribution and the
wholesaling selling of the goods.
On the information available the current use of 19 Gordons Hill Road is not
multiple use, but the principal use is not readily defined.
An office as a
principal use is not appropriate as goods are stored and sold from the site. A
shop is not seen as the principal
use of the site and if the principal use is
storage (warehouse), this is prohibited. Instead the various use components are
appropriately
classed as ancillary to a principle use akin to a building
contractor’s depot, which is either an Undefined or a Service Industry
use, which is defined as:
Use of a premises not more than 200
square metres which has no detrimental affect on the amenity of other activities
in the area,
and is used for either:
manufacture of goods intended for sale on the premises;
directed towards the servicing of goods; or
having a retail shop front and used as a depot for processing goods to be
If the Hi-lite Plaster Pty Ltd business at 19 Gordons Hill Road is an undefined
use it may be approved under the residential zone
as a discretionary use, if it
is a service industry it is a prohibited use in the proposed Local Business
zone. In either case,
the need for the amendment is not made
If the assessment of use classification is wrong there remains the test under
Local Business zoning as to whether the use is a business
activity that
‘meets the daily needs of the local community’ consistent with the
purpose of the zone.
Application of State Policies
State Coastal Policy1996
The draft amendment involves land in urban Bellerive. Use or development on the
land would be consistent with the Policy.
Interim State Policy on the Protection of Agricultural Land 2008
The land is not agricultural land as defined in the Policy.
State Policy on Water Quality Management 1997
Stormwater and waste water can be managed in accordance with the State
National Environmental Protection Measures
The NEPMs are not applicable to the applications.
Schedule 1 Objectives
Part 1 objectives
(a) to promote the sustainable development of
natural and physical resources and the maintenance of ecological processes and
The draft amendment does not affect natural and physical resources or the
maintenance of ecological processes and genetic diversity.
(b) to provide for the fair, orderly and sustainable use and development of
air, land and water.
Local Business zoning is not assessed as fair, orderly or sustainable.
Development in this area has the potential to adversely impact
on residential
zoned land to the east and result in a recently approved use and development
becoming a non-conforming use.
(c) to encourage public involvement in resource management and
The draft amendment has been through the formal public processes required by the
(d) to facilitate economic development in accordance with the objectives set
out in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) above.
The draft amendment is not consistent with the objectives, strategies and
initiatives for economic development in the planning policy
framework of the
planning scheme and will not facilitate economic development consistent with the
above objectives.
(e) to promote the sharing of responsibility for resource management and
planning between the different spheres of Government, the
community and industry
in the State.
Use or development allowed by the draft amendment would involve the sharing of
responsibility by government, community groups and
Part 2 objectives
The Part 2 objectives are not furthered principally in
terms of securing a pleasant, efficient and safe working, living and
recreational
environment.
The draft amendment is assessed as being not consistent with the objectives and
strategies of the planning policy framework of the
planning scheme. Local
Business zoning will increase the potential for land use conflicts with
adjoining residential zoned land
and reduce the effectiveness of Gordons Hill
Road as defining the extent of the Rosny Park commercial area.
The draft amendment is opposed by the landowners for 4 of the 7 titles, is
unlikely to address the matter of Hi-lite Plaster Pty
Ltd in terms of the
appropriate classification of the use and will result in a recently approved use
and development becoming non-conforming.
The draft amendment should be rejected.
The Commission rejects the draft amendment pursuant to
Section 41(b)
Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
) and refuses the permit.
Robin Nolan
Resource Planning and Development Commission
18 June 2009
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (221 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter