URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMC/2025/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Community Housing Ltd v Tara Donald [2025] TASMC 5 (25 September 2025)
[2025] TASMC 05
MAGISTRATES COURT OF
Community Housing Ltd v Tara Donald
[2025] TASMC 05
COMMUNITY HOUSING
DONALD, Tara
M/2025/1426
DELIVERED ON:
25 September
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE/S:
September 2025, 7 July 2025
DECISION OF:
CATCHWORDS:
Residential Tenancies – Goods left behind after termination of
tenancy– Whether abandoned
Words and phrases – “appear to be abandoned”
Residential Tenancy Act
Moorehouse v Angus and Robertson
(No. 1) Proprietary Limited
[1981] 1NSWLR 700
Craig Williamson Proprietary Limited v Barrowcliff
[1915] VicLawRp 66
[1915] VLR 450
Banks v Ferrari
[2000] NSWSC 874
Keene v Carter
(1994) 12 WAR 20
Simpson v Gowers
(1981) 121 DLR (3d)
REPRESENTATION:
Solicitors:
Community Housing
Limited – Self-represented
Respondent:
paragraphs:
Serial No 05/2025
File No M/2025/1426
COMMUNITY HOUSING LIMITED v TARA DONALD
REASONS FOR DECISION STANTON, DCM
25 September 2025 I made an order permitting the owner to sell the
tenant’s goods left at the property after the termination
of a residential
tenancy agreement for the best price reasonably obtainable. I indicated I would
give my reasons for making that
order shortly after that. These are those
6 September 2023 Tara Donald entered into a residential tenancy agreement with
Crescent in Rocherlea. On 11
March 2025 Ms Donald left the property. She did not remove her personal
belongings which have an estimated
value of $980.00. They are still there.
Housing Ltd, who I infer is now managing the property for Homes Tasmania, has
applied for an order pursuant to section 48(1)(c)
Residential Tenancy
1997 (the Act) permitting the sale of Ms Donald’s
belongings.
The power to order sale of abandoned goods
48 of the Act provides:
“48. Disposal or
sale of abandoned goods
(1) If a residential tenancy agreement is
terminated and goods on the premises to which the agreement relates appear to be
by the tenant, the owner may –
(a) dispose of the goods if they appear to
the owner to have no value; or
(b) sell the goods if they appear to have a
value less than the prescribed amount; or
(c) apply to a magistrate for an order
permitting the sale of the goods for the best price reasonably obtainable if
they appear to
have a value equal to or more than the prescribed amount.
(2) The owner is to verify by a statutory
declaration the means of disposal of any goods under
subsection (1)(a)
(3) The proceeds of the sale of goods are
to be dealt with as follows:
(a) firstly, in the payment of any debt owed
by the tenant to the owner;
(b) secondly, in the payment of the
reasonable costs of the sale;
(c) thirdly, any balance to be kept in an
interest bearing account for the tenant for a period of 6 months.
(4) If the tenant does not claim any
proceeds of the sale of goods kept under
subsection (3)(c)
6 months, the proceeds become the property of the Commissioner.”
of the preconditions to making the order are met.
the Residential Tenancy Agreement was terminated.
14 May 2025 the tenant signed a document headed “Notice of Vacating
Property” which acknowledged certain obligations
of the tenant. That
position seems to have been accepted by the owner. I therefore infer that the
parties have agreed to terminate
the residential tenancy agreement as provided
for in s 37(1)(a) of the Act.
Alternatively,
it might be that the tenant has vacated the premises early or abandoned them.
is meant by early vacation is not defined by the Act. It is not clear whether
it applies only to an agreement for a fixed period
or can apply to vacation of
the premises where the agreement is for no fixed period. But the premises are
abandoned if the circumstances
specified in s47 of the Act are met. That
provision is in the following
“47. Abandonment
Residential premises are abandoned if –
(a) the tenant has ceased to occupy those
premises; and
(b) a notice of termination has not been served
in respect of those premises; and
(c) a notice to vacate has not been served in
respect of those premises.”
tenant vacated the premises in March 2025. She provided a Notice of Vacating
Property in May 2025. In those circumstances it
is unlikely the procedures
for a notice of termination or notice to vacate were used. The tenant has
ceased to occupy the premises.
I am therefore satisfied the premises have been
there are various goods on the premises. The issue is whether those goods
appear to be abandoned by the tenant within the
meaning of s 48 of the Act.
That involves a construction of the phrase “appear to be abandoned”.
That construction is
to have regard to the text context and purpose of the
legislation.
for the text, the Macquarie Dictionary defines “abandon” to mean:
“to leave completely and finally; forsake utterly; desert;
to give up all concern in; to give up the control of; and to cast
away or leave
personal property with no intention of reclaiming it, thereby making it
available for appropriation by any person”.
meaning is consistent with the definition of abandonment in the law. In
Banks v Ferrari
[2000] NSWSC 874
Dowd J said, at
“Abandonment is said to occur when there is a giving
up or an absolute relinquishment of private goods by a former owner. Such
state of affairs may arise when the owner of the goods is intent on specific
desertion and relinquishment by either casting away
the property or by simply
leaving it behind Keene v Carter
(1994) 12 WAR 20
, at 26 per Ipp
Keene v Carter,
above, Ipp J referred to the judgment of the Ontario
Court of Appeal in
Simpson v Gowers
(1981) 121 DLR (3d) 709
where the Court adopted a textbook definition of abandonment in the following
“Abandonment occurs when there is ‘a giving
up, a total desertion, and absolute relinquishment’ of private goods
the former owner. It may arise when the owner with the specific intent of
desertion and relinquishment casts away or leaves behind
his property...”.
order to establish abandonment there must be some evidence of an intention not
to make any further claim in respect of the goods.
Moorehouse v Angus and Robertson
Proprietary Limited and Anor
[1981] 1NSWLR 700 Hutley JA said, at
“Let it be assumed that rights of property and
chattels may be lost or extinguished by abandonment. To attract the principle,
it would be necessary for the party asserting the abandonment to present
evidence which established an express intention to abandon
or from which such an
intention might be inferred.”
Establishing
that intention is often a matter of inference. It can be difficult for such an
intention to be established because there
are often many alternative
explanations for unclaimed goods.
that meaning strictly would have the effect of making it difficult for an owner
to establish that goods have been abandoned.
There might be many cases of goods
left at the premises after the end of a lease where the tenant is not intending
to give up the
right to possess or own the goods.
for context, s 48 immediately follows the section which defines the
circumstances in which the premises will be taken to have been
abandoned. That
involves nothing more than the tenant ceasing to occupy the property without
formal steps to bring the tenancy to
an end having been taken.
construction of s 48 is also informed by the principle that, so far as
possible, words used in a statute should be given the same
meaning wherever they
Craig Williamson Proprietary Limited v
Barrowcliff
[1915] VicLawRp 66
[1915] VLR 450
at 452 per Hodges J. The authors of Pearce and
Statutory Interpretation in Australia
expressed the principle
in the following way:
“Once a term is given a particular
meaning in an Act prima facie all references that are derived from or associated
term should be treated as based on the defined meaning of the
principle applies particularly to words used in the same section of the Act. In
this case the concept of abandonment is referred
to in adjoining sections
contained in the same Part and Division of the Act. That suggests the meaning
of the abandonment in s 48
should align with the meaning of abandoned in
s 47 of the Act.
the nature of the property dealt with in s 47 is different to that in
s 48, as a matter of practical reality, the occupation
of the premises and
the possession of goods on the premises are very closely connected. If the
meaning of abandonment in s 48 is
aligned with the meaning in s 47,
where the goods are left at premises after the right to occupy the premises has
been abandoned,
it would follow that the right to possess the goods has also
been abandoned.
turn to purpose.
purpose of s 48 is to fairly balance the rights of owners and the rights of
tenants once the residential tenancy agreement has
the owner’s perspective, goods left on the property create problems. The
owner becomes an involuntary bailee of the goods
with uncertain rights and
obligations.
position of an involuntary bailee is considered in
Palmer, N E, Bailment
evidence-in-chief, The Law Book Company Ltd 1991 at
pp 700-704. In that most useful and authoritative work the author states
is very little authority as to what courses of action are open to someone
in the position of the owner in this case. The authorities
referred to
variously suggest that there is no obligation to warehouse the goods but
returning them to the street might be a breach
of the admittedly low duty of
care. The author suggests suing the true owner for trespass although, as he
pragmatically indicates,
it is hard to believe that such actions would be
universally successful or if successful, worthwhile. Another suggestion is to
the chattel to the police but there is no obligation on the police to
accept custody. As the author says:
“The difficulties of the
involuntary bailee’s position remain a blot on the law...”
regard to the interests of the owner, creating the power to dispose of property
left after the tenancy has come to an end when
the tenant stops residing there,
is appropriate. It avoids the legal uncertainty that would otherwise attend
dealing with those goods.
It is clear that is one of the purposes of s 48
of the Act.
the legitimate interests of the tenant and others with an interest in property
left on the land must also be protected.
might be many situations where a tenant would be benefited by not having to
incur the cost and inconvenience of moving and storing
items even where they
have some value. In such situations the tenant is not disadvantaged by allowing
the owner to deal with the
the tenant cannot legitimately complain about valueless goods being disposed of
or low value goods being sold. Even in the
case of items of sentimental value,
if they are of sufficient value to the tenant, the tenant should remove them.
It is unfair to
burden the owner with responsibility for caring for those goods.
Of course, that still leaves the owner with the burden of dealing
with the goods
but they should be able to do so without liability to the tenant.
the goods have more substantial value, court approval is required for any sale.
That ensures some external scrutiny first to
ensure that the goods do appear to
be abandoned and second to ensure that the sale is not likely to give rise to
injustice for the
tenant. If the goods appear to be abandoned, the tenant
cannot legitimately expect the owner to care for them.
tenant also has the protection of being entitled to the balance of the proceeds
of sale and interest thereon after payment of
any debt due to the owner if the
tenant claims those proceeds within six months of the sale.
matters suggest the concept of abandonment should be construed broadly enough to
ensure an owner is not unfairly burdened with
responsibility for goods left
behind at the end of the tenancy but with sufficient rigour to ensure such goods
are not unfairly disposed
of contrary to the interests of the tenant.
in accordance with s 48 it is not necessary to establish actual abandonment
but only the
of abandonment. The use of the word
“appears” adds an important limitation on what needs to be shown in
order for the
owner to be entitled to deal with the goods. Actual abandonment
does not need to be shown. That is, it does not need to be shown
that there is
an intention to make no further claim. All that needs to be shown is that it
appears there is no intention to make
any further claim. The effect of the word
“appearance” is to loosen the strict requirements of what might
need to be established for an owner of premises to deal with goods
left there as abandoned goods.
many cases, leaving the goods at the property after the tenant ceases to reside
at the property bringing the residential tenancy
agreement to an end will create
that appearance. Nonetheless, the appearance of abandonment needs to be
established in all the circumstances
of the case.
this case there is some evidence that the tenant does not want to give up her
ownership of the property. In a meeting with Ms
Savage of Community Housing on
10 June 2025 the tenant said that she does want the items but has nowhere to put
them because she
has nowhere to live. That is arguably inconsistent with an
intention to make no further claim on them.
the intention of an owner of goods can change over time. In
Keen v Carter,
above, Ipp J said:
“...an owner of a chattel who loses
it, may initially not have the intention to abandon it (in which case it is not
but may thereafter change his or her mind, and form a specific intent
to relinquish ownership in the chattel. That in my view would
give rise to an
abandonment. This may occur, for example, when the owner regards the lost
things as being of little value, or of
no personal importance to him or her.
Inferences may be drawn of an intention to abandon from such matters as the
value of the chattel,
the circumstances under which and where it is lost, the
length of time for which it has been lost, and the attempts that the owner
made to ascertain its whereabouts... Generally, however, it would be difficult
to establish, inferentially, the abandonment of
a lost chattel by the
considerations apply to goods left behind at the end of a tenancy.
those principles and considerations into account, I am satisfied the goods do
appear to be abandoned within the meaning of
s 48 of the Act. The tenant
has stopped occupying the premises. The goods are still there many months
later. Although the tenant
has said she wants to keep the goods she has also
said she has no stable accommodation where she could take them. She has nowhere
to store them. Despite referring to the possibility of storing them with her
son, she has not achieved that. Whatever her desire
to be able to claim
possession of the goods, as a matter of practical reality she cannot retain
possession of the goods in her current
circumstances. There is no suggestion
that will change within a reasonable period of time. It therefore looks like
she will not
be making any claim to the goods. They therefore appear to be
means I have the discretion to make an order permitting the sale of the goods.
Balancing the interests of the owner and the
tenant in this case, in my view it
is fair to order the sale of the goods. The tenant will be able to claim the
proceeds of sale
if she wishes to do so.
those reasons I ordered that the owner is permitted to sell the tenants’
goods left at the property more particularly described
in the Schedule of
Abandoned Goods and Estimated Value contained in the affidavit of Sasha Savage
sworn 7 July 2025 for the best
price reasonably obtainable.
Pearce, D.C. and Geddes, R.S.
Statutory Interpretation in Australia,
ed. [6.67].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (128 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter