URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFC/2024/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hookway v Hookway [2024] TASFC 3 (27 May 2024)
[2024] TASFC 3
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (FULL
Hookway v Hookway
[2024] TASFC
: HOOKWAY, STIRLING MATHEW
HOOKWAY, TAMZIN
DELIVERED ON:
27 May 2024
HEARING DATE:
15 November 2022
Pearce J, Brett J, Martin AJ
Contracts – General contractual principles – Matters not giving
rise to binding contracts – Vagueness and uncertainty
– Uncertain
promises - Whether failure to specify essential terms makes contract void for
uncertainty – Failure to specify
caused failure to fulfill party
intentions – Contract void – Appeal dismissed.
Aust Dig Contracts
Legislation:
Testators Family Maintenance Act
Anaconda Nickel Ltd v Tarmoola Australia Pty
[2000] WASCA 27
(2000) 22 WAR 101
Australian and New Zealand
Banking Group Ltd v Frost Holdings Pty Ltd
[1989] VR 695
Eurocom Cable Management Bulgaria Eood & Ors
[2012] EWCA Civ
BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Ltd v Shire of Hastings
180 CLR 266
Gange v Sullivan
[1966] HCA 55
(1966) 116 CLR
Hansen Yuncken Pty Ltd v Parliament Square Hobart Landowner Pty
[2021] TASFC 11
Hookway v Hookway
[2016] TASSC
Minister for Immigration v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
Perri v Coolangatta Investments Pty Ltd
[1982] 149 CLR 517
56 ALJR 445
Sandra Investments Proprietary v Booth
[1983] HCA 46
(1983) 153 CLR 153
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
(1979) 142 CLR
REPRESENTATION
McTaggart SC
: K Cuthbertson
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Douglas & Collins
[2024] TASFC 3
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 3/2024
File No: 2414/2022
STIRLING MATHEW HOOKWAY v TAMZIN PETA HOOKWAY
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
27 May 2024
of the Court:
Appeal dismissed.
Serial No 3/2024
File No: 2414/2022
STIRLING MATHEW HOOKWAY v TAMZIN PETA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
27 May 2024
I agree with Brett J.
File No: 2414/2022
STIRLING MATHEW HOOKWAY v TAMZIN PETA HOOKWAY
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
27 May 2024
The parties to this appeal, to whom I will refer by their first names, are
siblings, and the only residuary beneficiaries of the
estate of their late
father, Peter Hookway. They have been involved in complex litigation with each
other about the estate since
his death. In December 2018, they reached a
settlement, the terms of which were recorded in a document entitled "Heads of
Agreement".
The settlement was intended to deal with all aspects of their
dispute. In due course, Tamzin brought an action against Stirling seeking
declaration that the agreement contained in the document was void and
unenforceable. Stirling counterclaimed seeking an order for
performance. On 21 July 2020, Blow CJ upheld Tamzin's claim and dismissed the
counterclaim. His Honour determined that,
although the parties had intended the
agreement to be binding, it was "void, unenforceable and of no effect" because
it was incomplete
and hence lacked sufficient certainty to constitute a valid
and enforceable contract. In particular, it did not deal with matters
for its operation.
has now appealed from this judgment. For the reasons which I set out below, I
have concluded that the appeal is without
merit and should be dismissed.
Factual Background
Peter Hookway died on 24 July 2006. He is survived by his defacto spouse
Renate, his children, Tamzin and Stirling, and his grandchildren,
daughter and Stirling's children. He left a substantial estate which contained
assets with a value in excess of $10m on
the basis of assessments made in 2006.
At that time, the estate had debts totalling $634,400, but this did not include
the estate's
liability for personal income tax, or any provision for the costs
of administration of the estate. Neither of these sums have since
quantified, and the evidence establishes that no tax returns have since been
lodged with the ATO. According to the evidence
of Timothy Levis, the corporate
solicitor of the Public Trustee, who is administering the estate, lawyers and
accountants are currently
working through the taxation issues, towards a final
assessment of the estate's current taxation liability. It can be inferred that
the taxation liability will be substantial.
The assets of the estate consist of a number of pieces of real property which
Peter Hookway either owned outright or in which he
had a partial interest. He
also had a substantial and controlling interest in four family companies. The
remaining assets of the
estate consist of cash investments, in particular term
deposits and other bank accounts, together with various items of personal
property, including a motor vehicle, livestock, furniture and art. The estate
also has an entitlement arising from an unresolved
claim for compensation by
reason of the compulsory acquisition of a portion of certain pieces of real
The litigation to which this appeal relates arises from and is part of a
complicated and ongoing dispute between Tamzin and Stirling
concerning the
estate and their respective personal interest in various assets of the estate,
in particular pieces of real estate
and the family companies. The dispute has
often manifested in specific pieces of litigation, some of which have been
resolved by
judgment, and others which remain unresolved. In 2008, a claim by
Renate under the
Testators Family Maintenance Act
was resolved on
the basis that she was paid $1.8m from the residuary estate. In 2012, three
family companies were wound up by the
Federal Court on the application of
Tamzin, and Mr Barry Hamilton was appointed as the liquidator of each company.
That remains the
situation at the present time.
In 2016, Estcourt J determined litigation between Tamzin and Stirling
concerning the validity of Peter Hookway's last will. The
result of this
litigation was an order that there be a grant of letters of administration, with
a will dated 13 June 2006 annexed,
to the Public Trustee:
[2016] TASSC 28.
Under this will, Tamzin and Stirling are entitled
to the residuary estate in equal shares. There are no other residuary
beneficiaries.
This order followed his Honour's finding of invalidity in respect
of a subsequent will executed by Mr Hookway, which still left the
estate to Tamzin and Stirling, but which included a significant devise to his
grandchildren.
Although the June 2006 will provides for a number of specific bequests to
others, these are relatively modest, and it is clear that
the bulk of the value
of the estate is contained within the residue, which will be shared equally
between the parties. Despite this,
the dispute has continued. On 4 December
2018, the parties engaged in mediation and, at its conclusion, signed a document
"Heads of Agreement". It is uncontroversial, and obvious from the terms
of that document in any event, that it was intended to resolve
all outstanding
matters of dispute between them. The learned primary judge found that the
parties intended the Heads of Agreement
to constitute a binding agreement,
notwithstanding that the document expressed an intention to reflect its terms
"in a more formal
document to be executed" at a later date. A further document
has not been executed, but the primary judge's finding as to the parties'
intention to conclude an agreement immediately binding upon them is not
challenged by either of them in this appeal.
The proceedings at
first instance
Tamzin's claim at first instance sought declaratory relief that the Heads of
Agreement was "void, unenforceable or legally ineffective".
There were a number
of bases pleaded to support the claim, but, of consequence, was an argument that
the agreement was "incomplete
and/or uncertain in its operation". Stirling
disputed the claim of invalidity, and counterclaimed for specific performance of
The primary judge upheld Tamzin's claim, and granted a declaration that the
agreement is "void and unenforceable or otherwise legally
ineffective". His
Honour dismissed Stirling's counterclaim. The determinative finding was the
absence of agreement on matters which
were "essential, fundamental and critical"
to the agreement. I will consider his Honour's reasoning in more detail later in
reasons, but, in short, his Honour concluded that:
All aspects of
the agreement were interdependent. That is, the parties intended that the
agreement, the purpose of which was to settle
all aspects of their longstanding
dispute, would only achieve that intention if it was performed in full. This was
a patently correct
conclusion, having regard to the content and context of the
Heads of Agreement, and again is unchallenged in this appeal.
At least two
aspects of the Heads of Agreement were subject to implied conditions precedent,
which were entirely contingent on the
decisions and actions of others, and hence
there was inherent uncertainty as to whether either or both could be carried
into effect.
Because the finding as to the interdependent nature of the
agreement meant, in effect that severance of any part of it was not available,
the failure of one or both would result in the inability of the Heads of
Agreement to fulfil the intention of the parties to settle
their dispute
completely.
The Heads of
Agreement did not deal, at all, with the consequences of the failure of one or
both contingencies. In particular, it
did not specify whether the agreement
would automatically terminate or be voidable at the election of one or both
parties. It also
did not deal with the situation in which there had been partial
performance by one or both parties prior to the failure of an unrelated
and how the complexities arising in that situation would be resolved.
concluded that, in the particular circumstances of this case, agreement about
such matters was essential to the operation
of the agreement, and the failure to
include same in the Heads of Agreement left it incomplete and, therefore
uncertain. Hence, the
agreement was invalid.
The grounds of appeal are as follows:
"1 The primary judge erred
by finding the agreement was incomplete in all the circumstances.
primary judge erred by determining the agreement was incomplete based on a
hypothetical case that was unlikely to happen.
primary judge erred by granting declaratory relief based on a hypothetical case
that was highly unlikely to happen.
primary judge erred by failing to determine that the agreement was terminable by
either party if an important contingency were
not fulfilled.
primary judge erred by failing to determine whether, on the construction most
favourable to the plaintiff, the agreement was incomplete
even if the highly
unlikely hypothetical event did happen.
primary judge erred by failing to imply contractual terms to give business
efficacy to the agreement in all the circumstances.
primary judge erred by failing to take into account adequately or at all the
express terms of the agreement which required the
parties to cooperate to give
effect to the terms of settlement."
It is uncontroversial that the nature of the appeal as a rehearing requires the
identification of error on the part of the primary
judge. The grounds attack
aspects of the reasoning of the primary judge, but in a case such as this, the
appealable error will be
identified, if it exists, in the final decision. This
is the correctness standard of appellate review explained in
[1979] HCA 9
(1979) 142 CLR 531
duty of the appellate court is to decide the case – the facts as well as
the law – for itself. In so doing it must
recognise the advantages enjoyed
by the judge who conducted the primary. But if the judges of appeal consider
that in the circumstances
the primary judge was in no better position to decide
the particular question than they are themselves, or if, after giving full
weight to his decision, they consider that it was wrong, they must discharge
their duty and give effect to their own judgment."
Minister for Immigration v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
, 264 CLR 54, Gageler J
observed that the correctness standard is applicable in cases, unaffected by the
application of a discretion,
in which there is only one "unique
“The course of High Court authority
Warren v Coombes
has accordingly proceeded on a
consistent understanding of how the line of demarcation is to be drawn between
those of a primary judge's
conclusions which attract the correctness standard of
appellate review reaffirmed in that case and those which attract the deferential
standard applicable to appellate review of an exercise of judicial discretion.
Without excluding the potential for other considerations
to affect the standard
of appellate review in a particular category of case, the understanding provides
a principled basis for making
at least the principal distinction.
The line is not drawn by reference to whether the primary judge's process of
reasoning to reach a conclusion can be characterised
as evaluative or is on a
topic on which judicial minds might reasonably differ. The line is drawn by
reference to whether the legal
criterion applied or purportedly applied by the
primary judge to reach the conclusion demands a unique outcome, in which case
correctness standard applies, or tolerates a range of outcomes, in which
House v The King
standard applies. The resultant line
is not bright; but it is tolerably clear and workable."
This approach is reflected in the grounds of appeal. Despite the existence of
seven grounds, senior counsel for the appellant, Mr
McTaggart SC, conceded
during the hearing of the appeal, without contrary argument from senior counsel
for the respondent, Ms Cuthbertson
SC, that all of the grounds merge in the
first ground, which is that the primary judge erred by "finding the agreement
was incomplete".
It can be accepted that the balance of the grounds attempt to
identify aspects which illustrate or have played a role in the reasoning
led to the final erroneous conclusion, but do not, of themselves, constitute
determinative error.
Of course, as was made clear in
Warren v Coombes
, the nature of an
appeal by way of rehearing requires this Court to conduct a "real review" of the
evidence at first instance and
of the primary judge's reasons, to determine
whether the correct conclusion has been reached. In this appeal, there are no
questions of fact, nor any argument about the correctness of the
underlying law applied by the primary judge. Ultimately, his Honour's
determination depended upon construction of the Heads of Agreement and
identification of invalidity based on a finding that the agreement
incomplete, because terms essential for its operation had not been agreed by the
parties and these could not be implied into
the agreement. A critical aspect of
the primary judge's reasoning was that the essential nature of such terms made
them necessary
to establish the agreement's validity. These are matters upon
which this Court is able to reach its own conclusion, and there will
be only one
correct outcome. Hence, the correctness standard is applicable.
An incomplete agreement
A valid contract will only arise if it includes all terms regarded by the
parties or the law as essential to achieve legally binding
relations. In my
respectful view, the primary judge correctly summarised the relevant principles
at paragraphs 27 and 28 of his decision
as follows:
"An incomplete
agreement is not legally effective:
Booker Industries Pty Ltd v Wilson
Parking (Qld) Pty Ltd
[1982] HCA 53
(1982) 149 CLR 600
per Gibbs CJ, Murphy and
Wilson JJ at 604. An agreement is incomplete if an essential,
fundamental or critical term is left out:
[1964] HCA 41
(1964) 112 CLR 597
per Menzies J at 607;
Tanks Pty Ltd v Running
[1982] 2 NSWLR 840
per Wootten J
Western Broadcasting Services v Seaga
[2007] UKPC
. As Gageler J said in
Crown Melbourne Ltd v Cosmopolitan
Hotel (Vic) Pty Ltd
[2016] HCA 26
'... a contract can arise only if parties have reached a present agreement
'upon all the terms which they regarded or the law requires
as essential for the
formation of legally binding relations', it being 'implicit in the very notion
of consensus that the minds of
the parties should have met in praesenti and not
merely that it is hoped or expected that they will meet in futuro'. [Footnotes
It is clear that the parties intended the Heads of Agreement to constitute a
legally binding contract. In that situation, a court
must do its best to
give effect to the parties' intention, despite any difficulties of
interpretation:
Scammell (G) & Nephew Limited v
[1941] AC 251
York Air-Conditioning and
Refrigeration (A/sia) Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
[1949] HCA 23
(1949) 80 CLR 11
Upper Hunter County District Council v Australian Chilling
and Freezing Co Ltd
[1968] HCA 8
(1968) 118 CLR 429
at 436-437;
[1982] HCA 52
(1982) 149 CLR 571
at 578, 589."
I will give further consideration to the question of what constitutes an
"essential" term later in these reasons.
Of course, when assessing whether an agreement is complete, it is necessary to
take into account the entire agreement, including
both express and implied
terms. Implied terms can sometimes deal with the omission of express agreement
The question as to whether a term is implied into a
contract will depend upon the application of well settled principles. A term
be implied by law or by fact. In this case, the former is not relevant, but the
primary judge correctly considered the latter.
Once again, his Honour's
statement of the prerequisites for the implication of a term, as a matter of
fact, are correctly explained
in paragraph 37 of the decision:
prerequisites for the existence of an implied term are as stated in
Refinery (Westernport) Pty Ltd v Shire of Hastings
(1977) 180 CLR 266
by Lord Simon of Glaisdale, Viscount Dilhorne and Lord Keith of Kinkel
'... for a term to be implied, the following conditions (which may overlap)
must be satisfied: (1) it must be reasonable and equitable;
(2) it must be
necessary to give business efficacy to the contract, so that no term will be
implied if the contract is effective
without it; (3) it must be so obvious that
'it goes without saying'; (4) it must be capable of clear expression; (5) it
contradict any express term of the contract.'"
The question of implication of terms according to the principles set out in
BP Refinery Western Port Pty Ltd v Shire of Hastings
, is part of the
process of construction of the overall agreement. Logically, it is impossible to
determine whether the agreement
is complete until it has been properly
construed, including by the implication of terms where appropriate. However, as
noted, the law will not permit the implication of a term solely on
the basis that it will fill a gap left in the outcome of the negotiations
between the parties and, in that way, make an incomplete agreement into an
enforceable contract. See
Australian and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd v
Frost Holdings Pty Ltd
[1989] VR 695 per Kaye J, with whom Marks and Teague
JJ agree. In other words, the process of construction comes first, taking into
account the obligation of the court to do its best to give effect to the
intention of the parties, and any assessment of incompleteness
is to be made
thereafter. It is apparent that the primary judge correctly followed this
methodology, by construing the agreement,
implying terms where appropriate and
then determining whether the agreement dealt with all essential and critical
matters. In this
case, the primary judge determined that it did not.
This Court should adopt the same methodology. This is consistent with its
obligation to conduct a "real review" of the evidence,
and to conclude whether
the primary judge reached the correct conclusion.
The principles which apply in construing a contract such as this are also not
in dispute. These principles were conveniently summarised
by the Court of Appeal
of Western Australia in
JKC Australia LNG Pty Ltd v CH2M Hill Companies Ltd
[2020] WASCA 112
, drawing upon principles stated by the High Court in
Electricity Generation Corporation v Woodside Energy Ltd
[2014] HCA 7
251 CLR 640
Mount Bruce Mining Pty Ltd v Wright Prospecting Pty Ltd
[2015] HCA 37
256 CLR 104
paras 46-52:
"1 The rights and
liabilities of parties under a provision of a contract are determined
objectively by reference to its text, context
(the entire text of the contract)
and purpose.
2 In determining the meaning of the terms of a commercial contract it
is necessary to ask what a reasonable business person would
have understood the
terms to mean. That enquiry will require consideration of the language used by
the parties in the contract, the
circumstances addressed by the contract and the
commercial purposes or objects to be secured by the contract.
3 The court approaches the task of giving a commercial contract an
interpretation on the assumption that the parties intended to
commercial result - one which makes commercial sense. (This has been said to
require that the construction to be placed
on the relevant provision be
consistent with the commercial object of the agreement.) Thus a commercial
contract should be construed
so as to avoid it making commercial nonsense or
working commercial inconvenience."
Hansen Yuncken Pty Ltd v Parliament Square Hobart Landowner
[2021] TASFC 11
per Martin AJ, with whom Wood and Geason JJ
agreed, at [15].
Construction of the Heads of
As I have noted, the primary judge found, as a matter of fact, that the Heads
of Agreement were intended by the parties to constitute
a binding contract, and
were not intended to be subject to execution of a further agreement. This
finding is not challenged in this
appeal, and in any event, in my view
constitutes the only possible conclusion. In this regard, I have regard not only
to the intention
actually expressed in the agreement itself, but also the nature
and terms of what was agreed, within the context of the underlying
disputes, as
well as terms which clearly indicate that the parties wished to resolve all
outstanding matters between them.
The relevant principles make it clear that a court construing an agreement can
only appropriately do so by considering the context
in which the agreement was
reached by the parties. The context of this agreement was a mediation and
resulting Heads of Agreement
intended to comprehensively deal with and bring to
an end the long running dispute between Tamzin and Stirling. The finality which
the parties intended to achieve by the agreement can be well understood by
having regard to the underlying context that ultimately
they shared the
residuary estate equally. The context critically includes the fact that the
underlying dispute was complex and related
to various interests in companies and
pieces of real estate and was characterised by several unresolved pieces of
litigation. The
Heads of Agreement attempted to deal with these individual
components of the dispute comprehensively. In order to better illustrate
it is worth setting out the Heads of Agreement in full:
It is intended that these heads of agreement shall be binding and that the
terms will be reflected in a more formal document to be
executed prior to 14
December 2018.
All issues between Tamzin and Stirling are resolved on the following
proceedings between Tamzin and Stirling be discontinued with no order as to
Kennedy Drive land be divided between Tamzin and Stirling as per the plan
attached and marked Option "6" (with no right of way).
Stirling shall take the
land to the west and Tamzin the land to the east. An easement be granted in the
south east corner for services
to benefit the land taken by Tamzin.
3 The land to the south of the highway be transferred to
4 Tamzin and Stirling shall cooperate to ensure the prompt transfer of
properties.
and Stirling cooperate and instruct Barry Hamilton to take Hookway Aerospace out
of liquidation. Any distribution to shareholders
shall be paid equally between
Tamzin and Stirling. Upon that occurring the shares in Hookway Aerospace be
transferred to Tamzin.
Stirling shall resign as a director.
shall be entitled to the physical assets of Hookway Aerospace save for those on
the list attached to these heads of agreement
plus any fencing materials.
and Stirling shall jointly give a direction to Barry Hamilton to immediately pay
the sum of $160,000 to Tamzin in repayment
of her loan on the basis that the
proceeding commenced by him shall be discontinued with no orders as to
shall be entitles (sic) to the personal effects and chattels of the Estate, save
for 6 bottles of Grange and 8 dozen bottles
of Cognac and any others set out in
the attached list.
shall not pursue Stirling for the costs of the appeal to the Court of
proceeds of the Land Compensation Case shall be divided according to the
ownership of that land as at the date of acquisition.
and Tamzin shall make a joint request to the Public Trustee to make
distributions from the Estate as follows; $200,000 to
each of Tamzin and
Stirling, the next $350,000 to Tamzin to be paid net of tax and thereafter the
balance of the Estate to be divided
50/50 with no further adjustments sought by
either Tamzin and Stirling.
acknowledges that Tamzin is the registered proprietor of 451 Churchill Avenue
and he makes no claim in respect of that property.
parties will cooperate to give effect to the Terms of Settlement including in
seeking the consent of the Public Trustee and liquidator
subdivision (and unless the Liquidator of HA otherwise decides) Tamzin and
Stirling will continue to lease the Kennedy Drive
properties through Hookway
is to construct the boundary fence and any necessary gate at his expense between
east and west.
and Stirling shall equally pay the rates, insurance and land tax of Meaden
Street which property shall be held by them for
the beneficial use of their
mother. An annual amount intended to cover the expenses shall be paid by Tamzin
and Stirling on 1 January
each year to Renate Hookway."
In the proceedings before the primary judge, there was argument about a number
of matters dealt with in this document, but ultimately
his Honour was concerned
re-agitate any aspect of
the Heads of Agreement other than those identified by
his Honour.
The aspects of the agreement which concerned the primary judge are contained in
paragraphs 2, 5 and 7. His Honour spent some time
in respect of the construction
and implication of terms relevant to these aspects of the agreement, and much
time was taken in argument
in the appeal concerning these matters. I will
examine the construction of these terms before proceeding further.
In respect of clause 2, as the primary judge correctly observed, the
subdivision referred to in that clause will require approval
of a plan of
subdivision by the relevant planning authority. In my view, application of the
relevant principles for implication of
a term means that it goes without saying
that approval of the relevant subdivision as a condition precedent to
performance of the
terms of clause 2 and the cooperation of the parties in
respect of the achievement of that approval, are terms which should be implied
into the contract. It is inconceivable that this would not have been understood
and intended by the parties, and it is necessary
in any event to provide
business efficacy with respect to the agreement. The primary judge's ultimate
conclusion proceeded on this
basis. Clause 13 can also be construed as requiring
the necessary cooperation between the parties to achieve that outcome.
The proper construction of clauses 5 and 7 pose more difficulty. As the primary
judge correctly concluded, achievement of the outcomes
specified in these terms,
will ultimately require the cooperation and agreement of the liquidator, Mr
Hamilton, and the approval
or order of the Federal Court. This certainly
includes the termination of liquidation of the company, Hookway Aerospace. As
noted at [14]:
"Similarly, Mr Hamilton does not
literally have the power to 'take Hookway Aerospace out of liquidation'. The
Federal Court of Australia
has a discretionary power to terminate the winding up
of the company pursuant to
Corporations
. The liquidator of a company may apply for such an order under
482(1A)(a).
In deciding whether to grant such an application, the
Federal Court will consider the interests of creditors, the liquidator, the
contributories and the public:
Re Warbler Pty Ltd (in liq)
(1982) 6 ACLR 526
Dubolo Pty Ltd v
Codrington Investment Corp Pty Ltd
(1998) 26 ACSR 723
In relation to paragraph 7, the primary judge correctly observed that the
parties were not entitled to give a legally binding direction
to the liquidator
concerning payment of the funds of the company. In evidence, Mr Hamilton said
that he did not see any difficulty
with compliance with paragraph 7 but when
tested under cross-examination, agreed that payment of such a sum would depend
existence of priority creditors, the financial position of the company
and generally his obligation to act in the best interests
of the corporation.
The taxation question in particular remains unresolved, and according to Mr
Levis is the "most significant issue"
affecting whether the companies, including
Hookway Aerospace, remain in liquidation. Mr Hamilton said in evidence that
the company
was in a solvent position because of the recent payment of rent to
it, but he seems to have come to this conclusion without detailed
consideration
of the potential taxation liability. In any event, the point is that the payment
to Tamzin is not as simple as Mr Hamilton
simply acceding to a direction from
the parties.
It is clear that the primary judge was concerned about the use of the word
"immediately" in paragraph 7. At paragraph 39, his Honour
"Clause 7 of the Heads of Agreement requires the parties to
'jointly give a direction to Barry Hamilton to
immediately
pay the sum of
$160,000 to Tamzin in repayment of her loan'. [My emphasis.] But for the
parties' use of the word 'immediately',
I might very well have concluded that
the Heads of Agreement was a valid and binding contract, containing implied
terms making performance
conditional upon various events taking place."
The appellant argued that all that was agreed in paragraph 7 was that the
parties would give the joint direction to the liquidator.
It was argued that
there is no question of uncertainty arising from compliance with this clause,
because it will be fulfilled upon
provision of the direction. The parties would
have been well aware that compliance with the direction depended on the
contingencies
referred to by the primary judge, including the consent of the
liquidator, and, accordingly, actual payment was not required to complete
agreement. Alternatively, "immediate" should be construed as "within a
reasonable time", and the consent of the liquidator should
be implied as a
condition precedent.
With one qualification, I agree with the primary judge's interpretation of this
clause, and reject the argument of the appellant.
It is obvious, in my view,
that the required direction to Mr Hamilton was a machinery provision designed to
achieve the underlying
purpose of the provision, which was the immediate payment
of the said sum to Tamzin. There could be no other reason for the insertion
the word "immediately" into that clause. Had the parties intended that Mr
Hamilton pay that sum within a reasonable time or when
reasonably able to do so,
the clause would have said that. It is obvious to me when that provision is
considered in the context of
the balance of the settlement of various disputes,
that the intention was that Tamzin would be immediately paid that money. While
clause 13 makes it clear that the parties anticipated the need for the consent
of the liquidator to the payment, I do not agree with
the submission that it
should be inferred that the parties would have thought through the potential
implications and considerations
involved in providing such consent. There was no
evidence to support such a proposition, nor can it be inferred from the terms of
the Heads of Agreement.
qualification I refer to is the linkage in the text of clause 7 between the
payment of the said sum to Tamzin and the discontinuance
of the proceedings
commenced by the liquidator against Stirling. The only reasonable and proper
interpretation of the clause is that
the parties intended that Tamzin would be
paid the said money immediately and that at that time or within a reasonable
time thereafter,
but with certainty, the proceedings commenced by the liquidator
against Stirling would be discontinued. As was demonstrated in the
proceedings
before the primary judge, the discontinuance of such an action would require not
only the agreement of the liquidator,
but also the leave of the Federal Court.
Without analysing this question in any great detail, Mr Hamilton summed up the
in cross-examination by conceding the need for the Federal Court's
leave, and acknowledging the uncertainty of that outcome. Such
uncertainty is
real. The cross-examination also established that the action was based upon
Stirling's possible breach of his statutory
and fiduciary duties as a director
by taking money from the company and using it for his own purposes. It is likely
that a court
considering this question would be concerned about such
None of these issues require detailed consideration or resolution in this
appeal, beyond the inescapable conclusion that the legal
reality is that Mr
Hamilton was not going to be able to "immediately" pay the relevant money to
Tamzin. Even if ultimately he became
able to do so, there would clearly be a
delay. The primary judge identified this as a critical question in paragraph
"Since the parties have no power to give Mr Hamilton directions,
cl 7 could properly be construed as requiring them to make a joint
request for
him to make an immediate payment of $160,000 from the funds of Hookway
Aerospace. It is clear from the pleadings that
it is common ground that cl 7
was a fundamental term. The Heads of Agreement are silent as to what the
consequences would be in the
highly likely event of Mr Hamilton, if requested to
do so, not making an immediate payment of $160,000. There are several
possibilities
that the parties could have agreed upon:
contract would automatically terminate if he failed or refused to make the
contract could be terminated by either party within a reasonable time after his
refusal or failure to make the payment.
contract would be neither terminated nor voidable, but that the time for payment
of the $160,000 would be postponed."
At paragraph 42 and 43 his Honour explained the significance of the
contingencies inherent in both the subdivision (clause 2) and
the payment to
Tamzin and the associated discontinuance of the action against Stirling:
"Applications for permits for subdivisions routinely take months.
Similarly, an application for the termination of the winding up
Aerospace could be expected to take months, given the involvement of three other
companies and the complexity of that
company's affairs. If Mr Hamilton were to
make an immediate payment of $160,000 to Tamzin from the funds of Hookway
Aerospace, it
is possible that a permit for the proposed subdivision might be
refused, or that an application for the termination of the winding
up of Hookway
Aerospace might fail, or that some other event might prevent the full
implementation of the plans embodied in the Heads
of Agreement. It is clear
that those arrangements, or at least the principal arrangements, were intended
to be interdependent.
However the Heads of Agreement are silent as to the
consequences of important contingencies not being fulfilled. In the event of
subdivision permit being refused, or an application for the termination of the
winding up being refused, the document does not
say whether the agreement would
automatically be at an end, or whether it would be terminable by either party.
Further, in that
situation it does not say whether the $160,000, if Tamzin had
received it, was to be refunded by her. It is by no means obvious
whether the
parties intended their agreement to terminate automatically or to be terminable
if an important contingency were not
fulfilled, nor whether Tamzin would be
entitled to retain the $160,000, as the proceeds of the repayment of a loan
debt, or whether
she would be obliged to refund it.
These shortcomings in the parties' document do not arise from ambiguities
that can be overcome by interpreting provisions in the agreement.
because the parties did not address and reach agreement upon questions that were
likely to arise if others did not make
decisions that they hoped for. It is not
possible to give effect to their intention to make a binding contract by
implying contractual
terms because, in relation to some fundamental aspects of
their arrangements, it is impossible to formulate terms that are so obvious
they go without saying."
It is apparent from these conclusions that the matters which his Honour
regarded as essential and critical for the purpose of a
valid agreement were the
consequences of the failure of an implied condition precedent. In respect of the
payment to Tamzin, it seems
that it is inevitable that that condition would
fail, in the sense that there would not be an "immediate" payment.
This analysis brings me to what I regard as the critical question in this
appeal. The uncertainty identified by the primary judge
did not lie in the
implied and express terms of the agreement. The means by which the parties
intended to settle their diverse and
long running dispute were clear enough.
However, the satisfaction of the conditions precedent to clauses 2, 5 and 7 were
hands of the parties. They were entirely contingent on the decisions
of others. His Honour construed these conditions as not just
performance of the specific requirements of the clause to which they directly
related, but each condition was precedent
to the performance of the entire
agreement. This construction was clearly correct, having regard to the
interdependent nature of
the agreement. It is obvious from the context and
purpose of the agreement that it will only settle the dispute if all aspects of
the agreement are carried into effect.
His Honour was clearly correct to conclude that the agreement did not expressly
address the consequences of the failure of one or
more of the conditions
precedent, both in terms of the question of termination, and the practical
consequences of partial performance
of other aspects of the agreement in the
event of termination. It was in this respect that the primary judge found the
to be fatally incomplete. This conclusion is only correct if agreement
on those matters can be regarded as essential to the achievement
of a legally
binding agreement. This appeal turns on that question.
essential term
As already noted, the general proposition is that a valid agreement must
contain all terms regarded by the parties or which the
law requires as essential
for the formation of legally binding relations. Of course, that general
proposition does not identify with
precision what is essential, as opposed to
some lesser category of importance, which can be left to later agreement and
affect the validity of the agreement. In
Anaconda Nickel Ltd v
Tarmoola Australia Pty Ltd
[2000] WASCA 27
(2000) 22 WAR 101
, Ipp J (with
whom Pidgeon J agreed) discussed this distinction at [29], by quoting an English
judge's analysis of what is not "essential":
"It does not follow
that any omission will make a contract incomplete or uncertain in the sense of
rendering it invalid. It is only
the omission of an essential term that will
have that effect. As to the meaning of "essential" in this context, the
following words
of Lloyd LJ (with whom the other members of the Court of Appeal
Pagnan SpA v Feed Products Ltd
[1987] 2 Lloyd's Rep 601
(at 619) are
'It is sometimes said that the parties must agree on the essential terms and
that it is only matters of detail which can be left over.
This may be
misleading, since the word 'essential' in that context is ambiguous. If by
"essential" one means a term without which
the contract cannot be enforced then
the statement is true: the law cannot enforce an incomplete contract. If by
"essential" one
means a term which the parties have agreed to be essential for
the formation of a binding contract, then the statement is tautologous.
"essential" one means only a term which the court regards as important as
opposed to a term which the court regards as less
important or a matter of
detail, the statement is untrue. It is for the parties to decide whether they
wish to be bound and, if so,
by what terms, whether they are important or
unimportant. It is the parties who are, in the memorable phrase coined by the
'the masters of their contractual fate'. Of course, the more important
the term is the less likely it is that the parties will have
left it for future
decision. But there is no legal obstacle which stands in the way of the parties
agreeing to be bound now while
deferring important matters to be agreed later.
It happens every day when parties enter into so-called 'heads of
agreement'."
A matter critical to the workability of the agreement may be regarded as
essential if it is necessary to ensure the achievement
of the agreement's
underlying purpose, notwithstanding that it is not legally essential. Common
examples are agreement as to price
or the subject matter of a contract of sale
or sufficient detail as to the works required by a construction contract. In
determining
this question, it is necessary to consider the underlying intention
and purpose of the parties in reaching the agreement. An agreement,
the terms of
which can be carried into effect on its face, may still be incomplete to the
point of invalidity if it is not sufficiently
certain to give effect to the
intention of the parties. See, for example,
Barbudev v Eurocom Cable
Management Bulgaria Eood & Ors
[2012] EWCA Civ 548.
the specification of the consequences of non-fulfilment of a condition precedent
Conditions precedent are a common contractual term. The decided cases dealing
with their interpretation, operation and consequences
of non-fulfilment seem to
relate almost exclusively to contracts which concern a single transaction, such
as the sale of land. In
such cases, the condition is often inserted for the
benefit of one party and compliance is in the hands of that party,
notwithstanding
that the decision upon which compliance depends will often be
made by another. A contract for sale of land, conditioned upon approval
finance and/or the sale of another property owned by the purchaser is a typical
It is common for such contracts to expressly provide for the consequences of
non-fulfilment. However, this is not always the case.
The High Court decision of
Perri v Coolangatta Investments Pty Ltd
[1982] 149 CLR 517
, concerned a contract for the sale of land which contained a condition
precedent that the contract was subject to the purchasers
completing a sale of
their existing property. Time was not fixed for compliance with the condition,
nor for settlement of the contract
itself. The contract did not specify the
consequences of non-fulfilment. The High Court by majority held that upon the
non-fulfilment
of the condition, in this case established by the expiry of a
reasonable time for its fulfilment and assuming that there has not
been earlier
waiver by the purchaser, that either party, if not in default, can elect to
treat the contract as at an end. It is apparent
from the reasoning of the
members of the majority that this conclusion was a necessary implication arising
from the contingent nature
of the condition and its intended operation as a
condition precedent to performance of the contract.
The cases also demonstrate that express provision in the contract as to the
consequences of non-fulfilment will not always determine
the outcome in that
event. For example, it is well established that a condition precedent included
in the contract solely for the
benefit of one party may be waived by that party
in the event of non-fulfilment, whereby the contract will remain on foot,
irrespective
of express provision for the consequences of non-fulfilment.
Gange v Sullivan
[1966] HCA 55
(1966) 116 CLR 418
Coolangatta Investments Pty Ltd
per Gibbs CJ at 543;
Sandra Investments
Proprietary v Booth
[1983] HCA 46
(1983) 153 CLR 153
per Gibbs CJ at
158-159. In
Gange v Sullivan,
the condition precedent in question
required planning approval of the use of the land for certain purposes. The
contract specified
that in the event that approval was not granted "this
Contract shall be deemed to be at an end and all moneys paid by the purchaser
the vendor shall be refunded". Despite what would appear to be clear and
express provision for automatic termination, all members
of the Court held that
the non-fulfilment rendered the contract voidable at the option of either party.
Taylor, Menzies and Owen
JJ expressed their view about this question in this way
"It was argued for the appellant that the condition did not
mean that the contract was brought to an end automatically when the council
not granted approval by 31st May.
Suttor v. Gundowda Pty. Ltd
[1950] HCA 35
(1950) 81 CLR 418
, together with other
cases, was relied upon to support the conclusion that non-fulfilment of the
condition did not of itself bring
the contract to an end but did no more than
render the contract voidable at the instance of a party not responsible for the
non-fulfilment
of the condition. Whilst the effect of a condition must in every
case depend upon the language in which it is expressed and a decision
meaning of one condition cannot determine the meaning of a different condition,
the authorities cited do show a disposition
on the part of courts to treat
non-fulfilment of a condition such as that here under consideration as rendering
a contract voidable
rather than void in order to forestall a party to a contract
from gaining some advantage from his own conduct in securing, or contributing
to, the non-fulfilment of a condition bringing the contract to an end.
Accordingly, notwithstanding that the language of the condition
susceptible of meaning that the contract came to an end if 31st May passed
without the council's approval, we are prepared
to treat non-fulfilment of the
condition as rendering the contract voidable rather than void. So understood,
non-fulfilment of the
condition could, in the absence of default contributing
thereto, be relied upon by either party as a ground for determining the
These comments were cited with approval in
by Brennan J, with whom
Stephen J agreed.
These authorities would seem to support the appellant's argument that
specification of the consequences of non-fulfilment of a condition
precedent is
not an essential requirement of a binding contract. Such a question is a matter
determined by the courts upon subsequent
litigation as a matter of construction,
and, as demonstrated by the cases cited, will often not be conclusive in any
event. However,
the authorities are also clear that every case will depend upon
its own facts and circumstances. In this case, there are some significant
of distinction from the cases referred to above. The intention of the parties to
resolve all aspects of their dispute by an
interdependent set of diverse
actions, subject to multiple, yet practically independent, conditions precedent,
and the consequent
finding that the failure of any condition precedent would
relate to performance of the whole agreement, are critical points of
distinction.
Further, there can be no question of either party being entitled to
a unilateral waiver of a condition precedent. In such a case,
a real question
does arise as to whether the contract would be voidable at the option of one
party or automatically terminated upon
failure of a condition precedent.
Of itself, this question may not render specification of the consequence an
essential term of this agreement. However, when combined
with the practical
implications which might result from partial performance, including those
identified by the primary judge, I am
of the view that his Honour reached the
correct conclusion. The almost certain failure of the "immediate payment"
required by clause
7, and the dependence of other conditions on decisions of a
planning authority and a court, meant that failure of one or more conditions
precedent was a real prospect. The fundamental purpose of the agreement was to
achieve a final and comprehensive settlement in order
to bring this long running
dispute to an end. This purpose could not be achieved by an agreement which had
the potential to fall
at the first hurdle, and where the consequences of such
failure, and consequent practical problems had not been considered or dealt
by the agreement. Rather than achieve its fundamental purpose, the problems
arising from an agreement which lacked such terms
were more likely to create
further areas of dispute. Accordingly, I am of the view that the primary judge
correctly concluded that
terms dealing with such questions were in the
circumstances and context of this agreement, essential to the creation of a
legal agreement. In their absence, the contract was "void, unenforceable
and of no effect".
As already discussed, these reasons deal with the correctness of his Honour's
decision, which deals with ground 1 and the balance
of the grounds merged into
it. In my view, this includes ground 3 which raises a point concerning the
availability of declaratory
relief. The argument supporting this ground is
confined to the point that such relief should not be granted to decide questions
are "purely hypothetical", and not necessary to resolve real controversy
between the parties. There is no question that this statement
principle is correct, but in the light of the above analysis, the argument is
clearly misconceived and inapplicable. The
finding that the agreement was
invalid because it was incomplete, and hence unable to achieve a binding
contract, was not a hypothetical
matter. The argument seems to be based on the
factual probability of the failure of a condition precedent, but this was a
related to the essential nature of the missing terms, not the ultimate
question resolved by the decision. In any event, the findings
which I would
uphold leave no room for arguments concerning hypothetical and unlikely
scenarios. The appellant's counsel was correct
to concede that all grounds
including ground 3 merged in ground 1.
For these reasons, I would dismiss the
File No: 2414/2022
STIRLING MATHEW HOOKWAY v TAMZIN PETA HOOKWAY
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
27 May 2024
I agree that the appeal should be dismissed for the reasons given by Brett
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (325 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter