URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASRPDComm/2009/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:20:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Launceston Planning Scheme 1996 Amendment 149 [2009] TASRPDComm 24 (16 June 2009)
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Land Use Planning and Approvals
Resource Planning and Development
Commission Act 1997
Decision and Reasons for Decision
LAUNCESTON PLANNING SCHEME
Draft Amendment 149
Permit Application No DA0672/2007
This application comprises a certified draft amendment which proposes to
rezone various strips of land from Rural and Forest Practices
to Road and a
permit for the construction of a bypass road in the Dilston area over the same
Date and Place of Hearing 27 May 2009, Launceston City Council Chambers
meeting on 30 March 2009
and pursuant to Section 8 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission
, the Commission delegated to Mr John Vandenberg:
powers and functions under
sections 40
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
in relation to draft
amendment 149 and permit number DA067/2007 to the Launceston Planning Scheme
1996 taking into account the issues
raised in the Commission’s
correspondence with the representors, the Council and the Department of
Infrastructure, Energy and
Resources dated 19 December 2008; and
connection with the exercise of those powers in performance of those functions,
its powers under Part 3 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Representors
Some 115 representations were received.
It was evident from the issues raised in representations that the majority of
representors were concerned about the impact of the
proposed road design rather
than the amendment.
Appearances
Mr Ron Goodes of 1279 East Tamar Highway, Dilston was the only representor to
Mr Goodes had nothing to offer in terms of the draft amendment. His only
concerns were with the design of the proposed Dilston bypass.
It was explained
that the Commission had no jurisdiction to consider a permit incorrectly applied
for under S.43A. Mr Goodes indicated
that he was aware that another application
had been made and a permit had already been issued. He also understood that any
determination of that process was a matter for another jurisdiction.
The certified draft amendment proposes to rezone various strips of land from
Rural and Forest Practices to Road.
The permit is for the construction of a bypass road in the Dilston area over the
same land covered by the draft amendment.
Issues raised in Representations
junction design
Viability of
rural properties
Environmental
impact (State and Federal jurisdictions)
Impacts on local
Provisions for
Movement of
cattle and machinery
Without exception, the representations are concerned with the permit rather than
the draft amendment. For the reasons given later
in this decision concerning
the permit, there is no need to consider that document in any
Additional issues identified by the Commission
There are a number of issues;
whether or not
the amendment to the planning scheme is required at all in order for the State
road authority to construct Major New
Road Works;
application of the Road Zone, and
whether any
other zoning is applicable, and
the validity of
the S.43A permit
Council’s Report
The planning authority
considered the representations at its meeting of 14 April 2008. It
resolved the following;
Council partially supports the representations to Launceston Planning Scheme
1996, Amendment 149.
Council recommends to the Resource Planning and Development Commission that the
draft amendment 149 be approved as certified
Council recommends to the Resource Planning and Development Commission that a
Development Application DA0672/2007 permit be
approved subject to the following
conditions: (excluded)
The permit conditions included substantive modifications to the intersection
designs for the proposed road development contained
application.
Commission’s consideration of the draft amendment
Interpretation of the Road Zone
This zone is unlike all other zones in the Scheme in the way that it is
constructed. It is more akin to a schedule than anything
The format for all other zones in the ordinance has the
Intent of the
Use of land
Development of
land (table)
Development
requirements, followed by varying specific issue
provisions.
The Road Zone has the following construct:
definitions
Application of
development of land (table)
procedure for certain roadworks
Road hierarchy
Road hierarchy
classifications
Road hierarchy
access requirements
Referrals to the
Department of Transport
Setbacks from
Traffic impact
assessments
Road junctions
Temporary closures
Margaret Street
Detention Basin
Intent of the Zone (31.1)
The Intent goes to enabling and ensuring that the planning area has a properly
planned, integrated and sustainable road network with
an established road
hierarchy. It contains its own specific definitions and perhaps most
importantly, its own specific method of
application.
Relevant Road Definitions (31.2)
“Major New Roadworks: All roadworks required for the construction of a new
section of road disassociated from any existing
road, e.g. bypass of town or
village, construction of a road within an existing road reserve, or the
upgrading of an existing road
to a higher design standard involving a number of
individual ‘Minor Roadworks’, including upgrading the overall road
alignment amounting to a de facto improved route;”
“Road: Land over which the general public has permanent right of passage
in a motor vehicle, including all land between the
boundaries of the road and
its reservation and all bridges over which such a road passes, being a road
which is the responsibility
of the Minister administering the
Roads and Jetties
or, a road for which the Council has accepted responsibility under its
seal or a road shown on the municipal map;”
“Road Zone: All that land lying within the boundaries of any road as
defined by Clause 31.3:”
The Road Zone includes the following:
(1) All land that is a Road under the control of a road authority, whether or
not such roads are shown on the planning scheme maps;
(2) All land dedicated by the Road Authority as a public Road; or
(3) All land designated as Road on a sealed plan of subdivision; and
(4) All land approved for Major New Road Works and which results in the creation
(5) [Not relevant – exemptions for Malls in the City centre]
In other words, land is not a Road until it has been constructed and become the
responsibility of a road authority. It does not include
an un-constructed road
reservation. Once a road has been created and satisfies any of categories (1),
(2) or (3) of the definition,
it lies within a Road Zone and use and development
within the zone is controlled by the table of C31.4. This allows for activities
such as certain exempt minor road works, road maintenance or minor utilities
without application for a permit and for other activities
that are reasonably
related to roads to be approved at Council’s discretion.
From a practical perspective any land, irrespective of its zoning under the
planning scheme, becomes a part of the “Road Zone”
immediately upon
becoming a road [Cl.31.3(1)], or upon being dedicated as a road by a road
authority [Cl.31.3(2)] or upon being shown
as such on a sealed plan of
subdivision [Cl.31.3(3)].
Clause 31.3(4) is only understandable when read as expressing some future intent
as opposed to the present tense of the other sub
clauses. However, it seems
clear that the land in question does not form part of the Road Zone until a
“Road” has been
created on it.
All this leads to the question as to whether or not the Road Zone is in fact a
zone or, because of the way it has been constructed,
whether it operates more as
a schedule that applies to roads irrespective of the underlying zoning.
How are Major New Roadworks to be approved?
First, as explained, Major New Road Works creates its own Road Zone merely by
the fact of (and simultaneously with) being approved.
This follows from 31.3(4)
above, (provided that the Clause can be properly interpreted). (Similarly, the
zone applies to any land
that satisfies 31.1,2 or 3, without any need for a
change to the plans.)
The Table of Use and Development shows that Major New Road Works is permitted
(permit required) (P), with a condition or restriction
‘See Clause
31.5.2’ It is the only use/development to be classified in this way
– all other road related uses are
either ‘permitted –no permit
required’ or discretionary.
Clause 31.5.2 says, “Route planning in respect of a ‘Major New
Roadworks’ shall include community consultation,
together with social,
economic, traffic impact assessments and environmental impact assessments made
in accordance with the principles
embodied in
Environmental
Management and Pollution Control Act 1994
However, it is unclear whether the “route planning” is intended to
be a pre-condition to the making of a planning application
or a pre-condition to
the approval of the application. In any event, the provisions seem to go beyond
the requirements of a permitted
classification.
When considered together these provisions (ss.31.3(4), 31.4 and 31.5.2) set up a
process that is clearly intended to obviate the
need for any scheme amendment to
give effect to Major New Road Works.
No reference needs to be made to the provisions of the underlying zones (in this
case Rural and Forest Practices) to determine an
application for Major New Road
Works. Indeed that is the point of the way scheme deals with Major New Road
Works; a new highway might
cut across a number of zones and it could be
concluded that it should not be controlled by the various provisions of those
(hence the applicable Road zone provisions).
The only proviso comes from the potential effects of certain overlays referred
to by the Special Provisions of
(e.g. heritage places, protected
catchments, flood prone areas). Development in such areas triggers discretionary
Clause 31.4 says
A permit issued by the planning authority should include all
the conditions required by the road authority
. Therefore, once the road
authority has determined the preferred route and applied for a permit, the
planning authority can grant
it as a permitted or at worst, a discretionary
approval. The planning authority is probably not at liberty to alter the
or substitute its own conditions for those supplied by the road
authority (although use of the word ‘should’ leaves an
The scheme does not prohibit Major New Road Works anywhere, so a scheme
amendment is not required because upon approval of the Major
New Roadworks the
affected lands automatically are included in the Road Zone. That being the
case, the prerequisite for a S.43A
permit cannot be met (
an application for a
permit which would not be allowed if the planning scheme were not
Conclusions
Draft Amendment
Unless land becomes part of the “Road Zone” because of the operation
of Clause 31.3 there is no way that any existing
zoning can be changed to that
zone. In other words, despite the request to amend the planning scheme, it is
both unnecessary and
beyond power to do so.
Any amendment to show the new road in the planning scheme plans could only be
for information purposes and only done after the event,
but it is not a
requirement for determining any use or development of the road.
The certified draft amendment shows where the road is on the zoning plans. At
the same time, it attempts to insert a specific ribbon
of land to Road (Class 1
Strategic Network) (as per C.31.7). This presumably is done to provide for easy
identification of the road
in terms of applying the provisions of the
appropriate Road Hierarchy Classifications. However, these classifications are
on the zoning plans, but are shown on the Special Area plans. The
road hierarchy classification could be shown as being inserted
appropriate Special Area plan, but again only after the existence of the road.
The draft amendment must be therefore considered as not “in order”
It is considered that the way that the Planning Scheme (and in particular, the
Road Zone) is constructed means it is never necessary
for any person seeking to
make application to develop a new road to seek a rezoning for that express
purpose. The act of approval
of the development application and the resultant
creation of a “Road” is sufficient to change the status of the land
such that the Road Zone automatically applies.
Therefore, an application for the creation of a new “Road” can never
an application for a permit which would not be allowed if the planning
scheme were not amended.
It follows that the application should have been
made, not pursuant to
, but as an application pursuant to
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
The application for the permit was not in accordance with
and therefore a
There is no ability to make a decision pursuant to
would normally be the case.
The Commission rejects the draft amendment pursuant to
Section 41(b)
Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
John Vandenberg
16 June 2009
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (94 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter