URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCAT/2025/199.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
LNT v Greenhill Education Group Pty Ltd [2025] TASCAT 199 (21 October 2025)
LNT v Greenhill Education Group Pty Ltd
[2025] TASCAT 199
Personal Compensation
LNT (Worker)
Greenhill Education Group Pty Ltd
Nominal Insurer (Joined Party)
Hearing Date:
16 October 2025
Hearing Location:
Date of Orders:
21 October 2025
Date Reasons Issued:
21 October 2025
RM Grueber – Deputy President
Orders Made:
1. Referral W2025/394 is dismissed.
Referral W2025/674 is dismissed insofar as it relates to any claim for
compensation accrued or accruing after 10 December 2024.
3. Referral
W2025/674 is referred to a conciliator for the purposes of the conciliation
process in Division 2 of Part V of the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
Catchwords:
Workers’ compensation – Entitlement to compensation –
Proceedings against the Nominal Insurer – Where employer
held no policy of
insurance – Where the worker and employer agreed to settle and executed a
deed – Where the employer
filed to pay the settlement sum and entered
liquidation – Whether liability for workers compensation is extinguished
Legislation Cited:
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
Corporations Act 2001
Cases Cited:
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
The Queen v A2
[2019] HCA 35
Trustees Victoria Limited v Ford
[2008] NSWSC 29
Bennett v State of
[2005] TASSC 44
Walker v J & A Freeman Building
[2006] TASSC 90
Attorney-General (Tas) v CL
Scott v Sun Alliance Australia Ltd
[1993] HCA 46
Toll (FGCT) Pty Ltd v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 52
Shire Council v Kiangatha Holdings Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWLEC 30
Equuscorp v Glengannon Investments
[2004] HCA 55
[1954] HCA 72
Braslin v Worbey
[1999] TASSC 139
Lorna Jean Dicker v City of Burnie
[1993] TASSC 104
Fercometal S.A.R.L. v Mediterranean Shipping Company S.A.
[1988] 3 WLR 200
Representation:
Worker: Self-represented
Employer: No appearance
Insurer: P Harris
– Wallace Wilkinson & Webster
W/2025/394 and W/2025/674
Publication Restriction:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication.
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Background and referrals
worker made a claim for a psychological injury arising from her employment with
the employer. The claim was not initially disputed
and was deemed accepted. The
employer did not have a policy of insurance, and the course of the claim was not
a smooth one. Eventually
the parties agreed to settle the worker’s claim
for a lump sum by way of a deed of release. However, the employer did not pay.
The worker obtained a judgement in the Magistrates Court for the settlement sum,
but the employer still did not pay.
worker then filed two referrals with the Tribunal:
seeking orders pursuant to s 127(1)(b) and (c) of the Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1988 (the Act) that “the
Nominal Insurer ... meet the
employer’s liability under the Act” (the first referral); and
pursuant to s 42 of the Act seeking payment of workers compensation for two
defined past periods and into the future (the
second referral).
Nominal Insurer was joined as a party to both referrals.
of jurisdiction were raised by the Nominal Insurer in respect to both referrals.
This determination deals with those matters
of jurisdiction. The matters were
heard together with evidence in one being evidence in the other.
the date of the hearing a liquidator had been appointed for the employer. The
employer’s practitioner withdrew before the
hearing and neither the
liquidator nor the employer appeared at the hearing.
worker was initially represented by a legal practitioner, and briefly in the
interlocutory stage by counsel, but ceased to have
legal representation after
the initial directions hearing for the second referral. She appeared at the
hearing in person. Except
where stated I have not differentiated between actions
of the worker through her practitioner and in person.
issues, distilled from the Nominal Insurer’s submissions are:
the Tribunal have jurisdiction under s 127 of the Act to order that the Nominal
Insurer pay the settlement sum or to direct the
Nominal Insurer to satisfy the
judgement obtained in the Magistrate’s Court; and
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to make orders in respect to payment of
workers compensation to the worker extinguished by the
settlement?
Nominal Insurer contended that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction on both
submissions filed on the day before the hearing, in response to submissions
filed earlier that day by the Nominal insurer, the
worker advised that she no
longer sought to have the settlement sum paid by the Nominal insurer. Her
primary position was that the
Tribunal retained jurisdiction to order that she
be paid workers compensation.
18 September 2023 the worker made a workers compensation claim in respect to a
psychological injury alleged to have been sustained
by her in her employment
with the employer on 1 September 2023.
employer did not hold a workers compensation insurance policy.
employer did not dispute the worker’s claim within 84 days as provided in
s 81A of the Act and so was taken by operation
of s81AB to have accepted
liability for the worker’s claim. The employer did not commence payments
of compensation and, as
a consequence, the worker filed a referral with the
Tribunal pursuant to s 42, which resulted in orders that the employer pay
compensation being made by consent on 5 February 2024.
appears that matters did not proceed smoothly, and the worker made another
referral pursuant to s 42 and s 127 of the Act, which
resulted in further orders
by consent on 9 July 2024 that the employer pay compensation to the worker.
after that, on 23 July 2024, the employer filed a referral pursuant to s 81A(5)
of the Act disputing foundational liability
to pay compensation. The employer
denied the material facts upon which the worker made her claim and asserted that
if the worker
was suffering from a psychological injury it arose from reasonable
administrative action taken in a reasonable manner to discipline
or counsel the
worker or in connection with her employment and so was not compensable.
20 September 2024, before the s 81A(5) referral proceeded to a conciliation
conference in the Tribunal, the worker accepted an
offer made by the employer
during a conciliation held in the Federal Circuit and Family Court in respect to
a general protections
claim made by the worker against the employer under the
Fair Work Act 2009
worker agreed to settle her claims for $50,000, made up of $45,000 for the
workers compensation claim and $5,000 for the general
protections claim. In
return for the settlement sum the worker agreed to release the employer from any
further liability in connection
with her claims.
16 October 2025 the worker’s practitioner filed a Resolved During
Conciliation form with the Tribunal to finalise the
referral. The form
was signed by the legal practitioners for both parties.
agreement to settle was subject to the Tribunal making orders approving the
settlement under s 132A of the Act. Section 132A(1)
provides that a
worker’s outstanding entitlements to compensation may only be settled by
an agreement by which the worker agrees
that all further claims to compensation
are extinguished. Any such agreement made within two years from the date on
which the claim
for compensation was made requires the approval of the Tribunal.
As the settlement occurred before 18 September 2025 approval was
required. In
this respect the relevant provisions of s 132A
132A. Settlement by agreement
(1) A worker's outstanding entitlements to
compensation under this Act in respect of an injury may only be settled by an
to settle by which the worker agrees that all further claims to
compensation are extinguished.
(2) An agreement to settle that does not
comply with this section is void.
(3) A settlement by agreement of all a
worker's outstanding entitlements to compensation may only be entered into,
before the end
of the period of 2 years beginning on the day on which a claim
for compensation is first made in relation to the worker, if the agreement
been approved by the Tribunal under this section.
(4) A worker, the employer or the
employer's insurer may, in a form approved by the Tribunal, refer to the
Tribunal for its approval
a proposed agreement to settle, which may be in the
form the parties think fit.
(5) The Tribunal may approve, or refuse to
approve, a proposed agreement to settle that is referred to it under
subsection (4)
worker’s legal practitioner filed a statement made by him in support of
the s 132A referral. In the statement the legal
practitioner described a series
of offers and counteroffers made between 8 May 2024 and 20 September 2024,
commencing with an offer
made by the worker and concluding with the worker
accepting the offer made by the employer during the conciliation at the Federal
Circuit and Family Court. The worker was not represented at the conciliation. In
his statement the practitioner said that on the
day of the conciliation the
worker told him that she had accepted the offer and wanted to proceed with s
132A approval of the settlement
agreement. He advised the worker that he was
happy to do so because he had previously advised the worker on the quantum of
and the worker had negotiated the settlement and was happy with it,
and in his view it was a good deal for the worker.
worker’s practitioner said in the statement that the worker instructed him
to wait until her weekly payments of compensation
were up to date before filing
the s 132A referral. He explained that following the conciliation the employer
ceased making weekly
payments and paying medical expenses. Between September and
November 2024 weekly payments were made on a few occasions, but were
and represented less than the worker’s full entitlement. On 29 November
2024 the employer made two weekly payments
and agreed to incorporate a term in
the deed that would allow the worker to recoup any shortfall of weekly payments.
On 29 November
2024, he received the deed of release from the employer’s
practitioners.
2 December 2024 the worker filed the s 132A referral. It appears from the
practitioner’s statement that the worker’s
weekly payments were not
up to date by that time, but I infer that the referral was made then because of
the agreement to allow the
worker to recoup any shortfall of weekly payments and
because cl 2.3 and cl 7.2 of the deed required the worker to execute the deed
within seven days of receipt and to file a s 132A referral within seven days of
executing the deed.
10 December 2024 the Tribunal made the orders sought by the worker under s 132A
approving the settlement.
11 December 2024 the worker executed the deed of release. I infer from the
pleadings set out below that the executed deed was delivered
on that day.
Notwithstanding
the agreement to settle and the delivery of the deed, the employer did not pay
the settlement sum to the worker.
a consequence, on 16 January 2025 the worker filed a claim in the Civil Division
of the Magistrates Court seeking payment of the
settlement sum of $50,000.00
plus interest and costs. The claim was pleaded as a breach of contract in the
following terms:
1. The Claimant was employed by the Defendant on or about 24 July 2023.
2. On or about 1 September 2023 the Claimant suffered an injury in the course
of her employment.
3. On about 20 September 2023 the Claimant made a claim for compensation
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
4. On about 8 November 2023 the Claimant made an application to the Fair Work
Commission alleging contraventions of the
Fair Work Act 2009
5. On about 23 July 2024 the Defendant filed a referral in the Tasmanian
Civil and Administrative Tribunal.
6. This referral sought an order terminating the worker's entitlement to
Workers Compensation Weekly Payments.
7. On 20 September 2024 the parties reached an in-principle settlement
agreement to resolve all claims.
8. On 10 December 2024, that agreement was approved by the Tasmanian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal pursuant to
section 132A
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
Particulars of contract
The contract provided for:
(a) Payment of a settlement sum of $50,000.00 “the Settlement
(b) Within 28 days of the date of approval of the order
(c) Pursuant to a deed of release.
9. On 11 December 2024, the Claimant provided a copy of the signed deed of
release to the defendant.
10. Pursuant to the terms of the contract, the Settlement Sum of $50,000.00
became payable on 11 January 2025.
Particulars of breach
The Defendant has not made payment of The Settlement Sum.
11. The Claimant seeks orders that the Defendant pay the Claimant:
(a) $50,000.00 in damages; plus
(b) Interest; plus
employer did not file a defence to the claim and on 6 March 2025 a default
judgment was issued by the Court for the sum of $50,000.00
(the judgment sum)
and $781.15 for costs.
employer did not pay the judgment sum and costs.
14 March 2025 the worker filed the first referral seeking orders pursuant to s
127(1)(b) and (c) of the Act that “the Nominal
Insurer ... meet the
employer’s liability under the Act”. The referral recited the
agreement to settle, the deed, the
s 132A orders and the judgement in the Court.
It was apparent that the liability that it sought to have met was the liability
pay the judgement sum.
13 May 2025 the worker filed the second referral, seeking:
(a) payment of workers
compensation weekly payments outstanding for the period 1 September 2023 to 10
December 2024;
(b) payment of workers compensation weekly payments from 10 December 2024 to the
date of any order; and
(c) payment of workers compensation weekly payments on an ongoing basis.
The relevance of the date 10 December 2024 is that it was the date that the s
132A orders were made.
22 August 2025 a liquidator was appointed for the company by the Federal Court.
Pursuant to
Corporations Act 2001
, where a liquidator
has been appointed enforcement proceedings cannot commence or proceed against
the property of the corporation
in liquidation. Following the appointment of the
liquidator the company’s legal practitioner withdrew. The liquidator
the Tribunal that he does not wish to take part in the proceedings.
worker lodged a proof of debt with the liquidator by way of a form described as
an affidavit but signed by the worker as a statutory
declaration on 15 September
2025. The proof of debt is for a sum which includes, amongst other claims, the
judgment sum of $50,000
plus the costs awarded by the Court and interest on the
judgment sum.
The deed of release
deed of release was made between the worker and the employer. It is expressed to
be executed as a deed. It recites the worker’s
employment, the work
injury, the claim for workers compensation, the general protections claim and
the agreement to settle. The recitals
in the deed include matters that are
required to be addressed under s 132A. The recitals include the offer and
acceptance of the
settlement sum of $50,000, made up of $45,000 for “any
outstanding entitlements to compensation under the Act”, which
in the deed as the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
, and $5,000
for “pain and distress in settlement of the General Protections
2.4 of the deed provides that compensation will cease to be paid to worker on
the date of
section 132A
approval by the Tribunal.
2.5 requires that the employer pay the settlement sum within 28 days of that
deed includes, in cl 3.1, a release in the following terms:
The worker releases and forever fully discharges the employer from all
liability, under the Act or in respect of, or in any way connected
employment, the injuries, the Claims and any causes of action, actions, claims,
demands, matters or complaints which the
worker now has or may in the future
have in respect of, or which are in any way connected with the employment, the
Claims or the
injuries, including all claims by Centrelink, Medicare Australia,
National Disability Insurance Scheme or any other government department
recoverable expenditure in respect of or in any way arising out of or connected
with the Claims or the injuries.
is defined broadly in cl 1.1 of the deed, and includes, inter alia, claims under
the Act and the
Fair Work Act
. It is clear from the recitals that where the deed
refers to “the claims” it is referring to the workers compensation
claim and the general protections claim. “Injury” is defined in cl
1.1 by reference to the recitals as the worker’s
psychological injury.
“The injuries” is defined by reference to the recitals as the injury
together with any recurrence,
acceleration, aggravation, exacerbation or
deterioration of the injury.
deed includes a bar to further claims in cl 6.1 in the following terms:
This deed operates as an absolute bar to all claims threatened or instituted or
attempted to be instituted by or in the name of the
worker arising out of or in
connection with the employment, the injuries or the Claims.
7 of the deed required the worker to file a notice of discontinuance in the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia in
respect of the general
protections claim within five days of payment of the settlement sum, and to make
a referral pursuant to s
132A of the Act within seven days of executing the
10.1 of the deed provides that:
This deed shall take effect as against the worker according to its purport from
the time of execution by the worker subject to the
Approval by Tascat.
contains a severance provision in cl 11.3:
If any term of this Deed is or becomes legally ineffective, under common law or
legislation, the ineffective provision may be severed
from this Deed which
otherwise continues to be valid and operational. The parties will agree on an
arrangement having a legal and
economic effect which will be as similar as
possible to the ineffective provision.
11.6 of the deed preserves obligations extending beyond the completion of the
settlement:
Any provision of this Deed which is not fully completed,
observed or performed immediately before completion of this Deed or is capable
of taking effect after completion does not merge on the completion but continues
in full force and effect after completion.
11.8 of the deed preserves the liability of the employer for outstanding unpaid
workers compensation weekly payments and medical
expenses from the date of the
injury to the date of approval by the Tribunal pursuant to s
Nothing in this agreement releases or discharges the employer
from their liability for:
compensation weekly payments from the date of injury to the date of approval of
this agreement by the Tribunal pursuant to
section 132A,
As You Go tax payable to the Australian Tax Office on the worker's behalf;
benefits from the date of injury to the date of approval of this agreement by
the Tribunal pursuant to section 132A.
Liability of the Nominal
circumstances where an employer has not obtained a policy of workers
compensation insurance or is wound up, a claim by a worker
that would ordinarily
be pursued or enforced against the employer may be pursued or enforced against
the Nominal Insurer.
126 of the Act sets out the circumstances where proceedings may be taken against
the Nominal Insurer. Section 126(1) provides:
126. When proceedings may be taken against the Nominal
(1) Where –
(a) an employer –
(i) has not obtained from a licensed insurer
such a policy of insurance as is referred to in
has failed to maintain in force any such policy so obtained by him;
(ii) has applied to take, or takes,
advantage of any law relating to bankruptcy, or has compounded, or entered into
an arrangement,
with his creditors; or
(iii) has left the State and his
whereabouts are unknown;
(b) an employer, or the licensed insurer from
whom or from which an employer obtained such a policy, is a body corporate and
(i) the winding-up of the body corporate has
commenced; or
(ii) a receiver or manager of the
property of the body corporate has been appointed, or the body corporate has
been placed under administration,
under the provisions of the
Corporations Act
or any corresponding previous enactment; or
(c) for any other reason there are reasonable
grounds for believing that an employer or a licensed insurer from whom or from
he has obtained such a policy is, or is likely to be, unable to discharge
in full any liability in respect of which such a policy
is required
be maintained by the employer –
the same claims, whether by way of legal proceedings or not, may be made against
the Nominal Insurer in respect of any liability
in respect of which such a
policy is required under
be maintained by the employer, and the same judgment may be obtained against the
Nominal Insurer, as could, apart from
, have been made or obtained against the person by whom the
liability was incurred.
provides for enforcement of orders or judgments made in respect to the
employer as against the Nominal Insurer. The relevant provision
enlivened by the
worker’s first referral is
which provides:
127. Order or judgment against Nominal Insurer
(1) Where, in respect of a liability in
respect of which an employer is required under
maintain a policy of insurance –
(a) an order has been made by the Tribunal in
respect of that liability; or
(b) judgment is obtained in any court in respect
of that liability –
and the order is not complied with or the judgment has not been satisfied within
the period of 28 days after the making of the order
or after the judgment is
(c) the Tribunal may, on the application of the
person in whose favour the order was made, order that the order be complied with
the Nominal Insurer; or
(d) the court in
which the judgment was obtained may direct that that judgment be entered against
the Nominal Insurer.
noted above, the first referral seeks orders pursuant to s 127(1)(b) and (c) of
the Act that “the Nominal Insurer ... meet
the employer’s liability
under the Act”. The referral recited the agreement to settle, the deed,
the s 132A orders and
the judgement in the Court. It is apparent that the
liability sought to be met is the judgement sum. The referral specifically seeks
orders pursuant to s 127(1)(b) and (c), which relate to enforcement of judgments
and orders against the Nominal insurer.
worker abandoned this claim on the afternoon prior to the hearing, although she
did not formally withdraw the referral. It appears
that she did so because her
preference was to pursue her claim for workers compensation entitlements rather
than enforce the settlement.
However, the referral was misconceived, and I will
address why that is so.
order that the referral seeks to have enforced against the Nominal Insurer is
the judgement of the Court. In correspondence with
the Tribunal’s Registry
it appeared that the worker mistakenly believed that the Tribunal exercises some
general plenary oversight
over the workers compensation system established by
the Act that could be exercised on its own motion, and she repeatedly criticised
the Tribunal for not enforcing its orders, while at the same time seeking
adjournments of directions hearings or refusing to attend.
It appears that the
worker was referring to the s 132A orders in this regard. Orders made pursuant
to s 132A are only to approve
a settlement, which is otherwise a private
arrangement between the parties. The section sets out the matters that the
Tribunal must
have regard to in doing so. Those requirements do not permit the
Tribunal to set the terms of a settlement. Nor do orders made pursuant
require parties to act in accordance with the terms of the settlement.
Specifically, the orders do not require an employer
to make any payment pursuant
to the settlement. A directions hearing was convened on 25 August to identify
for the worker the jurisdictional
issues arising on the referrals and to set the
referrals down for hearing. The worker refused to attend. The issues were
at the directions hearing and a transcript was sent to the worker.
meaning of s 127(1) is to be determined according to the ordinary and
grammatical meaning of the text having regard to the context
and purpose of the
surrounding sections and of the Act: Alcan (NT)
Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory
[2009] HCA 41
and [47] and
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
. A purposive
approach is to be taken, and context is to be considered at the first stage of
the process of construction:
The Queen v A2
[2019] HCA 35
purpose of s 127(1) is clear. It is to ensure that a worker with the benefit of
an order made by the Tribunal or a judgement given
by a Court in respect to an
employer’s liability arising from a work injury is not defeated by the
failure or inability of
the employer to pay. This is achieved by permitting the
worker to enforce the order or judgment against the Nominal Insurer. Under
130, the Nominal Insurer may recover from an employer an amount that is paid by
it in satisfaction of a claim, order or judgment.
127 does not relate to the circumstances of establishing a liability by the
employer either initially or in respect to any
particular claimed benefit. That
is covered by s 126. Section 127 contemplates only two circumstances, being
where an order has been
made by the Tribunal or a judgment has been given by a
ordinary and grammatical meaning of the s 127(1) limits the Tribunal’s
power to make an order for compliance by the Nominal
Insurer to the circumstance
of orders made by the Tribunal. It does not extend the Tribunal’s powers
to judgments of the Court.
Section 127(1)(a) and (b) distinguish between orders
and judgements respectively. Subsection (1)(c) provides that the Tribunal may
“order that the order be complied with by the Nominal Insurer”. It
clearly relates to (1)(a). In respect to judgments
under (1)(b), (1)(d) provides
that the power to “direct that that judgment be entered against the
Nominal Insurer” resides
in “the court in which the judgment was
obtained”, not the Tribunal.
referral seeks orders pursuant to s 127(1)(b) and (c). There is no relevant
order by the Tribunal. Tribunal has no power to direct
that a judgment of the
Magistrates court be entered against the Nominal Insurer. Assuming that a
judgment to enforce a settlement
agreement is a judgment obtained in respect to
a liability in respect of which an employer is required to maintain a
policy of insurance
pursuant to s 127(1), which would appear to be the case as s
132A(1) refers to settlement of a worker’s outstanding entitlements
compensation under the Act, the proper course would be for the worker to apply
to the Court for a direction pursuant to s 127(d).
It is not apparent why that
course was not pursued. The referral should be dismissed.
second referral
second referral seeks to enforce the worker’s rights to workers
compensation, including those which are apparently the subject
settlement, and to pursue those rights as against the Nominal insurer pursuant
to s 126. Although the worker did not expressly
frame her case in the context of
enforcement of the consent orders made on 5 February 2024 and 9 July 2024, she
made reference to
s 127 in her submissions and the referral is broad enough to
encompass the imposition on the Nominal Insurer of liability to comply
those orders.
extinguishes the worker’s right to compensation
and bars her claim. The
Nominal Insurer says that it does, the worker contends that it does
The parties’ submissions
worker submitted that the parties cannot contract out of the statutory rights
under the Act, and that the deed cannot lawfully
replace entitlements under the
Act. The worker’s point in respect to contracting out of obligations is
correct in respect to
liability for compensation, and the Act does not provide a
right of redemption, but s 132A expressly provides for settlement of the
entirety of a worker’s entitlement to compensation under the Act.
worker submitted that she signed the deed while injured and under duress. She
did not provide evidence of duress but said in submissions
that her lawyer told
her that he would cease acting for her if she did not take the settlement offer,
and that the Tribunal was “very
difficult to deal with and engage with and
to avoid it at all costs”. I observe that that is inconsistent with her
statement, which was in evidence, that the worker made the
initial offer of settlement, that she accepted the settlement in a conciliation
that her lawyer did not attend, and that he was subsequently advised of the
settlement by her, and that she wanted to proceed to
obtain approval of the
settlement under s 132A.
party is generally bound by their signature on a legal document, whether or not
they had read and understood the terms before signing,
unless they had no
positive belief at all about the nature and effect of the document, or a
positive belief as to the nature and
effect of the document radically different
from its actual nature and effect: for example see the analysis of Harrison J in
Trustees Victoria Limited v Ford
[2008] NSWSC 29
Equuscorp v
Glengannon Investments
[2004] HCA 55
the Court said in respect to
written agreements:
33. The respondents each having executed a loan
agreement, each is bound by it. Having executed the document, and not having
induced to do so by fraud, mistake, or misrepresentation, the respondents
cannot now be heard to say that they are not bound by the
agreement recorded in
it. The parol evidence rule, the limited operation of the defence of non est
factum and the development of
the equitable remedy of rectification, all proceed
from the premise that a party executing a written agreement is bound by it. Yet
fundamental to the respondents' case that the operative agreements between the
parties were wholly oral, and reached earlier than
the execution of the written
agreements, was the proposition that the written agreements subsequently
executed not only may be ignored,
they must be. That is not so. Having executed
the agreement, each respondent is bound by it unless able to rely on a defence
est factum, or able to have it rectified. The respondents attempted
worker did not contend that she did not understand the nature and effect of the
deed or that she believed that it had some different
effect. I observe that the
worker was represented by a legal practitioner who provided her with a
comprehensive letter of advice
on quantum and settlement dated 6 May 2024, prior
to her accepting the employer’s offer, and who represented her through the
s 132A process, witnessed the deed and continued to act for her until sometime
after the referrals were filed. The worker made the
s 132A referral and signed
the deed two and a half months after accepting the offer. Further, by
instituting the proceedings in the
Magistrate’s court and lodging the
proof of debt the worker sought to enforce the agreement that she had entered
worker raised issues of fairness and pointed to the beneficial nature of the
Act. Quite reasonably, she saw the employer’s
conduct in not paying the
settlement sum or her workers compensation as unjust and unfair. However, I am
confined by the powers expressly
or impliedly conferred by statute, in this case
the Act and the
Tasmanian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2020
Tribunal has no inherent jurisdiction and no inherent powers:
Bennett v State of Tasmania
[2005] TASSC 44
[9]. The Act is beneficial legislation and as a general rule ought to be given
an interpretation favourable to workers, however that
is subject to the confines
of the actual language employed:
Walker v J &
A Freeman Building Services
[2006] TASSC 90
Attorney-General (Tas) v CL
[2018] TASFC 6
[36]-[38]. Issues of fairness are of no assistance in construing the Act:
Scott v Sun Alliance Australia Ltd
[19]. I have no power to order that the Nominal Insurer pay the worker
compensation just because it may seem fair.
worker was critical of the Nominal Insurer and pointed out that statutory
liability transfers to the Nominal insurer under s 127,
and I would add s 126.
However, the imposition of liability under s 127 requires an order of the
Tribunal or a direction by the relevant
Court. I have dealt with this above in
respect to the first referral. No explanation was advanced by the worker at the
during the interlocutory process why a direction was not sought from
the Court. In respect to s 126, liability will turn on whether
the relevant
claims which may be pursued against the Nominal insurer have been extinguished
by the deed.
worker referred to s 86 of the Act. That section deals with certain
circumstances where an employer may unilaterally reduce or
terminate weekly
payments. It has no relevance to these circumstances.
worker referred to several authorities in support of her submissions. She cited
Watts v State of Tasmania
[2019] TASSC 20
as authority for the proposition that
where a worker remains without remedy because of non-performance of a settlement
the Tribunal
can and should exercise its remedial powers to give effect to the
intent of the Act to protect workers and ensure continuity of entitlements.
was not able to locate that decision on AustLII or BarNet Jade. The decision
with the citation
[2019] TASSC 20
Sutherland v Bukoven
, a probate case
with no relevance to this matter. I raised this with the worker during the
hearing, but she was not able to provide
an alternative citation or confirm that
she had a copy of the decision. I do not accept the submission made by the
worker also cited
Fitzgerald v F J Leonhardt Pty Ltd
[1997] HCA 17
authority for the proposition that non-performance of a settlement revives the
underlying cause of action. She was unable to take
me to the relevant passages
in that case. The case deals with enforceability of a contract where a statutory
provision rendered some
aspect of performance illegal. I can see no relevance to
earlier submissions the worker referred to Workcover Authority of
[2003] NSWCA 207
Price v Spoor
[2021] HCA 20
State of New South Wales
[2023] NSWCA 226.
The first of those cases does not
appear to exist. I found no relevant principles in either of the other two
Nominal insurer contends that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to make orders
was extinguished by the settlement reached between
the employer and the worker,
pursuant to s132A.
Nominal Insurer submitted that, if the employer had no intention to pay the
settlement sum, the worker might be seen to have been
induced to enter the
agreement by a misrepresentation by the employer. It submitted that the worker
could have applied under s 123A(10)
for an order to set aside the agreement
pursuant to s 132A(11)(c), which provides that the Tribunal may set aside an
agreement where
a party is induced to settle by a misrepresentation as to a
material fact, even if the misrepresentation is innocent or reckless,
not to. The Nominal Insurer says that instead the worker chose to enforce the
settlement by taking the proceedings in the
Magistrates Court. However, it is
apparent from s 132A(9) that the discretion under s 132(11) exists only in
respect to agreements
made after the expiration of two years from the date of
making the claim, and so was not available to the worker.
nominal Insurer also points to the worker having lodged the proof of debt with
the liquidator as further evidencing an intention
by the worker to enforce the
settlement agreement.
Consideration
referral seeks orders for payment of weekly payments of compensation in respect
to three periods:
(a) 1 September 2023 to 10 December 2024, which is the period between the date
that the worker accepted the employer’s offer
and the date of the s 132A
(b) from 10 December 2024 to the date of any order; and
(c) on an ongoing basis.
second and third periods can be dealt with together, and for the reasons set out
below the worker’s right to compensation
for those periods is
extinguished. However, separate considerations apply for the first period, from
1 September 2023 until 10 December
The period up to 10
December 2024
11.8(i) of the deed expressly excludes from operation of the deed liability for
weekly payments accrued from the date of injury,
which was 1 September 2023, to
the date of the making of the s 132A orders on 10 December 2025. The first
period claimed in the referral
falls within that excluded period.
Nominal Insurer submitted that the intention of the deed was to extinguish all
rights to compensation and that cl 11.8 may be
severed. I do not accept that.
The agreement as set out in the deed establishes a contract between the parties.
The correct approach
to interpretation of the terms of a contract was explained
Toll (FGCT) Pty Ltd v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 52
The meaning of the terms of a contractual
document is to be determined by what a reasonable person would have understood
them to mean.
That, normally, requires consideration not only of the text, but
also of the surrounding circumstances known to the parties, and
the purpose and
object of the transaction: Pacific Carriers Ltd v BNP Paribas
[2004] HCA 35
(2004) 78 ALJR 1045
at 1050-1051
[2004] HCA 35
208 ALR 213
That approach is also the proper approach to construction of a settlement
Oberon Shire Council v Kiangatha
Holdings Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWLEC 30
Equuscorp v Glengannon
Investments
at [34] the Court observed that “the legal rights and
obligations of the parties turn upon what their words and conduct would
reasonably understood to convey, not upon actual beliefs or
intentions”.
general release in cl 3.1 is for existing and future claims of any nature and
would release the employer from liability for any
past entitlement to weekly
payments. However, the specific provision in cl 11.8(i) is clearly and
ambiguously an exception to that
general release. It preserves in the employer
liability for weekly payments up to the date that the s 132A orders were
Accordingly,
on the terms of the deed the worker has not released the employer from any
liability for weekly payments which accrued
up to and including 10 December
2025, and the worker is not barred from pursuing those entitlements as against
the Nominal Insurer
under s 126(1), or s 127(1) where they may be said to arise
from the consent orders made by the Tribunal on 5 February 2024 and 9
I observe that although not expressly raised by the referral, cl 11.8(iii) of
the deed extends that right to medical expenses
incurred within that
settlement sum does not relate to any weekly payments for that period and it
follows that the right to pursue them is not affected
by the judgement of the
The periods after 10 December 2024
situation after 10 December 2024 is different. The deed clearly applies to any
claim for weekly payments that would otherwise
have accrued after 10 December
2024. It is well established that an agreement to settle is contractually
Masters v Cameron
[1954] HCA 72
Braslin v Worbey
[1999] TASSC 139
Lorna Jean Dicker v City
[1993] TASSC 104
settlement was by way of deed. A deed does not require consideration to be
enforceable. The settlement deed did however include
promises of consideration
by each party, and the worker contends that there was a total failure of
consideration by the employer.
I observe that there had been part performance of
the deed by both parties, including the effective abandonment by the employer of
the s 81A proceedings, which the Nominal Insurer points to as consideration by
the employer, although no orders were made and no
estoppel or bar to
resurrection of that claim followed from the filing of the Resolved in
Conciliation Form.
deed acts as a full release of liability in respect to any entitlement that the
worker would otherwise have accrued under the
Act after the date of the s 132A
orders. Clause 10.1 of the deed provides that it shall take effect as against
the worker according
to its purport from the time of execution by the worker,
subject to the s 132A approval. Clause 2.1 provides that the worker’s
covenants are in consideration of the settlement sum, but the only condition
precedent to the worker’s covenants is the s 132A
approval, not payment of
the settlement sum, which by the operation of cl 2.5 was payable up to 28 days
after the s 132A approval.
That can be contrasted with the obligation of the
worker to discontinue the general protections claim, which was conditional on
of the settlement sum.
nominal insurer acknowledged that the failure by the employer to pay the
settlement sum might constitute a repudiation of the
agreement. The right of the
innocent party in circumstances of repudiation were neatly framed by Lord Ackner
Fercometal S.A.R.L. v Mediterranean Shipping
S.A. (Simona)
[1988] 3 WLR 200
, albeit in respect to a case of
anticipatory breach:
When one party wrongly refuses to perform
obligations, this will not automatically bring the contract to an end. The
innocent party
has an option. He may either accept the wrongful repudiation as
determining the contract and sue for damages, or he may ignore or
attempt to determine the contract and affirm its continued existence.
that the employer’s failure to pay constituted a repudiation of the
agreement, it would have been open for the worker
to accept the repudiation and
treat the contract as at an end. The worker would have been discharged from her
obligations under the
deed, and would have been able to sue for any damages
incurred as a result of the employer’s breach, but would not have been
entitled to enforce payment of the unpaid settlement sum. The worker did not do
so. Instead she elected to treat the settlement as
on foot and to sue for the
settlement sum. At the relevant time she was legally represented, and the
circumstances concerning the
employer’s breach and her options would have
been apparent. By making that election she remained subject to her own
obligations
under the deed.
worker recovered a judgement for the settlement sum, and the right of action on
the agreement to pay the settlement sum merged
in the judgement. The
worker’s claim then became one for enforcement of the judgement. As late
as 15 September 2025 when she
signed the proof of debt in the liquidation the
worker was pursuing payment of the settlement sum.
remains open for the worker to apply to the Court under s 127(1)(d) for a
direction that the judgment be entered against the Nominal
claim for workers compensation accruing after the s 123A orders were made on 10
December 2024 falls within the release contained
in the deed. Pursuant to the
merger provision in cl 11.6 of the deed, the release of liability given by her
under the deed will continue
notwithstanding the
Determination
the reasons set out above I am satisfied that the Tribunal does not have
first referral, nor in the
second referral insofar as they relate to workers compensation entitlements
accruing after the making
of the s 132A orders.
party sought an order as to costs. I will not make any direction as to a
timetable for any application for costs given that
this determination is an
interlocutory one insofar as it relates to the second referral, and that the
worker may well consider an
application to the Court pursuant to s 12791)(d),
and that the parties might prefer to deal with any question of costs on the
resolution of the proceedings between them.
the request of the worker, both referrals bypassed the usual conciliation
process. It is appropriate that the remaining issues
on the second referral
follow that process.
Accordingly,
I make the following orders and direction:
W2025/394 is dismissed.
W2025/674 is dismissed insofar as it relates to any claim for compensation
accrued or accruing after 10 December 2024.
W2025/674 is referred to a conciliator for the purposes of the conciliation
process in Division 2 of Part V of the
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1988
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.9 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter