URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFC/2025/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Patiniotis v Garling [2025] TASFC 5 (12 June 2025)
[2025] TASFC 5
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (FULL
Patiniotis v Garling
[2025] TASFC
: PATINIOTIS, Dr Tony
GARLING, Ann
Garling v Patiniotis
[2024] TASSC 29
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Shanahan CJ, Estcourt J, Jago
Torts – Negligence – Procedure and evidence – Evidence
– Sufficiency of evidence – Appellant's contention
that trial judge
erred in accepting some and ignoring other evidence about the preferred method
of proctoscopic examination in medical
negligence case – Trial judge
considered and analysed the whole of the evidence and was alive to all
considerations raised
by appellant – Trial judge's preferred medical
evidence was decisive of fundamental issue of position of staple line in anal
canal and uncontradicted by proctoscopic examination method evidence –
Trial judge correctly weighed expert evidence against
other evidence before
determining ultimate factual issue – No error by trial judge –
Appeal dismissed.
Aust Dig Torts [1370]
Evidence – Admissibility – Opinion evidence – Expert
opinion – Basis of opinion – Appellant's contention
that trial judge
erred in admitting expert evidence on basis that it amounted to impermissible
speculation due to absence of internal
examination and lack of expertise –
Trial judge relied on orthodox reasoning and made no error by trial judge in
expert evidence – Appeal dismissed.
Evidence Act
Aust Dig Evidence [1138]
Damages – Assessment of damages in tort – Personal injury –
Other heads of damages – Medical, hospital and
like expenses
–Appellant's contention that trial judge erred in awarding $50,000 in
damages for past medical expenses in face
of vague and unsatisfactory evidence
– Essential aspects of proof of damage in evidence and trial judge
entitled to rely on
them – No error by trial judge – Appeal
Aust Dig Damages [1148]
Damages – Assessment of damages in tort – Personal injury –
Other heads of damages – Future care – Generally
– Appellant's
contention that trial judge erred in relying on joint opinion of expert
occupational therapists when calculating
damages for respondent's future care
– Trial judge entitled to accept joint expert opinion in absence of
contrary cogent evidence
or any fundamental flaw in factual basis for opinion
– Appeal dismissed.
Aust Dig Damages [1135]
Damages – Assessment of damages in tort – Personal injury –
General principles governing award of damages –
Cross-appellant's
contention that trial judge erred in assessing general damages on several
grounds including failing to expose reasoning
process and making findings
unsupported by evidence – Trial judge's award of damages defensible
– Cross-appeal dismissed.
[2021] TASSC 64
v Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd (No 2)
[2013] TASSC 35
Raper v Bowden
[2016] TASSC 35
, referred to.
Aust Dig Damages
REPRESENTATION
Read SC, J O'Farrell
: B McTaggart SC, R O'Keefe SC, K
Solicitors:
HWL Ebsworth
Respondent:
LHD Lawyers
[2025] TASFC 5
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 5/2025
File No 2017/2024
DR TONY PATINIOTIS v ANN MARISE GARLING
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
SHANAHAN CJ
12 June 2025
Cross-appeal
Serial No 5/2025
File No 2017/2024
DR TONY PATINIOTIS v ANN MARISE GARLING
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
SHANAHAN CJ
12 June 2025
agree that the appeal and cross-appeal be dismissed for the reasons outlined by
Estcourt J.
File No 2017/2024
DR TONY PATINIOTIS v ANN MARISE GARLING
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
12 June 2025
The appeal and the case at trial
The appellant has appealed against a judgment of Brett J of 17 June 2024,
awarding the respondent $755,475 in damages for the appellant's
negligence in
carrying out a surgical procedure on her.
The appeal asserts that the learned trial judge erred in his findings and
reasons as to the questions of both breach of duty and
causation of damage. He
also challenges his Honour's award of damages for past out-of-pocket expenses
and for future domestic assistance.
The respondent has cross-appealed,
challenging the award of general damages to her for pain and suffering and loss
of enjoyment of
In 2013, the respondent, who was then aged 58 years, was referred to the
appellant, a general surgeon carrying out colorectal surgery,
in relation to
some episodes of anal bleeding. He concluded that the bleeding was caused by
internal haemorrhoids and recommended
a procedure known as a stapled
haemorrhoidectomy (PPH). He subsequently carried out that procedure at the
Hobart Private Hospital
on 24 September 2013.
The learned trial judge gave the following description of the surgical
procedure at [7]-[9] of his reasons:
"7 My understanding of this
procedure is informed by published articles provided to me, expert evidence and
the evidence of the defendant.
A manual referred to by the defendant in his
evidence, was also provided to me.
6 The procedure uses a circular stapling device to fix the haemorrhoids to
the wall of the anal canal with a circle of metal staples.
It is performed under
general anaesthetic. In a very general overview, the operative technique
involves inserting the specially designed
stapler into the anal canal for an
appropriate distance, and then firing the staples into the wall of the anal
canal. Upon firing
the staples, the device excises a circumferential strip of
redundant tissue just above the haemorrhoids. The purpose of the stapling
return and fix the haemorrhoid into its correct anatomic position high in the
anal canal. The expectation is that eventually
fibrotic tissue will grow over
the staples ensuring the permanent fixation of the haemorrhoid.
7 Prior to firing the stapler, the surgeon inserts a circumferential
purse-string suture just above the apex of the haemorrhoid. The
suture draws up
redundant mucosa, which is then excised by the firing of the stapler. Because of
the manner in which the stapler
operates, the placement of the suture is
directly related to the final location of the line of inserted staples (the
staple line).
As will become apparent, the correct placement of the staple line,
and the consequences of failure to achieve that placement, are
matters central
to the resolution of this case.
8 In order to understand the context of the issues relevant to the placement
of the staple line, it is necessary to touch upon some
of the relevant
anatomical features. A feature of importance to this case is known as the
'dentate line'. The dentate line and its
anatomical context is described by
Professor Anthony Eyers, a colorectal surgeon, who was called by the plaintiff
as an expert witness,
as follows:
'The anal canal is defined by its relation to the anal sphincter complex,
extending from the upper limit of the sphincters (the 'anorectal
ring') to their
lower limit (the 'anal verge'). The perianal skin (a squamous epithelium)
extends into the canal (as the 'anoderm')
for about 2cm, where its nature
changes at a visible junction, the 'dentate line'. Immediately above the dentate
line there is a
further 1-2 cm zone of transitional epithelium (which is not
clearly distinguishable visually), above which the lining is a columnar
epithelium of the type found throughout the remainder of the large bowel. The
anoderm has a rich nerve supply, and cutaneous
sensation extends above it into
the transitional zone for a variable extent, but not into the upper anal canal
or rectum'.
9 It is a common theme in the expert evidence, that the correct placement of
the staple line is important to the successful outcome
of the procedure. This is
best described in a joint memorandum prepared by Professor Eyers, and the
colorectal expert engaged by
the defendant, Associate Professor Margaret
Schnitzler, as a result of a court mandated conference of experts conducted on
'With PPH there is an optimal level for the placement of the staple line; too
high and the procedure loses its efficacy in anchoring
the haemorrhoids below,
and too low it could impinge on the area of the anal canal with somatic
sensation'."
No issue was taken at trial with the appellant's selection of a stapled
haemorrhoidectomy as the appropriate surgical procedure
however, the respondent
claimed that the appellant negligently performed the procedure, and as a result
she was left with permanent
and disabling injury, with ongoing symptoms causing
pain and affecting the operation of her bowels and gastrointestinal system. She
required a further operative procedure to deal with the impact on her bowel
function, namely a loop ileostomy, and this had its own
adverse consequences for
her. It was alleged that there had also been a severe aggravation of a
pre-existing psychological illness.
Not only did the respondent not attack the appellant's choice of procedure but
she was not able to identify any specific aspect
of it performed by him that she
said amounted to negligence. Her case was almost wholly a circumstantial case,
namely that the line
of staples inserted was positioned too low in her anal
canal, and that this could only have come about as a result of the negligent
performance of one or more of the required steps involved. In other words, as
the learned trial judge put it, "proof of the location
of the staple line [too
low in the anal canal] will enable the Court to draw an inference that the
procedure was performed negligently".
appellant did not argue with that general approach. His evidence made it clear
that he was aware of the need to exercise care
in respect of the performance of
the procedure so as to end up with the correct placement of the staple line
above the dentate line.
And the expert evidence of other colorectal surgeons
confirmed that the placement of the staple line was the determinative factor
assessing competence in the performance of the procedure. There was nonetheless
a significant issue as to the precise location
of the staple line that would
justify an inference of negligence.
respondent's case was that the placement of the staple line within two
centimetres of the dentate line would establish negligence
as such a placement
meant that the staples would have been inserted into the transitional
epithelium, and thus that the surgeon had
not taken sufficient care to avoid
that zone. The appellant conceded at trial that such placement was "not ideal in
terms of outcome
of the operation" but disputed that this necessarily
established a lack of requisite care in the performance of the procedure.
the appellant did concede that "if the staple line has been positioned
so low that
it crosses or is below the dentate line
, then that would be
sufficient to support an inference of negligence". (Italics added.)
appellant denied negligence and also denied that the procedure has caused the
respondent's ongoing difficulties. There was no
real dispute concerning the
respondent's ongoing physical and psychological condition, but the appellant
denied that it has been
caused by the surgery,
irrespective of any negligence
in its performance.
The appellant's argument was that the evidence did not support a causal link
between any proved negligence in the performance of
the procedure and the
subsequent deterioration of the respondent's health. It was contended by the
appellant that the respondents
ongoing difficulties since the original surgery
were explained by the natural progression of her pre-existing conditions, and
or in the alternative, were consistent with the expected consequences of
a competently performed stapled haemorrhoidectomy.
The impugned
reasoning as to negligence and causation
The appellant asserts error on the part of the learned trial judge, in
particular in specific paragraphs from his reasons.
The first is [46], where his Honour said:
"Mr Read also put to Dr
Sitzler the opinion of the joint experts that the true location of the staple
line 'would best be determined
by a combined digital rectal and proctoscopic
examination'. The witness agreed but also expressed the view that the
sigmoidoscope
used by him was as good as a proctoscope for this purpose. As I
have noted, neither party has presented any evidence of the type
of examination
referred to by the joint experts. However, the plaintiff would argue that Dr
Sitzler's combined perianal rectal examination
together with further examination
with the use of the sigmoidoscope is equivalent to it. This seems to be the
effect of Dr Sitzler's
evidence. This opinion was challenged but not undermined
by cross-examination. It was not the subject of contrary evidence. I accept
Sitzler's opinion about this question."
It is said of that paragraph that his Honour erred in finding that Dr
Sitzler's opinion was not the subject of contrary evidence.
next is [81] where his Honour
"Having regard to all of the
evidence, I am satisfied on the balance of the probabilities that the defendant
inserted the staples
in a position which was across or below the anatomical
position of the dentate line. In particular, I accept the accuracy of Dr
observation,
that is that the staple line has been placed over and
therefore has obliterated the dentate line
. It may well be that this
occurred when the mucosa was drawn up by the purse string suture into the
stapler head, and that this included
the dentate line. This may explain why the
staples appear to be higher in the anal canal than the normal anatomical
position of the
dentate line. In any event, Dr Sitzler's evidence was
unequivocal and he was well-placed to make the observation, both in terms of
experience and the thoroughness of the examination. I note again that he
conducted both a rectal examination and an internal
examination with a
sigmoidoscope, an instrument which he equated as equivalent to the proctoscope
recommended by the joint experts,
in respect of its capacity to permit a view of
the relevant internal structures." (Italics added.)
It is said of that paragraph that in accepting the accuracy of Dr Sitzler's
observations that on the balance of probabilities the
appellant inserted the
staples in a position which was across or below the anatomical position of the
dentate line, his Honour engaged
in "impermissible speculation" having regard to
the absence of an internal examination of the respondent by Dr Sitzler with a
proctoscope.
The last of the impugned paragraphs, concerning causation is [72], at which the
learned trial judge said:
"Associate Professor Boesel qualified his
opinion on the basis that he is 'not a trained colorectal surgeon'. He concedes
makes it difficult for him to comment on the relationship between a
sub optimally placed suture line, and presumably, the relevant
nerve damage. At
trial, defence counsel objected to his evidence concerning the causal link
between the stapled haemorrhoidectomy
and the nerve damage on the basis of a
lack of relevant expertise. I permitted the evidence but observed that matters
such as the
absence of internal examination and a lack of expertise in respect
of the relevant procedure, would affect the weight to be placed
It is said of that paragraph that in permitting the evidence of Dr Boesel
concerning the causal link between the stapled haemorrhoidectomy
and the nerve
damage, his Honour engaged in impermissible speculation having regard to the
absence of an internal examination and
a lack of expertise in respect of the
relevant procedure.
Paragraph [46] of the reasons
Mr Read also put to Dr Sitzler the opinion of the joint experts that the
true location of the staple line "would best be determined
by a combined digital
rectal and proctoscopic examination". The witness agreed but also expressed the
view that the sigmoidoscope
used by him was as good as a proctoscope for this
purpose. As I have noted, neither party has presented any evidence of the type
of examination referred to by the joint experts. However, the plaintiff would
argue that Dr Sitzler's combined perianal rectal examination
together with
further examination with the use of the sigmoidoscope is equivalent to it. This
seems to be the effect of Dr Sitzler's
evidence. This opinion was challenged but
not undermined by cross-examination. It was not the subject of contrary
evidence. I accept
Dr Sitzler's opinion about this question
The appellant in his written submissions contends as follows:
Sitzler gave evidence that a combined perianal rectal examination together with
use of a sigmoidoscope is an 'equivalent' examination
to that suggested by the
conclave experts. The learned trial judge accepted this evidence and said
'[t]his opinion was challenged,
but not undermined by cross-examination. It was
not the subject of contrary evidence'.
That is the first error, identified by ground 1. Dr Patiniotis gave evidence
that the view from a sigmoidoscope compared to a proctoscope
was '[i]nferior'.
He went on to explain that a sigmoidoscope gives a view of the anal canal
through a 25 centimetre long tube,
only 2 centimetres in diameter, which did not
provide as much definition of the tissues. A proctoscope, by contrast, is a
five to six centimetre speculum that enables very close inspection of the
anal canal due to its short length, giving an 'excellent
The evidence of the joint experts was that the true location of the staple
line would be best determined by a combined digital rectal
and proctoscopic
examination. Dr Sitzler's opinion about the equivalence of the sigmoidoscope
was plainly the subject of contrary
evidence. Ground 1 must be made out.
[46] of the judgment contains a second error. His Honour said that neither
party has presented any evidence of the type of examination
referred to by the
joint experts (combined digital rectal and proctoscopic examination). The
defendant did present that evidence,
which is then acknowledged in the reasons
In her written submissions the respondent contends that this ground of appeal
fails to recognise that the fundamental issue was
whether Dr Sitzler was able to
observe the dentate line was obliterated by staples, irrespective of the alleged
relative superiority
of one instrument or method of examination over another for
the purpose of inspecting the anal canal.
The appellant submits that the "contradicting" evidence relied upon by the
appellant merely relates to the use of a proctoscope
rather than a sigmoidoscope
to view the anal canal. Most importantly it is submitted, there was no evidence
which suggested that
the use of a sigmoidoscope, could have led to Dr Sitzler
incorrectly identifying the position of the staple line. Moreover, there
challenge to that finding.
As to the second error asserted in par [46] of the learned trial judge's
reasons, namely that his Honour erred by stating that neither
party presented
evidence of the type of examination referred to by the experts, that is to say,
a combined digital rectal and proctoscopic
examination, the respondent submits
that the contention is a misinterpretation of his Honour's reasons as he was
clearly referring
to a combined digital rectal and proctoscopic examination
to locate the staple line
The respondent says that whilst the appellant relies upon his own digital
rectal and proctoscopic examination performed on 13 October
2013, he made no
record of, nor gave evidence about, observing the dentate line or of any
concerns about the position of the staple
line, other than finding the staple
line was in the anal
Discussion and disposition of
The respondent's submissions should be accepted.
The learned trial judge considered and analysed the whole of the evidence
related to this issue and was alive to all of the considerations
raised by the
What stands out on my review of that evidence is that there was no evidence
that the natural dentate line remained present, and
that the staple line was
above it after the surgery. It may be that a proctoscopic examination is
superior to one using a sigmoidoscope,
but no one reached a different finding to
Dr Sitzler using the method he used, or any other method. The appellant's own
examination
using a proctoscope made no observations at all about the dentate
line or the relative position of the staple line.
His Honour noted at par [49] of his reasons that the appellant did not give any
evidence that he was able to observe the dentate
line had not been obliterated
by the staple line and did not give evidence to contradict Dr Sitzler's
observations.
His Honour said at [49]:
"In cross-examination, the defendant
agreed that there is potential for error in placing the purse-string suture, and
in firing the
stapler when it is too low in the anal canal. Dr Sitzler's point
in the anal canal which includes some or all of the dentate line, was also put
to him. The defendant rejected this, saying
that it was 'false'. However, it was
not put to him that on his subsequent examinations, he observed a staple line
that crossed or
lay below the dentate line. In particular, the observation of Dr
Sitzler that the staple line had become a new dentate line was not
defendant by either counsel".
And, it was not suggested to Dr Sitzler that he was mistaken about the absence
of the natural dentate line and the relative position
of the staple line.
Dr Sitzler had been in specialist practice as a colorectal surgeon since about
1996 and there was no evidentiary basis for rejecting
the accuracy of his
observations made with the aid of a sigmoidoscope regarding the replacement of
the dentate line with a staple
line. His observations were consistent with his
digital examination. He made a contemporaneous record of his observations.
The learned trail judge was entitled to prefer the evidence of Dr Sitzler's
opinion which was decisive of this issue.
I would dismiss ground 1 of the notice of appeal.
Paragraph [81]
of the reasons
Having regard to all of the evidence, I am satisfied on the balance of
the probabilities that the defendant inserted the staples in
a position which
was across or below the anatomical position of the dentate line. In particular,
I accept the accuracy of Dr Sitzler's
observation, that is that the staple line
has been placed over and therefore has obliterated the dentate line. It may well
this occurred when the mucosa was drawn up by the purse string suture
into the stapler head, and that this included the dentate line.
This may explain
why the staples appear to be higher in the anal canal than the normal anatomical
position of the dentate line. In
any event, Dr Sitzler's evidence was
unequivocal and he was well-placed to make the observation, both in terms of his
and the thoroughness of the examination. I note again that he
conducted both a rectal examination and an internal examination with
sigmoidoscope, an instrument which he equated as equivalent to the proctoscope
recommended by the joint experts, in respect of
its capacity to permit a view of
the relevant internal structures
The appellant's submissions
Whilst lengthy, it is convenient to set out the appellant's written submissions
on this ground in their entirety, as several of
them are responded to in the
respondent's written submissions by reference to paragraph numbers. They are as
"What was 'all of the evidence', and how and in which way
did it tip the balance of probabilities? This is the 'real review' for
Court to conduct, in an appeal under
Supreme Court Civil
Procedure Act 1932
(Tas). The evidence on this issue comprised:
direct evidence of Dr Sitzler, that he directly observed the staple line and
that was a new dentate line. There are obvious
issues with that evidence,
canvassed in relation to ground 1. Further, Dr Sitzler's observation was made
in September 2016 and was
not made for the purposes of the proceeding, but was
made to clinically evaluate whether the plaintiff needed an ileostomy for her
slow transit constipation, a condition which was likely to have been latent
before the PPH procedure. Upon his review, Dr Sitzler
also remarked '[w]hen I
examined her there was really nothing to find'.
Eyers put the plaintiff's solicitor on notice of ways to measure the precise
location of the dentate line very early, on
19 April 2018. In his first report,
he stated that the precise location of the staple line in relation to the anal
anatomy could
be documented by 'proctosigmoidoscopy with measurement of the
anatomical landmarks and/or CT (or, preferably, MRI) scanning'. (Emphasis
this regard, the plaintiff made a curious forensic decision in this proceeding.
Despite being on notice since April 2018 of a
method pursuant to which the
precise location of the dentate line could be confirmed, the plaintiff failed to
undergo such an examination.
The rule in
Jones v Dunkel
applies where a
party is required to explain or contradict something. Whether an explanation is
required depends on the issues
in the case as thrown up by the pleadings and the
evidence. It has also been described as where it would be natural for one
to produce a witness where the facts would be elucidated. Plainly an
explanation was called for: a proctoscopic examination would
have likely
determined the issue of breach definitively. The failure to call a relevant
expert permits an inference that the untendered
evidence would not have helped
the plaintiff. It entitles the Court to more readily draw the inference that
the staples were not
at or distal to the dentate line.
the plaintiff did not seek the best available evidence about breach, there was a
medical practitioner who undertook a proctoscope
together with a digital rectal
examination: Dr Patiniotis. He did so on 9 October 2013 when the plaintiff
presented at his rooms
complaining of vaginal (but not anal) discomfort. On
this occasion, Dr Patiniotis broke down the area of the staple line to express
an infected haematoma of pus, including with a proctoscope. His
contemporaneous clinical notes describe what occurred. They contain
suggesting there was an issue with the location of the staple line.
further examination of the plaintiff by Dr Patiniotis at his rooms on 23 October
2023 indicates that the staples were 'high above
the anus' and 'intact'.
Although he suspected that the high left-sided vaginal discomfort she was
experiencing related to his surgery,
he thought it would get better soon and
encouraged her to give it four weeks to resolve.
a digital rectal examination by Dr Mignanelli in November 2014, he reported that
there was a 'very low staple line, probably
just at or slightly below the
anorectal ring'. Dr Mignanelli makes no comment about the proximity of the
staples to the dentate
line. The anorectal ring is above the dentate line.
Mignanelli sought a second opinion from Dr Gall 'really at [the plaintiff's]
insistence', which Dr Gall provided in January 2016.
The plaintiff informed Dr
Gall that she wanted imaging to confirm what she thought was injury to the
anorectum during the stapled
haemorrhoidectomy. An endoanal ultrasound
confirmed 'there is no evidence of injury as a result of the stapled
haemorrhoidectomy'.
(Emphasis added.)
plaintiff saw Associate Professor Craig Lynch, a colorectal surgeon, in August
2016. Following a manual rectal examination, he
reported that 'PR examination
demonstrated a good anal tone with a palpable staple line from the previous
staple haemorrhoidectomy.
I could not identify a defect...'
Eyers' report of 19 April 2018 states: 'I do not believe that the staple line
was below the dentate line'.
CT scan was taken on 27 June 2018 of the plaintiff's pelvis in an attempt to
identify the location of the staples. These images
taken were provided to
Professor Eyers to analyse. Professor Eyers concluded that the staple line was
in the mid-anal canal. Although
he concluded that the staple line was too low,
his diagram puts the staples in the transitional zone, i.e., no breach.
27 June 2018 CT scan also provided to Associate Professor Schnitzler for her to
provide a joint opinion with Professor Eyers.
In that opinion, they stated
In the Plaintiff's case, the staple line appears to lie, at
least in part, in the upper anal canal. This opinion is based on reviews
scans taken of the site following the procedure...
We do not believe that the staple line was positioned distal to the dentate
line. This is based on the reports of other practitioners
who have examined the
plaintiff and our review of the CT scan images.
second CT scan, taken 6 September 2021, was examined by Dr Jones, who concluded
that the CT scan accurately shows the position of
the staples with respect to
the anorectal junction and that '[t]he lowest surgical staple is 7 mm above the
dentate line, and all
of the surgical staples are grouped around the anorectal
line, well above the dentate line'. (Emphasis added.)
August 2019, Dr Greenberg examined the plaintiff by digital rectal examination
at the request of her solicitors. He stated '[t]here
was no significant
stenosis. The staple line from the previous stapled haemorrhoidectomy was low
in the anal canal and lower than
I would have expected'. However, he declined
to give a definitive opinion about the position of the stapled line and its
to the anal canal, the dentate line and the anatomical landmarks
because it required specific instruments, possibly under anaesthesia.
reason unexplained in the evidence there was no further examination by Dr
Greenberg. Again, an explanation as to the true
location of the staple line was
called for. The call was not answered by the plaintiff. A
inference should be made.
the plaintiff's failure to submit to an internal examination which would
conclusively prove the location of the dentate line
was unexplained, when
clearly an explanation was called for. This was the key issue in the case.
Again, a Jones v Dunkel inference
should be made.
procedure is a straightforward one with a number of checks to ensure that it is
correctly performed. One of the checks is that
the practitioner performing the
procedure 'can see the dentate line' through a plastic obturator, such that the
stapling tool is
placed above the dentate line when it is fired.
straightforward nature of the procedure and the checks during performance is no
doubt why Professor Eyers, a colorectal surgeon
of some 40 plus years' medical
experience, has never seen a patient with a staple line below the dentate line.
final relevant evidence relates to the plaintiff's acute post-operative
condition. That evidence is:
(a) According to Professor Eyers, symptoms of severe anal pain, faecal
incontinence and irregular bowel habit would be reasonably
attributable to
staples below the dentate line.
(b) Dr Sitzler said in cross-examination that acute pain would likely be present
following the operation.
(c) The contemporaneous records show she did not have this symptom complex.
Rather she had bloating, colicky abdominal pain and an
inability to open her
bowels without significant use of aperients. This symptom complex is are likely
to reflect slow-transit constipation
and/or obstructed defecation.
(d) Dr Patiniotis' correspondence discloses that the plaintiff 'tolerated the
procedure well... and was able to be discharged home
day one post op
comfortably'.
(e) The Hobart Private hospital notes disclose that on the day following the
operation the plaintiff left the hospital without seeing
staff, causing staff to
telephone the patient.
(f) On 9 October 2013, the plaintiff attended Dr Patiniotis' rooms complaining
of vaginal discomfort. On 23 October 2013, Dr Patiniotis
reported high
left-sided vaginal discomfort, but expected it would resolve. He did not report
(g) On 15 October 2013 she presented at the RHH complaining of uncomfortable
dragging pain within her vagina. Bowel motion was said
to be normal and nil pain
in perianal area.
His Honour correctly found that if the staple line was positioned low in the
anal canal, 'even within 2cm of the dentate line, but
remained proximate [sic]
to that line', that would not establish a breach of duty.
The vast majority of the evidence points away from his Honour's conclusion
that the staples were across or below the dentate line.
The proper conclusion
to be drawn from the evidence is that while the staples were possibly in the two
centimetre 'transitional
zone', they were above the dentate line.
Moreover, the plaintiff had the opportunity to prove the issue definitively
by submitting to a digital rectal and proctoscopic examination
to identify the
precise location of the staples. She did not avail herself of that opportunity.
The appellant submits ground 2 must
The respondent's submissions
The respondent submits that none of the matters raised in paragraphs 2, 3, 13
and 14 of the appellant's submissions were raised
before the trial judge and
therefore ought not to be considered on this appeal.
The respondent relies on the authority of
Whisprun Pty Ltd v Dixon
[2003] HCA 48
77 ALJR 1598
where Gleeson CJ, McHugh and Gummow JJ made the
following observations at [51]–[52]:
"51 It would be inimical
to the due administration of justice if, on appeal, a party could raise a point
that was not taken at the
trial unless it could not possibly have been met by
further evidence at the trial. Nothing is more likely to give rise to a sense
injustice in a litigant than to have a verdict taken away on a point that was
not taken at the trial and could or might possibly
have been met by rebutting
evidence or cross‐examination. Even when no question of further evidence
is admissible, it may not
be in the interests of justice to allow a new point to
be raised on appeal, particularly if it will require a further trial of the
action. Not only is the successful party put to expense that may not be
recoverable on a party and party taxation but a new trial
inevitably inflicts on
the parties worry, inconvenience and an interference with their personal and
business affairs.
Water Board v Moustakas
makes clear, a point may be a new point even
though it is within the pleadings or particulars. The pleadings and particulars
frequently decisive in determining whether a party is seeking to raise a new
point on appeal. But they are not conclusive. To determine
whether a party is
raising a new point on appeal, it is 'necessary to look to the actual conduct of
the proceedings' [Footnotes omitted.]"
The respondent says that had these matters been raised at the trial, the trial
might have been conducted differently. For example,
evidence may have been
adduced from Professor Eyers that he was satisfied with the measurements
undertaken and with Dr Sitzler's
observations.
The respondent notes that it was never put to the respondent in
cross-examination that she made a forensic decision to not undergo
examination.
The respondent says that the purpose of the examination was not therapeutic but
to provide further evidence as to the position of
the staple line for the
purpose of the proceedings. Dr Greenberg commented that the examination is
difficult in a medico-legal setting
and requires specific instruments or
possibly under anaesthesia.
The respondent says that in any event, she had no need to undergo such an
examination as Dr Sitzler had identified the absence of
the dentate line which
had been replaced by the staple line.
The respondent says that the suggestion that the respondent in some way
departed from the recommendations of Professor Eyers is
wrong. The respondent
called Professor Eyers and he gave evidence about his opinions in this case. It
was not put to him in cross-examination
that the Dr Sitzler's observations were
unreliable and that further examination/measurements were required.
Moreover, the respondent says that the type of assessment Professor Eyers
referred to was undertaken, that proctosigmoidoscopy was
performed by Dr Sitzler
and Professor Eyers noted his findings in his report.
The respondent notes that in his second report on CT measurement of anatomical
landmarks performed by Professor Eyers, it was stipulated
have made all of the inquiries that I believe are desirable and appropriate to
it, and no matters that I regard as relevant and
significant have knowingly been
withheld from it. I do not believe that the opinions I have expressed are
incomplete or inaccurate,
and I have not relied on the opinions of any others in
arriving at them."
The respondent says that Professor Eyers expressed the opinion that CT scans
demonstrated that all of the staples that he could
see are within the zone that
should be avoided, and the staple line was too low.
The respondent says that the appellant chose not to have his counsel
cross-examine Professor Eyers about the points it now seeks
to raise on appeal.
The appellant ought not be permitted to agitate such speculative points in this
Moving to the balance of the appellant's submissions, the respondent says that
all of the material to which the appellant refers
to in paragraphs 6 to 12 above
was considered by the learned trial judge:
Dr Mignanelli at
ultrasound result at [39]
Professor Lynch
opinion of Professor Eyers and Associate Professor Schnitzler at [35]
Dr Jones at
The respondent says that the submission made by the appellant at par 9, namely
that Professor Eyers reported on 19 April 2018 that
he did not believe the
staple line was below the dentate line is made without acknowledging that in his
subsequent report, he found
on examination of CT scan images, that some of the
staples were at least three centimetres below the anorectal ring, which could
well mean they covered the dentate line.
The respondent says that it is erroneous to submit that Professor Eyers'
interpretation of the CT scan images put the staple line
in the transitional
zone which would not constitute a breach of duty. The consensus of evidence,
including Professor Eyers, was that
the natural dentate line lies 1 to 2
centimetres below the anorectal ring. Therefore, the placement of staples up to
three centimetres
below the anorectal ring could breach the dentate line.
The respondent says that the trial judge had the benefit of observing Dr
Sitzler give evidence, albeit by audio visual link, and
that this Court ought to
recognise that he had the advantage of assessing Dr Sitzler's demeanour when
giving evidence of an actual
recollection.
As with ground 1, the respondent submits that the learned trial judge was
entitled to accept the direct evidence of Dr Sitzler.
It was based on his actual
recollection of his observations made during his assessment of the respondent.
The respondent submits:
"That evidence was far more probative of the
issue than the imprecise and generalised comments contained in some records made
practitioners who the defendant did not arrange to give evidence. The
defendant did not call Dr Mignanelli, Dr Gall, Dr Lynch nor
Associate Professor
Schnitzler who he had engaged to provide reports and who was an author of the
joint report."
The respondent submits that the trial judge correctly weighed Dr Sitzler's
evidence against the other evidence before he determined
the ultimate factual
issue, namely the location of the staple line at [81-82] of his Honour's reasons
and that there was no error
in his approach. Dr Sitzler was an expert with no
interest in the proceedings. He recalled his consultations with the respondent
and was able to give unequivocal evidence regarding the non-existence of the
dentate line.
The respondent also submits that there was other evidence that was consistent
with Dr Sitzler's findings, namely:
The alteration
in the pattern of defecation and/or development of perianal pain, of which the
respondent had never complained in the
past, was a relevant factor which the
trial judge was entitled to and did accept. His Honour considered the records of
and evidence of post operative symptoms in detail and the appellant's
submissions in relation to same at [56] to [75].
His Honour also
considered and accepted the evidence of a pain specialist, Professor Boessel,
regarding the relationship between nerve
damage in the anal canal and the "pace
of development and the experience of that symptomatology by the patient". This
was a finding
his Honour was entitled to make.
The respondent also says that the report of Dr Mignanelli, colorectal surgeon,
dated 6 November 2014, in which he stated "digital
rectal examination showed a
very low staple line, probably just at or slightly below the anorectal ring" was
And further, the respondent submits, the radiological opinion of Dr Jones, was
of little weight. The trial judge considered his
evidence in detail at [76] to
[80]. He acknowledged that Dr Jones had claimed that analysis of a CT scan of
the anal canal and rectum,
obtained on 27 June 2018, could provide more accurate
assessment of the position of the staples compared to a manual examination
[77]). His Honour referred to Dr Jones's evidence that the staples were placed
at least 7mm above the dentate line but then,
correctly, acknowledged that in
cross-examination Dr Jones had conceded that:
A CT scan does
not enable him to view the dentate line (at [78])
He was not able
to see the dentate line on CT scan and was thus unable to exclude a hypothesis
based on Dr Sitzler's evidence, that
the dentate line had been pulled into the
stapler and excised during the procedure (at [78]).
The respondent observes that the learned trial judge then noted the parties
submissions about Dr Jones's evidence and the absence
of cross-examination and
found, implicitly, that such evidence did not detract from the accuracy of Dr
Sitzler's observations (at
[81]), noting that the findings of Dr Jones that
staples may be higher in the anal canal than the expected position of the
line, may be explained by the fact that the mucosa was drawn up by the
purse string into the staple head including the dentate line,
and resected.
Given anatomical variability in the precise position of the dentate line, Dr
Jones was not entitled to assume a fixed
or accurate location for the
respondent's dentate line on CT images. Further, the CT images he reviewed were
post-surgery, in circumstances
where, according to Dr Sitzler, there had been
alterations to the anatomy of the anal canal.
The respondent submits that the learned trial judge was entitled to accept Dr
Sitzler's evidence and to draw inferences from the
whole of the evidence,
including the development of post operative symptoms and that his Honour
ultimately concluded that Dr Sitzler's
evidence was unequivocal and he was
well-placed to make the observation both in terms of his experience and the
thoroughness of his
examination (at [81]). His Honour weighed the contradicting
evidence but was not satisfied that it displaced the accuracy of Dr Sitzler's
observations (at [82]).
Finally on this ground, the respondent submits that it is inaccurate to make
the submission made at par 15 of the appellant's submissions,
namely, that the
procedure was straightforward. The appellant gave evidence that there is the
potential for errors in the performance
of the procedure in the placement of the
purse string suture, the drawing of too much tissue from the lower anal canal
into the device
and the potential for error in firing the stapler when it is in
too low a position.
Discussion and disposition of ground
Leaving aside the appellant's submission that a
Jones v Dunkel
should be drawn as a result of the respondent not having undergone a
proctoscopic examination, much of what I said in relation
to ground 1 of the
notice of appeal has similar application in relation to this ground. Again, in
my view the respondent's submissions
should be accepted.
It is correct, as the respondent says, that all of the material to which the
appellant refers in paragraphs 6 to 12 of his written
submissions set out above,
was considered by the learned trial judge, but in my view, the respondent's case
was not an entirely circumstantial
case. The appellant conceded that if the
staple line has been positioned so low that it crossed or was below the dentate
that would be sufficient to establish a breach of duty. The evidence
of Dr Sitzler was direct evidence of negligence. It was based
on his notes of
his actual observations made during his assessment of the respondent. As the
respondent submits:
"That evidence was far more probative of the
issue than the imprecise and generalised comments contained in some records made
practitioners who the defendant did not arrange to give evidence. The
defendant did not call Dr Mignanelli, Dr Gall, Dr Lynch nor
Associate Professor
Schnitzler who he had engaged to provide reports and who was an author of the
joint report."
I agree that the trial judge correctly weighed Dr Sitzler's evidence against
the other evidence before he determined the ultimate
factual issue, namely the
location of the staple line, (at pars [81-82] of his Honour's reasons), and that
there was no error in
his Honour's analysis. Dr Sitzler gave unequivocal
evidence regarding the non-existence of the dentate line, which itself was, in
the circumstances of this surgical procedure, proof of negligence. As observed
by his Honour, Dr Sitzler's opinion was challenged
but not undermined by
cross-examination and his actual recorded observations were not the subject of
contrary evidence.
I also agree with the respondent that there was circumstantial evidence that
was consistent with Dr Sitzler's direct evidence, namely,
the alteration in the
respondent's pattern of defecation and the development of perianal pain, of
which the respondent had not complained
prior to her surgery, and the learned
trial judge was entitled to accept the evidence of Professor Boessel, regarding
the relationship
between nerve damage in the respondent's anal canal and the
"pace of development and the experience of that symptomatology by the
On my own review of the evidence, I also accept that the report of Dr
Mignanelli dated 6 November 2014, in which he stated "digital
rectal examination
showed a very low staple line, probably just at or slightly below the anorectal
ring" was inconclusive and that
the radiological opinion of Dr Jones that the
staples were placed at least 7mm above the dentate line, was of little weight
he acknowledged in cross-examination that a CT scan did not enable him to
view the dentate line, and he was thus unable to exclude
Dr Sitzler's evidence,
that the dentate line had likely been pulled into the stapler and excised during
the surgery. In any event,
the CT images Dr Jones reviewed were post-surgery, in
circumstances where, according to Dr Sitzler, there had been alterations to
anatomy of the anal canal.
Finally, I reject the submission made by the appellant at paragraph 9 of his
written submissions set out above, namely that Professor
Eyers' evidence, as set
out in his report of 19 April 2018, was that he did not believe that the staple
line was below the dentate
line, when it is made without acknowledging that in
his subsequent report, Professor Eyers stated that he found on examination of
scan images, that some of the staples were at least three centimetres below the
anorectal ring.
The learned trial judge was entitled to accept Dr Sitzler's evidence and to
draw supporting inferences from other evidence, including
the development of
post operative symptoms by the respondent. His Honour, at pars [81]-[82] weighed
all of the potentially contradictory
evidence but was not satisfied that it
displaced the accuracy of Dr Sitzler's observations. He was entitled to
conclude, as he did,
that Dr Sitzler's evidence was unequivocal, and that he was
well-placed to make the observations he did, both in terms of his experience
the thoroughness of his examination.
I do not accept the appellant's submission that a
Jones v Dunkel
inference should be drawn as a result of the respondent "having made a forensic
decision not to undergo a proctoscopic examination".
The circumstances described
on behalf of the appellant are esoteric and the proposition was not put to the
respondent. There is
no evidence that her decision was a forensic or tactical
decision. Moreover, the purpose of the examination was not therapeutic,
involved anaesthesia and the respondent had no need of further evidence when Dr
Sitzler had identified the absence of the dentate
line which had been replaced
by the staple line.
The respondent says that had these matters been raised at the trial, the trial
might have been conducted differently. For example,
evidence may have been
adduced from Professor Eyers that he was satisfied with the measurements
undertaken and with Dr Sitzler's
observations. Thus, this is not a case where it
can be said that the point could not possibly have been met by cross-examination
or rebutting evidence. In any event, in my view, it would not be in the
interests of justice to allow the point to be raised on appeal,
evidence of Dr Sitzler, called by the respondent was unequivocal and not
contradicted.
I would dismiss ground 2 of the notice of appeal.
Paragraph [72]
of the reasons
Associate Professor Boesel qualified his opinion on the basis that he is
"not a trained colorectal surgeon". He concedes that this
makes it difficult for
him to comment on the relationship between a sub optimally placed suture line,
and presumably, the relevant
nerve damage. At trial, defence counsel objected to
his evidence concerning the causal link between the stapled haemorrhoidectomy
and the nerve damage on the basis of a lack of relevant expertise. I permitted
the evidence but observed that matters such as the
absence of internal
examination and a lack of expertise in respect of the relevant procedure, would
affect the weight to be placed
on this opinion.
Associate Professor Boesel prepared an expert report, following his examination
of the respondent on 30 March 2021. He took a history
from her, and he
conducted an external examination. He conceded that he was not a colorectal
surgeon and therefore, it was difficult
for him to comment on the relationship
between a sub optimally placed suture line and the respondent's pain.
He expressed the following conclusions:
"Based on my findings
today, I believe that Ms Garling has a chronic pain disorder. This consists of
the following:
- Perianal nerve
injury (inferior anal nerve) likely sustained during haemorrhoidectomy leading
to perianal neuralgia, with secondary
sensitisation affecting other territories
innervated by the pudenal nerve including the perineum and vagina. There is
sensitisation of her bladder.
She has had a chronic
antalgic gait...
The patient has a neuropathic pelvic floor syndrome. This was not present
prior to her surgical management. This consequently suggests
relationship.
Please note that I am not a trained colorectal surgeon, my expertise lies in
the diagnosis and management of chronic pain disorders.
It is therefore
difficult for me to comment on the relationship between sub optimally placed
suture line as identified in the report
of Professor Eyres...".
The respondent's counsel objected to the admission of Associate Professor
Boesel's evidence, but the learned trial judge admitted
it. At [111] of his
reasons, his Honour said:
"111 I also accept the opinion of
Associate Professor Boesel. He conceded that he is not able to identify the
mechanism by which damage
has been caused and in particular, is not in a
position, having regard to the extent of his expertise, to relate the nerve
to the placement of the staple line. However, he was able to identify the
existence of nerve damage, and with his expert understanding
of the symptoms
associated with such damage, was able to infer the existence of a causal link by
virtue of the temporal coincidence
between the operation and such symptoms, in
particular pain. This is consistent with the view of the colorectal experts, who
were not able or prepared to identify the mechanism of injury and causation
of consequence with precision, but accept the probability
of the causal
The appellant's submissions
The appellant submits that
Evidence Act
"If a person has specialised knowledge based on the person's
training, study or experience, the opinion rule does not apply to evidence
opinion of that person that is wholly or substantially based on that knowledge."
The appellant submits that, as Gleeson CJ observed in
[1999] HCA 2
has the practical effect of emphasising the need for
attention to requirements of form. The section requires an opinion to be
in a form which makes it possible to answer whether an opinion is
wholly or substantially based on specialised knowledge based on
training, study,
or experience. At [44], his Honour said:
"This was not a trial by
jury, but in trials before judges alone, as well as in trials by jury, it is
important that the opinions
of expert witnesses be confined, in accordance with
, to opinions which are wholly or substantially based on their specialised
knowledge. Experts who venture 'opinions' (sometimes merely
their own inference
of fact), outside their field of specialised knowledge may invest those opinions
with a spurious appearance of
authority, and legitimate processes of
fact-finding may be subverted. The opinions which Mr McCombie was to be invited
appear to provide a good example of the mischief which is to be
The appellant submits that in reaching his conclusions on causation, Associate
Professor Boesel "inferred the fact of causation,
by virtue of the temporal
coincidence of the operation and the plaintiff's symptoms". The appellant
argues that he had no specialised
knowledge, based on his study, training and
experience which allowed him to draw that inference of fact.
The appellant notes that at [109] of his reasons, and having just examined the
principles relevant to circumstantial evidence, his
Honour stated that:
"Having regard to the whole of the evidence, and applying the
principles set out above, I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities
the breach, that is the placement of the staple line over the dentate line,
which necessarily involved staples placed low in
the anal canal, and the
excision of material from that area which included the dentate line, is the
cause of the nerve damage diagnosed
by Associate Professor Boesel, and the harm
experienced by the plaintiff as a result of this damage...".
The appellant observes that there was no direct evidence on the fact of
causation in as much as no expert stated that the breach,
the location of the
staples, was harm that was a necessary element of the respondent's alleged
symptoms, so that his Honour was left
to rely on the respondent's circumstantial
case as the question remained whether his Honour was properly able to infer the
connection himself.
The appellant submits that a review of the whole of the evidence discloses the
following matters.
The evidence of
the joint experts was that placement of the staples sub-optimally could (but
will not necessarily) impinge in the
area of the anal canal with somatic
According to
Professor Eyers, symptoms of severe anal pain, faecal incontinence and irregular
bowel habit would be reasonably attributable
to staples below the dentate line.
However, bloating, colicky abdominal pain and an inability to open her bowels
without significant
use of aperients are more likely to reflect slow-transit
constipation and/or obstructed defecation. It is known that the respondent
a gastrointestinal motility disorder (slow transit constipation) since 2003. Dr
Sitzler also said in cross-examination that acute
pain would likely be present
following the operation.
At trial, the
respondent told the Court that she experienced anal pain following the
operation. The Court should be wary to accept
that recollection without noting
that the respondent was often described by experts and treating practitioners as
a poor historian,
confusing, or someone who had a tendency to give complicated
and "rambling" histories.
Some of the
respondent's symptoms were experienced before the procedure. The respondent has
admitted to her GP some faecal incontinence
prior to the haemorrhoidectomy,
suggesting one of the symptoms noted by Professor Eyers does not necessarily
bear a causal relationship
with the procedure. The respondent admitted in
cross-examination that she had trouble defecating since April 2002.
contemporaneous records do not disclose acute and severe anal pain, which the
experts indicated would be expected if the staples
were placed at or below the
dentate line.
The notes of the
respondent's general practitioners disclose vaginal discomfort and a dragging
sensation in the rectovaginal area
in the month after the operation. On 15
November 2013, there is a note reflecting that the respondent's vaginal
discomfort had
improved. In December 2013, she complained of increasing reflux,
bloating, incomplete evacuation, belching and abdominal pain (all
associated with a motility disorder). There is a marked absence of notes
recording anal pain.
In June 2014,
the respondent again presented to her GP, who recorded that the respondent had
"[p]ain in pelvis since a fall in the
bathroom on 4/6/2014". In September 2014,
her GP queried whether she had torn tendons in her pelvis. It is at this stage
is a mention of the respondent having pain in her 'rectal area' following
the operation and difficulty sitting down. The development
symptomatology is, however, unclear. The treating practitioner specifically
noted "[h]ard to follow the history, all over
the place".
Following the
haemorrhoidectomy, the first specialist who the respondent saw was Dr
Mignanelli. His notes in late 2014 and early
2015 record abdominal pain,
obstructed defecation, tenesmus and issues emptying her bowel, including
perianal leakage. He noted
an inability "to sit down because of discomfort for
at least a couple of months following that operation" but not acute and ongoing
pain specifically in the anus.
correspondence of April 2016 records chronic anal pain which the respondent
attributed to the haemorrhoidectomy. It also
suggests that the respondent's
faecal incontinence is attributable to her overuse of laxative. Dr Gan's
correspondence of July
2016 report constipation, abdominal pain, "anal
discomfort", nausea and vomiting and incontinence from excessive laxative use.
Professor Lynch's correspondence of August 2016 does not disclose anal pain at
all, though it does disclose abdominal pain,
bloating and belching. Again,
these symptoms are not attributable to the procedure, but to gastrointestinal
motility issues.
Professor Brown's correspondence of October 2016 discloses nausea,
regurgitation, and vomiting as prominent symptoms. They
do disclose pelvic
floor discomfort which the respondent attributes to residual staples, but not
The symptoms
which the respondent reported to Dr Keck in November 2016 were "difficulty with
bowel evacuation even when her stools
were loose, infrequent bowel movements,
bloating and belching, crampy abdominal pain and occasional anal pain."
Dr Gall's later
correspondence of May 2017 notes mainly abdominal symptoms, including bloating,
discomfort, nausea and regurgitation.
He noted "[t]here is intermittent anal
The respondent
was seen in person by two experts in this proceeding, Dr Greenberg and Associate
Professor Boesel. This history which
the plaintiff reported to them is quite
different to what she reported to her clinicians at the time. Dr Greenberg
remarks in his
report that "[f]ollowing the stapled haemorrhoidectomy, Ms
Garling developed severe perianal pain", which she asserted was "ongoing".
appears his remarks were made following him taking an oral history from the
respondent.
The respondent's
past medical history reported to Associate Professor Boesel does not reflect the
extent of her condition, as otherwise
recorded in her general practitioner
notes. Associate Professor Boesel stated "[s]he told me that she had ongoing
perianal pain
from very early on in the postoperative period, which has
continued and gradually worsened over time...". It does not appear that
Associate Professor Boesel was given the respondent's medical records. His list
of the respondent's past medical conditions is remarkably
short, given the
contemporaneous medical records.
The appellant argues that, having regard to the whole of the evidence, there is
no temporal connection between the haemorrhoidectomy
and the primary symptom of
which the respondent now complains: perianal pain. Because of the absence of
relevant pain post-operation,
there is no place to resort to the Latin phrase
post hoc ergo propter hoc
[after this, therefore because of this].
The appellant argues that it is curious that following the haemorrhoidectomy
and in the period prior to the commencement of this
proceeding, the respondent
saw no less than eight colorectal specialists for clinical treatment. She saw
no less than three gastroenterological
specialists. Many physically examined
her. Although some remarked that the staples were below the anorectal ring,
none remarked
that the location of the staples were the cause of her
complaints.
The respondent's submissions
The respondent submits that it is trite law that an expert is entitled to
express opinions based upon the making of assumptions
and that no expert
evidence is based exclusively on the expert's training, study, or experience.
The submission runs that all fields
of specialised knowledge assume observations
and knowledge of everyday affairs and events, and departures from them, it being
added ingredient of specialised knowledge to the expert's body of general
knowledge that equips the expert to give their opinion
[2023] HCA 29
; Kiefel CJ and Gageler J at [12];
[2002] HCA 4
The respondent submits that Associate Professor Boesel possessed the requisite
expertise to comment on the cause of the respondent's
symptoms. He explained
that he is a pain medicine specialist with expertise in neuropathic pain and is
able to diagnose neuropathic
pain in any region of the body.
The respondent notes that senior counsel for the appellant initially objected
to his expertise and further evidence of his expertise
was adduced de bene esse.
He then conceded Associate Professor Boesel's expertise to diagnose neuropathic
pain in any region of the
body and to diagnose musculoskeletal pain secondary to
pelvic pain.
The respondent observes that the learned trial judge ruled as
"I'm going to allow that evidence but I note the evidence
is to be taken with the explanation that he's given as to what it means.
not purporting to express an opinion that anything to do with the – he's
not saying he's an expert in the anatomy or
the procedures involved in what
– in the process that was conducted. He's expressing opinion as a pain
expert based on deductions
or inferences he's drawn from the existence of pain,
something that he is an expert in.."
The respondent submits that Associate Professor Boesel's opinion was based upon
his synthesis of the information available to him,
including the fact the PPH
occurred, the temporal relationship between the PPH and the onset of and
progression of symptoms and his
findings on external examination. As he noted in
his own words:
"All the relationships between chronic pain and
injury are complex and is biologically overdetermined, and there are changes
occur in the periphery, in the spinal cord and in the brain. So it can
sometimes be a very difficult area and the entire medical
profession struggles
with causality issues. I attributed causality to the surgery by the nature of
the history presented by the patient
to me at the time of assessment...
So your opinion as to causal relationship is based purely on her
history?...
It's based on the history and the subsequent examination findings that there
are sensory alterations in the area of reported pain.
And the absence of any other causative event? That's correct."
The respondent notes that in relation to sustaining a perianal nerve injury
during the PPH, Associate Professor Boesel commented
that his opinion is based
on the fact that the respondent had no pain in this region reported prior to the
surgery and had pain from
early on in the post operative period, so it follows
logically that something occurred during the surgery and induced her pain.
And the respondent notes that Associate Professor Boesel noted that the
temporal relationship between the current presentation of
the respondent and the
surgery was important, and that the respondent had not reported a similar
pattern of pain prior to the haemorrhoid
operation. The respondent says that
this is substantiated as there is no history of any perianal pain prior to
September 2013.
The respondent observes that when expressing an opinion about the neuropathic
pelvic floor pain syndrome, Associate Professor Boesel
commented that he could
find a causal relationship between that and her surgical management based on
temporal factors and the subsequent
clinical picture that she has lost sensory
function and she has pain. His opinion as to the causal relationship was based
history and the subsequent examination findings of sensory alternations
in the area of reported pain and the absence of any other
causative event.
The respondent submits that it was also of importance that Associate Professor
Boesel commented that it was difficult to quantify
whether a person should
suffer immediate post operative pain noting, that there are patients who present
with numbness in the first
instance after nerve injury and then the pain
symptoms gradually evolve over time. So, he commented, it depends on the extent
which the nerve is injured, and it depends on other factors, for example the
way the pain was treated in the post operative setting
with analgesic
medications, and it can also reflect changes in the nervous system that occur
cumulatively over time.
The respondent submits that Associate Professor Boesel discounted any other
sensation which he
observed on examination and for the pain which the respondent complained of, and
he rejected the proposition it
could have been due to an episiotomy scar, nor
hysterectomy, nor hernia repair.
The respondent also notes that there was literature to support the finding of
causation, contained in the journal article titled
Hemorrhoidopexy versus
Milligan-Morgan Hemorrhoidectomy
" in which the authors noted that, as with
conventional surgery, anorectal dysfunction can occur after stapled
hemorrhoidopexy in
some patients.
The respondent submits that the learned trial judge noted the limitations with
Associate Professor Boesel's expertise with respect
to colorectal disorders at
[72-75] of his reasons but nevertheless, the trial judge was entitled to accept
his expertise in identifying
and diagnosing nerve damage.
And the respondent notes that his Honour, at [111] of his reasons, considered
Associate Professor Boesel's opinion in conjunction
with the opinions of the
joint colorectal experts, noting that in this case it was not possible to
identify precisely the mechanism
of injury but that a causal link was probable.
Discussion and disposition of ground 3
It is instructive to set out pars [71]-]75] and [111] of his Honours reasons.
They are as follow:
"71 Associate Professor Boesel expressed the
opinion that there is a causal relationship between the haemorrhoidectomy and
the neuropathic
pain syndrome. He diagnosed perianal nerve injury which he
opined was 'likely sustained during haemorrhoidectomy'. He found the
injury to have led to a pain disorder which he described as "a neuropathic
pelvic floor pain syndrome". He went on to say:
'This was not present prior to her surgical management. This consequently
suggests a causal relationship.'
Professor Boesel qualified his opinion on the basis that he is 'not a trained
colorectal surgeon'. He concedes that this
makes it difficult for him to comment
on the relationship between a sub optimally placed suture line, and presumably,
the relevant
nerve damage. At trial, defence counsel objected to his evidence
concerning the causal link between the stapled haemorrhoidectomy
and the nerve
damage on the basis of a lack of relevant expertise. I permitted the evidence
but observed that matters such as the
absence of internal examination and a lack
of expertise in respect of the relevant procedure, would affect the weight to be
on this opinion.
Professor Boesel was cross-examined about his opinion as to a causal link
between the hemorrhoidectomy and the pain syndrome.
In particular, Mr Read asked
Associate Professor Boesel whether, if a nerve had been injured in the
operation, he would expect 'that
as the person came out of anaesthetic they
would suffer greater pain than the operation would ordinarily impose on them'.
Professor Boesel's answer was:
'It is difficult to
quantify .... There are patients who present with numbness in the first instance
after nerve injury and then the
pain symptoms gradually evolve over time. So it
depends on the extent to which the nerve is injured and it depends on other
for example, the way the pain was treated in the postoperative setting
with analgesic medications and it can also reflect changes
in the nervous system
that occur cumulatively over time.'
was other cross-examination concerning subsequent procedures, and whether they
might account for the plaintiff's ongoing reports
of pain. The effect of
Associate Professor Boesel's response, in my view, was a concession that they
could but he relied heavily
on the temporal history of the pain, that is an
absence of similar pain prior to the stapled haemorrhoidectomy, and its
development
accept Associate Professor Boesel's opinion as expressed in this evidence. There
is no question that his expertise is not in the
procedures related to treating
haemorrhoids with stapled haemorrhoidectomy. However, he has considerable
expertise in identifying
and diagnosing nerve damage and the symptomology
associated with it. This must include the pace of development and the experience
of that symptomology by the patient. There is no question that the colorectal
experts are well-placed to identify the correct procedure
and the relationship
of the procedure to the anatomy within the anal canal and associated structures.
They can undoubtedly speak
from experience as to symptoms associated with
aspects of that procedure, including the misplacement of staples. However, in my
Associate Professor Boesel's expertise in respect of nerve damage and
associated pain is superior to that of the colorectal experts...
also accept the opinion of Associate Professor Boesel. He conceded that he is
not able to identify the mechanism by which damage
has been caused and in
particular, is not in a position, having regard to the extent of his expertise,
to relate the nerve damage
to the placement of the staple line. However, he was
able to identify the existence of nerve damage, and with his expert
understanding
of the symptoms associated with such damage, was able to infer the
existence of a causal link by virtue of the temporal coincidence
between the
operation and such symptoms, in particular pain. This is consistent with the
view of the colorectal experts, who also
were not able or prepared to identify
the mechanism of injury and causation of consequence with precision, but accept
the probability
of the causal link."
In my view the learned trial judge did not err in admitting the evidence of
Associate Professor Boesel on the basis and for the
purposes which he did. Even
if he was not, he would have been entitled to take that evidence, minus the
opinion as to the causal
link, and arrive at the same conclusion himself based
on the whole of the evidence as to the onset of symptoms and the lack of any
other identified cause for the respondent's pain.
As to the appellants submissions as to the respondent's lack of reliability as
a historian and a witness, the learned trial judge
saw and heard the respondent
and was better placed than I am to assess the value of her evidence, both as to
her symptoms immediately
post operatively and thereafter.
His Honour employed orthodox reasoning in a case which merely required
satisfaction on the balance of probabilities. If his Honour
had not accepted the
respondent's evidence to the extent required for satisfaction as to the truth of
the history given to Associate
Professor Boesel, then his Honour would not have
been able to infer the requisite causal relationship between the breach and the
harm (or, assuming he correctly admitted that the expert opinion evidence of the
associate professor, to have accepted that opinion).
And, if his Honour had reached the view that a lack of reporting by the
respondent of specific pain post-surgery affected the verisimilitude
history given by her to Associate Professor Boesel, he would not have found in
favour of the respondent. It is clear from
a reading of his Honour's reasons
that he was alive to this issue. He had the benefit of seeing and hearing the
witnesses, and the
inferences necessary for his findings as to causation were
clearly open to him to draw. And on my review of the evidence he was right
In addition, of course his Honour had the evidence of Associate Professor
Boesel's examination findings of sensory alternations
in the area of pain
reported by the respondent, and the absence of any other causative event.
The arguments advanced by the appellant as noted above in the series of bullet
points set out at [74], are all well made but they
are substantially the same
arguments made to his Honour at trial. They are not unassailable, and his Honour
was not obliged to accept
the appellant's case theory.
I would dismiss ground 3 of the notice of appeal.
– past medical expenses
The appellant's submissions
The appellant, somewhat brashly asserts in relation to this issue, that "even
the learned trial judge expressed doubt about his
own conclusion".
The appellant submits at [139] of his Honour's reasons that he said that the
evidence supporting the claim for medical expenses
was "vague and
unsatisfactory" but, having decided for the respondent on liability, "it seems
his Honour felt that the plaintiff
should receive an award, and said he was
limited to a 'broad brush' approach".
The appellant submits that the respondent bore the onus of proving that she had
suffered damage and the amount of loss which was
sustained but notes, relying on
Luntz and Harder, Assessment of Damages for Personal Injury and Death
(5th ed, 2021, Lexis Nexis) at [4.2.1]; and
Lumley v Sainsbury
"Of course, where there has been a loss of some
sort, the law does not permit difficulties of estimating loss to defeat the only
being an award of damages. There must, however, be a sufficient basis
for the estimate. A judge is not free to make something
out of nothing, or to
find loss established where there was an insufficient basis upon which to do on
the evidence. It has been
said that a plaintiff must prove the extent of the
loss on the balance of probabilities with as much precision as the subject
reasonably permits. Moreover, the services claimed must be reasonable
in type and number."
The appellant says that the respondent has claimed:
$29,209.45 based
on what was shown in a Medicare notice of past benefits, dating from 23
September 2013.
$52,565.05 based
on an HCF statement, which the plaintiff had '"ticked" to indicate which
services related to her injury.
$18,720 for
medication costs, which was an estimate only and totally unsupported by
documentary and oral evidence.
Taking a broad brush
approach, his Honour discounted the total amount claimed of approximately
$100,000 by 50%, to $50,000.
The appellant submits that this is not a case where his Honour erred in
exercising a discretion, but rather, his Honour erred because
the respondent
failed to prove the link between her injury and the expenses claimed, and she
failed to explain why they were reasonable
in type and number. The appellant
submits that no damages should not be allowed under this head.
The respondent's submissions
The respondent submits that her evidence regarding out-of-pocket expenses was
general in nature but it was capable of justifying
the award. She says that her
evidence included:
Evidence that
she consulted with doctors at Lindisfarne Medical Practice and Sandy Bay
practice for her symptoms after 2013.
Continuation of
symptoms after 2013.
Consultation
with medical specialists during 2014, 2015 and 2016 due to symptoms following
The identity of
the various specialists was confirmed – Dr Mignanelli, Dr Gall, Dr
McCulloch, Dr Jackson, Professor Keck, Dr
Brown, Dr Sitzler.
The link between
the loop ileostomy procedure and her PPH related symptoms.
Deterioration in
mental health after the PPH leading to consultations with a psychologist and
prescription of Escitalopram and Seroquel.
Since the PPH
the respondent has taken Endone, Gastro Stop, Quetiapine, and Motilium.
consulted with the doctors identified on the
Medicare notice of Past
because of the complications of the PPH.
The respondent points out that the appellant then conceded during a discussion
between the learned trial judge and counsel for
the respondent, that the
Private Health Insurer's Statement of
would also be admitted into evidence on the basis that it was the
respondent's belief that all the items of expenditure were paid
for medical
treatment of the respondent, which she believed was required because of the PPH.
The respondent submits that in the absence of any cross-examination the award
was reasonable and appropriate taking into account
the finding that the
respondent's compensable injuries comprised:
Proctalgia;
Psychological
Chronic pain
Aggravation of
slow transit constipation
Performance of
ileostomy with stoma and hernia formation.
The respondent annexed to her written submissions to this Court a schedule
prepared specifically for this appeal which cross-references
medical expenses
which are specified in the
Medicare Notice of Past Benefits
Private Health Insurer's Statement of Benefits
that were tendered at
trial, with references in the evidence to treatments which the respondent
pursued for her compensable injuries.
The respondent says that the schedule demonstrates there was evidence before
the Court to justify the amount awarded for past out-of-pocket
expenses and that
although the evidence was imperfect, the trial judge correctly allowed an
approximated sum for past out-of-pocket
The respondent says that this is consistent with authorities to the effect that
the Court may draw inferences concerning the costs
of medical treatment and may
apportion loss between tortious and non-tortious causes (
Layton v Walsh
(1978) 19 ALR 594
Adams v Ascot Iron Foundry Pty Ltd
(1968) 72 SR (NSW)
125 per Sugarman AP at 125-126 and
State of NSW v Skinner
[2022] NSWCA
Discussion and disposition as to ground 4
I accept the respondent's submissions. It is true that the respondent bore the
onus of proof but to my mind, the respondent's schedule
demonstrates that the
essentials of that proof were in evidence and in the absence of any
cross-examination by the appellant to identify
expenses that were not related to
the respondent's compensable injuries, the learned trial judge was entitled to
take the course
he adopted.
Ground 5 – future care
The appellant's submissions
The appellant submits that at paragraph [157] of the reasons, his Honour
identified "the real issue" on this head of damage as "the
question of
causation".
The appellant says that was an error because there was another, logically
anterior issue, namely "what was the plaintiff's (sic)
reasonable need for
future domestic assistance?" The appellant says that the answer to that question
is "the reasonable cost of meeting
the need which is the measure of damages,
which, in turn, is tempered by whether meeting the need – given the cost
is reasonable".
The appellant says that Erica Skibby and Verity Coulter, both occupational
therapists, gave joint evidence that the respondent would
require future
domestic assistance for 12 hours per week for the rest of her life, which they
estimated would cost $65.17 per hour.
That is reflected in his Honour's reasons
at [157]–[158] where he said:
"157 The final head of damages
is in respect of future domestic care and assistance. This is the subject of
agreement between the
occupational therapists. They agree that the plaintiff
will require future domestic assistance for 12 hours per week for the rest
her life. They have agreed on an average hourly cost of $65.17. They also agree
that with this care the plaintiff should be able
to continue living
independently in the community for the near future. The plaintiff's claim is
based on this agreement, and although
Ms Skibby was cross-examined, there was no
challenge concerning the agreed position in this regard. The real issue is the
of causation. I again use the same methodology as with other types of
future cost, which essentially is to apply a significant discount
to accommodate
contingencies, including the effect of pre-existing conditions. Once again,
because of the length of assessment of
this claim and its broad nature, I think
it appropriate to apply a discount of 40%.
158 The appropriate calculation is $782.04 x 685.6 = $536,166.62."
The appellant points out that the joint experts do not identify what would take
up that time of 12 hours, other than a general reference
to "combined domestic,
personal and protective care, and transport".
The appellant points out that the respondent gave evidence-in-chief that she
lives in a one bedroom, one bathroom unit in Claremont
and that she previously
received care from Anglicare, which she stopped because she had "given up" on
herself and was embarrassed
Anglicare carer did one hour of washing up, hanging the clothes on the line and
vacuuming. She also said that there were other things that needed doing in her
house, such as "cleaning the bath and the shower
recess and probably putting the
washing on, the clothes".
The appellant submits that "it is hard to see how she could need 12 hours of
care each week, to maintain a one-bedroom home unit.
Indeed, although she had
received it; she rejected it. This is hardly indicative of need".
The appellant submits the Court must not delegate its assessment of the
respondent's need to a third party expert and simply accept
the opinion, as the
learned trial judge did. The appellant submits that if "an expert's opinion is
not supported by the admissible
evidence (eg, the testimony of the plaintiff),
the opinion may have little or no value".
The appellant submits that the evidence discloses a maximum need of two hours a
week and that "given the parlous state of the plaintiff's
health absent the
surgery, the counterfactual suggests that two hours would be needed, in any
The respondent's submissions
The respondent points out that these damages were based on the joint opinion of
the expert occupational therapists and that the
learned trial judge's approach
was a broad brush one, namely to discount the agreed assessment by the
occupational therapists by
40% to take into account conditions which the judge
found were not related to the negligence, and would have required some
in any event.
The respondent says that this was a significant discount and amply reflected
the finding that some of the claimed injuries, including
musculoskeletal
injuries, were not compensable.
Discussion and disposition of
The respondent's submissions should be accepted. The learned trial judge was
not obliged to accept the joint opinion of Ms Skibby
and Ms Coulter simply
because it comprised expert evidence or because it was a joint expert opinion.
But he was entitled to accept
it in the absence of other cogent evidence or some
fundamental flaw in the factual basis for the opinion.
It is of note that in his closing address to his Honour, counsel for the
appellant said:
"Your Honour, the opinions of Ms Skibby, the
occupational therapist, we say have little or no weight , because she assumed
of the problems reported by Ms Garling were the result of surgery, and
it's pretty easy to see that this lady could do with some
condition. The real question is, what's that got to do with the surgery?"
Counsel then said that the respondent had given preferable evidence that
previously she only needed one hour a week and that she
ultimately rejected
that, albeit because of embarrassment at her situation.
I do not regard that evidence as undermining the joint expert opinion and I
detect no error in the learned trial judge taking the
approach that he did in
discounting the agreed assessment by the occupational therapists by 40%, to take
into account conditions
which he found were not related to the negligence and
would have required some assistance in any event.
cross-appeal – ground 1
The respondent (cross-appellant) has cross-appealed against the learned trial
judge's assessment of general damages on seven grounds.
The first is that his Honour erred in finding at [124] of his reasons, that
the award should be modest due to a high probability
that the cross-appellant
would have required an ileostomy and stoma at some time in the future due to
slow transit constipation,
absent the appellant's (cross-respondent) breach of
duty as that finding was:
Not supported by
the evidence.
Amounted to
impermissible speculation.
constitute an adequate basis upon which to apply a significant discount to the
The second is that the learned trial judge erred in finding that the effect of
Professor Eyers' evidence was that the cross-appellant
would have required an
ileostomy and stoma at some time in the future due to slow transit constipation
absent the appellant's breach
of duty, which was contrary to the joint expert
report and Professor Eyers' evidence that:
"(a) Joint report 1(j)
and 1(k) if you impinge of the area of the anal canal with somatic sensation you
get (a) acute pain and (b)
defaecation seriously affected – 'While there
is no reliable evidence that such acute pain would likely become chronic, such
an impact on defaecation would be likely to be experienced long-term.'
(b) Professor Eyers page 15 of 797 of Court Book- 'On the basis of the reported
literature, both Ms Garling's anal pain and a change
in her pattern of
defaecation can be attributed to the PPH.'
( c) Professor Eyers page 15 of 797 of Court Book – 'While it is likely
that Ms Garling had latent slow-transit constipation
before the haemorrhoid
operation, the PPH's effect on her pattern of defaecation was temporally
associated with its inexorable
worsening, and is, on a balance of probabilities
causally associated with it worsening.'"
The third is that the learned trial judge failed to expose his reasoning
process for finding that the cross-appellant would have
required an ileostomy
and stoma due to slow transit constipation at some time in the future absent the
appellant's breach of duty.
The fourth is that the learned trial judge erred in the assessment of damages
for pain, suffering and loss of amenities of life
in failing to have sufficient
regard to the finding which His Honour made that the cross-appellant had
developed a severe and chronic
pain disorder, and that she will likely suffer
pain for the remainder of her life in consequence of the appellant's breach of
in circumstances where there was no evidence that such disorder may have
developed at some time in the future, absent the appellant's
breach of duty and
where His Honour did not make any such finding.
The fifth is that the learned trial judge erred in failing to specify a sum for
damages for pain, suffering and loss of amenities
of life from which a specified
deduction was then made for the contingency that the cross-appellant would have
required an ileostomy
and stoma due to slow transit constipation at some time in
the future absent the appellant's breach of duty.
The sixth is that the learned trial judge erred in the assessment of damages
for pain, suffering and loss of amenities of life in
failing to specify extent
of the deduction made for the finding that the cross-appellant would have
required an ileostomy and stoma
due to slow transit constipation at some time
absent the appellant's breach of duty.
The seventh is that the award of damages for pain, suffering and loss of
amenities of life was manifestly inadequate having regard
to the totality of the
evidence before the learned trial judge.
It is useful to set out the impugned findings and conclusions. His Honour said
at [124]-[125]:
"124 Of course, when assessing damages, it is
necessary to take into account the quality of the plaintiff's pre-injury life
contingencies already discussed. In particular, much of the misery
currently being experienced by the plaintiff is due to the ileostomy
stoma. This was specifically to deal with the constipation. While I have found a
causal link between the placement of the
staple line and the constipation, I
think there is a high probability that this would have been required at some
time in any event.
This is the effect of Professor Eyers' evidence, who opined
that the procedure had aggravated pre-existing and latent slow transit
constipation. Accordingly, I should apply a significant discount when making the
relevant assessment.
125 For pain, suffering and loss of amenities of life, I award the sum of
Cross-appellant's submissions
All of these grounds are addressed as one in the written submissions of the
cross-appellant.
The cross-appellant submits that the learned trial judge erred in the
assessment of damages for pain, suffering and loss of amenities
failing to have sufficient regard to the finding, which his Honour made, that
the cross-appellant had developed a severe
and chronic pain disorder and that
she would likely suffer pain for the remainder of her life in consequence of the
appellant's breach
of duty, in circumstances where there was no evidence that
such disorder may have developed at some time in the future, absent the
appellant's breach of duty and where his Honour did not make any such
The cross-appellant submits that the learned trial judge erred in failing to
specify a sum for damages for pain, suffering and loss
of amenities of life from
which a specified deduction was then made for the contingency that the
cross-appellant would have required
an ileostomy and stoma due to slow transit
constipation at some time in the future absent the appellant's breach of
The cross-appellant submits that the learned trial judge erred in the
assessment of damages for pain, suffering and loss of amenities
failing to specify extent of the deduction made for the finding that the
cross-appellant would have required an ileostomy
and stoma due to slow transit
constipation at some time absent the appellant's breach of duty.
The cross-appellant submits that the learned trial judge's award of damages for
pain, suffering and loss of amenities of life was
manifestly inadequate having
regard to the totality of the evidence before his Honour and where the
cross-appellant's evidence of
the effects of her symptoms was not in issue.
The cross-appellant submits that the learned trial judge found that the manner
in which the PPH was performed by the appellant was
the cause of the nerve
damage diagnosed by Associate Professor Boesel and the harm experienced by the
cross-appellant as a result
of that nerve damage. That included the ongoing pain
syndrome diagnosed by Associate Professor Boesel and a significant aggravation
of the cross-appellant's pre-existing problems with bowel function, in
particular the slow transit constipation.
The cross-appellant submits that the learned trial judge was also satisfied
that the aggravation of the cross-appellant's pre-existing
bowel problems led to
the performance of the loop ileostomy and consequences thereof, including the
parastomal hernia and problems
that the cross-appellant has continued to
experience with respect to her amenity of life and psychological health and
The cross-appellant submits that the learned trial judge formed the impression,
after having the benefit of observing the cross-appellant
in the witness box and
being cross-examined, that she has suffered considerable psychological
disturbance as a consequence of her
current condition and difficulties arising
from the performance of the PPH and ileostomy.
The cross-appellant submits that the learned trial judge's impression after
listening to the cross-appellant's evidence was that
the stoma has had a very
significant impact on her amenity of life, and that she was experiencing a high
level of suffering at the
time she gave her evidence at trial. His Honour found
that the cross-appellant's capacity to enjoy her life and activities was very
impaired, and that he understood how the cross-appellant had developed the
attitude that she had "given up".
The cross-appellant submits that the learned trial judge accepted that while
the performance of the loop ileostomy had relieved
some of the cross-appellant's
symptoms, it had caused a number of other ongoing impacts on the
cross-appellant's life, importantly,
his Honour accepted the cross-appellant's
evidence that immediately before the PPH, she had no symptoms of perianal pain
or problems
with defecation.
The cross-appellant submits that the learned trial judge accepted the opinions
of Associate Professor Boesel, who diagnosed the
cross-appellant as suffering a
chronic pain disorder, consisting of perianal nerve injury with secondary
sensitisation affecting
other territories including the perineum, vagina and
bladder and was of the opinion that as the cross-appellant had an established
pain disorder, she will likely suffer pain for the remainder of her life.
The cross-appellant notes that in their joint report, Dr Smith and Dr Kutlaca
diagnosed the cross-appellant as suffering post traumatic
stress disorder and
persistent depressive disorder, with intermittent major depressive episodes, and
they agreed that anxiety has
an impact on gastric and colorectal functioning and
psychological distress and results in amplified perception of distress and pain.
The cross-appellant notes that Dr Greenberg diagnosed chronic proctalgia,
ileostomy and a parastomal hernia and was of the opinion
that her perianal
symptoms (proctalgia) were unlikely to resolve and are permanent.
In respect of the pain and suffering the cross-appellant gave the following
uncontradicted evidence:
The pain in her
perianal region continues, she is required to use enemas, but it is a
"nightmare, and I bleed, and I cry and sit on
the floor in a sitz bath and I
dread the next need to use an enema."
She suffers
severe depression because she feels useless.
difficulty making friends because it was an effort to go out, especially when
"stinking is a problem", coming from the bag,
which can leak in public and fall
Her pattern of
leaving the home was worse since the loop ileostomy was performed and it is an
effort to leave her home.
Her house is a
mess, and she is ashamed of that, and that her home not being neat and tidy
anymore is an indication of her giving
She requires
medication to sleep.
She experiences
constant anal pain, anal discharge in the form of mucus, pain in her stoma,
constant pain in her hernia, and bowel
She is unable to
have sexual relations because of her stoma, and her inability to be intimate
with another human being makes her feel
walled in and solitary.
She attempted
suicide by overdosing on medication.
The cross-appellant drew the Court's attention to the obiter comments of Blow
[2021] TASSC 64
where his Honour said:
"As I said in
Mercer v Allianz Australia
Insurance Ltd (No 2)
[2013] TASSC 35
, it was well known that awards
for damages for non-economic loss were for many years significantly lower in
Tasmania than in most,
if not all, mainland jurisdictions, but there is no
reason why that should any longer be so, given the mobility of the Australian
population."
The cross-appellant referred the Court to a number of broadly comparable cases
in Victoria and New South Wales where awards of general
damages were made,
ranging from $200,000 to $300,000 and suggested that an appropriate award of
damages in the present case would
be $250,000.
cross-respondent's submissions
The cross respondent made submissions as to the principles underlying the
assessment of damages for pain and suffering and loss
of amenities and pointed
out that an award "must always spring from the trial judge's assessment of the
plaintiff's counterfactual
(what their life would have been were it not for the
tort) against the factual."
The cross-respondent drew the Court's attention to the principle that an award
for pain and suffering should, only be the additional,
consequential pain and
suffering later arising from the manner of the injury.
The cross-respondent submits that determining the increment between the factual
and the counterfactual is not a straightforward
analysis where a plaintiff
suffers from a pre-existing injury, or condition, because the possible effects
of the injury or condition
must be brought to account.
Tasmanian Alkaloids Pty Ltd v Anthony
[2005] TASSC 53
(Underwood CJ with whom Crawford J agreed);
Lee Transport Co Ltd v Watson
[1940] HCA 27
(1940) 64 CLR 1
Miller v Jennings
[1954] HCA 65
(1954) 92 CLR 190
194-196 (Dixon CJ and Kitto J);
Cowra Shire Council v Trudgett
(Palmer J with whom Meagher and Hodgson JJA agreed);
Westfield Shopping Centre Co Management Pty Ltd
[2013] NSWCA 298
(Meagher and Barrett JJA), the cross-respondent pointed out that an appellate
court should only interfere with a trial judge's award
of general damages where
it clearly appears that the trial judge's discretion in making the award has
miscarried, because either
the trial judge:
applied a wrong
principle of law
misapprehended
made such an
extreme assessment of damages to indicate in itself that such error has
The cross-respondent proceeded to canvas the evidence relevant to the award and
concluded that the learned trial judge had not misapprehended
the facts and had
not engaged in "impermissible speculation." Indeed, it was submitted that when
considering the counterfactual,
a court must speculate to some extent.
The cross-respondent then turned to the cross-appellant's ground of appeal
asserting that the learned trial judge failed to expose
his reasoning process
for finding that the cross-appellant would have required an ileostomy and stoma
due to slow transit constipation
at some time in the future, absent the
appellant's breach of duty, and there was no evidence before the Court on which
could have made that finding.
The cross-respondent submits that the ground of appeal misrepresents his
Honour's finding which was that there was a "high probability"
ileostomy and stoma would have been required in any event.
The cross-respondent then summarised his Honour's reasoning process and
submitted that it is relatively easy to discern from his
Honour's reasons how he
arrived at the conclusion that the stoma and ileostomy would have been required
in any event, and that the
judicial duty to give reasons does not require the
trial judge to spell out in minute detail every step in the reasoning process,
or refer to every single piece of evidence.
As to the ground of cross-appeal alleging that the learned trial judge failed
to have sufficient regard to the finding which his
Honour made, that the
cross-appellant had developed a severe and chronic pain disorder and that she
would likely suffer pain for
the remainder of her life in consequence of the
breach, in circumstances where there was no evidence that such disorder may have
developed at some time in the future absent the defendant's breach, the
cross-respondent submitted:
"To be clear: Associate Professor
Boesel's diagnosis was that the cross-appellant suffered a perianal nerve injury
leading to perianal
neuralgia, with secondary sensitisation affecting other
territories innervated by the pudendal nerve. There was no general finding
a 'severe and chronic pain disorder' as alleged by the ground. At [123], his
Honour found that Associate Professor Boesel expressed
the view that the pain
disorder is established and the cross-appellant would likely suffer pain for the
rest of her life. It is
important to note that Associate Professor Boesel
considered there to be another aspect of the cross-appellant's chronic pain
too: chronic antalgic gait and developing right-sided trochanteric
bursitis and adductor tendinopathy. Note that an antalgic gait
was recorded by
her GP before the haemorrhoidectomy (though the plaintiff later reported it was
associated with it). It appears
to have developed from her 2002 motor vehicle
The dual aspect to the cross-appellant's alleged chronic pain disorder and
the origins of it can put to rest the assertion that there
was 'no evidence that
such disorder may have developed at some time in the future'. There are also
other suggestions that the cross-appellant
was susceptible to a chronic pain
disorder developing otherwise. Dr Smith said in cross-examination that patients
who suffer from
PTSD are more susceptible to chronic pain, which also runs
contrary to the proposition put by this ground.
The cross-appellant's assertion that the trial judge failed to have
sufficient regard to the facts is, in effect, an allegation that
the trial judge
did not place enough weight on them. In the context of this appeal, it is
ultimately an allegation that an insufficient
award was made. It must be
remembered that this ground is not a
Warren v Coombes
ground where there
is only one unique outcome. If the trial judge had regard to a fact which led
him to an award of damages, the
award is defensible, so long as it is not
'extreme'. For the very reasons identified by Professor Atiyah in paragraph 1,
this is a case in which a range of outcomes is tolerated and so the
Warren v Coombes
'correctness standard' does not apply."
The cross-respondent concluded that no error is identified by the ground.
As to the two grounds of cross-appeal alleging error in failing to specify a
sum from which a deduction was made, and in failing
to specify the deduction,
the cross-respondent submitted that, as the Full Court of the Federal Court
observed in
Hughes (t/as Beesley and Hughes Lawyers) v Hill
[2020] FCAFC 126
(Perram J, with whom Collier and Reeves JJ agreed):
"The suggestion that the trial judge gave no reasons for his award
of general damages is without substance. As is usual with an award
damages, the trial judge gave no arithmetic specification of how the figure was
arrived at but it followed a detailed
consideration of the relevant evidence and
was, in that regard, entirely orthodox."
The cross-respondent submits that there was no error in the trial judge's
approach in reaching the award of $75,000.
As to the last of the grounds of the cross-appeal, the cross-respondent submits
that the award of $75,000 was not "manifestly inadequate"
having regard to the
totality of the evidence. The cross-respondent submits:
examines the cross-appellant's history, she had relatively little amenity before
the procedure. Her significant medical history
is summarised by the trial judge
at [90] to [91]. She continues to the afflicted by gastrointestinal motility
and musculoskeletal
issues, quite independently of the procedure: at [109].
Quite independently of the slow-transit constipation, the effects on her
must be brought to account; they cannot be the subject of compensation.
However, the cross-appellant's present amenity which is said to be associated
with the PPH procedure is largely characterised by the
stoma and ileostomy which
his Honour said at [98] has had a 'very significant impact on her amenity of
life'. It is this which causes
'much of [her] misery': at [124] and see also
[109]. The cross-respondent does not cavil with these observations. However,
(a) the ileostomy and stoma were to treat an independent and
pre-existing illness (which was aggravated by the PPH, but not caused
and (b) the cross-appellant chose to have the procedure in light of
alternatives. Because of these facts, the loss of amenity
cross-appellant from the PPH procedure cannot be sheeted home, in its entirety,
to the cross-respondent.
Making an estimate of an appropriate figure of general damages in a case such
as this will always be hard. It will be based on the
Court's view of the 'mix'
of the cross-appellant's pre-existing condition(s), and the possibilities of
those, or independent events
otherwise coming to bear on the cross-appellant.
The cross-appellant's 'mix' in this case was complex, but the trial judge
considered that he must bring to account a number of independent
factors in arriving at the figure of $75,000. That award is not
disproportionate' or 'manifestly inadequate' in all of the circumstances."
Discussion and disposition of the cross-appeal
accept the general thrust of the submissions made by the
cross-respondent.
At the outset I should say that I do not find the comparable awards, to which
the Court was referred by the cross-appellant, to
be particularly useful. Having
regard to the work of this Court in recent years, I am of the view that judges
well understand the
point made by Blow CJ in
(above) at [122].
This is well demonstrated by cases such as
Mercer v Allianz Australia
Insurance Ltd
(above) and
(above); and
Raper v Bowden
[2016] TASSC 35.
To that I add that Professor Eyers early expressed opinion was that said that
'the PPH's effect on her pattern of defecation was
temporally associated with
its inexorable worsening...'. He described that pattern as chronic. As the
cross-respondent submitted,
the professor's use of the adjectives
“inexorable” and “chronic”, indicates that the condition
was an inevitability, or at the very least, highly probable, which
were the words used by the learned trial judge. To say that the
ileostomy was a
high probability is not an error in my view even taking into account the
evidence as to the cross-appellant's pain
medications and antidepressant
medications. I note both that she was taking antidepressants prior to the PPH,
and that, ultimately
she eschewed laxatives, making reliance on analgesics even
more likely going into the future.
It is possible to tend to over discount in that scenario by losing sight of the
importance of the identified causal link between
the PPH and the constipation
and focussing unduly on the probability that the ileostomy, carried out
specifically to deal with constipation,
would have been required at some time in
the future in any event. Whether that occurred is something I cannot know.
However, that
does not matter because I am not of the view that the learned
trial judge started from a base in his assessment of general damages
simply too low.
The question of the extent of the respondent's pre-existing conditions was
explained at a granular level on this appeal both as
to the appeal and the
cross-appeal however the material is such that it cannot be analysed and a
formula applied to it. His Honour
was faced with a case requiring a broad-brush
approach to discounting to take account of the respondent's pre-existing
conditions.
As with the medical expenses and the future care costs claimed, his
Honour was, in my view required to estimate. He took such an
approach in
relation to the evidence he actually had from the respondent and in my view, in
doing so, he did not err. This appeal
may be a rehearing but it is not a
retrial. The award is “defensible”. It is not
I would dismiss the cross-appeal.
File No 2017/2024
DR TONY PATINIOTIS v ANN MARISE GARLING
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
12 June 2025
agree the appeal and cross-appeal should be dismissed for the reasons expressed
by Estcourt J.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (381 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter