URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMC/2024/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sergeant Little v Dalton-Smith [2024] TASMC 13 (3 December 2024)
[2024] TASMC 13
DEVONPORT COURT OF PETTY SESSIONS
Sergeant Little v Dalton-Smith
[2024] TASMC
LITTLE, Cameron
DALTON-SMITH, Nicholas
DELIVERED ON:
December 2024
DELIVERED AT:
Devonport (by video-link from
Launceston)
HEARING DATE:
11 October 2024
Stanton, DCM
CATCHWORDS:
Courts – Court of Petty Sessions - Limitation Period –
Time for making complaint Statutes – Principles of
construction –
Implied repeal, Words and phrases – “Limited”
(NT) Alumina Proprietary Limited v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
2009 239 CLR 27
Project Blue Sky Inc. v Australian Broadcasting
[1998] HCA 28
[1998] 194 CLR 355
Attorney General (Tas) v
[2018] TASFC 6
Goodwin v Phillips
[1908] HCA 55
(1908) 7 CLR
Valentine v IED
(1992) 27 NSWLR 615
Eames v Eames
Fam CAFC 204
Police v AB
Magistrates Court (Youth Justice Division),
unreported, File No 52977/2023, Magistrate Marron, 2/10/24
Police v Lynch,
Launceston Court of Petty Sessions, unreported, File No 3430/2024,
Magistrate Cure, 12/7/24
R v Greater Manchester Coroner: ex parte Tal
[1985] 1 QB 81
Police Offences Act
,(5),(5A) &
Justices Act
Acts Interpretation Act
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
Solicitors:
North Western
Prosecution Service
Respondent:
G A Richardson
Paragraphs: 42
Serial No. 13/2024
File No. 53847/2023
SERGEANT CAMERON LITTLE v NICHOLAS GERARD
DALTON-SMITH
REASON FOR DECISION STANTON, DCM
defendant is charged with two counts of indecent assault contrary to
Police Offences Act
which are alleged to have been committed on
27 November 2022 and 29 December 2022. The complaint containing those charges
on 24 November 2023. The defendant submits the complaint is out of time
and should be dismissed. The prosecution submits the complaint
can be made at
any time and should proceed.
resolution of that dispute relies on the construction of
Police Offences Act
Justices Act
Limitation on summary proceedings
(1) In the case of a simple offence that is not
an indictable offence,
unless some other time is limited for making
complaint by the law relating to the particular case
, complaint must be made
(a) within 6 months from the time when the
matter of complaint arose....
[underlining mine]
from 20 April 2023
Police Offences Act
so far as relevant:
Common assault and aggravated assault
(1) A person shall not unlawfully assault
another person.
(1A) A person who contravenes
is guilty of an offence and is liable on summary conviction to a
penalty not exceeding 20 penalty units or to imprisonment for a
exceeding 12 months.
(3) A person who with
indecent intent assaults any other person is liable to a fine not exceeding 50
penalty units or to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 2 years.
(4) If on a complaint under
the court finds the assault proved but not the intent, it may
amend the complaint to one under
for the same assault and convict accordingly.
subsection (5A)
a complaint made for the purposes of the
in relation to an offence against this section is to be
made within 12 months after the date of the offence.
Subsection (5)
not apply to a complaint made for the purposes of the
in relation to –
an offence under
subsection (3)
an offence under
subsection (1)
subsection (4)
the complaint for the same assault was amended from a complaint
subsection (3)
a complaint under
subsection (1)
The amendments to this section
effected by
Justice Miscellaneous (Royal Commission
Amendments) Act 2023
apply in respect of proceedings for an
(a) whether or not that offence was committed
before or after the commencement of that Act; and
whether or not a limitation
period previously applying to the offence had expired before the commencement of
[underlining mine]
principal issue is whether or not the exception to the 6-month time limit in
Justices Act
effected by the phrase “
some other time is limited for making complaint by the law relating to the
particular case”
is engaged by the provisions of
Police Offences Act
which deal with the time for making a complaint
in respect of an offence under
of that Act.
Richardson, counsel for the defendant, submits that the meaning of those
provisions is clear.
Justices Act
6-month time limit on making a complaint unless some other time is limited by
the law relating to a particular case. The
time limit of 12 months referred to
Police Offences Act
does not apply in respect of
an offence under
expressly states it has no application
to such an offence. There is therefore no time limited in respect of such an
offence. That
means the 6-month time limit in
Richardson submits that is not only a plain reading of the text but the only way
those provisions can be read. Any contrary construction
would require the
meaning of the words used in those provisions to carry a meaning they cannot
have, to impermissibly rewrite the
legislation.
the initial attraction of that construction I am satisfied it is incorrect. The
is that a complaint for an offence under
Police Offences Act
can be made at any time. That is a time limited
for making a complaint provided by the law relating to the charge of assault
indecent intent. The 6-month time limit in
does not apply to a
complaint for such an offence because the exception to the application of that
limit is engaged.
process of statutory construction which leads to that conclusion requires the
application of well-established principles. It
requires consideration of the
text itself and its context, including the general purpose and policy of the
legislation and the consequences
of a literal construction;
Alumina Proprietary Limited v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
2009 239 CLR 27
per Hayne, Heydon, Crennan and Kiefel JJ at paragraph 47;
Project Blue Sky Inc. v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
[1998] 194 CLR 355
Attorney General (Tas) v CL
[2018] TASFC 6
Porter AJ at [51], (Blow CJ and Wood J agreeing at [2] and [3]). A construction
which promotes the purpose or object of the
Act is to be given effect:
Interpretation Act
Extrinsic material such as the second reading
speech can be considered if the provision is ambiguous or obscure or to confirm
interpretation conveyed by the ordinary meaning of the provision:
Interpretation Act
is convenient to first consider the effect of s 35 of the
Police Offences Act
first and most powerful indicator supporting the construction I have concluded
is correct is contained in the second reading speech
for the Act which
introduced s35(5A) into the
Police Offences Act
Miscellaneous (Royal Commission Amendments) Act
. That second reading
speech contains the following statements:
“The bill also abolishes statutory time limitation periods that
apply to some summary sexual offences consistent with the royal
commission’s recommendations.
Accordingly, the existing the [sic] 12-month limitation period for the
offence of assault with indecent intent contrary to the
Police Offences Act
, is removed by the bill. The amendment will have retrospective effect to
enable historical offences to be pursued by investigating
and prosecuting
authorities”.
fact sheet accompanying the bill stated:
The Bill amends the
Police Offences Act 1935
limitation period for the offence of ‘assault with indecent
statements are a remarkable example of a second reading speech which makes the
intention of the legislation abundantly clear.
The purpose of the bill is to
abolish statutory time limitation periods for the offence of assault with
indecent intent. That is
to enable a complaint for the offence of assault with
indecent intent to be made at any time which enables historical offences to
pursued by investigating and prosecuting authorities.
within the context of the
Police Offences Act
, that purpose is aptly
achieved by the drafting mechanism employed. Prior to the amendment there was a
12-month time limit for all
offences under
Police Offences Act
. The effect of
is to remove the 12-month restriction on making
a complaint for an offence under
Again within the context of the
Police Offences Act
the literal effect of that removal is that a
complaint for such an offence can be made at any time.
same result could have been expressed in positive language by using words such
as, “A complaint in respect of a breach of
can be made at any
time.” Indeed there is a clarifying bill using similar language. But
the intention of
is clear. It is intended to remove the 12-month time
limit so that a complaint for an offence against
can be made at any
Police v Lynch,
Launceston Court of Petty Sessions, File No 3430/2024
12/7/24 Magistrate Cure held that was the clear purpose of that legislation.
With respect I agree with that conclusion even though I disagree with her
Honour’s conclusion that the 6-month time limit in
therefore applies.
question then is whether the default time limit of 6 months in
Justices Act
is engaged. There are very strong indications that the
6-month time period in
Justices Act
was not to apply to
the offence in this case
it is implausible that an Act to implement recommendations of the Royal
Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual
Abuse would be intended
to shorten rather than lengthen the time within which proceedings for sexual
offences could be commenced.
Shortening the time limit for bringing proceedings
would hamper rather than enable historical offences to be investigated and
contrary to the intended effect of the legislation stated in the
second reading speech. A construction of the legislative scheme
Justices Act
which is so clearly contrary to the intended
purpose of the amendment to
Police Offences Act
be avoided if that is possible.
if the effect of
was to replace the 12 -month time limit in
Police Offences Act
with the 6-month time limit in
Justices Act
, the amendment effected by
Offences Act
, particularly paragraph (b) thereof, would have no work to
do. If the 12-month time limit had expired the six-month time limit would
have expired and there would be no need to make the removal of the 12-month time
limit retrospective. Imposing retrospectivity
on the removal of the 12-month
time limit only makes sense if the time for making a complaint is extended to
longer than 12 months.
s 35(5B)(b)
does have work to do if the time
restriction for making a complaint has been removed so that the complaint can be
made at any time.
The latter construction is therefore supported by the
principle of statutory construction which requires that every provision should
be given work to do:
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting
(above) at [71] per McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne
the text of
Justices Act
can support the abundantly
clear intention of parliament without impermissibly straining its meaning. The
question is whether the
provisions of
which mean that a complaint can made
at any time fall within the meaning of the expression in
Justices Act
some other time is limited for making
complaint by the law relating to the particular case...”
Sub-sections
35 (5), (5A) and (5B) are the relevant law relating to the particular case. They
deal with the time for making a complaint.
They constitute provision by the law
of a time other than 6 months within which a complaint can be made in respect of
this offence.
The question is therefore further refined to be whether the fact
that the complaint can be made at any time after the commission
of the offence
means that no other time is
for making a complaint.
real effect of the submissions for the defendant is that because a complaint can
be made at any time, no time is limited for making
a complaint and therefore the
exception to the 6-month time limit in
Justices Act
not engaged
The correctness of that proposition depends on the meaning
of the word “limited” in the exception to the default time
contained in
I do not consider that word should be given the narrow
meaning implicit in the meaning contended for in the submissions of the
obvious purpose of
is to create a default limitation period of six
months where the question of the time within which a complaint may be made has
been defined or provided for by the law in respect of the particular case.
Where that time has been defined or provided for,
should be read in a
way that supports the time otherwise specified by the law. It should not be read
giving a narrow meaning to the
word “limited” in a way which would
defeat the specific time provided for making the complaint in respect of that
central meaning of the adjective “limited” is usually "confined
within limits, restricted, or circumscribed”
It is used to describe the
state of being within boundaries. Its synonyms include
“circumscribed” which in turn means
“to mark off or
define”. To define includes “to fix or lay down definitely; specify
distinctly”: Macquarie
Dictionary definitions.
removes a time restriction, the combined effect of
(5B) is nonetheless to define the time for making a complaint. The time for
making a complaint is defined by those provisions
as any time. In my view, the
correct construction of the word “limited” in
is to refer to
a time that is circumscribed in that it is “defined” or
“provided for”. That is a meaning
moving away from the meaning of
the word “limited” as it is often used. But it is not an
impermissibly strained meaning.
meaning is also consistent with the use the phrase “time limits”
when referencing a bar to commencing legal proceedings.
That phrase and its
various derivatives are used to describe the time defined or specified for that
step. Some time limits are short.
Some are longer. But where the time is
defined, even if it is defined to be any time, that falls within the meaning of
the expression
“time limited” in the context of commencing
proceedings.
approach implicit in the submissions of the defendant to the meaning of the word
“limited” in
is to conclude that its antonym
‘unlimited’ is engaged because the time is not restricted.
However, a distinction can
be drawn between a time that is not limited in the
sense that no time is prescribed or defined for doing an act and a provision
that an act may be done at any time. The former can be described as
unlimited or not limited. The latter is not so. The word limited
used in the sense that where there is another definition or provision for making
a complaint the exception to the default time
limit is engaged.
a construction leaves ample work for
Justices Act
There are many offences, including offences under the
Police Offences Act
, for which there is no provision made for the time within which a
complaint must be made and to which the 6-month default time limit
all of those reasons I am satisfied that the correct interpretation of
,(5A) and (5B) of the
Police Offences Act
Justices Act
is that a complaint for the offence of assault with
indecent intent contrary to
can be made at any time. The exception
contained in
is engaged so the default time limit of 6 months does not
if I am wrong as to that, I consider the later specific provisions defining the
time for making complaint in respect of the
particular offence of assault with
indecent intent displace or supersede the general provisions of
Justices Act
in respect of that subject matter. That occurs by
application of the principle that later Acts repeal earlier inconsistent Acts.
That principle was stated by Griffiths CJ in
Goodwin v Phillips
[1908] HCA 55
at 7 in the following terms:
“...where the provisions of a particular Act of Parliament dealing
with a particular subject matter are wholly inconsistent
with the provisions of
an earlier Act dealing with the same subject matter, then the earlier Act is
repealed by implication....[I]f
the provisions are not wholly inconsistent, but
may become inconsistent in their application to particular cases, then to that
the provisions of the former Act are excepted or their operation is
excluded with respect to cases falling within the provisions
of the later Act.
an inconsistency is only found where the two enactments are so inconsistent or
repugnant that they cannot stand together:
Goodwin v Phillips
[1908] HCA 55
per Barton J at 10. It is preferable to read the Acts in a manner which
enables them to operate together. The construction I have
given to them above
achieves that objective.
if the construction of
Justices Act
contended for
by the defendant is correct, the six-month time limit required by that
provision is repugnant to and superseded by the clear provision
of an unlimited
time for making a complaint in respect of the offence of assault with indecent
intent contrary to
Police Offences Act
is instructive to consider the position which would apply if the clarifying
legislation was passed. There would be a positive statement
that a complaint can
be made at any time. If the defendant’s submission is correct, even if
such an expression was used, there
would still be no time limited for the making
of a complaint in accordance with the meaning to be attributed to that
expression and
therefore the 6-month default time limit would still apply. The
later provision would have the effect that complaint can be made
at any time.
The exception in the earlier provision would not be engaged so the 6-month time
limit would also apply. The provisions
would be irreconcilably inconsistent. The
later provision should therefore prevail. The only difference between that case
is the form of words used to give effect to the intention of
Parliament. The intention remains the same and is given effect by either
words. A difference in expression of that sort should not produce a different
outcome. Primacy must be given to the effect
, (5A) and (5B) which
provide that a complaint can be made at any time.
I need to deal with the effect of the decisions of two other magistrates which
have held that the time limit for making a
complaint in respect of the offence
is the 6 months provided for in
Justices Act
am not bound by those decisions. The doctrine of
stare decisis
application as between inferior courts. Nonetheless, as a matter of judicial
comity, I should follow them unless I am satisfied
they are plainly wrong,
particularly where the question involved is one of statutory construction. That
conclusion should not be
lightly reached:
Valentine v IED
(1992) 27 NSWLR
Eames v Eames
[2018] FamCAFC 204.
first of those decisions is
Police v AB
Magistrates Court (Youth Justice
Division) File No 52977/2023 Magistrate Marron 2/10/24. That was an
decision where, as a result of his Honour refusing an adjournment
requested by the prosecution to address the issue, his Honour did
not have the
benefit of considered and detailed submissions in support of the contrary view.
In contrast to that I have had the benefit
of considered, detailed and well
referenced submissions from both parties. Further, with respect, despite having
the benefit of a
transcript of the proceedings I found it difficult to discern
the reasons for his Honour’s conclusion apart from the bare statement
he was satisfied it was correct.
second decision is
Police v Lynch,
Launceston Court of Petty Sessions,
File No 3430/2024 12/7/24. In that case Magistrate Cure had the benefit of more
comprehensive
submissions. In her Honour’s oral reasons and subsequent
written reasons emailed to the parties she agreed with my conclusion
clear intention of Parliament expressed in the
Police Offences Act
was for the time for making a complaint to be unlimited. But she considered that
giving effect to that intention would involve filling
a gap. I assume the gap
her Honour was referring to was the failure to specifically address the effect
Justices Act
upon the removal of the 12-month time
limit for the offence of assault with indecent intent.
respect I do not consider this is a case where there is any omission or gap that
needs to be filled. It is a case of considering
whether the clear intention to
allow a complaint to be made at any time engages the exception to the default
time limit in
I have stated my views about why it does above.
Alternatively it is a case where the later Act prevails over the inconsistent
Act. Neither of those matters were considered by her
Honour also considered that any ambiguity in the provisions should be resolved
in favour of the defendant because the legislation
is penal. Assuming that
principle applies in the case of retrospective removal of a time limit for
commencement of a prosecution
for an offence, that principle is a servant, not a
master in the process of construction. With respect, her Honour was correct to
conclude that the principle has not been abolished by the High Court. However
its application is now limited to cases where there
is an ambiguity that remains
after the application of the ordinary rules of construction. For the reasons I
have expressed above
I am satisfied that there is no ambiguity once the
legislative scheme is properly construed.
difference between Magistrate Cure and me is the existence of ambiguity. That is
a question of statutory construction. Although
I have reached a different view,
as a matter of judicial comity I should follow her Honours decision unless
satisfied that the construction
her Honour gave to the provisions is plainly
test for what is plainly wrong was stated in
R v Greater Manchester Coroner:
ex parte Tal
[1985] 1 QB 81. It requires becoming convinced the decision was
wrong after earnest consideration and for good reason. I have given
such consideration and hesitated in preferring my views to those of Magistrate
Cure. But in the end I am satisfied for
the reasons identified above that the
construction I have given the legislation is correct and I should give effect to
those reasons I have concluded the effect of
, (5A) and (5B) is that a
complaint alleging a breach of
can be brought at any time. The default
time limit of 6 months in
Justices Act
The complaint is not out of time and should
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (177 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter