URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASHPT/2019/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:16:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Medical Board of Australia v Dr Christopher Kwan Chen Lee [2019] TASHPT 3 (16 April 2019)
[2019] TASHPT 3
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL
Medical Board of Australia v Christopher Kwan Chen Lee
(Ref No 11/2018)
[2019] TASHPT 3
MEDICAL BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
LEE, Christopher Kwan Chen
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
25 March 2019 and by written submissions dated 14,
25 and 26 March 2019
DELIVERED ON:
16 April 2019
DECISION OF:
Chairperson Webster
CATCHWORDS:
Medical practitioner – professional misconduct
– inappropriate comments posted online by respondent – reprimand,
suspension and imposition of conditions
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law Act
Health Practitioners Tribunal Act
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (Tasmania) Act
Tasmanian Board of the Medical Board of
Australia v Lyall
[2015] TASHPT 3
Pharmacy Board of Australia v Meaney
[2017] TASHPT 1
Medical Board of Australia v Roberts
[2014] WASAT
Adamson v Pharmacy Board of Tasmania (No 2)
[2004] TASSC 82
v The Medical Board of South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
Prothonotory of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
[1957] HCA 46
Queensland College of Teachers v Teacher EAJ
[2014] QCAT 29
HCCC v Davis (No 2)
[2013] NSWNMT 25
Medical Board of Australia v
[2012] QCAT 198
Healthcare Complaints Commission v Dr
Nikolova-Trask
[2014] NSWCATOD 149
Khan v Medical Council of NSW
[2016] NSWCATOD 88
Secretary to the Department of Planning and Community
Development v Muto
[2011] VCAT 328
Medical Practitioners
Board of Victoria
[2007] VCAT 526.
DETERMINATION:
The respondent is guilty of professional misconduct and
appropriate sanctions are imposed.
REPRESENTATION:
S. Taglieri
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Australian Health
Practitioner Regulation Agency
Respondent:
[2019] TASHPT 3
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. On 20 December 2018 the applicant referred to the Tribunal
pursuant to s193 of the Schedule to the Health Practitioner Regulation
Law Act 2009 (QLD) (“the National Law”) and
Practitioners Tribunal Act 2010
conduct of the respondent which it asserts
amounts to professional misconduct. The National Law set out in the schedule to
Practitioner Regulation Law Act 2009 (QLD) has been adopted by the
Tasmania Parliament and applies as a law of this
case concerns the professional consequences for a medical practitioner, Dr Lee,
who made inappropriate statements or comments
on online internet forums or chat
3. The respondent received a notification about comments the
respondent posted online while he was residing in Hobart between 9 December
and 10 December 2016 which identify him as a medical practitioner. An
investigation was conducted as a result of the receipt
of that notification and
further online posts were discovered by the investigator.
4. The first
directions hearing in this matter was conducted by me on 10 January 2019. Dr
Lee, who appeared on his own behalf at
that hearing, indicated he was prepared
to proceed immediately to conciliation. The matter was therefore adjourned for
that purpose
after the applicant agreed to provide an amended application which
set out the orders sought by way of suspension and particulars
of the conditions
it wished me to attach to the respondent’s registration.
5. This matter
proceeded to conciliation on 22 January 2019. At that mediation Dr Lee was
accompanied by his supervisor Dr Weeraratne
who is an emergency physician and
the current Director of Emergency Medicine Training at the Latrobe Regional
Hospital and Knox Private
Hospital in Victoria. He worked closely with Dr Lee
when he worked as a registrar at Latrobe Regional Hospital within the Emergency
Department in 2018 and 2019.
6. As a result of the conciliation the parties
were able to agree on an outcome in relation to this application. A joint
was provided to the Tribunal and it was signed by the solicitor for
AHPRA, Mr Shears, and Dr Lee, and it is dated 14 March 2019.
That submission
was provided to the Tribunal on that day and thereafter the matter was set down
for hearing on 25 March 2019. At
that hearing details of a prior matter emerged
and I received written submissions from the applicant as to that matter on 25
2019 and Dr Lee responded on 26 March 2019.
These Proceedings
7. This application alleges Dr Lee’s conduct on the dates
and at the times particularised below constitutes professional misconduct
the National Law and at common law. The conduct consists of making numerous
inappropriate and offensive statements or comments
online in public forums in
which the respondent was readily identifiable from his own words and photographs
as an Australian medical
practitioner. The following statements or comments
were made by the respondent on the online forum
http://forums.hardwarezone.com.sg:
beg to differ. This kind will NEVER learn. She needs to be abandoned in India
and repeatedly raped in order for her to
wake up her idea.”
[09-12-2016, 9:45pm]
“Doctor cannot be scathing? Doctor cannot be vulgar? Doctor cannot
scold people? Fug you all lah.”
[09-12-2016, 9:45pm]
“I will not conform to your ridiculous moral standards and your
expectations of what a doctor should or should not say.”
[09-12-2016,
“I am a medical practitioner. I also have a foul mouth and call a
spade a spade.”
[09-12-2016, 9:45pm]
“I can just as easily condemn your mother for a whore (if the situation
warranted it) as I can save your life or even hers.”
[09-12-2016,
“I am what I am. Doctors are not produced from a cookie cutter mold
. Deal with it.”
[09-12-2016, 9:45pm]
“Don’t live in Singapore. For someone to get their license
revoked over something like this is bloody nonsensical.”
[09-12-2016,
“I’m not pinoy
, you dumb SOB
[09-12-2016, 9:51pm]
“I work in the ER.”
[09-12-2016, 9:53pm]
“I didn’t go to med school for six years and gain entry to the
Australasian College of Emergency Medicine to let some
anonymous moron call me a
nurse and a fake doctor. My qualifications are as genuine as your
stupidity.”
[09-12-2016, 10:02pm]
“Life’s a stage. I live for the applause. Free forum, baby;
anyone can start a thread on anything. Suck it up.”
[09-12-2016,
“I’m not at home right now. I’m at the hospital, although
I’m not actually working. My wife is on night
shift and I’m here to
keep her company and help her with stuff if she requires assistance.”
[09-12-2016, 10:31pm]
“Nah, I’m a lesbian in mind only. I think I just need some
[09-12-2016, 11:42pm]
“You really ought to meet me in real life. My online personality is
exactly the same as my offline one. I don’t just
talk big here. I talk
big EVERYWHERE.”
[10-12-2016, 07:51pm]
“Thank you for redirecting; I didn’t even initially realise that
we were going off topic. The original issue at play
here is that people are
criticising me for being a blunt, heartless foul mouthed bast@rd on an Internet
[10-12-2016, 08:00pm]
“What would you rather me say, hmm? That hers was a misguided
outburst? That she should be let off the hook? Well that ain’t
mister. If I don’t’ like you, there won’t be any kid gloves.
Some women deserve to be raped, and that
supercilious little bitch fits the bill
in every way.”
[10-12-2016, 10:16pm]
“You give her too much credit. She’s too bloody thick skinned to
know guilt or regret. If I turn out to be wrong, though,
it won’t be any
skin off my nose. With her suicide, nothing of value would be lost.”
[10-12-2016, 10:42pm]
8. The following statements or comments were made by the
respondent on the online profile Wikidot (http://edmw.wikidot.com/nachtsider)
being posted on a date on or before 9 January 2018 in which the respondent
describes himself as follows:
“A mongrel doctor who
claims to know all manner of shit on earth. He works and resides in Australia,
and is also well known
to practice Sintua religiously. It is rumored
that his hospital in Australia has the highest casualties in the world due to
him not attending to his dying patients and consistently
posting ran jiao weis
in edmw. He has a chio Ceylonese wife and will piak and/or play with her tits
almost everyday. There’s
some tiagong that he was forced into the
marriage because his wife had threatened to report him to police for raping her,
spiked her curry then upped her after their graduation prom night.
Famous for being a shortie.”
9. The following statements or comments were made by the
respondent on the online forum http://forums.hardwarezone.com.sg/ being posted
on a date on or before 16 January 2018:
“If my marriage fell
apart, it would not end in divorce. It would end in
10. On 3 December 2017, a date after the respondent had
received notice that he was subject to a notification under the National Law,
an online forum http://forums.hardwarezone.com.sg/ referring to an article about
an Egyptian lawyer who was sentenced to three
years in prison for saying that
women who wear ripped jeans should be raped in punishment, he stated:
“I’m surprised
they didn’t give him a medal instead.”
11. On a date on or about 3 January 2016, the respondent on the
online forum http://edmw.longluntan.net/ stated in response to another
person’s post of “walao...rape rape la...why must kill young
people...fuck man” with:
“What do you expect
them to do, if the victim has seen their
The Joint Submission of the Parties
12. The respondent admits he wrote the online posts and
published them on the dates and at the times alleged.
13. The respondent is
now 31 years of age and he was employed by the Tasmania Health Service between
February 2016 and February 2018.
He is now based in Box Hill, Victoria. He
told me at the hearing he graduated from the University of Melbourne in 2012 and
thereafter an intern at the Bendigo Base Hospital. He was then a resident
in the Acute Care Stream of that hospital in 2014 and
2015. He was then a
Registrar of Emergency Medicine at the Royal Hobart Hospital in 2016. He moved
to the Launceston General Hospital
in the same role in 2017. In 2018 he
returned to Victoria and became the Emergency Registrar at Traralgon. He
commenced an identical
position at Box Hill Hospital in 2019. He advised me the
hospitals at Traralgon and Box Hill were part of Eastern Health in
14. At the time he posted his online comments the respondent says
he was relatively young and inexperienced and he had a brash and
opinionated
bent to his conduct on social media. It is agreed he did not fully appreciate
that posting comments on a Singaporean
online forum would have consequences on
his practise of medicine in Australia.
15. The joint submission stressed that
despite the respondent’s above mentioned online conduct he has not
permitted his socio-political
and other personal views to colour or influence
his medical practise and he has certainly never been discriminatory or
towards the groups of individuals that his comments are alleged to be
inflammatory of. He says it can be demonstrated that no violations
surrounding
direct patient care can be attributed to the respondent through his entire
medical career, and a recent clinical supervisor
can confirm the respondent has
constantly conducted himself in a professional and compassionate manner while in
the workplace.
16. Attached to the joint submission was a letter of support
which has been provided by Dr Weeraratne who is an emergency physician
than 27 years experience in emergency medicine in Australia. He is currently
the Director of Emergency Medicine Training
(an appointment endorsed by the
Australasian College for Emergency Medicine) at Latrobe Regional Hospital and
Knox Private Hospital.
He says in his letter of support he worked closely with
the respondent when he worked as Registrar at Latrobe Regional Hospital
the Emergency Department in 2018 and 2019. The respondent was equivalent to a
second in charge of that department and he
had significant responsibility in his
role. Dr Weeraratne says the respondent has excellent knowledge, clinical
skills, patient
care and advocacy and leadership. He has come to this view
after observing the respondent closely. He also says the respondent
engaging and affable and has excellent communication skills. Finally he says
the respondent is professional and punctual
and he has an excellent work ethic.
Dr Weeraratne is fully aware of the conduct the respondent has admitted to
having attended
the conciliation with him.
17. The applicant says that in
relation to the claims in paragraphs 14 and 15 it has no means of confirming
them. I have no hesitation
in accepting what Dr Lee says given it was clear to
me at the hearing he understood the gravity of his conduct and the position he
has put himself in. In addition he appears to have admitted his conduct and
attempted to finalise this matter as soon as reasonably
possible. In those
circumstances I could not imagine he would seek to mislead the
18. When I asked him some questions he confirmed he authored the
posts, he rejected them and would endeavour not to repeat such conduct.
they were not made in the context of patient care and he has not allowed his
views to ever colour his care of patients.
He did not appreciate posts on
forums overseas would have any bearing on his practise of medicine in Australia.
He says his care
of patients has never been the subject of a complaint. He has
treated many patients from the ethnic and gender groups mentioned
in the posts
and he has not behaved in a discriminatory fashion towards those patients. He
said he understood the posts could be
perceived as inflammatory, misogynistic or
racist in tone and the posts were clearly associated with him. It is clear from
and the photographs he posted he is a registered medical
practitioner.
19. The respondent says the initial posts were made in the
context of a socio-political situation in Singapore/Malaysia where as a
of certain events a local female college student made disparaging remarks about
servicemen. Others, including the respondent,
took exception to her comments
which his 2016 posts were responding to. He concedes anger with the content of
her posts clouded
his judgement. He agreed with my suggestion it would be wise
for him to stay away from such forums in the future.
20. Tendered by consent
during the hearing were the following documents:
(a) Good Medical Practice: A Code of Conduct for Doctors in
Australia, March 2014 (“the Code”);
(b) National Board policy for
registered health practitioners – Social Media Policy, March 2014;
(c) Two photographs which the respondent posted on the hardwarezone forum
mentioned above which depict the respondent with his degrees
obtained from the
University of Melbourne and in medical attire. The photograph of the respondent
in medical attire also shows him
wearing his employee identification card and a
stethoscope.
Prior Disciplinary Matters
21. During the hearing on 25 March 2019 I asked whether or not
there were any prior matters. Dr Lee was candid in his response.
He said there
was a prior matter for which he was issued a caution and it related to his
inappropriate access of a patient’s
hospital records.
22. After the
hearing I was provided with further details of that matter by the applicant.
The information I was provided was that
Dr Lee was the subject of a notification
which led to disciplinary action being taken against him by the Board and on 23
the applicant issued a caution to Dr Lee in the following
practitioner is cautioned in relation to accessing Royal Hobart Hospital patient
[patient’s name]
health records on 21 occasions, between July 2015
and December 2016 (inclusive), which was inappropriate because it was done
consent or clinical need.”
23. The applicant submitted the conduct that resulted in the
imposition of a caution is not of the same nature as the conduct referred
this application. Nevertheless, it was submitted that in each instance the
conduct which Dr Lee engaged in demonstrates he
has difficulty appreciating and
acting at all times in a professional and ethical manner, as is required, for
him to meet the expected
and accepted standards of a medical practitioner. I
was referred to s8.1 of the Code which will be referred to below.
response Dr Lee wanted me to be aware of the circumstances surrounding the issue
of the caution and therefore he provided me
with a copy of the letter he
received from AHPRA of 24 July 2018 which sets out the terms of the caution, the
documentation which
the Board took into account in reaching its decision and the
reasons for its decision. The reasons he gave for his conduct are
also set out
in that letter. In his email to the Tribunal of 26 March 2019 he accepts his
actions were wrong. He says his actions
were entirely without malice and did
not “pertain to direct patient care”.
Findings of Fact
25. Given the admissions of the respondent I find as facts the
particulars set out in paragraphs 7 to 11 above. I also accept as facts
matters contained in in paragraphs 13-16, 18 and 19.
Does the Respondent’s Conduct Amount to Professional
Misconduct?
26. The respondent does not dispute that in the circumstances
of this case a finding of professional misconduct is appropriate.
27. Insofar
as the categorisation of the admitted conduct is concerned, the Tribunal can
determine in respect of all or some of those
matters set out in paragraphs 7-11
the respondent:
(a) behaved in a way that constitutes unsatisfactory
professional performance;
(b) behaved in a way that constitutes
unprofessional conduct; or
(c) behaved in a way that constitutes professional
28. The meaning of those terms has been previously discussed by
this Tribunal in the decisions of Tasmanian Board of the Medical Board
Australia v Lyall
[2015] TASHPT 3
and Pharmacy Board of Australia v Meaney
[2017] TASHPT 1
wherein the decision of Medical Board of Australia v Roberts
[2014] WASAT 76
has been discussed. I have considered the general principles
set out in those cases for the purposes of this case.
29. Each of the terms
in paragraph 27 is defined in the National
and in summary they are:
(a) Unsatisfactory professional performance means the
knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised by the practitioner
the practice of the health profession in which the practitioner is registered is
below the standard reasonably expected of a health
practitioner of an equivalent
level of training or experience.
(b) Unprofessional conduct means
professional conduct which is of a lesser standard than might reasonably be
expected of a health
practitioner by the public or the practitioner’s
professional peers.
(c) Professional misconduct includes unprofessional
conduct of a practitioner that amounts to conduct that is substantially below
the standard reasonably expected of a registered health practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience. Additionally,
where more than one
instance of unprofessional conduct, when considered together, amounts to conduct
substantially below the standard
reasonably expected of a registered health
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience then this amounts
to professional
misconduct. It includes conduct whether that conduct occurs in
connection with the practice of the health practitioner’s profession
not, which is inconsistent with the practitioner being a fit and proper person
to hold registration in the profession.
30. I accept the definition of “professional
misconduct” in paragraph 29 is an inclusive one and is not an exhaustive
statement of that term. The definition therefore includes conduct that may not
fall within any of the matters contained within the
definition, for example
matters established at common law or under previous disciplinary
legislation.
31. The term “unprofessional conduct” is defined by
including examples and is an exhaustive statement of that term. It
of a less serious nature than professional misconduct and must be judged in
accordance with the standards of the practitioner’s
peers. This term has
both a performance component and a conduct component. As explained in Medical
Board of Australia v Roberts
(supra) at [181]:
performance component is professional conduct that is of a lesser standard than
that which might reasonably be expected
of the health practitioner by the public
or by the practitioner’s professional peers. The conduct component is,
for example,
the conviction of the practitioner for an offence under an Act
other than the National Law, the nature of which may affect the
practitioner’s
suitability to continue to practise the
profession.
32. In Medical Board of Australia v Roberts (supra), the
Tribunal went on to say at [182]:
“Unsatisfactory
professional performance, on the other hand, has only a performance component
(the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised by a medical
practitioner is below the standard reasonably expected of a medical practitioner
equivalent level of training or experience). It is suggestive of a
generalised deficiency in the way in which a practitioner handles
professional affairs...[i]t is likely that a finding of unsatisfactory
professional performance will occur where the performance
of the practitioner
concerned has consistently fallen below the expected standard as a medical
practitioner, or where the practitioner
has never attained that
33. The comments in Medical Board of Australia v Roberts
(supra) are confined to medical practitioners as the respondent in that case
a consultant paediatrician, however the statutory definitions do not distinguish
between health professions and therefore apply
to all health
professionals.
34. Professional misconduct, by reference to common law
principles, includes behaviour on the part of a member of a profession that
would reasonably be regarded as disgraceful or dishonest by members of that
profession of good repute and
the respondent was a registered medical practitioner at the time he posted the
comments online set out in paragraphs 7 to 11,
the Code is relevant to the
characterisation of his conduct. Paragraph 8.1 of the Code says the
“In professional life,
doctors must display a standard of behaviour that warrants the trust and respect
of the community. This
includes observing and practising the principles of
ethical conduct.”
36. Paragraph 8.1 goes on to say the guidance contained in
section 8 of the Code which is titled “Professional Behaviour”
emphasies the core qualities and characteristics of “good doctors”
which are outlined in paragraph 1.4 of the Code.
Paragraph 8 then goes on to
deal with such matters as professional boundaries, reporting obligations,
medical records, insurance,
advertising, medical reports, certificates and
giving evidence, medico-legal, insurance and other assessments, the contents of
curriculum vitae, investigations, conflicts of interest and financial and
commercial dealings.
37. Parts of paragraph 1.4 of the Code are worth
repeating here. It is headed “Professional values and qualities of
Its first three paragraphs are as follows:
individual doctors have their own personal beliefs and values, there are certain
professional values on which all doctors
are expected to base their
Doctors have a duty to make the care of patients their first concern and to
practise medicine safely and effectively. They must be
ethical and
trustworthy.
Patients trust their doctors because they believe that, in addition to being
competent, their doctor will not take advantage of them
and will display
qualities such as integrity, truthfulness, dependability and compassion.
Patients also rely on their doctors to
protect their
confidentiality.”
38. The respondent was also subject to the social media policy
referred to in paragraph 20(b) which has been adopted by the applicant
published on its website. Under the heading “Introduction” to that
policy the following statement is made:
“Whether an online
activity is able to be viewed by the public or is limited to a specific group of
people, health professionals
need to maintain professional standards and be
aware of the implications of their actions, as in all professional
circumstances.
Health professionals need to be aware that information
circulated on social media may end up in the public domain, and remain there,
irrespective of the intent at the time of posting.”
39. The social media policy reminds the reader that
“[w]hen using social media, health practitioners should remember that the
National Law, their National Board’s code of ethics and professional
conduct ... apply.”
40. I asked the respondent what his knowledge of
the Code and the social media policy was. He did not appreciate the extent to
the Code operated and he only vaguely knew about the social media policy.
He is, of course, as a practising medical practitioner,
obliged to have a full
knowledge and understanding of the principles set out in the Code and how the
Code influences his practise
of medicine and of policies adopted by the
applicant including the social media policy. It is clear that by making the
online posts
the respondent breached the Code and the social media
41. The parties submitted, and I agree, the online posts convey
socially unacceptable and extreme sentiments which are disrespectful
and comment upon violence towards or sexual abuse of women. Some of the online
posts might reasonably be interpreted as
being racially discriminatory and
contrary to acceptable social norms in Australia. All of the online posts had
the potential to
incite radical views, antagonise the reader and they had the
potential to cause harm to the public. In addition some of the posts
the use of vulgar language, expressions of committing violence and crime all of
which are inconsistent with the good repute
of medical practitioners and the
relationship of trust between medical practitioners and patients who are, of
course, members of
the public.
42. A reasonable person reading the online
posts, could reasonably infer from the tenor of them the respondent, despite his
submissions
to the contrary, would not ethically and professionally treat
particular patients or fully abide by the Hippocratic oath expected
practitioners in Australia.
43. I take the view that any individual online
post made by the respondent fell substantially below the standard reasonably
of a medical practitioner of an equivalent level of training and
experience as the respondent. When all the posts are taken together
the conduct
is all the more grave. The respondent’s conduct constitutes several
instances of unprofessional conduct, which
together amount to professional
misconduct as defined in subsection (c) of the definition of professional
misconduct under the National
Law; see paragraph 27 above.
acknowledged the online posts were not made in the course of practising medicine
and were posted after hours. Despite this
there is a clear nexus between the
posts and the respondent’s profession as he identified himself as a
medical practitioner
and his assertion that he is a medical practitioner was
supported by several photographs he posted on the same online forum. One
photographs, as mentioned in paragraph 20(c), shows his graduation certificates
from the University of Melbourne which bear
his name. Another photograph shows
the respondent in hospital clothing with a hospital identity card and
stethoscope. The comments
and the photographs clearly identify the respondent
as a medical practitioner. I accept the submission of the parties that
practitioners
of good repute in the medical profession would regard his conduct
as disgraceful and dishonourable, meaning that it constitutes professional
misconduct at common law as well.
45. It is clearly arguable that the nature
of the online posts and the number of them might demonstrate conduct
inconsistent with
the respondent being a fit and proper person to hold
registration in the medical profession.
46. Many pieces of legislation which
deal with professional vocations require a member of that profession to be a fit
and proper person
or a person of good standing and repute. The question of
whether the respondent is a “fit and proper” person to practise
be considered in the context of the definition of what constitutes professional
misconduct for the purposes of the definition
of that term in s5 of the National
47. Professional misconduct in terms of the definition set out in
paragraph (c) in s5 of the National Law only requires a practitioners
be “inconsistent with the practitioner being a fit and proper person to
hold registration in the profession”
(my emphasis).
What Consequential Orders are Appropriate?
48. The parties seek the following consequential
respondent be reprimanded;
b. the respondent be suspended for a period of six weeks;
c. a condition be imposed on the respondent’s registration requiring him
to undertake education on ethical behaviour and communications,
particularly in
the use of social media. Particulars of the conditions sought to be imposed are
annexed and marked ‘A’.”
49. Particulars of the conditions are attached to this decision
and marked “A”.
50. In making orders under the National Law it is
important to understand the Tribunal’s primary purpose is protection of
public and the Tribunal makes orders with the purpose of maintaining
standards of and public confidence in the medical profession.
As the Court said
in Craig v The Medical Board of South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
purpose of disciplinary proceedings is to protect the public, not to punish a
practitioner in the sense in which punishment
is administered pursuant to the
criminal law. A disciplinary tribunal protects the public by making orders
which will prevent persons
who are unfit to practise from practising, or by
making orders which will secure the maintenance of proper professional
A disciplinary tribunal will also consider the protection of the
public, and of the relevant profession, by making orders which
will assure the
public that appropriate standards are being maintained within the relevant
profession.”
51. The dominant purpose of the disciplinary regulation of the
medical profession is the protection of the public by the maintenance
standards within the profession. Therefore, the impact which an appropriate
penalty would have upon a practitioner who
is guilty of misconduct, and any
personal hardship imposed on such a practitioner, are secondary
considerations
appropriate sanction is to be considered at the time of imposing the sanction
and not by reference to the date of the
53. Suspension
is of course a less serious consequence for the respondent than cancellation of
his registration because suspension
is for a specified and limited period. The
proper use of a suspension is in cases where the practitioner has fallen below
standards to be expected of such a practitioner, but not in such a way
as to indicate that he or she lacks the qualities of character
necessary attributes of a person entrusted with the responsibilities of a
practitioner
is suspension is appropriate where the Tribunal is satisfied that, upon
completion of the period of suspension, the practitioner
will be fit to resume
54. In determining an appropriate sanction I have previously said a
number of matters require
consideration
matters which previous cases have considered are inter-related and are not
mutually exclusive. There may, of course, be other
relevant matters depending
upon the circumstances of each case. The matters are as follows:
(a) Any need to protect the public against further
misconduct by the
practitioner
need to protect the public from similar conduct, through general deterrence, of
practitioners
need to protect the public and maintain confidence in the profession by
reinforcing high professional standards, denouncing
transgressions and thereby
articulating the high standards expected of the
that even where there may be no need to deter a practitioner for repeating the
conduct, the conduct is of such a nature that
the Tribunal should give an
emphatic indication of its
disapproval
(d) In the case of conduct
involving misleading conduct, including dishonesty, whether the public and
fellow practitioners can place
reliance on the word of the
practitioner
(e) Whether
the practitioner has breached any Act, regulations, guidelines or code of
conduct issued by the relevant professional
body and whether the practitioner
has done so knowingly.
(f) Whether the practitioner’s conduct
demonstrates incompetence, and if so, to what level.
(g) Whether or not the
conduct was isolated such that the Tribunal can be satisfied of his or her
worthiness or reliability in the
practitioner’s disciplinary
(i) Whether
or not the practitioner understands the error of his or her ways, including an
assessment of any remorse and insight (or
lack thereof) shown by the
practitioner. It has been said a practitioner who fails to understand the
significance and consequences
of misconduct is a risk to the
desirability of making available to the public any special skills possessed by
the practitioner.
(k) The practitioner’s personal circumstances at the
time of the conduct and at the time of imposing the sanction. The weight
given to personal circumstances cannot, however, override the fundamental
obligation of this Tribunal to provide appropriate
protection of the public
interest in the honesty and integrity of practitioners and in the maintenance of
proper standards of such
Tribunal may consider any other matters relevant to the practitioner’s
fitness to practice and other matters which may
be regarded as aggravating or
which mitigate its
seriousness
Generally speaking, mitigating factors such as no previous misconduct or a
practitioner’s service to the profession are of
considerably less
significance in this jurisdiction than in the criminal process because this
55. I was referred to the facts and penalty in a number of
cases by way of comparison to this case. The first case was Ziems v The
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New Wales
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR
In that case Mr Ziems had practised as a barrister for approximately 18
years until he was convicted in 1956 of manslaughter and
sentenced to
imprisonment for a period of 2 years. The facts were that Mr Ziems had appeared
in court in Newcastle until 4:00pm
on the day of the crime and had thereafter
attended to private matters. At 10:00pm that day he remonstrated with another
of a hotel at which he was staying who had thrown some bottles of beer
against a wall and used disgusting language which was directed
at two young
women. A fight ensued and Mr Ziems was violently and savagely assaulted. A
sergeant of police intervened and advised
Mr Ziems to attend hospital. It was
on the drive to hospital Mr Ziems collided with an oncoming motorcycle on the
wrong side of
the road and the motorcycle rider died of his injuries. The Crown
case against Mr Ziems was the accident occurred because he was
influence of alcohol. It was Mr Ziems’ case he was not intoxicated but
was suffering from shock and concussion as
a result of the serious injuries he
had sustained in the hotel. He was convicted and sentenced. Thereafter the
Supreme Court of
New South Wales removed his name from the roll of barristers on
the ground of his conviction and sentence. On appeal the High Court
majority of three to two, that Mr Ziems should have only been suspended from
practice during the period of his imprisonment
and not disbarred. The thrust of
the majority decision is that the approach of a court to a case of personal
misconduct is very
different from its approach when dealing with professional
misconduct and personal misconduct may show that the person is not a fit
proper person to practice but that is not necessarily so. The vital question is
not whether Mr Ziems had been convicted of a
criminal offence but whether his
conduct was such that he was unfit to remain a member of his
profession.
56. The next case was Queensland College of Teachers v Teacher
[2014] QCAT 29.
The facts of that case are that the respondent’s
marriage broke down in or about 2006. Between 2007 and 2012 her two adolescent
children were subject to various notifications raised with the Department of
Child Safety. Those notifications resulted in orders
being made under the Child
Protection Act 2009 which included supervised contact, suspended contact and the
taking into foster care
of one of the children between September 2009 and March
2012. As a result of the marriage breakdown and involvement of Child Safety,
the respondent engaged in behaviours towards those she saw involved in these
events that culminated in charges and convictions against
her in the criminal
justice system. Firstly in February 2008 she was convicted of common assault,
two counts of wilful damage,
three counts of breaching a domestic violence order
and one count of unlawful stalking, for incidents between 2005 and 2008. These
incidents involved her former husband and his new partner. No convictions were
recorded but she was ordered to pay restitution,
have no contact with the
subject of the stalking incident for 5 years and she was placed on 12
months’ probation. She received
a warning in October 2008 from the
Queensland College of Teachers Professional Practice & Conduct Committee in
relation to those
incidents. Secondly on 24 November 2009 she was convicted of
a serious assault on a person in the lawful execution of their duty
particulars of which were that she verbally abused and spat in the face of a
Child Safety Officer from the Department of Child
Safety. A conviction was
recorded against her and she was placed on 18 months’ probation with
conditions. In July 2010 she
received another reprimand from the Professional
Practice & Conduct Committee of the Queensland College of Teachers. Thirdly
on 20 October 2011 she pleaded guilty and was convicted of using a carriage
service to menace, harass or cause offence in relation
to incidents between 5
and 8 November 2010. These incidents involved using her son’s Facebook
account to send multiple abusive
message to her son in care and his foster
parent. She was sentenced to 3 months’ imprisonment to be suspended on
recognisance
of $1,000.00 and she was placed on probation for 2 years. It was
that conduct which resulted in the Queensland College of Teachers
referring a
matter to the Tribunal for disciplinary action. In that case the respondent
claimed her personal life had nothing to
do with her teaching however the
Tribunal did not agree and said that personal conduct was capable of relevance
to a professional
discipline if there is a relationship between conduct and
relevant professional standards and responsibilities. In that case the
considered the manner in which a teacher behaves with a child in his or her
private and family life is relevant to the professional
standards and
responsibilities of a teacher. If there is no recognition of appropriate
boundaries in a teacher’s private relationship
with children, it is
reasonable to infer that appropriate boundaries in professional teacher/student
relationships may be unrecognised
and appropriate standards transgressed in a
professional setting. In that case the Tribunal cancelled the
respondent’s registration
for a period of 2 years with conditions noted on
the register.
57. An analogy was drawn between that case and this case in
that although the internet postings occurred in the respondent’s
time they were disseminated publicly because AHPRA received a notification. It
was noted the respondent’s posts were
published on the internet far and
wide and there was a high risk of damage to the professional standing of the
medical profession
in the public eye.
58. The third case was HCCC v Davis (No
[2013] NSWNMT 25.
In that case the Tribunal found conduct alleged against Mr
Davis proved which amounted to unsatisfactory professional conduct of
sufficiently serious nature to justify the suspension or cancellation of his
registration as a registered nurse and professional
misconduct was also found.
The conduct concerned his treatment of four elderly dementia patients. In
relation to the first patient
he made the patient beg on his hands and knees for
a cigarette and would laugh when the patient did so and he continued to laugh
even when told by other nursing staff to stop. He did this in order to make fun
of the patient. In relation to the second patient
he, on several occasions,
placed his thumb inside the mouth of the patient for a number of minutes and
then would laugh upon witnessing
that patient suck his thumb and continue to
laugh when told by other nursing staff to stop. In relation to the third
patient, on
two separate occasions while that patient was watching television,
he put his hand down the patient’s pants in the area of
patient’s genitals. In relation to the fourth patient he put his face
near the patient, called him “Daddy”,
tried to kiss him on the
forehead and despite being physically pushed away and being told “I am not
your daddy and I don’t
like you” he continued with this behaviour.
He also caused distress to this patient by being unnecessarily involved in that
patient’s care when he was not required. Accordingly it was alleged in
relation to the four patients he failed to have regard
to their dignity and
respect and he breached the ANMC National Competency Standards for the
Registered Nurse and the Code of Ethics
for Nurses in Australia. He also, in
relation to the four patients, failed to recognised the responsibility to
prevent harm and
accordingly breached the National Competency Standards for the
Registered Nurse, ANMC. By reason of the matters referred to either
individually or cumulatively he engaged in inappropriate and/or unwelcome
conduct of an harassing nature towards the patients.
59. When it became time
to determine the penalty it was submitted that the gravity of the proven
behaviour needed to be seen on a
background of Mr Davis’s previous
behaviour between 2000 and 2009. In September 2000 his employer conducted an
investigation
into the use by him of inappropriate and offensive language to his
Nursing Unit Manager. He received a warning for this behaviour.
In November
2006 there was a complaint against him because he commented to another staff
member within earshot of a patient that
the patient was a “stupid
bitch”. After that incident the patient discharged herself without
medical clearance as a
result of his comments. In May 2008 four complaints were
proven against him. They related to incidents on the nights of 17 and
2008. The first of these was that he touched a patient’s toes for no
clinical reason. The second allegation was he
repeatedly told the same patient
she was beautiful. The patient described his repeated comments as similar to
“pick up lines
that might be used in a pub”. The next allegation
was that on the same day he said to the same patient, while washing her,
the reason she had six children was because she likes sex. There was also
another allegation that he said to another staff
member, within earshot of the
patient, that the reason she had six children was because she was a Catholic.
He was directed to attend
counselling. The purpose of the counselling was to
address the established pattern of inappropriate behaviour and comments over
8 year period.
60. After taking those matters into account in conjunction
with the proved conduct in relation to the current complaint, Mr Davis’s
registration as a nurse was cancelled. It was ordered that at least 4 years
lapse from the date of the order before he could apply
to be registered again.
He was also prohibited, for a period of 4 years from the date of the orders,
from providing health services,
whether they be private, public or volunteer
61. The next case was Medical Board of Australia v Karam
In this case the Medical Board of Australia brought disciplinary
proceedings against the respondent alleging unsatisfactory professional
when he temporarily held an acting appointment as Trainee Registrar in
Obstetrics and Gynaecology at a hospital in Queensland
from late 2006 to early
2007. His contract was not extended because of complaints from patients and
staff, largely about his attitude
and poor communication skills. The respondent
made admissions about a pattern of communicating with colleagues that reflected
on his professionalism. His communications with colleagues on a number
of occasions were argumentative and disrespectful. During
one incident he
argued with two registered nurses in the presence of a patient about to undergo
an emergency Caesarean section for
foetal distress. He also argued with
anaesthetist colleagues about patient matters or clinical procedures. He
communicated poorly
with colleagues responsible for the care of two patients he
treated. He failed to give a full account of the condition of one patient;
the other he failed to provide the relevant practitioner with any account at
all. He failed to keep appropriate clinical records
for the two patients and he
breached the confidence of a patient, who overheard him doing so, by disclosing
a matter to a member
of staff. These incidents were not isolated and the
respondent conceded they demonstrated a pattern of inappropriate communication.
They also suggested contempt for his colleagues and they revealed a lack of
concern for patients. A finding of unsatisfactory professional
conduct was
made. Although the conduct of Dr Karam is not comparable to the respondent in
this case, reliance is placed on a number
of posts. They were not isolated and
it demonstrates inappropriate behaviour. In the case involving Dr Karam he was
from working in obstetrics for a period and also subject to
conditions.
62. In Healthcare Complaints Commission v Dr Nikolova-Trask
[2014] NSWCATOD 149
the respondent was suspended for a period of 3 months and at
the expiration of the suspension her registration was subject to certain
conditions. In that case the Tribunal found complaints of unsatisfactory
professional conduct and professional misconduct proved.
The circumstances of
the case involved inappropriate sexual relations between the practitioner and a
patient or patients and the
treating of a patient in circumstances of a very
close personal friendship between the patient and the practitioner. The
proceedings
also raised the issue of what are appropriate communications between
a patient and a practitioner using text messaging or social
media; i.e.
Facebook. In relation to text messaging there was regular text communication
with one of her patients and they had a
close personal relationship and she
discussed her own personal affairs, including matters relating to her family law
proceedings.
They also discussed the patient’s financial affairs and
problems associated with the breakdown of his marriage. It was also
that in the second half of 2009 after she conducted a genital examination she
was well aware of the possibility of a sexual
relationship developing between
herself and the patient. The number of mobile text messages and telephone calls
were clearly significant
and many were late at night or in the early hours of
the morning. She also used Facebook and provided flippant messages to
63. The final case was Khan v Medical Council of New South Wales
[2016] NSWCATOD 88.
In that case the practitioner appealed from a decision to
suspend his registration. His appeal was out of time so the appeal decision
focusses upon the application for an extension of time which was ultimately
refused. It details complaints of misconduct against
the practitioner with
respect to communications he had engaged in with three of his patients. There
was a further complaint referable
to the prescription of the drug Seroquel to
two of the patients. The communications were text messaging and telephone calls
personal and sexual nature which were in breach of therapeutic boundaries.
There is also reference to the conduct of an examination
of eight patients which
were not clinically indicated and which were inappropriate. The medical
practitioner had worked as a general
practitioner and he tended to treat a
number of patients for mental health issues as well as rheumatology. It appears
difficulties he was having in his own marriage he started reaching
out to female patients in the hope that he could develop a relationship
them and discuss his problems. His inappropriate communications with
client’s were only part of the conduct which led
suspension.
64. In relation to the matters set out in paragraph 54
subparagraph (d), (f) and (j) are not relevant to this case.
65. In relation
to subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) of paragraph 54 when the facts of this case
are compared to those set out in paragraphs
55 to 63 the conduct in this case is
not at the severe end. The respondent’s posts were to the worldwide web
rather than to
individuals or to patients who were being treated. However there
was a nexus between the remarks and the medical profession because
respondent identified himself as a medical practitioner and posted the
photographs referred to above. The risk of harm to the
public was therefore
material and significant. The nature of the posts was forceful and they were
strongly conveyed. They carried
a higher risk of inciting inappropriate social
behaviour that could jeopardise the public. A person reading the posts and in
a woman or a person of a particular race who might present to Dr Lee
could be fearful they would not be treated professionally and
appropriately.
At worst there is a risk Dr Lee might not be treating persons appropriately or
respectfully or alternatively patients
might leave a facility where Dr Lee is
practising because they are fearful of how they might be treated. The conduct
and does amount to professional misconduct. Accordingly a strong
sanction is necessary in order to send a message to both the respondent
doctors broadly that they need to be circumspect and they must abide by the
professional behaviours required of them in the Code
and the social media
66. In relation to paragraph 54(e) it is clear in this case the
respondent has breached the Code and the social media policy. He
answers to questions from me he did not know the extent of his obligations under
the Code and the social media policy but
now does so. He is, of course,
required to know what his obligations are when practising the profession of
67. I do not think it could be said that the respondent’s
conduct was isolated. While the vast majority of the posts were confined
and 10 December 2016 there were other posts on 3 January 2016, 3 December 2017,
9 January 2018 and 16 January 2018. There may
have been others not uncovered
during the investigation.
68. The respondent’s disciplinary history is
dealt with in paragraphs 21 to 24. It appears the conduct the subject of this
application and the conduct which was the subject of the previous caution can be
characterised as conduct which overstepped professional
boundaries which the
respondent was unaware of. This is of course no excuse. He needs to be fully
aware of his obligations with
respect to patient boundaries and that he is not
to cross them while practising his profession.
69. As to paragraph 54(i), I
accept given my interactions with the respondent he now understands the error of
his ways. He was apologetic
for his behaviour and he understood that he should
perhaps, given his own personal views, not partake in such forums in the
70. In relation to paragraph 54(k) his personal circumstances are set
out in paragraphs 13 to 16 above.
71. In making determinations and orders in
this matter I am assisted and guided by statements of Ross J. in Secretary to
the Department
of Planning and Community Development v Muto
[2011] VCAT 328
, where his Honour observed that:
proceedings in respect of civil penalties there is now a well-established line
of authority in support of the proposition
that where a regulatory body and a
respondent have reached a negotiated settlement and the penalty proposed is,
broadly speaking,
within the ‘permissible range’ having regard to
all the circumstances, the court (or in this case the Tribunal) should
depart from the agreed sanction. I propose to adopt the same approach to the
matter before me. The question then becomes whether
the sanction proposed is
within the permissible range.”
72. This approach has been followed in other health
practitioner disciplinary
proceedings
73. As I have previously
whether the
sanction proposed is within the permissible range must be answered by whether
the protection of the public and maintenance
of professional standards is
achieved by imposition of the proposed penalties. Before determining this
question it is important
to look at the differences between a suspension and a
cancellation. In Honey v Medical Practitioners Board of Victoria
[2007] VCAT
the Tribunal said the following at [42]-[45]:
“42 The major difference between a period of
suspension and cancellation is that once the doctor’s registration is
he must reapply after the period specified. He is not guaranteed that
he will be so re-registered. He must still satisfy the Board
that registration
is appropriate and that he fulfils the qualifications for general
registration...
Cancellation
of registration sends a clear message of unsuitability to practice. Suspension
may be thought to indicate confidence
in the doctor’s future ability to
practice once the period of suspension is served.
are some cases in which it is abundantly clear that deregistration is the only
option available to protect the public from a
miscreant doctor.
is apparent in situations in which the practitioner does not accept the
inappropriateness of his conduct, or has been shown to
be a serial
offender...”
74. In determining what orders should be made the Tribunal
should have regard to the seriousness of the conduct and the potential
the medical profession into disrepute. The orders should fulfil the objective
of maintaining the professional reputation
of medical practitioners and also act
to deter the type of conduct that occurred which is quite unbecoming of the
standards and reputation
of the profession. Obviously the respondent’s
concessions with regard to this application and his co-operation with the
are relevant to the making of consequential orders. While the orders
imposed by the Tribunal should not serve to punish the respondent,
they do need
to operate to deter him and other health practitioners to ensure the seriousness
of his type of conduct on social media
is recognised and hence not undertaken.
The orders also should promote the objective of encouraging compliance with
current accepted
social norms while practising as a medical practitioner or
otherwise so that patients and the public are treated respectfully, ethically
and professionally.
75. Weighing the obligations set out in paragraphs 73-74
with the facts of this case I agree with the parties that the totality of
respondent’s conduct amounts to professional misconduct and that he be
reprimanded and suspended. On balance I think a
suspension for a period of 6
weeks is appropriate in the circumstances of this case. The commencement of the
operation of the orders
is of concern to the respondent. He wants to be able to
give his employer advanced notice so that staffing arrangements can be made
cover the period of his suspension. Given the respondent’s employer is
fully cognisant of these proceedings and is supportive
of him I do not think
that is an unreasonable request. The orders will therefore be stayed for a
period of 2 weeks to permit those
arrangements to be made.
DISPOSITION
76. I have found the respondent’s conduct amounts to
professional misconduct so I formally determine the conduct summarised
paragraphs 7 to 11 constitutes professional misconduct pursuant to the National
Law. Insofar as penalty is concerned, I order
(a) the respondent be reprimanded;
(b) the respondent be
suspended for a period of 6 weeks;
(c) the commencement of the period of
suspension is stayed for a period of 2 weeks from 16 April 2019;
(d) conditions be imposed on his registration requiring him to undertake
education on ethical behaviour and communications, particularly
in the use of
social media. Particulars of those conditions are annexed to this decision and
marked “A”.
R. B. WEBSTER
CHAIRPERSON
Schedule of Conditions
Undertake education
practitioner must undertake and successfully complete a program of education,
approved by AHPRA in consultation with the Chair
of the Board and including a
reflective practice report, in relation to ethical behaviour and communication
particularly in the use
of social media.
2. Within 21 days of the notice of
the imposition of these conditions, the practitioner must, on the approved form
(HPN24), nominate
for approval by AHPRA in consultation with the Chair of the
Board an education course, assessment or program (“the education
program”) addressing ethical behaviour and communications particularly in
the use of social media.
3. The practitioner must ensure:
(a) the nomination includes a copy of the curriculum of the
(b) the education consists of components comprising a minimum of 8
4. The practitioner must complete the education within 6 months
of the notice of the approval of the education.
5. Within 21 days of the
completion of the education, the practitioner must provide to AHPRA:
(a) evidence of successful completion of the
(b) a reflective practice report demonstrating, to the
satisfaction of the Board, that the practitioner has reflected on the issues
that gave rise to this condition and how the practitioner has incorporated
lessons learnt in the education into the practitioner’s
6. Within 21 days’ notice of the imposition of these
conditions the practitioner must provide to AHPRA, on the approved form
the contact details of a senior person, such as the Director of Medical
Services, Director of Nursing, Senior Practice Manager,
Senior Manager, Senior
Partner, Proprietor, Owner, or equivalent (“the senior person”) at
each current place of practice.
In providing this form, the practitioner
acknowledges that:
(a) AHPRA will contact the senior person and provide them
with a copy of the conditions on the practitioner’s registration or
confirm that the senior person has received a copy of the conditions from the
practitioner; and
(b) the practitioner will be required to provide the same
(i) within 7 days of the commencement of practice at each and every
subsequent place of practice; and
(ii) within 7 days of each and every notice
of any subsequent alteration of these conditions.
7. All costs associated with compliance with the conditions on
their registration are at the practitioner’s own expense.
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (Tasmania) Act
See s196(1)(b) of the
National Law.
See s5 of the
National Law.
Adamson v Pharmacy Board of
Tasmania (No 2)
[2004] TASSC 82
Legal Profession Complaints
Committee v Detata
[2012] WASCA 214
Legal Profession Complaints
Committee v Masten
[2011] WASC 71
Legal Profession Complaints
Committee v Leask
[2010] WASAT 133
Medical Board of Australia
[2014] WASAT 137(S)
A Solicitor v Council of the Law
Society of NSW
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253.
Legal Profession Complaints
Committee v A Legal Practitioner
[2013] WASAT 37(S)
Practitioner
(1984) 36 SASR 590
at 593 per King
Nursing & Midwifery
Board of Australia v Gregory John Hogan
[2018] TASHPT 3.
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
at 440C and
NSW Bar Association v
(1999) NSWCA 404
Veterinary Practitioners
Board of NSW v Johnson
[2010] NSWADT 308
NSW Bar Association
(supra) at [77].
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman
(supra) at 444F and
NSW Bar Association v Hamman
(supra) at [77] and
Craig v The
Medical Board of South Australia
(supra) at [64].
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman
(supra) at 445B and 445G;
Veterinary Practitioners Board
of NSW v Johnson
(supra) at [109].
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman
(supra) at 442E and 442G;
New South Wales Bar Association
[1968] HCA 20
(1968) 117 CLR 177
Council of the Law
Society (NSW) v A Solicitor
[2002] NSWCA 62
Chamberlain v Law
Society of the Australian Capital Territory
[1993] FCA 527
(1993) 118 ALR
at 62 and 63.
Profession Complaints Committee v O’Halloran
[2013] WASC 430
New South Wales v Walsh
[1997] NSWCA 185
per Beazley JJA;
Profession Complaints Committee v Lashansky
[2007] WASC 2011
Law Society of New South Wales v Foreman
Settlement Agents Supervisory Board
[2007] WASCA 97
(2007) 33 WAR 361
Profession Complaints Committee v A Legal Practitioner
(supra) at [25].
Law Society of New South
Wales v Walsh
See for example
Board of Australia v Saykao
[2011] VCAT 1338
Board of Australia v Gazelakis
[2011] VCAT 726
Pharmacy Board of
Australia v Victoria Brice
[2018] TASHPT 2.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (250 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter