URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASSC/2025/60.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:21:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Illingworth v Richardson [2025] TASSC 60 (3 November 2025)
[2025] TASSC 60
: SUPREME COURT OF
Illingworth v Richardson
[2025] TASSC
: ILLINGWORTH, Kalysta Joy
RICHARDSON,
Constable Jennie
DELIVERED ON:
November 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Cuthbertson J
Magistrates – Appeal and review – Tasmania – Motion to
review – Other matters – Appeal against sentence
– Applicant
alleged sentence manifestly excessive – Magistrate imposed six weeks
imprisonment wholly suspended together
with a 12 month community correction
order for shoplifting and trespass offences – Applicant had just turned 18
years old –
Applicant had no prior convictions, but had pleaded guilty to
a number of similar offences committed when she was 16 and 17 years
Applicant pending sentence on youth matters when committed new offences –
Applicant alleged insufficient weight
given to the applicant's age, pleas of
guilty and deprived background – Applicant alleged magistrate erred in
imposing a custodial
sentence where applicant had not yet been sentenced by a
court – A custodial sentence was outside the bounds of the proper
of the sentencing discretion in the circumstances of the case – Motion to
review allowed.
Aust Dig Magistrates
Legislation:
Police Offences Act
Sentencing Act
Banfield v Tasmania
[2024] TASCCA
Brown v Moore
[2021] TASSC 3
Dinsdale v The Queen
[2000] HCA 54
202 CLR 321
Director of Public Prosecutions v Broadby,
Cockshutt and Woolley
[2010] TASCCA 13
20 Tas R 399
[2020] TASCCA 8
32 Tas R 156
Lahey v Sanderson
[1959] TASStRp 10
[1959] Tas SR
[1975] TASStRp 5
[1975] Tas SR 62
R v Mathers and Rogers
[1959] TASStRp 10
R v McInerney
(1986) 42 SASR 111
Turner v Davis
Serial No A87/1977
Watson v Woodgate
[2025] TASSC
REPRESENTATION
Van der Meer
Solicitors:
Tasmanian Aboriginal
Legal Service
Respondent:
Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions
Judgment Number:
[2025] TASSC 60
paragraphs:
Serial No 60/2025
File No 1755/2024
KALYSTA JOY ILLINGWORTH v CONSTABLE JENNIE RICHARDSON
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT CUTHBERTSON J
3 November 2025
This is a motion to review a sentence imposed upon the applicant by Magistrate
C Webster on 29 May 2024. The applicant pleaded guilty
on that date to four
counts of stealing and three counts of trespass. A sentence of six weeks'
imprisonment, wholly suspended on
condition that for a period of two years the
applicant not commit another offence punishable by imprisonment and be of good
was imposed. A 12 month community correction order was also imposed.
The sole ground of the motion to review is that the sentence
was manifestly
excessive. The complaint of manifest excess is directed at the suspended
sentence only.
The principles which apply to a motion to review a sentence on the ground of
manifest excess are well-settled. They were recently
summarised by Pearce J in
Watson v Woodgate
[2025] TASSC 26
"To succeed on a ground that a sentence is manifestly
excessive it is not enough to establish that the sentence may be regarded by
some as too harsh. An appeal court may not substitute its own opinion for that
of the magistrate merely because it may have exercised
the sentencing discretion
differently:
Lowndes v The
[1999] HCA 29
195 CLR 665
. This Court
must be persuaded of error of the second type referred to
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR
at 505, that is, that the sentence imposed by the sentencing court is,
on the facts, unreasonable or plainly unjust, such that the
appellate court may
infer that in some way there has been a failure to properly exercise the
sentencing discretion. Manifest excess
or inadequacy must be plainly apparent.
An applicant must show that the sentence is so obviously excessive that it is
outside the
proper limits of the broad sentencing discretion of a
magistrate:
[2009] TASSC 10
TGW v Tasmania
[2017] TASCCA
26 Tas R 106
For the reasons that follow, the sentence is manifestly
The facts of the offending
All of the offences relate to the applicant stealing from supermarkets. The
first in time occurred on 5 May 2024. The applicant
was charged with stealing a
butterflied lamb leg, valued at $24.20, from the Woolworths store in New Town.
The applicant entered
the store and went to the meat section where she took the
leg of lamb and put it in her bag. This was captured on CCTV. She was later
located at home and arrested. She declined to be interviewed at the police
station. She did, however, under caution admit she had
taken the roast lamb. She
was charged and bailed.
The applicant had previously been issued a notice on 22 March 2023 which
prohibited her from entry into any Woolworths supermarket
for a period of two
years. The applicant signed that notice.
On 26 May 2024, the applicant and two others entered the Woolworths store at
Sandy Bay where they took a large quantity of meat
valued at $2,340.43. They
left the store without paying for the items. The theft was captured on CCTV.
None of the property was recovered.
The applicant was charged with trespass as
she entered the store without the consent of the owner, occupier or person in
the building, such consent having been withdrawn by way of the
prohibition notice. She was also charged with stealing.
On 27 May 2024, the applicant and another female entered the Woolworths store
at New Town. They selected numerous items of meat,
hiding them in their bags
before leaving without paying. The total value of the items taken was $536. The
theft was captured on CCTV.
The applicant was charged with stealing and
Later the same day, the applicant and another female entered the Woolworths
store at Sandy Bay where they selected numerous items
of meat before hiding them
and leaving the store without payment. This conduct again was captured on CCTV.
The value of the meat
stolen on that occasion was $867.52. The applicant was
also charged with trespass on this occasion. She was later located at her
address. She was arrested and taken to the Hobart Police Station. She did not
participate in a record of interview. While under
caution, however, she admitted
that she was aware of the prohibition notice. She said it was her intention to
go to Woolworths to
steal and that she did not have any money for the items. She
said that she could not remember what she did with the meat after stealing
At the end of the interview, the applicant was charged, processed and detained
to appear in court.
The applicant's circumstances
The applicant appeared before the magistrate on 29 May 2024. She entered pleas
of guilty to all of the charges. The applicant had
just turned 18 on 5 May 2024,
that is on the same day the first of the stealing charges was committed. The
applicant's record of
prior convictions was tendered. The only matters recorded
were two stealing charges from December 2022 and a computer related fraud
April 2023. She was informally cautioned on these matters.
Of more significance were the applicant's pending youth justice matters, which
were also listed before the magistrate. There were
15 complaints in total. The
applicant had pleaded guilty to the charges on 14 of those complaints. Those
matters had previously been
adjourned to 14 May 2024 for facts and sentence,
however, the applicant failed to appear. A warrant was issued for her arrest.
complaints were as follows:
– one count of stealing goods to the value of $209.98 from Chemist
Warehouse on 22 February 2023.
– one count of stealing goods to the value of $96.99 from Dan Murphy's on
18 March 2023.
– one count of stealing goods to the value of $101.79 from Woolworths on
20 March 2023.
– one count of stealing goods to the value of $559.86 from Chemist
Warehouse in New Town, and one count of stealing
goods to the value of $555.97
from Chemist Warehouse in Sandy Bay on 14 April 2023.
– one count of trespass and one count of stealing goods to the value of
$155.89 from Woolworths on 15 April 2023.
– one count of wilfully obstruct a police officer and one count of resist
a police officer.
– one count of stealing goods to the value of $569.98 from Anaconda on 15
– three counts of stealing from Dan Murphy's on 14 June 2023, 15 June 2023
and 20 June 2023. The value of the items
stolen was $124.94, $58 and $59
respectively.
one count of stealing goods to the value of $1,099.94 from Kathmandu on 21 July
2023, and one count of stealing goods
to the value of $93.60 from Steve's Liquor
on 21 July 2023.
one count of stealing goods to the value of $93.43 from Chemist Warehouse on 26
– one count of stealing goods to the value of $1,789.82 from Chemist
Warehouse on 26 July 2023.
– one count of stealing goods to the value of $29.90 from Bunnings on 18
October 2023.
– one count of breach of bail.
– three counts of stealing, two counts of trespass and two counts of
computer related fraud. This complaint concerned
stealing goods to the value of
$287.26 from Woolworths on 9 November 2023, goods to the value of $74.98 from
Chemist Warehouse on
26 November 2023, goods to the value of $440 from
Woolworths on 16 December 2023.
The final complaint, 90531/2024, was a new youth justice matter alleging one
count of stealing goods to the value of $709.86 from
Chemist Warehouse on 21
December 2023. No plea was entered to this complaint when she appeared on 29 May
Prior to sentence, the applicant had been living at home with her mother. Her
mother was present in court during the proceedings
before the magistrate. The
applicant had no income; she was not working and had not been granted any
Centrelink payments. Her counsel
told the magistrate that staff employed by the
Tasmanian Aboriginal Legal Service would be providing assistance to the
to obtain a Centrelink benefit.
A youth justice report had been prepared in anticipation of the sentencing
which was to occur on 14 May 2024. The applicant's counsel
drew on some of the
matters referred to in that report during the course of her sentencing
submissions, including that the applicant
had expressed embarrassment when the
facts of her offending were read to her. She explained she recognised she had
little regard
for the law and the impact of her stealing on others at the time
of offending. She told the report writer that her behaviour was
"pretty shitty"
and said she wanted to apologise for her conduct.
The applicant's family situation was outlined to the court. She is one of two
children of her parent's relationship. She is Aboriginal.
She has three half
siblings, one of whom is younger. Her older siblings lived in Queensland. One of
the applicant's older brothers
was fighting cancer and was also incarcerated.
The applicant had missed attending court on some earlier occasions in order to
in Queensland to support her brother during his illness. She appeared in
court by phone from Queensland on those occasions.
The applicant grew up in Queensland, primarily residing in her mother's care.
The family had lived in Hobart since 2019. The applicant
did not have any
significant contact with her biological father. There was a history of family
violence between the applicant's parents.
The applicant's mother had a
long-standing problem with drug use and had served some time in prison. During
those times, her children
were placed in the care of others. The applicant was
the subject of care and protection orders for a period of five years between
2009 and 2014. For some of that time, she lived with her grandparents.
The applicant was not participating in any mainstream schooling. She had been
involved with a program designed to help students
re-engage by addressing
barriers to education. She had completed her secondary education to year 10. She
was identified as having
very limited achievement across all academic areas when
she was last assessed. There was information to the effect that the applicant
had poor attendance and was dealing with a lot in her home life which affected
her education. The magistrate was told that the applicant
wanted to do a beauty
course at TAFE the following year. The applicant instructed her counsel that she
was trying to stay away from
pro-criminal associates, but struggled with
depression when she stays at home.
In summary, the picture painted was of a young woman with a background of much
family dysfunction who had impaired educational outcomes
due to poor attendance
and a chaotic home life. The submissions did not address the reason for
offending in any detail.
The magistrate's sentencing
Following the plea in mitigation, the magistrate immediately proceeded to
sentence, stating the following:
"Well I take into account the fact
... you're before the Court and you've pleaded guilty to committing stealing
matters whilst a youth.
And despite that, despite the outstanding matters, you
continued to engage in similar activities. Unfortunately for you, you're now
adult and be dealt with like an adult."
In respect of the stealing matters, the magistrate stated the following:
"On 5262/24 and 5263/24 which are the stealing matters, I take into account
all the matters raised by counsel, I take into account
the fact you've got
outstanding matters in the Youth Court which precede these, I record a
conviction of six weeks imprisonment,
wholly suspended for two years on the
condition you're of good behaviour, so you keep your nose clean for two years
and that's the
I'll also make a Community Correction order. This for your help. Regard this
as help. That pursuant to
Sentencing Act
, I make a Community
Correction order for 12 months, a supervision order. The core conditions are
that you must report to the probation
officer in Hobart along the road as soon
as you sign the bail documents - well, the court documents. You go down the road
then you must not commit an offence punishable by imprisonment.
As I said, you must report to Community Corrections by 5 o'clock today. You
must report to probation officers required by that probation
officer. You must
comply with the reasonable lawful directions given by a probation officer or
supervisor. You must not leave or
stay outside Tasmania without the permission
of probation officer. You must notify a probation officer of any change of
employment before or within two working days after the change. Has
she got any drug or alcohol problem?
MS SALLINEN: No, your Honour.
HIS HONOUR: Okay, well, I won't make any special orders."
The applicant's arguments
The applicant referred to the well-established principle that a custodial
sentence is a punishment of last resort and should not
be imposed unless it is
necessary and where no other punishment is appropriate:
[2020] TASCCA 8
J. Recognising the process that should be undertaken when determining to impose
a suspended sentence, as discussed by Kirby
Dinsdale v The Queen
[2000] HCA 54
applicant submitted the magistrate must have concluded that the offending
warranted the imposition of a period of imprisonment.
The applicant argues that
in light of all the relevant circumstances, this demonstrated a fundamental
error on the part of the magistrate.
The applicant submitted that there were a number of prominent mitigating
factors, none of which were referred to by the magistrate
when handing down his
sentence. The applicant argues that he must have failed to adequately take those
factors into account. Those
prominent mitigating factors included:
(a) The applicant's youth
– she had recently turned 18 at the time
of the offending and at the time of sentencing. The imposition of a sentence of
imprisonment
risked exposing the applicant to the corrupting influence of
prison, a risk which ought to be avoided when sentencing young offenders:
Director of Public Prosecutions v Broadby, Cockshutt and Woolley
, Evans J at [14]-[15];
(b) The applicant's pleas of guilty and cooperation with the authorities
– although it was conceded there was a strong case against the applicant
in relation to all matters, she did enter a plea of
guilty on the first possible
opportunity. This facilitated the administration of justice and spared the need
for hearings on all
matters. The applicant also made relevant admissions when
questioned in relation to the matters;
(c) The applicant's personal circumstances
– at the time of
sentencing, the applicant had spent over 24 hours in custody. She had never been
sentenced to a period of
imprisonment before. She had no prior convictions. She
had a difficult upbringing which was a factor which may have the effect of
mitigating a sentence:
Banfield v Tasmania
[2024] TASCCA 1.
Of particular importance, the applicant had never been sentenced by a court
before. The applicant argued that the imposition of
a period of imprisonment in
those circumstances was fundamentally inconsistent with the principle that a
sentence of imprisonment
will only be imposed as a last resort. During the
review hearing, the applicant submitted that the magistrate "didn't properly
whether a sentence lower on the sentencing hierarchy would have
appropriately balanced the sentencing aims of rehabilitation, specific
deterrence, and denunciation". She argued that a sentence lower on the hierarchy
than a period of imprisonment could have addressed
those sentencing aims.
Respondent's arguments
The respondent accepts that the applicant's youth and prospects of
rehabilitation were relevant matters. It was submitted, however,
circumstances of the case were such that the magistrate was entitled to give
significant regard to other principles of sentencing,
particularly specific and
general deterrence as well as rehabilitation.
The respondent noted a number of aggravating features of the offending. The
offending involved four occasions of stealing across
multiple dates. It was not
possible to treat the offending as "a single youthful escapade":
R v Mathers and Rogers
[1959] TASStRp 10
[1959] Tas SR 17
26. The applicant had made admissions to a degree of premeditation in her
conduct. She demonstrated a disregard of the law, both
in terms of the frequency
of her offending and in that it had occurred while she was on police bail and in
breach of a prohibition
order. She did not act alone, as she stole and secreted
items with associates. The stolen items were not recovered and there had
attempts by the applicant to make restitution for her conduct. The value of the
items taken was relatively high and could
not be considered minor shoplifting.
Given the quantity of the meat stolen, it could not be claimed that the
offending was needs
The respondent acknowledged the applicant had no prior convictions at the time
of sentence. The magistrate, however, was aware of
the multiple youth complaints
for similar offending to which the applicant had pleaded guilty which
demonstrated constant offending
across the entirety of 2023. The respondent
submitted the magistrate was entitled to take these matters into account as
to sentence, although they did not constitute prior convictions. It was
information which demonstrated the offending was not an uncharacteristic
aberration but constituted a continuation of a pattern of conduct and
disobedience of the law. The magistrate was aware that the
previous charges,
court appearances, bail conditions and the prohibition notice issued by
Woolworths had failed to deter the applicant
from continuous dishonest
offending. This indicated a need to impose a punishment which had the effect of
deterring the applicant.
The respondent also submitted that shop lifting is an offence that attracted
the need for a deterrent sentence. Such offending causes
losses to businesses
and their revenue, which in turn affects prices charged to customers. It creates
a circumstance of risk to the
health and wellbeing of retail staff, particularly
if they intervene to prevent theft. The respondent cited an increase in the
of lodgements in the Magistrates Court of complaints relating to property
and deception offences in 2023 to 2024 compared to the
previous year. Such
offences made up the second highest number of lodgements after traffic offences.
Given those circumstances, the
magistrate was entitled to consider the need to
deter others from similar offending.
As to rehabilitation, the magistrate directly considered that in the sentence
he fashioned; the community correction order he made
was expressed to be for the
benefit of the applicant. The magistrate said that he took into account all
matters raised by the applicant's
counsel, which included the mitigating matters
raised during the sentencing hearing. Even taking into account the applicant's
of guilty and cooperation, the respondent submitted that the sentence was
not one that was manifestly excessive. The maximum penalties
applicable to each
of the stealing offences was a term of imprisonment not exceeding three years
Sentencing Act
) and a term not exceeding six
months for each count of trespass (see
s 14B(2)(b)
Police Offences Act
). The respondent
argued that it could not be said that the magistrate went to a place of last
resort when imposing sentence. Ultimately,
the penalty handed down was not so
severe or disproportionate to the seriousness of the applicant's conduct that it
could be characterised
as onerous or plainly unjust.
sentence was manifestly excessive
The magistrate's comments on passing sentence were brief. They do, however,
reveal that he was conscious of the applicant's age
and that these were the
first offences for which she was to be dealt with as an adult. It is clear that
the applicant's pending matters
were of particular importance to the magistrate.
He noted the offending was a continuation of that earlier conduct. The need to
the applicant from like offending in the future was highlighted. The
magistrate also recognised that the applicant would benefit
from support to
address her offending behaviour through the imposition of a community correction
order with a supervision component.
Although the magistrate's failure to mention
what the applicant described as "prominent mitigating factors" was referred to
the course of argument, no ground of appeal was directed at the
sufficiency of reasons or alleged a failure to take a relevant consideration
into account.
By imposing a wholly suspended period of imprisonment, the magistrate utilised
what was described by Kirby J in
at [76] as a "popular and much
used sentencing option". In this jurisdiction, the
Sentencing Act
provides that a court may,
when sentencing an offender for an offence, record a conviction and order that
the offender serve a term
of imprisonment that is wholly or partly suspended:
This is expressed as a sentencing order distinct from one that a person
serve a term of imprisonment: see
Sentencing Act
Suspended sentences are further dealt with in Division 4 of
Sentencing Act
which is concerned with custodial sentences. The
Sentencing Act
provides no legislative guidance as to the exercise of the
discretion to suspend a sentence of imprisonment in whole or in part, save
it mandates the imposition of a condition that the offender not commit another
offence punishable by imprisonment during the
period the order is in force:
, Kirby J explained at 346 that
"two distinct steps" were involved in the decision to impose a suspended
sentence pursuant to the
Western Australian statutory regime the High Court was
then considering. The first was a determination that a sentence of imprisonment,
and not some lesser penalty, was warranted. The second was the determination of
the portion to be suspended. As Kirby J further explained,
"[i]t follows that
imposition of a suspended term of imprisonment should not be imposed as a 'soft
option' when the court with the
responsibility of sentencing is 'not quite
certain what to do'".
While these two distinct steps were required by the terms of the particular
statutory regime being considered in
, it has long been accepted
that this reflects the approach required in Tasmania: see
[1975] TASStRp 5
[1975] Tas SR 62
, Neasey J at 73.
Turner v Davis
, Neasey J explained at 3-4
that "[i]f a sentence of imprisonment does not lie within the bounds of a
sentencing discretion properly
exercised, it cannot be brought within those
bounds by suspending its operation". This reflects the reality that the
imposition of
a suspended sentence is accompanied by the risk that the offender
will be required to serve the period held in suspense if the conditions
suspension are breached: see
Sentencing Act
It follows that the issue arising from this appeal, in circumstances where the
applicant took no issue with the length of what was
a modest head sentence, is
whether a sentence of imprisonment was outside of the bounds of the exercise of
the sentencing discretion.
As Pearce J explained in
Brown v Moore
[2021] TASSC 3
sentencing magistrate had a wide sentencing discretion. There is a range of
legitimate outcomes and no single correct
v The Queen
[1998] HCA 57
(1998) 194 CLR 610
If the applicant was being sentenced as a first-time offender with no pending
matters, I would not hesitate to conclude that a period
of imprisonment,
suspended or otherwise, was outside of the bounds of the exercise of the
sentencing discretion in light of the applicant's
young age and the
circumstances of the offending. In my view, the stealing and trespass offences,
particularly those committed on
26 and 27 May 2024, were moderately serious
examples of such offending. They were committed in company. The value of the
meat stolen
was significant, totalling $3,732.15. The goods were not recovered.
The stealing of goods such as meat from stores in a targeted
fashion is a matter
of considerable concern. Such offending is commonly seen by courts in this
State. General deterrence is a relevant
consideration when sentencing for such
offences. Nevertheless, the offending in isolation, while serious, did not
demand giving effect
to the deterrent aspects of punishment at the expense of
other weighty considerations, including the applicant's youth, personal
circumstances and pleas of guilty.
The ultimate question is whether the applicant's pending matters brought a
custodial sentence within the bounds of the sentencing
discretion. While the
applicant had not been sentenced for those offences, she had pleaded guilty to
18 counts of stealing and three
counts of trespass across the 14 complaints. The
value of the goods exceeded $6,000. The offending occurred over a 10 month
The applicant does not contend that these pending matters were irrelevant to
the exercise of the sentencing discretion. As Evans
J explained in
Broadby, Cockshutt and Woolley
(Porter and Wood JJ agreeing), "a sentencing court looks at all relevant aspects
of an offender's behaviour up until the time
of sentencing". Evans J also cited
with approval at [20] the decision of King CJ in
R v McInerney
(1986) 42 SASR 111
at 113 where
he relevantly said:
"The cardinal rule is that while good character
may operate to reduce the sentence which the facts of the crime would otherwise
bad character cannot increase it. A person is not to be punished, or
punished again, for crimes other than the crime for which sentence
passed. Offences committed prior to sentence for the offence under consideration
may affect the sentence in two ways. They
may diminish or abrogate any leniency
by reason of good character. They may, moreover, lead to a greater sentence than
would otherwise
be imposed, although within the proper limits indicated by the
facts of the immediate crime, for the purpose of personal deterrence;
prisoner's record may indicate that greater punishment is needed to protect the
public by deterring him from further crime. Where
the other offences have been
committed before the commission of the immediate offence, their relevance is
clear in the generality
of cases. The offender has committed the offence not as
a first offender but as a person whose character is affected by previous
offending. He must be sentenced against the background of his record:
DPP v Ottewell
[1970] AC 642
52 Cr App R 679
The effect of the prior offences is more cogent if
they have been the subject of conviction before the immediate offence. In such
cases, the offender has committed the immediate offence notwithstanding the
formal judgment and condemnation of the law in respect
of the earlier offences
and notwithstanding the warning as to the future which the conviction experience
" (emphasis added)
Accordingly, the applicant was not entitled to claim that the offences were out
of character or a youthful aberration. The conduct
for which she fell to be
sentenced represented a continuation of the consistent, significant and like
offending she engaged in during
the course of the previous year. While there was
a gap of some five months between the last of the 2023 matters and the first of
the offences committed in May 2024, the reasons for that gap were not explored
in the sentencing hearing. It is difficult, therefore,
to ascribe any particular
weight to the modest gap in those circumstances. Personal deterrence assumed,
therefore, importance in
the sentencing exercise.
In this case, the applicant had not yet been the subject of a sentence imposed
by a court, either as a youth or an adult. While
the relevance of the pending
matters was clear, it was not a case where the applicant had received any
warning of the kind described
by King CJ in
As Cox J also
explained in
"A conviction is a formal and
solemn act marking the court's, and society's, disapproval of a defendant's
wrongdoing, so that a prior
offence may not assume quite the same significance
as a prior offence coupled (by the time the instance offence is committed) with
a prior conviction."
After much consideration, I have concluded the magistrate erred in imposing a
suspended sentence in this case. In imposing the sentence,
the magistrate gave
predominance to the applicant's pending matters and status as an adult offender.
While the pending matters were
serious and of a like nature, the fact they had
not yet been the subject of sentencing orders required a degree of moderation
considering their relevance to the sentence to be imposed, particularly as
to the issue of specific deterrence. There is no question
the pending matters
made personal deterrence a relevant consideration, however, this was not a case
of an offender breaching, or
failing to heed the warning communicated by, a
previous sentence imposed by a court.
In my view, despite the applicant's pending matters, the offending did not
warrant the imposition of a custodial sentence at the
expense of a lesser
sentencing option. She was a young offender. It was important to bear in mind
that a suspended sentence, albeit
of modest length, exposed her to the risk of
serving a period of imprisonment and being exposed to the corrupting influence
prisoners: see
Lahey v Sanderson
[1959] TASStRp 10
[1959] Tas SR 17.
Her rehabilitation remained an important consideration,
particularly in circumstances where the capacity of community-based orders
encourage and assist her to amend her conduct had not been tested. The
offending, as I have already observed, while serious, was
not so serious that
issues of general and specific deterrence and denunciation outweighed other
weighty considerations. Consequently,
a custodial sentence fell outside of the
bounds of the proper exercise of the sentencing discretion in the circumstances
of the case.
The imposition of a suspended period of imprisonment was manifestly
excessive as a consequence.
The motion to review is allowed. Given the community corrections order imposed
by the magistrate had expired by the time this motion
to review was heard, I
will hear the parties further concerning the orders which should be made,
including as to resentence, in light
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (192 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter