URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASSC/2025/47.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:21:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
TBH v Marist Regional College & Anor [2025] TASSC 47 (25 September 2025)
[2025] TASSC 47
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA
Marist Regional College & Anor
[2025] TASSC
MARIST REGIONAL COLLEGE (ABN 60 165 188
ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH TRUST CORPORATION OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF HOBART (ABN 24
097 986 470)
DELIVERED ON:
September 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
2025, submissions 13, 20 and 31 March 2025
JUDGMENT OF:
Procedure - Civil Proceedings in State and Territory Courts - Court
supervision - Amendment of originating process and pleading -
Application to
amend a statement of claim - Proposed amended statement of claim fails to state
with sufficient clarity the case that
must be met - Application refused.
Aust Dig Procedure [1107]
Procedure - Civil Proceedings in State and Territory Courts - Parties and
representation - Proper or necessary party -
Civil Liability Act
provides for the appointment of a proper defendant for an
unincorporated organisation only after proceedings have commenced.
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Defendants:
Barry Nilsson (Qld)
[2025] TASSC 47
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 47/2025
File No 1310/2024
TBH v MARIST REGIONAL COLLEGE (ABN 60 165 188 918)
ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH TRUST CORPORATION OF THE
ARCHDIOCESE OF HOBART (ABN 24 097 986 470)
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT DALY AsJ
25 September 2025
Introduction
By interlocutory application filed on 23 December 2024, the plaintiff has
applied for leave to amend his statement of claim in accordance
proposed amended statement of claim annexed to the interlocutory application.
The defendants oppose the application on
several bases. Very generally, the
defendants submit that the proposed amended statement of claim (a) does not set
up any proper
basis upon which the first defendant is sued; and (b) that the
second defendant was improperly joined, or named, as a defendant when
proceedings were commenced. Certain other miscellaneous defects are also
identified.
During the course of the hearing of the interlocutory application it became
clear that there are substantial disputes about who
the plaintiff's action is
against and how such claims are framed.
The principal
proceedings
This action was commenced by writ and statement of claim filed on 21 May 2024.
These are 'child abuse proceedings" for the purposes
Civil Liability
Div 4. Only the second defendant has filed a defence,
dated 8 July 2024.
The plaintiff alleges that throughout 1976 and 1977 when he was a student at
Marist Regional College, he was sexually assaulted
by Paul Goldsmith, who worked
as an athletics coach. Goldsmith is not a party to this action because he is
deceased. There is
a dispute about whether Goldsmith was employed at the
The proceedings name two defendants. The first defendant is Marist Regional
College, an unincorporated organisation which the plaintiff
says he has sued as
the 'successor organisation'
incorporated organisation being the organisation which actually operated the
school at the relevant time: Marist Regional
College Incorporated.
The second defendant is the Roman Catholic Church Trust Corporation of the
Archdiocese of Hobart, a body corporate established under
Roman Catholic
Church Property Act
which the plaintiff says he has sued as the proper defendant for the Archdiocese
of Hobart. The basis upon which each of the defendants
is sued, both in the
extant statement of claim and the proposed amended statement of claim, is
contested. The defendants' position
is that the archdiocese has not been sued
in the proceedings. There is also an issue whether the former Archbishop of
Hobart, the
late Guilford Clyde Young has been sued in the proceedings and if
so, upon what basis.
Very generally, the plaintiff pleads that each of the first defendant,
Archbishop Young and the archdiocese each owed duties of
care to the plaintiff
because they each had a degree of control over the school at which he was a
pupil and at which Goldsmith was
employed. The plaintiff pleads that
Goldsmith's employment or appointment at Marist Regional College was a
foreseeable risk of harm
to the plaintiff, in the form of sexual abuse because
the Archbishop knew that Goldsmith was alleged to have sexually abused
school-aged
boys. The plaintiff seeks to attribute Archbishop Young's knowledge
to the archdiocese because of his position as its 'head'. The
plaintiff says
the archdiocese effectively operated Marist Regional College through an
incorporated organisation named Marist Regional
College Incorporated (MRCI).
The proposed amended statement of claim pleads that this risk of harm to the
plaintiff was one in respect
of which a reasonable person would have taken
precautions, but each of the first defendant (for MRCI), the archdiocese and the
failed to do so, which caused harm to the plaintiff.
The proposed amended statement of claim
The plaintiff outlined that the proposed amended statement of claim is intended
to clarify his claim against MRCI, Archbishop Young,
the archdiocese and the
second defendant: see par 4 of the plaintiff's first written submissions dated
24 February 25 (footnotes
"4.1 The proposed amendments
seek to correct a factual error in the existing statement of claim regarding the
status of the Second
Defendant as a body corporate, to clarify that the Second
Defendant is proceeded against as the nominated proper defendant for the
Archdiocese of Hobart, to provide further clarify as to the real questions in
controversy between the parties including in relation
to the dual roles and
powers of the Archbishop in relation to MRCI and the Archdiocese of Hobart and
the attribution of prior notice.
4.2 The proposed amendments provide greater clarity and specificity to the
existing claim.
4.3 They do not fundamentally alter the nature of the case but rather refine
the issues to be determined by the court.
4.4 The amendments arise from the same facts already pleaded and do introduce
a new cause of action."
The defendants oppose the amendments. In their first written submissions dated
3 March 2025, they state:
"41 MRCI is deregistered and cannot be
sued at law. Archbishop Young is dead and cannot be sued at law
The Archdiocese of Hobart is an unincorporated
organisation which cannot be sued at law."
The defendants submit further that:
"Even now the claim is confusing, contains unnecessary allegations and
wrongly incorporates alternative allegations of duty against
multiple persons
(none of whom are parties to the proceeding and none of whom can be legally
The defendants submit that the proposed amended statement of claim does not
clearly articulate how liability is sheeted home to
the first defendant; and to
the extent that it is alleged that 'the College' is somehow separate to the
first defendant, this amounts
to an unnecessary and confusing plea. Secondly,
the defendants submit that the proceedings against the second defendant were
'improperly
issued'. Thirdly, the defendants submit that there are multiple
defects in the plaintiff's proposed amended statement of
. The defendants submit the
defects they identify would, if allowed, attract the operation of r 230
(inconsistent pleading), r 258
(prejudice or delay the fair trial) and r 259 (no
reasonable cause of action disclosed) justifying striking out those paragraphs.
The particular defects in the proposed amended statement of claim identified by
the defendants include:
(a) pars 1 to 4, 6–10 and 13-26 plead background narrative matters which
contain unnecessary or irrelevant allegations;
(b) par 5 contains allegations about the second defendant, however there is no
cause of action pleaded against the second defendant
in the pleading;
(c) throughout the
[proposed amended statement of claim]
the tortfeasor
is described variously as "the College" (an abbreviation for Marist Regional
College), the "First Defendant" (Marist
Regional College), and "MRCI" with the
pleading not disclosing a cause of action against the first defendant;
(d) throughout the
[proposed amended statement of claim]
entities are alleged to have engaged or employed the sole perpetrator (or to
have had involvement in this process), however
only MRCI is alleged to be
vicariously liable for the perpetrator's conduct;
(e) pars 9-12, 30 and 31 contain alternative allegations, including allegations
against multiple entities that are not named as defendants
to the proceeding
(these paragraphs do not comply with r 230 and which also would offend r
(f) paragraph 7 contains particulars quoting 2.5 pages of content from two
documents; and
(g) pars 23 and 24 plead allegations of vicarious liability against MRCI and
"thus the First Defendant" which is vague and ambiguous
and does not properly
plead a case against the first defendant.
The defendants' first written submissions at par 47 also identified examples of
facts "clearly not material to any action against
the first defendant". I have
dealt with the most significant issues raised by the defendants, below.
However, many of the examples
identified in par 47 appear in the extant
statement of claim, not the proposed amended statement of claim. The Court is
not dealing
with any application to strike out any of the identified examples
which appear in the extant statement of claim.
The parties agreed that the relevant principles to be applied on the question
of whether or not to allow a party to amend a pleading
were set out in the
decision of
Spaulding v Law Society of Tasmania
[2004] TASSC 1
Holt (as he then was), as follows:
(a) compliance with r 227 requires a pleading to be as brief as the nature of
the case allows and to contain only a statement of
the material facts on which
the party relies;
(b) r 258 and r 259 provide the Court with discretion to strike out a pleading
which may tend to prejudice or delay the fair trial
of the proceeding, or which
fails to disclose a reasonable cause of action;
(c) relevant to the discretion under r 427 to amend the pleading is the "[t]he
function of pleadings is to state with sufficient
clarity the case that must be
Banque Commerciale (SA) (In Liq) v Akhil Holdings Ltd
(d) when considering a defective pleading, the Court will take into account
whether the defects are of substance and whether notwithstanding
deficiencies the fundamental function of pleadings is served:
v Pioneer Concrete (Qld) Pty Ltd
[1999] FCA 499
(1999) ATPR 41-691
(e) if the facts alleged, even if proven, would not afford any chance of the
Court granting relief, no cause of action will have
been disclosed, and no
purpose would be served in allowing the pleading;
(f) an amendment which is futile because it is obviously bad in law will not be
Commonwealth of Australia v Verwayen
(1990) 170 CLR 394 at 456;
(g) if the facts alleged are set out in prolix, confusing or ambiguous terms, or
that are in material respects mere conclusions drawn
from unstated facts, the
fair and efficient conduct of the action may be placed in jeopardy. Such
pleadings are embarrassing and
it should generally be expected that they will
not be permitted to stand.
The first defendant
In relation to the plaintiff's claim against the first defendant, for the
reasons that follow, I agree that the proposed amended
statement of claim fails
to articulate the allegations in respect of liability with sufficient clarity or
particularity.
The first defendant is an unincorporated organisation, without legal
personality and without the ability to sue or be sued in its
own name. On this
basis, the first defendant would have a complete defence to the plaintiff's
claim: the '
defence', see
Trustees of the Roman Catholic
Archdiocese of Sydney v Ellis
[2007] NSWCA 117
63 ACSR 346
However, the Act, Part 10C removes this barrier and provides a pathway to relief
by process of appointment of an entity which is
able to be sued in Tasmania ('a
proper defendant') under the Act s 49N and which is then taken to be the
defendant for all relevant
purposes, including incurring any liability from the
claim under the Act, s 49Q.
By consent order made on 10 December 2024, the second defendant (an
incorporated organisation) was appointed as a proper defendant
unincorporated first defendant. The plaintiff's proposed amended statement of
claim was delivered on 13 December 2024, but
it does not plead anything in
relation to that appointment. The defendants' position is that the second
defendant's role in the
proceedings is as a proper defendant appointed for the
unincorporated first defendant. The plaintiff's position is entirely different:
he pleads that the first defendant is sued as the successor organisation to MRCI
under the Act s 49E: see the extant statement of
claim par 4(i).
The extant and proposed statements of claim at par 5, make clear that the only
appointment of a proper defendant acknowledged by
the plaintiff is (relevantly)
the appointment of the second defendant as a proper defendant for the
archdiocese. It is unclear why
the plaintiff consented to the order that the
second defendant be appointed as a proper defendant for the first defendant
he does not acknowledge that appointment in his pleadings. Even
though the proposed amended statement of claim the plaintiff does
not expressly
acknowledge that order, none of the parties can be unaware of its legal
The plaintiff sued an unincorporated organisation; and that organisation
appointed a proper defendant. Yet the plaintiff asserts
it sued the
unincorporated organisation in its own right as a 'successor organisation' to
MRCI, a deregistered organisation.
The first defendant as
successor organisation to MRCI – identification of the relevant
The defendants submit that proposed amended statement of claim, pars 2 and 4 do
not articulate how liability is sheeted home to
the first defendant. Further,
the defendant submit that, to the extent that it is alleged that "the College"
is somehow separate
to the first defendant, this amounts to an unnecessary and
confusing plea within the meaning of rule 258.
Paragraph 2 (of either version of the statement of claim) introduces 'Marist
Regional College' as an entity separately to 'the first
defendant' of the same
name, which is described in par 4. Paragraph 2 deals mostly with the
relationship between 'Marist Regional
College' and various other entities,
including MRCI. The proposed amendments to par 2 also include subparagraphs on
a completely
different topic, being Archbishop Young's knowledge about Goldsmith
which is allegedly attributable to MRCI and the archdiocese:
see par 2(k).
Paragraph 2 therefore deals with knowledge relevant to the foreseeability of
risk of harm within the same paragraph
which introduces and identifies the first
defendant and also MRCI. Paragraph 4 of the statement of claim relates to "the
first defendant",
which is somehow separate from the entity in par 2 –
also 'Marist Regional College'. There are no material amendments proposed
par 4. The proposed amendments to par 2 contribute to the confusion and
ambiguity in relation to the plaintiff's claim against
the first defendant.
They should not be allowed.
It is common ground that the first defendant: (a) operates Marist Regional
College today, as an unincorporated organisation; and
(b) did not operate the
college at the date of the alleged sexual abuse of the plaintiff. The
plaintiff's pleading at par 4(i) is
that that the unincorporated first defendant
is the 'successor organisation' to MRCI which operated the college at the
material time
and which was
deregistered in 1995. Paragraph 4(i) is not the subject of any proposed
amendment. Under the Act, s 49E, a successor
organisation is taken to be the
same organisation as its
predecessor.
Logically, however,
if the first defendant is taken to be the same organisation as MRCI – then
it must be accepted that the
first defendant it is taken to have been
deregistered in 1995. It is not at all clear what the plaintiff can achieve
through this
The defendants dispute that the first defendant is a successor organisation to
MRCI, submitting that after MRCI was deregistered
in 1995, Marist Regional
College Inc No. 03208C (an association incorporated under the
Associations
Incorporation Act
) then operated Marist Regional College between 31 May
1995 to 21 April 2008. While the issue of whether the first defendant is a
successor in law to MRCI is not to be determined on this application, evidence
was presented in the form of the affidavit of the
plaintiff's legal
representative, Lucille Nel, which annexed a proposed amended defence. That
foreshadowed defence alleges that
at the relevant time in 1976-1977, the Marist
Fathers and the Sisters of Mercy - both unincorporated organisations within the
of section 49L of the Act - jointly conducted and managed Marist
Regional College through MRCI. The plaintiff maintains that the
first defendant
is the successor to MRCI and does not propose any relevant amendments to para
Section 49E does not appear to provide the unincorporated first defendant with
a legal personality where none ever existed; nor
does it deem an unincorporated
organisation to be an incorporated
No application has been made
to reinstate MRCI (although that was adverted to in the plaintiff's written
submissions), nor has the
plaintiff proposed to plead a case against a proper
defendant on the basis that the school was operated by the archdiocese through
either the Marist Fathers or the Sisters of Mercy. The plaintiff has proposed
that there be discovery prior to the pleading further.
That issue is dealt with
The plaintiff's claim against the first defendant as the 'successor
organisation' to MRCI may well simply be a factual issue to
be determined at the
trial, but it is an obviously perplexing matter for the management of the claim.
It is not, however, a matter
introduced by the proposed amended statement of
'Marist Regional College' is used in three senses
The defendants complain that to the extent that the plaintiff's references to
"the College"
are references to an entity somehow separate to the first
defendant, that amounts to an unnecessary and confusing plea within the
of rule 258. The plaintiff submits, at par 2.7 of his second written
submissions dated 20 March 2025 that the basis for
his allegation of the first
defendant's succession for the purposes of s 49E include:
college is the continuous vehicle which permits the plaintiff to hold the first
defendant liable as the successor organisation
of MRCI, which no longer
In this paragraph, it appears clear that the plaintiff uses
in the sense of it being the undertaking of a school, as distinct
from the entity which carried on the undertaking. At par 2.2 of
the plaintiff's
second written submissions, the plaintiff explains that the first defendant,
Marist Regional College is an unincorporated
entity and is proceeded against as
the successor organisation to MRCI. He then explains that "the school known as
Marist Regional
College ... has continued to exist and operate ...
notwithstanding that its organisation structure has changed from time to time,
including its incorporation as MRCI during the period the subject of the
plaintiff's claim and its subsequent deregistration". The
defendants correctly
submit that this is confusing. The defendants correctly submit that the
confusion in the pleading arises from
the fact that plaintiff uses 'Marist
Regional College' in various different senses.
The first sense in which the plaintiff uses 'Marist Regional College' is in the
title of the proceeding to identify the first defendant
and as the organisation
which now operates the school (the ABN is not relevant to legal personality):
see par 4 of the extant statement
The second sense in which the plaintiff uses 'Marist Regional College' is as
the school itself, in the sense of an undertaking as
distinct from an entity
which carries on the undertaking:
pars 1(b)-(e), 2(a), (b) and (d).
The third sense in which 'Marist Regional College' is used is in par 2(a), (c),
to refer to the entity which "became an incorporated
association" and then was
MRCI (par 2(e)).
This is conceptually and practically confusing and will prejudice and delay the
fair trial of the proceeding. For example, par
2 of the extant statement of
claim includes facts which may be seen as relevant to the plaintiff's 'successor
organisation' plea,
which is an assumption on my part because there is no
narrative cue in the text of the paragraph to put the reader on notice that
is indeed the subject of those allegations. The actual corresponding pleading
relating to 'successor organisation' in the extant
statement of claim is not
made until many paragraphs later, in par 4(i). Paragraph 2 also pleads facts
relating to the first defendant
being subject to the control by the Archbishop
(including the irrelevant detail
"in accordance with the Catholic faith"
a proposed amendment); together with facts relating to knowledge
possessed by the first defendant in relation to Goldsmith's abuse
of one or more
other school boys (that is not clear). The statement of claim blends
significantly different subject matter within
a paragraph which should deal with
a single topic or element to the cause of action.
I accept the defendants' submission that the identified problems cause
confusion. The issue will undoubtedly place in jeopardy
the fair and efficient
conduct of the action.
However, this confusion arises from the extant statement of claim. The
proposed amended statement of claim does not propose any
amendments contributing
to – or ameliorating - the obvious problem with the description of the
first defendant. The preceding
comments are intended to provide some assistance
with the ongoing management of this case, given detailed submissions made by the
Improper issue of proceedings against the second
The defendants' second submission is that proceedings have been improperly
issued against the second defendant. The first aspect
to this submission is
that a cause of action has been pleaded directly, but improperly, against the
second defendant. I reject this
first submission. The plaintiff has not pleaded
a case against the second defendant directly. It is clear enough that the
intends to sue the second defendant on the basis that it was appointed
as a proper defendant for the archdiocese and the late former
Archbishop Young.
The defendants' principal complaint with the proposed amended statement of claim
relates to that circumstance.
The plaintiff submits that he has pleaded a cause of action against each of the
archdiocese and Archbishop Young and that the second
defendant was validly
appointed as a proper defendant for each of them. At par 1.4 of the plaintiff's
first written submission,
filed 24 February 2025, the plaintiff submits:
"The second defendant is sued as the appointed proper defendant of
the Archdiocese of Hobart (an unincorporated entity) pursuant to
Civil Liability Act
by way of nomination made by
the Archdiocese of Hobart in anticipation of commencement of the current
proceedings".
In relation to Archbishop Young, the plaintiff has abandoned the pleading that
the second defendant was appointed as a proper defendant
for him. But it
remains unclear how the plaintiff puts his case that Archbishop Young is
personally liable for the abuse suffered.
Claim against the
late Archbishop Young
The defendants oppose the plaintiff's proposed amendments on the basis that the
pleading relating to Archbishop Young is unnecessary.
Even though Archbishop
Young is dead and despite not being named as a defendant, the plaintiff pleads a
cause of action in negligence
against him personally, alleging that:
- he was the
head of the archdiocese between 1955-1988: par 5B(d)
- his acts were
the acts of the archdiocese, which is directly liable for his conduct: par
- he authorised
the existence or establishment of Catholic schools in Tasmania: par 5B(h)
- he was in a
position of authority over Catholic schools: par 5A(b)c;
authority over MRCI: par 5B(i)
- he owed a duty
of care to the plaintiff
because he knew of the risk that
Goldsmith, in the course of his employment or engagement at the school would
abuse the plaintiff:
pars 6 and 7;
- he breached
his duty of care to the plaintiff by failing to take reasonable care to prevent
Goldsmith from abusing the plaintiff:
- his breach of
duty was a necessary condition of the harm, injury and loss suffered by the
plaintiff: pars 26-28.
In my view, the plaintiff does not engage with the point that he has pleaded a
cause of action against the deceased Archbishop personally.
Nor is the basis
upon which the deceased Archbishop could be held personally liable. There is no
pleading to the effect that the
archdiocese would be vicariously liable for any
harm caused by Archbishop Young's breach of duty. Instead, the proposed
involving the addition of par 5C is in the following
5C By virtue of the matters at 5A.(a) and (b), and 5B. (d) to
(a) the acts of Archbishop Young were the acts of the Archdiocese of Hobart
itself; and,
(b) the Archdiocese of Hobart is directly liable for his conduct.
The plaintiff would need to clarify the basis upon which he pleads any claim
against Archbishop Young. Leave to file the proposed
amended statement of claim
as it relates to the claim against Archbishop Young will not be granted.
Claim against the Archdiocese
The plaintiff submits that he has properly sued the archdiocese, which has
appointed the second defendant as a proper defendant.
In his second written
submissions dated 4 March 2025, the plaintiff
plaintiff's proposed amended statement of claim clearly articulates that the
Second Defendant is joined as such as the proper
defendant appointed by the
Archdiocese of Hobart and its liability rests on a finding of liability with
respect to the Archdiocese
of Hobart."
With no disrespect to the pleader, the claim is not as clearly articulated as
it might be. Doing the best I could to marshal the
various allegations made
against the archdiocese, the claim against the archdiocese appears to be as
5A The Archdiocese of Hobart is the organisation for the
Roman Catholic Church in the State of Tasmania which includes the offices
Archbishop of Hobart and Catholic Education. The archdiocese owed a pastoral
duty of care to students enrolled at Catholic
schools operated under the
authority of Archbishop Guilford Clyde Young in Tasmania, including MRCI.
5B The head of the archdiocese was the Archbishop.
5B, 2(h) The Archbishop was the controlling authority of MRCI on behalf of
the archdiocese.
archdiocese was responsible for the care, welfare, safety, education,
supervision and pastoral needs of students enrolled at the
3(b) In 1969, Goldsmith was the subject of "a serious
allegation" made by the parents of a catholic school boy in Launceston to the
former Archbishop of Hobart, Archbishop Young, following which he was deemed
unsuitable to enter the priesthood and was not ordained
as a priest in the
Archdiocese of Hobart.
(I refer to this as 'the 1969 allegation').
2(k), 5B(k), (l) The Archbishop, whose knowledge is attributable to the
archdiocese, knew that Goldsmith sexually abused or was suspected
sexually abused at least one other catholic school boy within the Archdiocese of
Hobart between 1965 and 1974 and had deemed
him unsuitable for priesthood as a
consequence.
(I refer to this as 'the 1965-1974 allegation').
5B(n) The Archbishop did not disclose what he knew about Goldsmith to MRCI at
the time of Goldsmith's appointment at Marist Regional
College or at any time
thereafter.
archdiocese owed the plaintiff a duty to take all reasonable steps to protect
him from foreseeable risks of harm including the
risk that he may be abused by
8A The archdiocese had a non-delegable duty of care to
the plaintiff to ensure that reasonable care was taken to prevent harm to
plaintiff participated in athletics at the school between
2(g), 3(d),
11, 12, 15 Goldsmith was appointed as the athletics coach by MRCI in 1976 and
was the coach from 1976-1977. By his appointment, MRCI,
Archbishop Young and/or
the archdiocese, represented he was trustworthy in that role.
1(e), 3(e) Goldsmith had a leadership role in the "Marist Youth Community
Group" in which the plaintiff participated.
was a danger, known to the archdiocese, that the plaintiff might be abused by
11, 16-21 Goldsmith groomed the plaintiff; and the
archdiocese knew or ought to have known about that.
plaintiff was sexually abused by Goldsmith.
archdiocese breached its duties of care to the plaintiff.
archdiocese's breach of its duty of care caused injury and loss to the
These allegations against the archdiocese appear in the proposed amended
statement of claim as parts of a jigsaw puzzle. It is
not possible to obtain a
clear understanding of the plaintiff's claim against the defendants from reading
the proposed amended statement
of claim sequentially. Allegations suggesting
that the archdiocese owed the plaintiff a duty to take reasonable care by virtue
its relationship to the plaintiff are not stated either clearly or briefly.
The same can be said for the allegations that the archdiocese
breached its duty
of care to the plaintiff.
The plaintiff submits that he intends to plead a case directly against the
archdiocese. As stated above, the plaintiff does not
allege that the
archdiocese is vicariously liable for Goldsmith's actions. Vicarious liability
is pleaded only against the first
defendant; and only on the basis that "MRCI,
and thus the first defendant, is vicariously liable for the actions of
Goldsmith": see
par 23 of the proposed amended statement of claim. However, the
proposed addition of par 5C appears to plead that the archdiocese
is liable for
the acts of Archbishop Young. It may be that the plaintiff is merely pleading
that the archdiocese acts through the
Archbishop. If that is so, it is lost in
the excess of detail of the proposed amended statement of claim.
In my view, the plaintiff fails to make clear enough which entity knew what
particular information relevant to the risk of harm
to the plaintiff
(Goldsmith's engagement at the school) and which entity failed in which respect
to take reasonable care to avoid
harm to him.
The proposed amended pleading is prolix, unnecessarily complex, circular and
should not be allowed. A clear example is where par
7 of the proposed amended
statement of claim pleads that:
"7 By reason of each and every
matter pleaded in paragraphs 2(k), 3(b), and 5B(k) and 5B(l) hereof, there
existed a danger, which
danger was known to, or ought to have been known to MRCI
and, or in the alternative, Archbishop Young, and, or in the alternative,
Archdiocese of Hobart, that the Plaintiff might be abused by persons in
positions of authority at the College, in particular,
by Goldsmith."
Pleaded in this way, the reader must consider each of those disparate
paragraphs in turn. The matters pleaded against the archdiocese
in the proposed
amended statement of claim, pars 2(k), 3(b), 5B(k) and 5B(l) are as follows:
- Paragraph 2(k)
pleads the 1965-1974 allegation - that 'Marist Regional College' prior to 1976
knew or ought to have known that Goldsmith
had sexually abused or was suspected
of having sexually abused at least one other catholic school boy within the
Archdiocese of Hobart
between 1965 and 1974. This paragraph includes
'particulars of knowledge' which refer to pars 3(b) and 5B(d)-(i) "attributable
MRCI and, or in the alternative, the Archdiocese of Hobart". Therefore,
referring to those two paragraphs:
Paragraph 3(b)
relates to the 1969 allegation - a "serious allegation" made about Goldsmith in
1969 by "parents of a Catholic school
boy" to Archbishop Young "following which
he was deemed unsuitable to enter priesthood and he was not ordained as a priest
Archdiocese of Hobart".
5B(d)-(i) are the
six sub-paragraphs of par 5B contrary to what the
alphabetical sequencing might otherwise suggest. As I understand the many sub
- and the evidence which is impermissibly pleaded here - they simply
allege that Archbishop Young possessed and exercised complete
authority over the
Catholic Church within the Archdiocese of Hobart, including authority over MRCI.
- Paragraph
5B(k) pleads that prior to 1976 Archbishop Young knew of the 1965-1974
allegation - "that Goldsmith did sexually abuse,
or was suspected of having
sexually abused, at least one other catholic school boy within the Archdiocese
of Hobart between 1965
and 1974". The particulars of the Archbishop's knowledge
are pleaded as being:
Paragraph 3(b) -
that he received the 1969 allegation; and
5B(d)-(i) - that he had executive control over the Catholic Church within the
Archdiocese.
- Paragraph
5B(l) pleads that Archbishop Young deemed Goldsmith unsuitable for the
priesthood having regard to "the matters" in pars
3(b) and 5B(k) above.
It is not clear whether the 1969 allegation in par 3(b) is a factually distinct
allegation to the 1965-1974 allegation in par 5B(k).
The separate descriptions
and dates suggest they are; and they are referred to in par 5B(l) as "the
matters". The allegation in
par 25(b)(ii) (second occurring – the
sequence of paragraphs is inappropriately numbered) that the archdiocese "failed
the unlawful conduct of Goldsmith towards a Catholic school boy in
Launceston, to the Tasmanian Police" contributes to the ambiguity
surrounding
the information allegedly known by certain entities. It is unknown whether this
latter reference is to the 1965-1974
allegation, the 1969 allegation, or a
separate incident altogether.
The plaintiff's central allegations as now proposed,
appear to be
the archdiocese, through its Archbishop, possessed information relating to an
unclear number of allegations relating to Goldsmith's
inappropriate contact with
boys, which for the purpose of his employment or engagement at Marist Regional
College amounted to a foreseeable,
not insignificant, risk of harm to the
plaintiff which a reasonable person would have taken precautions to prevent, but
defendant ('for MRCI'), the archdiocese and the Archbishop all failed
to do so. The plaintiff alleges that the archdiocese's breach
of its duty was a
necessary condition of the harm caused to the plaintiff, and the plaintiff's
injuries are a consequence. While
it can be appreciated what might be intended,
it is not sufficiently clear.
Leaving aside issues of which entity may be identified as the tortfeasor
– the proposed amended statement of claim is vague,
complex and difficult
to follow. The plaintiff should not be granted leave to amend the statement of
claim as proposed.
The appointment of a proper defendant for
the Archdiocese
"at any time"
The next dispute relates to whether the archdiocese has appointed the second
defendant as a proper defendant under the Act. Because
it is an unincorporated
organisation, the archdiocese purported to appoint the second defendant as a
proper defendant under the Act,
, prior to the commencement of the
proceedings. That was done at the plaintiff's invitation, in order to avoid
unnecessary cost and
delay. The plaintiff pleaded the fact of the appointment in
par 5(c) of the extant statement of claim and the second defendant admitted
fact in in its defence at par 12(c). Despite that admission, the defendant now
submits that appointment was not valid.
To show that the requirements of
are satisfied, the plaintiff relies upon
an exchange of letters between the parties' legal representatives dated 2 May
2024 and 14
May 2024 (obviously prior to proceedings being commenced on 21 May
2024). The plaintiff submits that his solicitors expressly sought
appointment of the second defendant as a proper defendant for the archdiocese
before proceedings were commenced in order to avoid
the delay and expense
involved in the plaintiff commencing proceedings and then bringing a further
application within the proceedings
for orders appointing the second defendant as
a proper defendant.
The plaintiff contends that the Act,
should be read literally where it
provides that an unincorporated organisation may "with the consent of an entity,
appoint the entity
as a proper defendant for the organisation
" (my emphasis), including at a time before proceedings commence. The
defendants submit that
cannot be read literally and that Court must
read it in context as part of a legislative scheme which is intended to operate
after a proceeding has
For reasons I
explain, I agree with the defendants.
The purported appointment
of the second defendant as a proper defendant for the archdiocese
The second defendant's consent to be appointed as a proper defendant for the
archdiocese occurred as follows. By letter dated 2
May 2024, Shine Lawyers for
the plaintiff wrote to Barry Nilsson for the defendants:
Regional College & Archdiocese of Hobart (Your client)
Please advise whether or not you hold instructions to accept service of the
foreshadowed proceeding.
Furthermore, we seek your client's confirmation that it appoints the Roman
Catholic Church Trust Corporation of the Archdiocese of
Hobart, also known as
the Archdiocese of Hobart, as a proper defendant for the Archdiocese of Hobart
and the previous Archbishop
of Hobart, Archbishop Guilford Clyde Young, and
assumes any liability for the Archdiocese of Hobart and the previous Archbishop
Hobart, Archbishop Guilford Clyde Young, for the purposes of the foreshadowed
proceeding pursuant to relevant provisions of
Civil Liability
As requested, the practitioners for the second defendant confirmed the
appointment on 14 Mar 2024:
"Dear Colleagues
Our Client: Archdiocese of Hobart
Your Client: [TBH]
We confirm our client appoints the Roman Catholic Church Trust Corporation of
the Archdiocese of Hobart, as a proper defendant for
the Archdiocese of Hobart
and the previous Archbishop of Hobart, Archbishop Guilford Clyde Young.
We are instructed to accept service on behalf of the Archdiocese of
We otherwise consider the proper First Defendant ought to be Marist Regional
College Incorporated (ACN 009 500 323) and not Marist
Regional College as
currently pleaded. As you are aware, MRCI has been deregistered.
Yours faithfully"
The defendants submit that when interpreting the expression
, the Court should read the provision as operating only after
the commencement of the proceedings. The plaintiff submits that interpreting
in such a way involves the implication of additional words into the
The plaintiff
submits that the words
"at any time"
are to be given their natural and
literal meaning and that no 'clear
is demonstrated to
justify the implication of additional words. The defendants do not submit that
the Court should imply any additional
; simply that, properly
construed in context, the provision applies only after proceedings have
Section 49N
of the Act appears in Division 4 of
, titled 'Proceedings
against unincorporated organisations'. It is in the following
49N Unincorporated organisation may appoint proper
(1) An unincorporated organisation may, with the
consent of an entity, appoint the entity as a proper defendant for the
organisation
at any time.
(2) An appointment of a defendant as a proper
defendant for an unincorporated organisation is to be made in accordance with
Supreme Court Rules 2000
or, if other rules of the Supreme Court are
prescribed for the purposes of this subsection, those other rules.
(3) If the unincorporated organisation is a
Government department established under
State Service Act 2000
(a) the State is taken to be appointed as the
proper defendant in relation to the organisation; and
(b) subsection (1) does not apply in relation
to the organisation."
Relevant principles
The parties referred to the following principles of statutory construction:
The fundamental
rule of interpretation is that a statute is to be expounded according to the
intent of Parliament:
Amalgamated Society of Engineers v Adelaide Steamship
(1920) 28 CLR 129
The primary
object of statutory construction is to construe the relevant provision so that
it is consistent with the language and
purpose of all the provisions of the
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
196 CLR 355
at [69]-[71]
The process of
construction is to begin by:
the context of the provision that is being construed.
Project Blue Sky
considering
the text itself
: Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Cmr of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27
The context of
the words, the consequences of a literal or grammatical construction, the
purpose of the statute or the canons of construction
may require the words of a
legislative provision to be read in a way that does not correspond with the
literal or grammatical meaning:
Project Blue Sky
The meaning of
the provision must be determined by reference to the language of the statute
viewed as a whole:
Project Blue Sky
case at 161.
Civil Liability Act 2002
of the Act was introduced by the
Justice Legislation Amendment
(Organisational and Liability for Child Abuse) Act 2019
, which fulfilled the
Tasmanian Government's commitment to implement the recommendations in the 2017
final report of the Royal Commission
into Institutional Responses to Child
Sexual Abuse, aimed at improving civil litigation outcomes for survivors of
child sexual abuse.
Similar schemes were introduced throughout Australia in
every state and territory: Pt 1B, Div 4 of the
Civil Liability Act
Identity of Defendants (Organisational Child Abuse) Act 2018
Liability Act 1936
Liability Act 2002
Liability Act 2003
(Qld); Ch 8A of the
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act
Personal Injuries (Liabilities and Damages) Act
The Act, Part 10C is divided into four divisions:
dealing with definitions and successor organisations.
Division 2 deals
with duties of organisations to prevent child abuse.
Division 3 deals
with the vicarious liability of organisations.
Division 4 deals
with proceedings against unincorporated organisations.
objects of the Division are set out in s 49K:
49K Objects of
The objects of this Division are –
(a) to enable child abuse proceedings to be brought against unincorporated
organisations; and
(b) to enable an organisation to pay liabilities arising from child abuse
proceedings from the assets of an associated trust in certain
circumstances."
49M provides as follows:
49M Child abuse proceedings may be
commenced against unincorporated organisation
(1) Child abuse proceedings may be commenced or continue against an
unincorporated organisation in the name of the organisation, or
reasonably sufficient to identify the organisation, as if the organisation had
legal personality.
(2) For the purposes of this Division, a function that may be exercised by an
unincorporated organisation may be exercised by a management
member of the
organisation.
(3) A court may make the orders and directions that it thinks fit for the
purposes of this Division, in particular to further the
objects of this
(4) Without limiting subsection (3), a court may direct one or more
management members of an unincorporated organisation to exercise
a specified
function of the organisation under this Division."
49N (set out above) provides for the appointment of a proper defendant for the
unincorporated organisation in s 49M. Section
49O then sets out the criteria
for suitability to be appointed as a proper defendant for an unincorporated
organisation. This brings
us to s 49P.
Section 49P suggests 'at
any time' means 'at any time after proceedings have commenced'
The defendants submit that the terms of s 49P support its submission that s 49N
should be construed so that the words
"at any time"
refer to any time
after commencement of the proceedings.
Section 49P applies only if proceedings are commenced against an unincorporated
organisation which has not appointed a proper defendant
after 60 days of being
served with notice of the commencement of the proceeding. Section 49P
relevantly provides as follows:
49P Court may appoint proper
(1) This section applies if –
(a) child abuse proceedings are commenced against
an unincorporated organisation and no suitable proper defendant is appointed as
a proper defendant for the organisation by the end of the period of 60 days
after the unincorporated organisation (or a management
member of the
unincorporated organisation) is served with notice of the commencement of the
proceedings; or
(b) after the end of that period, the proper
defendant that is appointed ceases to be a suitable proper defendant.
(4) Within 28 days after the making of an application by a plaintiff under
this section, the unincorporated organisation must identify
to the court any
associated trusts of the organisation, including by identifying the financial
capacity of those trusts."
The defendants submit that it is relevant that the present tense is used in
each of the following expressions in s 49P(1)(a):
"if child abuse
proceedings
commenced against an unincorporated organisation";
"no suitable proper defendant
appointed".
The defendants submit that the use of the present tense in those provisions
demonstrates that parliament intended that the appointment
of a proper defendant
occurs following the issuance of a proceeding and not at some prior time.
The defendants submit further that provision for the 60 day period within which
an unincorporated organisation may appoint a proper
defendant is a further clear
demonstration that parliament provided a coherent scheme for the appointment of
a proper defendant which
commences upon proceedings being issued. These
submissions have merit.
It appears as though, on this approach, the words
"at any time"
47N(1) operate consistently with the other provisions of Part 10C Div 4 because
an unincorporated organisation may appoint a
proper defendant including after an
application under s 49P has been made but before it has been determined.
Equally consistently,
if at any time during the proceedings a proper defendant
ceases to be a suitable proper defendant - for example by death or the vesting
of the relevant trust - then s49N(1) appears to permit a proper defendant to be
appointed at that time.
Section 49Q suggests 'at any time'
means 'at any time after proceedings have commenced'
The defendants submit that the terms of s 49Q are also consistent with s 49N(1)
applying only where proceedings have already commenced.
Section 49Q specifies
the effect of appointing a proper defendant in the following
49Q Effect of appointment of proper defendant
On the appointment of a proper defendant for an unincorporated
organisation –
(a) the proper defendant is taken to be the
defendant, in the child abuse proceedings against the organisation, on behalf of
the organisation
and is responsible for conducting the proceedings as the
defendant; and
(b) anything done by the unincorporated organisation
is taken to have been done by the proper defendant and a duty or obligation of
the unincorporated organisation in relation to the proceedings is a duty or
obligation owed by the proper defendant; and
(c) the unincorporated organisation must continue to
participate in the child abuse proceedings and a court may make orders or
in respect of the organisation as if the organisation had legal
personality; and
(d) a court may make substantive findings in the
child abuse proceedings against an unincorporated organisation as if the
organisation
had legal personality; and
(e) the proper defendant incurs any liability, from
the claim in the proceedings on behalf of the organisation, that the
organisation
would have incurred if the organisation had legal personality,
including any costs awarded; and
(f) the proper defendant may rely on any defence or
immunity that would be available to the organisation as a defendant in the
proceedings
if the organisation had legal personality; and
(g) any right of the unincorporated organisation to
be indemnified (including under a policy of insurance) in respect of damages
in a claim in child abuse proceedings extends to, and indemnifies, the
proper defendant; and
(h) if more than one proper defendant is appointed,
the proper defendants must file a single defence and proceed as a single
defendant."
The defendants submit that the consequences set out in s49Q could not be
carried into effect unless proceedings had already been
commenced at the date of
appointment. It appears reasonably clear that the responsibilities and/or
obligations of a proper defendant
and the unincorporated organisation are
triggered upon the event of the appointment of a proper defendant in relation to
"the proceeding"
or "child abuse proceedings". It is submitted that the
reference to 'the proceedings' in s 49Q contemplates that the appointment
s49N is to be made once those proceedings commenced.
The defendants submit that if an appointment is made
proceedings
have commenced, an unincorporated organisation would be unable (for example) to
"continue to participate in the child
abuse proceedings" as required by s
49Q(c), as there are no such proceedings to continue to participate in. The
defendants submit
that this puts the plaintiff's proposed interpretation of s
49N in clear conflict with s 49Q.
I accept that s49Q and s 49N(1) should logically be read together as applying
only upon commencement of the proceedings. If a proper
defendant is purportedly
appointed before proceedings have been commenced, the provisions of s 49Q appear
incongruous. It appears
clear to me that Part 10C, Div 4 is intended to provide
for a scheme operating after proceedings commence. I am not satisfied that
4 of Part 10C establishes a scheme contemplating an appointment of a proper
defendant beforehand. It would not be consistent
with the text and context of
the Act to read the words
"at any time"
in s 49N(1) as allowing an
appointment of a proper defendant prior to proceedings been commenced. In my
view, that would not be consistent
with the language and purpose of the other
provisions of the statute. The provisions of s 49Q support the defendants'
relating to the context of s 49N(1) at the conclusion that the
appointment of a proper defendant occurs after proceedings commenced.
construction conforms with the language of the Act as a whole.
Even if, as the plaintiff correctly submits, Part 10C is to be construed as
remedial legislation and given as generous a construction
as the language of
these provisions permits,
appointment of a proper defendant for an unincorporated organisation being made
prior to the commencement of proceedings does
not appear to promote the remedial
and beneficial purpose of Part 10C. That purpose is the establishment of a
clear statutory framework
to enable proceedings to be brought against
unincorporated organisations by the appointment of a proper defendant in those
proceedings.
I am not satisfied that the statutory framework was intended to
apply where no proceedings exist.
Section 49Q suggests 'at any
time' means 'at any time after proceedings have commenced'
The defendants submit that the terms of s 49S are also consistent with s 49N(1)
applying only where proceedings have already commenced.
Section 49S provides
that the Supreme Court may make rules for the purposes of Part 10C. No such
rules have yet been made. Section
49S is in the following
49S Rules of court
(1) The Supreme Court may make rules, not
inconsistent with this Part, for or with respect to any matter that, by this
Part, is required,
or permitted, to be prescribed by rules or that is necessary,
or convenient, to be prescribed by rules for carrying out or giving
(2) Without limiting the generality of
subsection(1), the rules may make provision for or in respect of the following
(a) the practice and procedure to be followed in
respect of proceedings under this Part and any matters incidental to or relating
to that practice and procedure;
(b) the protection of the privacy of the
plaintiffs;
(c) the duties of registrars and other officers
of court in relation to, or for the purposes of, the operation of this Part;
(d) the forms to be used in connection with
the operation of this Part."
The defendants submit that the reference to the
Supreme Court Rules
(2) leads to the conclusion that, for an appointment of a proper defendant to be
validly made under s 49N (1), the proceedings
must have already commenced. The
defendants' second submissions dated 20 March 2025, par 30
"...if the appointment could be made without a proceeding
being on foot, the Supreme Court could not be given jurisdiction to enforce
rules with respect to that appointment. Thus, if the plaintiff's interpretation
were accepted, section 49N(2) would be superfluous".
(citing par [71] of
Project Blue Sky
Thus, it was submitted, if the plaintiff's interpretation were accepted, s
49N(2) and s 49S would be superfluous where they refer
to the rules. The
defendants submit that on a proper construction of s 49N, it is clearly intended
to establish a framework for
an appointment of a proper defendant in respect of
which rules of court amenable to 'enforcement' by the Court.
The defendants referred generally to the position in Victoria. The
Legal Identity of Defendants (Organisational Child Abuse) Act
is part of a materially different statutory scheme, which
appears to provide greater clarity on this issue than
It provides
that "unless the court otherwise orders, a nomination of a proper defendant may
occur at any time within 120 days after
the commencement of the proceeding" for
the claim against the unincorporated organisation. The
Supreme Court
(General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic), Order 85 provides:
"85.02 Nomination of proper defendant
(1) A nomination of an entity to act as a proper defendant to a claim and
consent under section 7 of the Act, made after the commencement
of a proceeding,
shall be in Form 85A and include an address for service.
(2) The nomination shall be filed with the Prothonotary and served on each
party to the proceeding and on the entity nominated to
act as a proper defendant
within 7 days of the nomination being filed."
However, the
Civil Liability Act 2002
is in effectively
identical terms to the Act, s 49N:
6L Unincorporated
organisation may appoint proper defendant
(1) An unincorporated organisation may, with the consent of an entity,
appoint the entity as a proper defendant for the organisation
at any time.
(2) An appointment is to be made in accordance with the
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 2005
(3) However, if the unincorporated organisation is a public sector body, the
State is taken to be appointed as the proper defendant."
The uniform
Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW), r 7.4
7.4 Proper defendant in child abuse proceedings
against unincorporated organisation
An unincorporated organisation may not appoint an entity as a proper
defendant for the organisation unless the entity's consent to
act as a proper
defendant has been filed in the approved form."
In making rules under
Civil Liability Act
the Uniform
Rules Committee should be understood as having made rule 7.4 consistently with
the authorising provision in the
Civil Procedure Act
reflecting, at least, that the practice in
was necessary or convenient
for the purposes of s 6L of the NSW Act. The approved form for the purposes of
r7.4 (Form 162) is required
to be filed in the
proceedings.
Supreme Court Rules
apply to "any proceedings commenced in
Court": r 3. There is one obvious example of a rule that applies prior to the
commencement
of proceedings: r 403C - discovery to identify a defendant "for the
purpose of commencing a proceeding". Otherwise, the rules deal
with proceedings
which have been commenced. While the appointment of a proper defendant before
the commencement of the proceedings
might not render s 49N(2) entirely
superfluous, its presence together with the presence of s 49S provide strong
contextual indications
that parliament intended to establish a scheme for the
appointment of a proper defendant intended to operate after proceedings have
commenced and in respect of which the Court could exercise jurisdiction.
Conclusion as to s 49N(1)
For the foregoing reasons, I agree with the defendants' submissions that it is
intended that an appointment of a proper defendant
under s 49N(1) is to occur
after the commencement of proceedings. In my view, the literal reading urged by
the plaintiff does not
conform to the clear legislative purpose of the Act, Part
10C, to enable proceedings to be brought against unincorporated organisations,
which includes the appointment of a proper defendant within those proceedings.
The second defendant admits it is the proper defendant for the
Archdiocese
Despite my view as to the proper construction of the provision, the second
defendant's admission in its defence that it was appointed
as a proper defendant
for the archdiocese ought to bind it. In par 12(c) of its defence, the second
defendant admits that it is the
proper defendant for the Archdiocese of Hobart.
As things stand, the proposition that the second defendant is a proper
defendant for the archdiocese is no longer in issue in the
proceedings. It
appears to me that to interpret s 49N(1) as applying only once proceedings have
commenced cannot have any impact
on the second defendant's admission. That was
self-evidently an admission made during the course of the proceedings. The
is unambiguous: that it is a proper defendant for the archdiocese.
There has been no application to withdraw the admission. I note,
however, that
in the proposed amended defence annexed to the affidavit of Lucille
at par 24, the second
defendant proposes to deny par 5 absolutely.
The Act, s 3A(5) provides that the Act is not a codification of the law
relating to civil claims for damages for harm. Where, prior
to proceedings
commencing, parties agree that they will be commenced upon a particular basis,
those arrangements may be reflected
in the title to the proceedings and in the
pleadings. While no published decision of the Court reflects this, the Court's
miscellaneous
civil list reflects a discernibly widespread practice in child
abuse proceedings under the Act Part 10C involving unincorporated
organisations
– particularly those alleged to operate schools in which child abuse
occurred. In these cases, writs are commonly
issued naming a proper defendant
as the only defendant, as distinct from the relevant unincorporated organisation
which may be the
subject of the statement of claim. In such actions,
accompanying statements of claim routinely plead a brief paragraph or two, to
the effect that the institutional defendant is a proper defendant nominated or
appointed by the relevant unincorporated organisation
(or at least that they are
a suitable one) which controlled or managed (for example) a school, in order to
set up the factual matrix
in which the duty of care is said to arise. Equally
routinely, a proper defendant admits those allegations. In practice it appears
that the because of the absence of any rules, formalising the appointment of a
proper defendant occurs within the proceedings as
a matter of pleading. What
happened in this case appears to be consistent with the practice as
In his second written submissions, the plaintiff submitted that because rules
have not been made for the procedure in relation to
the appointment of a proper
defendant, it is not clear whether it is preferable the proceeding be brought or
continued in the name
of the unincorporated organisation of the proper
If a difficulty arises, or if a doubt exists relating to the practice or
procedure to be followed in a proceeding, then the
Supreme Court Civil
Procedure Act
confers "jurisdiction to make such order and give
such directions as to the institution or prosecution of the proceeding as may be
necessary to meet the case, and any proceeding or step in a proceeding taken in
accordance with any such order or direction, shall
be deemed to be regular and
sufficient." Relevantly,
relates to any proceeding in the Court or " about
to be instituted therein".
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act 1932
201 provides as follows:
201 Provision for cases of doubt or
(1) In any case in which no form or manner of
procedure is provided for by this Act or the Rules of Court, or in which any
arises or doubt exists as to the procedure or practice to be followed
in, or with respect to, any proceeding in the Court, or about
to be instituted
therein, the Court or a judge, if satisfied that such case is unprovided for, or
that there is any such difficulty
or doubt, shall have jurisdiction to make such
order and give such directions as to the institution or prosecution of the
as may be necessary to meet the case, and any proceeding or step in a
proceeding taken in accordance with any such order or direction,
shall be deemed
to be regular and sufficient. Any such order or direction made or given by a
judge may be varied or discharged by
a Full Court, but the variation or
discharge of the order or direction shall not invalidate or affect the
regularity or sufficiency
of any proceeding or step in a proceeding taken
pursuant to any such order or direction.
(2) If the case which is not provided for, or with
respect to which the difficulty has arisen or the doubt exists, is as to the
or manner in which a proceeding should be instituted, or if it arises in a
matter which will be, or has been, heard
, the application
for an order or directions under subsection (1) shall be made to the Court or a
judge (whether sitting in court
or in chambers) by or by way of motion by or on
behalf of the person desiring to institute the proceeding or the person
prosecuting
the matter, as the case may be.
(3) If the case which is not provided for, or with
respect to which the difficulty has arisen or the doubt exists, arises in a
the application for an order or for directions under subsection (1)
shall, if made to the Court or a judge sitting in court as a
court be made by
motion, and if made to a judge sitting in chambers be made by summons, and in
either case in accordance with the
Rules of Court."
In these proceedings, despite the second defendant's admission, if it were
necessary to remedy any procedural issue with the archdiocese's
appointment of
the second defendant as a proper defendant such an order might be sought under
s201. The process by which that order
might be sought would be by means of an
application under r 524, as rule 527 provides that the reference to 'summons' in
to be read as an interlocutory application to a judge in chambers.
Alternatively, as the plaintiff submits, s 49M(3) provides that a court may
make the orders and directions that it thinks fit for
the purposes of Division
10C, in particular to further the objects of that Division. The Act confers
power upon the Court to make
directions in relation to this issue.
Other defects in the pleading
Turning to the defendants' submission that pars 1-4, 6–10 and 13-26 plead
background narrative matters which contain unnecessary
or irrelevant
allegations. Examples include the allegations at par 1(f)-(j) which appear to
be unnecessary in light of the pleading
that the plaintiff attended the school
– a pleading which gives rise to a non-delegable duty of
Having said that, only
par 1(g) is the subject of a proposed amendment. There are some other obvious
but minor issues with the
pleadings as proposed:
(i) par 4(e)
"in accordance with the Catholic faith"
is unnecessary;
(ii) par 5B contains 11 subparagraphs, which are inappropriately numbered. The
first sub-paragraph is not 1(a), but 1(d);
(iii) the particulars of par 5B(i)(iii) are misdescribed as "particulars of
subparagraph 5A. i)
hereof"; and
"Particulars of 5A. i)"
appear within the body of
par 5B, not 5A.
(v) the allegations in par 25(b) are inappropriately numbered, as the next
number after (vi) is (i).
The defendants complain that the proposed
"Particulars of 5A. i)"
unnecessarily plead the text of the memorandum of association for MRCI. I
agree. Two and a half pages of the proposed amended statement
of claim are
filled with the reproduction of that memorandum of association. These long
passages are not material in the sense used
in r 234. These paragraphs plead
evidence. A concise statement of the effect of the relevant terms of the
document is the more
appropriate course.
If these issues were the only issues of concern with the proposed amended
statement of claim, it might not justify a refusal of
leave to amend. Even
though the pleading of background and narrative matters are a source of
frustration, they might not, of themselves,
create such unfairness justifying a
refusal of leave to amend. However, these aspects of the plaintiff's pleading,
considered together
with the other issues identified, above, contribute to the
ambiguous and confusing character of the plaintiff's pleadings.
Finally, the plaintiff's pleading in relation to the employment of Goldsmith is
unclear. The following propositions are contained
in the extant and proposed
amended statement of claim:
(i) Goldsmith was a member of "staff at the Marist Regional College": par 1(h)
(ii) Marist Regional College as MRCI was:
- responsible
for the appointment, management, control
of Goldsmith: par 2(f);
- the employer
of, or in the alternative, engaged the services of Goldsmith at the college: par
(iii) MRCI appointed Goldsmith and athletics coach: par 11;
(iv) MRCI engaged or employed Goldsmith to work as athletics coach at the
college: par 3(d);
(v) MRCI and the first defendant's vicarious liability arises because of MRCI's
employment of Goldsmith: par 23; and
(vi) Goldsmith was the agent of the first defendant and MRCI: par 24.
(vii) Goldsmith had a leadership role in the college's "Marist Youth Community"
group: par 3(f);
(viii) the former Archbishop Guildford Clyde Young permitted the employment or
engagement of Goldsmith as athletics coach at the
college: par 5B(l);
(ix) MRCI and, or in the alternative, Archbishop Young, and, or in the
alternative, the Archdiocese of Hobart engaged or permitted
Goldsmith to:
specialist athletics coach: par 8A(d);
leadership role, including hosting prayer groups and activities of its "Marist
Youth Community" group: par 8A(e); and
(x) MRCI and, or in the alternative, Archbishop Young and, or in the
alternative, the Archdiocese of Hobart, appointed Goldsmith
as coach of the
athletics team: par 15.
These variously expressed propositions contain repetition and create confusion
through the use of the various expressions 'employment',
'engagement',
'appointment' and 'permitted to act'. Further confusion is created through the
various allegations about Goldsmith's
relationship to the Archdiocese,
Archbishop Young and MRCI respectively. This contributes to the jigsaw-like
quality of the proposed
amended statement of claim, which fails "to state with
sufficient clarity the case that must be met":
Banque Commerciale
proposed amended statement of claim does not clarify or refine the issues.
For the reasons expressed, leave is refused for the plaintiff to amend his
statement of claim in accordance with the proposed amended
statement of claim
attached to his interlocutory application filed on 23 December 2024.
The plaintiff states in his fourth written submissions that the defendants
should make discovery before he is required to plead
further. The order made on
10 December 2024 that the defendants make discovery by 28 February 2025 was
obviously premised on the
assumption that any amendments to the statement of
claim would have already been made in accordance with a timetable and the
would be closed by that date. That has not come to pass, and the
pleadings are not yet closed. The plaintiff has not made any formal
application
for discovery under r 386 or r 388. If the plaintiff intends to apply for an
order for discovery before pleading further,
that application should be made
within a reasonably short time. I will hear the parties further about that.
If the defendants propose to take any steps to seek any further orders in
relation to the extant statement of claim, any such application
should be made
In his third written submissions the plaintiff submitted that if the Court is
persuaded that the second defendant was 'incorrectly
named', and the archdiocese
ought to be named as the second defendant, then it has the power, under s49M(3)
and r 184 to make certain
orders as follows:
(i) that the name of
the second defendant be struck out;
(ii) that the Archdiocese of Hobart be joined as Second Defendant;
(iii) that the Roman Catholic Church Trust Corporation of The Archdiocese of
Hobart be appointed as the proper defendant for the
Archdiocese of Hobart;
(iv) that the plaintiff has leave to amend his writ and statement of claim to
reflect the above orders, and apart from those changes,
otherwise in accordance
with his proposed amended statement of claim; and
(v) that the second defendant be granted an opportunity to amend its defence if
In relation to the striking out of the second defendant, this leads back to the
issue of the identity of the unincorporated organisation
which the plaintiff
alleges is primarily liable as the operator of the school at the time of the
alleged abuse. This is obviously
of fundamental importance and is a wider
issue, not to be determined on the application for leave to amend. The
plaintiff readily
concedes that this is an issue which ought not be determined
by way of the defendant opposing an application for leave to amend the
On the material before me, the defendants appear to be open to assisting the
plaintiff to correctly identify that unincorporated
organisation and to ensuring
the appointment of a proper defendant so that if liability is proved against
that unincorporated organisation,
there is a proper defendant with assets to
satisfy any liability that may be incurred. I would hope that the plaintiff may
to bringing his proceeding on this basis.
In relation to the clarification that the archdiocese is the subject of the
action and that a proper defendant should be appointed,
despite what is set
above, I will hear the parties as to whether an order should be made in
conformity with the second defendant's
admission in par 12(c) of its defence,
appointing the second defendant as a proper defendant for the archdiocese.
I will hear the parties further as to the appropriate steps to be taken for the
further case management of the action.
Civil Liability Act
statement of claim pleaded that the second defendant was an unincorporated
organisation. The plaintiff acknowledges that
was in error.
See pars 43-52 of the
defendants' first written submissions dated 3 March 2025 and par 85 of the
defendants' second written submissions
dated 20 March 2025.
The plaintiff acknowledges the
consent order in his first written submissions dated 24 February at par 2.10.
See par 2(d) of the statement
of claim and par 7 of the first defendant's defence.
Plaintiff's first written
submissions par 1.3.
[2024] HCA 41
Plaintiff's outline in reply
to the defendants' submissions dated 5 March
Plaintiff's second
submissions dated 5 March 2025, par 9 and the affidavit of Lucille Debra Nel
affirmed 3 March 2025.
the defendants' second written submissions dated 20 March 2025, pars 8 and
Letter from Shine
Lawyers, Annexure LDN2 to the affidavit of Lucille Deborah Nel affirmed 3 March
Affidavit of Lucille
Nel affirmed 3 February 2025, Annexure
See the submissions
made at paras 19-49 of the plaintiff's fourth written submissions dated 31 March
Thompson v Goold
[1910] AC 409 at
Legal Services Board
v Gillespie-Jones
249 CLR 493
at 509, at par [50]; cited in
EXV v Uniting Church in Australia Property Trust (NSW)
[2024] NSWSC 490
https://ucprforms.nsw.gov.au/
Affidavit of Lucille Nel
affirmed 3 March 2025, annexure LDN-4.
NSW v Lepore
; (212) CLR 511.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (417 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter