URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMC/2024/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
XY (a pseudonym) v Sergeant Hamish Woodgate [2024] TASMC 8 (30 July 2024)
[2024] TASMC 08
MAGISTRATES COURT OF TASMANIA
(a pseudonym) v Sergeant Hamish Woodgate
[2024] TASMC
XY (a pseudonym)
Hamish (Sergeant)
32720/2024,
DELIVERED ON:
30 July 2024
HEARING DATE:
26 July 2024
CATCHWORDS:
Criminal Law – Jurisdiction, practice and procedure – in general
– implied power of magistrates – suppression
– non-publication
orders – power to make – where risk of harm to defendant and
assembled persons is not acute but
generalised – where suppression is
necessary – calculus of risk
Courts and Judges – Practice and procedure – Magistrates Court of
Tasmania – suppression and non-publication orders
– implied power to
make – risk to defendant, family and associated persons – whether
suppression order is necessary
to protect safety of persons – test to be
applied – whether extent of risk to defendant sufficient to found a
suppression
order – whether form of harm to third parties warrants a
suppression order
Words and phrases – “administration of justice” –
“calculus of risk test” – “probability
test” – “necessary” – “non-publication
orders” – “safety of persons”
– “suppression
order” – “necessary to protect the safety of any person”
Criminal Code
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Suppression and Non-publication Orders Act 2010
[1989] HCA 45
Visser v Hodgetts
[2002] TASSC
R v Ian Roger Matterson and Anor Ex Parte Christine Debra Moles (No.
[1993] TASSC 75
Attorney-General v Leveller Magazine Ltd
[1979] AC 440
Tasmania v G and T
Hogan v Hinch
[2011] HCA 4
243 CLR 506
John Fairfax
and Sons Ltd v Police Tribunal (NSW)
[1986] 5 NSWLR 465
[2011] NSWCA 403
Scott and Anor v Scott
[1913] UKHL 2
[1913] AC 417
AB (A Pseudonym) v R
[2019] NSWCCA
AB (A Pseudonym) v CD (A Pseudonym)
EF (A Pseudonym) v CD (A
[2019] HCA 6; 93 ALJR 321; 364 ALR 202
[2017] NSWSC 916
Hogan v Australian Crime Commission
[2010] HCA 21
240 CLR 651
[2012] NSWCA 314
John Fairfax
Publications Pty Ltd v District Court of New South Wales and Ors
Lehrmann v Queensland Police Service and Ors
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Tasmania Police – Northern Prosecution
Number of Paragraphs:
Serial No. 08/2024
File No. 32720/2024
XY V TASMANIA POLICE
REASONS FOR DECISION BROWN, M
30 July 2024
Introduction
applicant has been charged with two counts of grooming with intention to expose
a young person to indecent material pursuant to
Criminal Code
s125D(3), one count of producing child exploitation material and one count of
possession of child exploitation material.
first appeared in court on 5 June 2024. At that time the matter was adjourned
without plea and the defendant’s counsel sought
an order that I suppress
the defendant’s name. At that time I was supplied with a report from a
psychiatrist, Dr AG, together
with some submissions in support of the
application. Attached to those materials was also a printout from a Facebook
page entitled
"Tasmania/And Justice for All"
and several pages from that
basis for the application was that if the defendant’s name were published
in the ordinary way that the defendant may suffer
harm, being attempted suicide.
It was also submitted that the defendant’s physical safety might be
compromised by such publication
as evidenced by the posts on the Facebook page
referred to above.
materials in support of that application on the defendant’s initial
appearance were relatively brief and I adjourned the
matter until 26 July 2024
in order to give the defendant the opportunity to produce further materials and
make any further submissions
in support of the application to suppress. When
the matter was listed for argument on 26 July2024, the defendant renewed his
application
for the making of a suppression order and the prosecution advised,
somewhat to my surprise, that they would simply abide the decision
of the Court
as to the matter. Therefore they pressed for neither publication nor
non-publication in the matter.
is accepted by the parties that I have the power to make the order sought: see
Grassby v The Queen
[1989] HCA 45
and [26]. His Honour there noted that whilst I possess no inherent powers, a
magistrate exercising judicial power pursuant
to a statute possesses the power
by necessary implication. His Honour said at paragraph
“It would be unprofitable to attempt to generalize in
speaking of the powers which an inferior court must possess by way of
implication. Recognition of the existence of such powers will be called for
whenever they are required for the effective
exercise of a jurisdiction which is
expressly conferred but will be confined to so much as can be ‘derived by
implication from
statutory provisions conferring particular
Therefore, whilst the power this Court possesses is not an inherent power, it
is undoubtedly a power which must be exercised as would
a superior court
exercising such powers pursuant to its inherent jurisdiction: see
[2002] TASSC 44
to [21] per Underwood J.
common law position concerning whether suppression orders or pseudonym orders
ought be made has been discussed by courts in a
number of decisions. In this
R v Ian Roger Matterson and
Anor ex parte Christine Debra Moles (No. 2)
[1993] TASSC 75
“7. The common law rule that the administration of
justice must be done in public has been re-affirmed on many occasions since
[see below at paragraph 10(x) of this judgment]
and was not called
into doubt in these proceedings. ... It is required in order to maintain public
confidence in our system of justice
and to safeguard against judicial
arbitrariness.
8. Notwithstanding the importance of the common law rule, it has been
recognised that when adherence to it would defeat the very purpose
designed to satisfy namely, the interests of justice, it may be abrogated but no
more than is necessary for the purpose of
doing justice. In Attorney-General v
Leveller Magazine Ltd
(1979) AC 440
Lord Diplock acknowledged the
importance of the general rule at 450 and said:
‘Apart from statutory exceptions, however, where a court in the
exercise of its inherent power to control the conduct of proceedings
departs in any way from the general rule, the departure is justified to the
extent and to no more than the extent that
the court reasonably believes to be
necessary in order to serve the ends of justice’."
This passage was approved of more recently in
Tasmania v G and T
[2014] TASSC 71
by Pearce J at [6].
A similar formulation was adopted by the High Court in
Hogan v Hinch
[2011] HCA 4
243 CLR 506
at paragraph
where French CJ said:
“20. An essential characteristic of courts is that they sit in
public. That principle is a means to an end, and not an end in
itself. Its
rationale is the benefit that flows from subjecting court proceedings to public
and professional scrutiny. It is also
critical to the maintenance of public
confidence in the courts. Under the
Constitution
courts capable of exercising
the judicial power of the Commonwealth must at all times be and appear to be
independent and impartial
tribunals. The open-court principle serves to maintain
that standard. However, it is not absolute.
21. It has long been accepted at common law that the application of the
open justice principle may be limited in the exercise of a
superior court's
inherent jurisdiction or an inferior court's implied powers. This may be done
where it is necessary to secure the
proper administration of justice. In a
proceeding involving a secret technical process, a public hearing of evidence of
process could ‘cause an entire destruction of the whole matter
in dispute’. Similar considerations inform restrictions
on the disclosure
in open court of evidence in an action for injunctive relief against an
anticipated breach of confidence. In the
prosecution of a blackmailer, the name
of the blackmailer's victim, called as a prosecution witness, may be suppressed
the ‘keen public interest in getting blackmailers convicted and
sentenced’ and the difficulties that may be encountered
complainants to come forward ‘unless they are given this kind of
protection’. So too, in particular circumstances,
may the name of a police
informant or the identity of an undercover police officer. The categories of
case are not closed, although
they will not likely be extended. Where
‘exceptional and compelling considerations going to national
security’ require
that the confidentiality of certain materials be
preserved, a departure from the ordinary open justice principle may be
The character of the proceedings and the nature of the function
conferred upon the court may also qualify the application of the
principle. The jurisdiction of courts in relation to wards of the State and
mentally ill people was historically an exception
to the general rule that
proceedings should be held in public because the jurisdiction exercised in such
cases was ‘parental
and administrative, and the disposal of controverted
questions ... an incident only in the jurisdiction.’ Proceedings not
the ordinary course of litigation’, such as applications for
leave to appeal, can also be determined without a public hearing.
22. It is a common law corollary of the open court principle that, absent
any restriction order by the court, anybody may publish
a fair and accurate
report of proceedings including the names of the parties and the witnesses and
the evidence testimonial documentary
or physical that has been given in the
proceedings.”
that case the Court approved of Mc Hugh JA (as he then was) in
John Fairfax
and Sons Ltd v Police Tribunal (NSW)
(1986) 5 NSWLR 465
at [476]-[477]
(Glass, JA agreeing):
“The fundamental rule of the common
law is that the administration of justice must take place in open court. A court
depart from this rule where its observance would frustrate the
administration of justice or some other public interest for whose
Parliament has modified the open justice rule. The principle of open justice
also requires that nothing should be done
to discourage the making of fair and
accurate reports of what occurs in the courtroom. Accordingly, an order of a
court prohibiting
the publication of evidence is only valid if it is really
necessary to secure the proper administration of justice in proceedings
it. Moreover, an order prohibiting publication of evidence must be clear in its
terms and do no more than is necessary to
achieve the due administration of
justice. The making of the order must also be reasonably necessary; and there
must be some material
before the court upon which it can reasonably reach the
conclusion that it is necessary to make an order prohibiting publication.
belief that the order is necessary is insufficient.”
New South Wales the matter of court suppression and non-publication orders was
made the subject of legislation in 2010; see the
Court Suppression and
Non-publication Orders Act
(NSW). That legislation was considered in
Rinehart v Welker
[2011] NSWCA 403.
Under that legislative scheme the
making of an order could only occur if it was
"necessary"
as noted at
paragraph [28] of
“necessary"
adopted as a test for the making of a suppression order on the recommendation of
the New South Wales Law Reform Commission.
Similar language appears in
Federal Court of Australia Act
and s 11 of the
Contempt of Court Act
1981 (UK). It was
the test applied by courts with an inherent jurisdiction to make non-publication
orders: see
John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd v District Court of New South
Wales and Ors
[2004] NSWCA 324
is apparent that the statutory schemes considered in cases reported from a
number of interstate jurisdictions and the position
at common law are very
closely aligned. No doubt the use of the term “necessary” in those
enactments owes its genesis
not simply to Law Reform Commission reports but to
the use of that term repeatedly in numerous decisions relating to the nature of
various courts’ powers pursuant to their inherent jurisdictions.
Therefore, a number of cases considering these matters from
interstate, while
dealing with particular legislative provisions, are still relevant to
consideration of my implied powers.
the above cases (and from numerous others) the following general principles or
general observations in relation to suppression
orders can be
court proceedings should be open to the public.
criminal matters where the state seeks sanction against private citizens, it is
critical that those proceedings occur in open court.
a necessary corollary of the open court principle that there be the ability for
the media to publish fair and accurate reports
of those proceedings.
an order should only be made where it is shown to be
“necessary”.
from that rule will only be necessary in the most exceptional
circumstances.
might amount to exceptional circumstances is not a closed category.
“the safety of persons” may be put at risk by publication, such an
order may be made.
safety of persons might relate to the risk of both physical and psychological
harm to parties or even other persons related to
them or the subject matter of
the proceedings.
an order should not be made simply because it is desirable or reasonable to do
I note in determining an application such as this in a criminal matter
especially, the words of Lord Atkinson in
Scott and Anor v Scott
; [1913] AC 417 must be borne in mind:
hearing of a case in public may be, and often is, no doubt painful, humiliating
or deterrent to both parties and witnesses
and in many cases, especially those
of a criminal nature, the details may be so indecent as to tend to injure public
morals, but
all this is tolerated and endured because it is felt that in public
trial is found on the whole, the best security for the pure,
impartial and
efficient administration of justice, the best means of winning public confidence
and respect”.
safety of persons is relied on here and is now a recognised category that may
attract a suppression order. No doubt that has its
genesis in cases involving
persons such as informants, undercover police officers, complainants in
blackmail cases and the like.
However, it is now established that the classes
of persons and the harms they may suffer are far broader than that. In
Pseudonym) v R
[2019] NSWCCA 46
, the claimed harm
related to not only the defendant but also members of his family: see also
(A Pseudonym) v CD (A Pseudonym)
EF (A Pseudonym) v CD (A Pseudonym)
[2019] HCA 6; 93 ALJR 321; 364 ALR 202. The possibility of persons
suffering mental harm was also the subject of
Moseley v AB
, a civil damages case for sexual abuse brought by a former
student against a former teacher. In this case it is submitted on behalf
defendant applicant, that if his name were published or if details of the matter
were published, that he is at risk of attempting
suicide. It is clear that in
the appropriate circumstances such harm is one which a suppression order may be
made to avert. More
recently a claim relating to psychological harm to a
defendant was considered in
Lehrmann v Queensland Police Service and Ors
[2023] QSC 238.
The meaning of “necessary”
considering the cases regarding the nature and extent of powers pursuant to a
court’s inherent jurisdiction (and therefore
this court’s implied
powers), or under legislation enacted in other states, a common feature is that
the making of such an
order must be “necessary”. It seems apparent
that the use of that word in federal and state legislation in other
finds its genesis in language used in the authoritative decisions
of the highest courts in this country and in the UK. In my view
it is crucial in
this matter to consider the proper interpretation of that term.
Hogan v Australian Crime Commission
[2010] HCA 21
240 CLR 651
considering powers under the
Federal Court of Australia Act
Court noted that the word
“‘necessary’ is
collocation of the
“necessity to
prevent prejudice to the administration of justice”
parliament was not dealing with trivialities.
the ourt also noted that
“necessary is a strong
which reinforces the legislative tension that orders should only
be made in exceptional circumstances a position which prevailed
at common law:
at [27] and see
Moseley v AB
[2017] NSWSC 916
and [22]. In
the High Court also noted that in determining
whether such an order is necessary that it is insufficient if the order is seen
“convenient, reasonable or sensible, or to serve a notion of the
public interest still less that, as a result of some "balancing
exercise" the
order appears to have one or more of those characteristics”.
relation to the necessity for such orders in safety cases, the New South Wales
Court of Appeal in
[2012] NSWCA 314
, in discussing the relevant
state legislation, considered whether to be necessary to make an order that the
applicant prove that
“on the balance of probabilities, that the order
sought is necessary to protect the safety of any person, in the sense that
absent the order being made it would be probable that the person in question
would suffer harm”
. Put another way, the question there is whether it
is a pre-condition for the making of an order that
"as a matter of
probability the person would in question suffer harm if the order was not
. The Court there also noted that a different construction of the
section was open whereby the Court needed to be satisfied on the
probabilities that the order sought was necessary to protect a person’s
“On this construction proof of the probability
of harm is not a precondition. The necessity for such an order will be informed
by the nature, imminence and degree of the likelihood of harm occurring to the
relevant person. If the prospective harm is very severe,
it may be more readily
concluded that an order is necessary even if the risk is a possibility as
opposed to a probability”.
Noting those two constructions the Court preferred the former over the
latter. It also held that a further consideration was whether
there is utility
in the making of such an order. For example it may be that details of the
particular event or circumstance in question
is already in the public arena.
, courts preferred the first construction
“the probability test”
when considering
whether the making of an order was necessary – i.e. that the applicant
must show that, absent an order, that
it is more likely than not that the harm
asserted – a serious one – will materialise. It was accepted that
more stringent one than the alternate construction, later termed the
“calculus of risk test”
later authorities in the area reached a different conclusion. In
[2019] HCA 6, Nettle J said at [14] and [15]:
application is made on the basis that the orders sought
are necessary to protect the safety of HI and JK. As this
observed, "necessary" is a word which denotes more than what is merely
convenient, reasonable or sensible. As a constituent
of the collocation
"necessary to protect the safety of any person", "necessary" connotes that the
Parliament is not concerned with
trivialities. It has been suggested that
"necessary" in this context permits of two possible constructions: either that
established on the balance of probabilities that, absent the order
sought, the person would suffer harm; or alternatively, satisfaction
balance of probabilities that the order is necessary to protect the person's
safety, the latter being a conclusion informed
by the nature, imminence and
degree of likelihood of apprehended harm. As it appears to me, the latter
construction is to be preferred.
15. The criterion is not one of necessity to prevent harm to a person but
of necessity to protect the safety of a person. And safety
is a protean
conception which is certainly informed by the nature and gravity of apprehended
harm and the risk of its occurrence.
To take but one, prosaic example, no one
today rationally doubts that the wearing of seat belts while travelling in a
motor car is
necessary to protect the safety of drivers and passengers. At the
same time, it is certainly not the case that, but for wearing a
seat belt, it is
more probable than not that an occupant of a moving motor car will suffer harm.
That is not to suggest that just
any risk of harm will suffice. To repeat, the
provision is not concerned with trivialities. But what it is intended to convey
that, because the idea of safety invariably entails the assessment of risk,
it should be regarded as sufficient to satisfy the test
of "necessary to protect
the safety of any person" that, upon the evidence, the court is satisfied of the
existence of a possibility
of harm of such gravity and likelihood that, without
the order sought, the risk of prejudice to the safety of the person would range
above the level that can reasonably be regarded as acceptable”.
decision was considered in
[2019] NSWCCA 46
when considering the
legislative scheme in New South Wales.
noted above in this state the power I am urged to exercise is an implied one,
not one governed by legislation. Nevertheless, the
above cases provide guidance
as to the exercise of that power. In my view the proper approach to this matter
is to keep in mind
the various admonitions regarding the crucial significance of
open justice et cetera noted above as a starting point, to steadfastly
in mind that the touchstone for the exercise of the power is
“safety” of persons, and to then consider the nature,
imminence, and
degree of likelihood of their safety (or the safety of, say, family
et cetera) being at real risk of being compromised
– i.e. of harm
alleged occurring. If the prospective harm is very severe on the above
formulation it may be more readily
concluded that the order is necessary, even
if the risk does not rise beyond a mere possibility.
relied on and discussion
material from the psychiatrist as to the matter of the defendant’s
psychological wellbeing is contained in a letter dated
1 June 2024 sent to the
defendant’s solicitors. That relatively brief letter is as
Thank you for reaching out regarding XY who I have met on one occasion as
you are aware.
As stated in my GP letter I strongly feel that his depressive symptoms are
being perpetuated by the stress of the trial, with one
of the major stressors
being bringing shame to the family name.
Although he had the capacity to make the poor decisions he made, which
have now led to the charges against him, I also believe that
he was medically
untreated for his mental health prior to and during the time these events
occurred and hence this may have influenced
his judgement.
Hence, I am of the belief that he deserves a fair chance to get better and
similarly a fair chance to be given the privilege of his
name being suppressed
by the media. Should he have his name exposed I fear he may become suicidal
which has been one of his concerns
whilst depressed.
Should you have any concerns please do reach out as you can also request a
medicolegal report if needed.
Kind regards
Dr AG, Psychiatrist”.
materials to be found on the
“Tasmania/And Justice for All”
post is as follows:
“26 March: A 29-year-old man from
Youngtown has been charged with child exploitation offences following an
investigation by
Tasmania Police and Australian Federal Police’s Joint
Anti-Child Exploitation Team (JACET).
Police executed a search warrant on Monday, and the man was subsequently
arrested and charged with possessing child exploitation material.
appear in the Launceston Magistrates Court on 5 June”.
comments on that story were several. The first was a picture of a coffin. The
next simply commented
. The next simply commented
. The next commented
"he will get a slap like Brett Broadby
on the hand and get told don’t do it again"
. The final comment was
attached to the materials I received was another post from the
“Tasmania/And Justice for All”
Facebook page with a number of
comments. Those related to other stories about child sex offenders and the sort
of responses which
followed on that page when that sort of issue was posted
with a comment
"a pack of feral hogs can consume an entire paedophile in less
than 10 minutes"
. Another comment was to the effect
"another pathetic
sentence! Take him out of protective custody!!"
. Another was a picture of a
young person making what appears to be a cutthroat gesture across their own
throat. Another was a picture
of a knife or blade of some sort. The final two
comments relied upon were in the following terms. One was simply
, and the final one was
"he’s in Risdon with all the
other pedo’s and sick twisted murdering druggy scum, he’ll be
treated like a king,
all the other rapists and child predators like Red Riley
and co have a huge party down there"
Facebook materials were tendered in support of a submission that the
defendant’s physical safety may be at risk if his
name was published.
That submission was also joined with a more wide-ranging submission that the
defendant’s name was such
as to be able to identify it with his family,
the family business and that therefore that the safety, wellbeing and interests
other members of his family and/or others who work at that business might be
compromised consequent on publication of his name.
those materials I note the following:
opinion as to the matter of suicidal ideation is based on the opinion of a
psychiatrist, albeit one who has seen the defendant
on one occasion only. There
is no other history or materials referred to which have been taken into account
in making the comments
that Dr AG made.
comment by Dr AG,
“hence I am of the belief that he deserves a fair
chance to get better and similarly a fair chance to be given the privilege
his name being suppressed by the media”
takes this application
nowhere. It is an expression of opinion by the doctor and no more. It appears
to relate to the comments
made in the paragraph immediately before it which
would appear, doing the best I can, to perhaps be matters which might be put in
mitigation, should the defendant plead guilty or be found guilty of the
relevant part of the report is limited to the following comment.
have his name exposed I fear he may become suicidal which has been one of his
concerns whilst depressed"
the stress of the bringing of charges and court appearances is having the effect
of perpetuating some depressive symptoms
as is the major stressor of
"bringing shame to the family name"
relation to those comments at (iv) above I refer to the comments of Lord
Atkinson in
Scott and Anor v Scott
as referred to in paragraph 10(x)
above. While expressed in archaic language the words of Lord Atkinson are as
relevant today as
they were 111 years ago.
accept that the application here is more limited than some which have been made
in other cases in that all that is sought to be
suppressed is the name of the
defendant and the defendant does not seek to have more regarding the matter
suppressed from public
view. Nevertheless despite that, all the considerations
I have referred to above apply in this case.
the purposes of this application insofar as it relates to the safety of the
defendant the key words in Dr AG’s report as
to the matter of the
safety of the defendant are the words
"I fear he may become suicidal"
that basis on the materials before me, adopting the
"calculus of risk"
approach described above, I am not satisfied that the order remaining in place
is “necessary”. For completeness, if
it be that a different
approach to the matter of whether an order is necessary or not (i.e. if it be
“probability test”
ought be applied) then I likewise
note that the materials fail to satisfy me of that test.
other matter which was relied upon is the matter of the safety and interests of
the defendant’s family and those employed
in the family’s business.
Without in any way seeking to detract from the upset and even the real distress
that publication
may cause those persons, that type of consequence flowing from
charging of suspects is hardly unknown or in any way exceptional or
unusual. As
is apparent to anyone familiar with the criminal justice system, for many, many
people the process of having their loved
ones, friends or associates
investigated and charged, especially for serious offending, is a very
distressing circumstance. It may
result in damage to the reputation of the
family generally amongst some elements in the community. It may even affect
interests. It may also result in reputational damage for those close
to and associated with the person so charged.
without wishing to detract from the extent of that, the words of Nettle J in
[2019] HCA 6 at paragraph [15] are of particular significance in
this regard. We are concerned here with safety of persons, not
harm to them in
the sense referred to above. Again to use the language of Nettle J, those harms
might be properly considered “trivialities”
for the purpose of an
application such as this.
materials relied on as to the defendant’s physical safety are entirely
unconvincing in any event. The sorts of ill-informed
comments as published on
the Facebook pages that were put into evidence take the matter nowhere. They
are generalised and express
the sort of ill-conceived notions that abound in
relation to matters involving sexual offending, particularly that in relation to
children. None of the reactions to other cases, nor even the reactions to the
post relating to this defendant give rise to particular
concerns about this
defendant which carry any weight. They represent no more than ill-advised and
ill-considered commentary or expressions
of opinion by people who, with respect,
probably have little real knowledge or understanding of the justice system, the
standard of proof or sentencing.
materials here insofar as they relate to the physical safety of the defendant
and the safety of those in his family and his family’s
business are to be
contrasted, for example, with the threat to the family members as is apparent in
Any threat here is vague, generalised and non-specific. There
is no evidence that anyone making the comments is anything but an opinionated
bystander, rather than someone capable of actually doing anything nefarious
whatsoever. On applications such as this Court should
be robust about social
media posts of that sought. At the end of the day those materials do no more
than evidence the community’s
disquiet about matters such as this.
therefore decline to continue the interim order currently in force. However,
noting that the defendant may wish to appeal this
ruling, I will hear the
parties as to the details of the order that I make today.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (185 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter