URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCAT/2025/188.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CHH (Application for Treatment Order) [2025] TASCAT 188 (25 September 2025)
CHH (Application for Treatment Order)
[2025] TASCAT 188
Mental Health Stream
CHH (the Patient)
Dr MDH(Applicant)
Hearing Date:
12 August 2025
Hearing Location:
Date of Orders:
12 August 2025
Date Reasons Issued:
25 September 2025
R Holder – Senior Member
O Ridley– Ordinary Member
Morrissey – Senior Member (Psychiatrist)
Orders Made:
Treatment order made
Catchwords:
Mental Health Stream – Application for treatment order –
Schizophrenia – Patient wanting to leave hospital - Treatment
criteria met
–– Treatment order made.
Legislation Cited:
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas) ss, 4, 6, 7, 12, 15, 40, Sch 1.
Cases Cited:
B v Mental Health Tribunal
[2020] TASSC 10
CMB v Mental
Health Tribunal
[2021] TASFC 4
S v Mental Health Tribunal
Representation:
Publication Restriction:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication.
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
(the patient) is a 30-year-old male who lives by himself in a flat at his
mother's property in [regional Tasmania]. CHH is currently
unemployed. Prior to
his recent admission to hospital, CHH has been case managed by Adult Community
Mental Health Services (ACMHS),
on a voluntary basis.
application for a treatment order for CHH (the application) was filed on 8
August 2025 by the Tasmanian Health Service with the
Tasmanian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (the Tribunal). The Tribunal made an interim treatment
order on the 8 August 2025 which
was to expire on the 18 August 2025. The
application was listed to be heard on 12 August 2025.
hearing proceeded on 12 August 2025 and was heard at the Tribunal’s
premises, 38 Barrack Street in Hobart and via video
link. CHH, the applicant Dr
MDH, psychiatry registrar, KRR clinical lead, BC social worker, BL and T
registered nurses, and Dr TN,
psychiatric registrar (observing) all attended the
hearing by video link. At the end of the hearing, we provided our determination
and our oral reasons. CHH became verbally aggressive and appeared to be agitated
and chose to leave the hearing before we provided
our oral reasons.
has requested written reasons. These are our
Legislation
are required to determine whether the patient meets the treatment criteria in
of the Act.
40. Treatment criteria
The treatment criteria in relation to a person are –
(a) the person has a mental illness; and
(b) without treatment, the mental illness will, or is likely to, seriously harm
(i) the person's health or safety; or
(ii) the safety of other persons; and
(c) the treatment will be appropriate and effective in terms of the outcomes
referred to in
section 6(1)
(d) the treatment cannot be adequately given except under a treatment order; and
(e) the person does not have decision-making capacity.
exercising our discretion whether to affirm, vary or discharge a treatment
order, we are to consider the objects of the Act outlined
The objects of this Act are as follows:
(a) to provide for the assessment and treatment of persons with mental
(b) to provide for appropriate oversight and safeguards in relation to such
assessment and treatment;
(c) to give everyone involved with such assessment and treatment clear direction
as to their rights and responsibilities;
(d) to provide for such assessment and treatment to be given in the least
restrictive setting consistent with clinical need, legal
and judicial
constraints, public safety and patient health, safety and welfare;
(e) to promote voluntary over involuntary assessment and treatment and the
making of free and informed assessment and treatment choices;
(f) to provide for all incidental and ancillary matters.
must refer to the mental health service delivery principles when exercising our
responsibilities under the Act, which is outlined
in Sch 1 of the Act (s 15; see
B v Mental Health Tribunal
[2020] TASSC 10
CMB v Mental
Health Tribunal
[2021] TASFC 4
The person has a mental illness – s 40(a)
term ‘mental illness’ is defined under s 4 of the Act:
4. Meaning of mental illness
(1) For the purposes of this Act –
(a) a person is taken to have a mental illness if he or she experiences,
temporarily, repeatedly or continually –
(i) a serious impairment of thought (which may include delusions); or
(ii) a serious impairment of mood, volition, perception or cognition;
MDH gave evidence at hearing that CHH had experienced a deterioration in his
mental state in the 4 weeks prior to his admission.
CHH was refusing medications
and was brought to the emergency department for admission, after review with a
medical practitioner.
MDH stated CHH has a diagnosis of schizophrenia since he was 18 years old and
presented to hospital with symptoms suggesting acute
psychosis, complicated by
substance use. Dr MDH noted CHH has Cluster B and C personality traits. We heard
CHH’s symptoms included
auditory and visual hallucinations and delusions
of persecution and being detached from reality. At the time of hearing Dr MDH
CHH was irritable, responding to external stimuli and believed he could
hear and see demons.
did not comment on whether he had mental illness. CHH confirmed he had multiple
admissions to hospital in Victoria, because ‘he
was doing amphetamines
quite frequently.” CHH stated:
I was around drugs before I came to hospital. I didn't do them, but I was around
them both (sic).
accept the evidence of Dr MDH and find that CHH has a mental illness, namely
schizophrenia.
Without treatment, the mental illness will, or is
likely to, seriously harm the person’s health or safety; or the safety of
other persons – s 40(b)
Honour Blow CJ provided interpretative commentary on s 40(b) in two previous
S v Mental Health Tribunal
[2016] TASSC 34
, his Honour mentioned at [22]:
The thresholds for the satisfaction of the criteria in s 40(b) and (c) are
fairly low. To be satisfied as to (b), a medical practitioner
need not be
satisfied of any risk to other persons, nor of any risk to the safety of the
patient. It is sufficient if the practitioner
is satisfied that, without
treatment, the mental illness is likely to seriously harm the person's health,
which of course includes
the person's mental health.
the purposes of the Act, the word ‘likely’ means “something
more than a remote or theoretical possibility...something
that might well
B v Mental Health Tribunal
[2020] TASSC 10
her oral and written evidence Dr MDH stated that without treatment CHH’s
symptoms are likely to worsen, especially if CHH
continues to engage in
substance use. Dr MDH also opined that CHH is at risk of self harm as he is
wanting to take blood from his
body to “allow the demons to leave his
did not respond to this evidence.
accept the evidence of Dr MDH that without treatment CHH’s mental illness
is likely to deteriorate causing harm to both his
health and safety, and most
probably requiring readmission to hospital for ongoing treatment. We are
satisfied that s 40(b) of the
Act is met.
The treatment will be
appropriate and effective in terms of the outcomes referred to in s 6(1) –
need to be satisfied that the outcome of the proposed treatment is appropriate
and effective as per s 6(1) of the Act:
6. Meaning of treatment
(1) For the purposes of this Act, treatment is the professional intervention
necessary to –
(a) prevent or remedy mental illness; or
(b) manage and alleviate, where possible, the ill effects of mental illness;
(c) reduce the risks that persons with mental illness may, on that account, pose
to themselves or others; or
(d) monitor or evaluate a person's mental state.
S v Mental Health Tribunal
(supra), his Honour Blow CJ commented on the
interpretation of this criterion at [23]:
Although s 40(c) uses the words "the treatment will be appropriate and
effective", it is clear that the legislation is intended to
apply to mentally
ill individuals whose symptoms cannot be treated or ameliorated in any way. For
the purposes of s 40(c) treatment
will be "appropriate and effective" if it is
treatment directed towards the management of the ill effects of mental illness,
just the monitoring of a person's mental state: s 6(1)(b) and (d).
her oral evidence, Dr MDH stated that CHH is receiving inpatient treatment
currently in the high dependency unit (HDU) in the mental
health unit of the
hospital and was receiving one on one supervision, treatment and care.
MDH stated CHH was receiving quetiapine, lorazepam and olanzapine with a plan to
transition from oral antipsychotic medication
to a depot antipsychotic
medication. Dr MDH confirmed this treatment is proposed moving forward including
follow up by ACMHS once
CHH is discharged from hospital, as well as metabolic
and physical health monitoring and regular blood and urine testing
MDH opined that the optimisation of CHH’s treatment will control his
symptoms of acute psychosis and return him to his baseline.
on all the evidence, we find the treatment being provided and proposed, is
appropriate and effective as it is likely that CHH’s
psychotic symptoms
will continue to improve and resolve. We find s 40(c) of the Act is
The treatment cannot be adequately given except under a
treatment order – s 40(d)
MDH stated CHH was requesting to leave the hospital because he did not believe
his symptoms were related to his mental health,
but instead believed he needed
spiritual help and wanted to attend the mosque. Dr MDH opined that as CHH does
not believe he needs
treatment for mental illness it is likely he would leave
and disengage from ACMHS and treatment.
MDH indicated CHH usually ceases his medications when he starts to become
unwell, as has occurred prior to this admission.
expressed he did not need to be in hospital. In response to questioning by the
Tribunal, CHH confirmed if he wasn’t on a
treatment order, he would leave
hospital and go straight to the mosque. In relation to the medications CHH
stated he would take the
Quetiapine and the Lurasidone but not the Olanzapine.
CHH indicated that Olanzapine is an “evil drug” as it makes you
“stupid, tired and fat.”
find that CHH is likely to leave the hospital and cease treatment if he was not
on a treatment order. Further, we find s 40(d)
of the Act is met, because CHH
lacks decision making capacity for treatment, which is addressed below. Lawful
authorisation is required
under the Act to treat CHH, and as such, a treatment
order is required.
The person does not have decision-making
capacity – s 40(e)
term ‘decision-making capacity’ is defined in s 7 of the Act:
of adults and children to make decisions about their own assessment and
(1) For the purposes of this Act, an adult is taken to have the capacity to
make a decision about his or her own assessment or treatment
(decision-making
capacity) unless a person or body considering that capacity under this Act is
satisfied that –
(a) he or she is unable to make the decision because of an impairment of, or
disturbance in, the functioning of the mind or brain;
(b) he or she is unable to –
(i) understand information relevant to the decision; or
(ii) retain information relevant to the decision; or
(iii) use or weigh information relevant to the decision; or
(iv) communicate the decision (whether by speech, gesture or other means).
MDH opined that CHH does not have decision making capacity as he was presenting
acutely psychotic and detached from reality. Dr
MDH stated CHH is unable to
understand and use and weigh information to make and have adequate decisions
related to his mental health
in terms of retaining the information relevant to
the decision, CHH has showed limited ability to retain the information provided.
find that CHH is acutely psychotic, which is impairing the functioning of his
mind and his perception of reality. By reason of
this we find CHH is unable to
understand, use and weigh information and retain information relevant to his
mental illness and the
treatment of it. We heard from CHH that he is fixed on
discharging from hospital and going to the mosque to obtain spiritual help
does not recognise the benefits of remaining in hospital and receiving
The discretion to make a treatment order
indicated, we are satisfied that CHH meets the treatment criterion. In
exercising our discretion, we are required to take account
of the objects of the
Act (s 12) and the mental health service delivery principles (Sch 1). Given the
evidence before us, we were
satisfied that we should exercise our discretion and
make a treatment order for CHH.
treatment order for CHH was made for a period of six months and is due to expire
on 11 February 2026 at 4.10pm, unless discharged
by the Tribunal or an approved
medical practitioner sooner.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.8 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter