URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCAT/2025/202.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
OT v Asbestos Compensation Commissioner [2025] TASCAT 202 (6 November 2025)
OT v Asbestos Compensation Commissioner [2025] TASCAT 202
Personal Compensation
OT (Applicant)
Asbestos Compensation Commissioner (Respondent)
Hearing Date:
Hearing Location:
Date of Orders:
6 November 2025
Date Reasons Issued:
6 November 2025
L D Jack, Senior Member
Orders Made:
(a) The applicant is entitled to compensation under the
Asbestos-Related
Diseases (Occupational Exposure) Compensation Act 2011
for a compensable
disease on the basis that:
(i) He has the asbestos-related disease of asbestosis.
(ii) The asbestos-related disease is reasonably attributable to exposure to
asbestos in the course of his employment as a worker
in Tasmania.
(b) The applicant has an imminently fatal
-related disease being
asbestosis.
(c) The Asbestos Compensation Commissioner is to determine the applicant’s
entitlement to
compensation
under the Act and to pay to the applicant
(via his legal representatives) his entitlement within 14 days of these
(d) There are no orders as to the costs of the proceeding
Catchwords:
Asbestos compensation – applicant has a compensable disease –
whether ‘imminently fatal’ or ‘non-imminently
asbestos-related disease – Tribunal required Asbestos Compensation
Commissioner to refer medical questions to
a medical panel – weight to be
given to medical panel’s determination
Legislation Cited:
Asbestos-Related Diseases (Occupational Exposure) Compensation Act
Cases Cited:
Representation:
Applicant: A Arian
Respondent: S
Solicitors:
Applicant: Maurice Blackburn
Respondent: State Litigation Office
Publication Restriction:
The decision has been anonymised for the purposes of publication.
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
applicant made a claim for compensation under the
Asbestos-Related Diseases
(Occupational Exposure) Compensation Act 2011
(the ARDC Act).
claim for compensation was received by the Asbestos Compensation Commissioner.
The claim for compensation was accompanied by a
number of documents which
included clinical records relating to the applicant, the results of radiological
investigations, medical
certificates and documents relating to the
worker’s employment history and marital status. The applicant also relied
opinion of his treating consultant Respiratory Physician, Professor F
Lake and expert witness reports from Professor K Thomson, Diagnostic
Interventional Radiologist, dated 5 July 2024 and Professor F Brims, Consultant
Respiratory Physician, dated 30 August 2024.
accordance with the ARDC Act the Commissioner referred a number of medical
questions to a medical panel (the original medical panel).
Upon being notified
of the original medical panel’s decision in relation to those medical
questions, the Commissioner determined
that the applicant was entitled to
compensation under the ARDC Act on the basis that the applicant had a
non-imminently fatal asbestos-related
disease in accordance with s 70(2)(b) of
the ARDC Act.
applicant disputed the determination that his condition was a
‘non-imminently fatal asbestos-related disease’. He
contended that
his condition is an ‘imminently fatal asbestos-related disease’
within the meaning of s 70(2)(a) of the
applicant referred the Commissioner’s determination to the Tribunal under
s 124 of the ARDC Act.
a person is entitled to compensation under the Act, the question of whether the
compensable person has a ‘non-imminently
fatal asbestos-related
disease’ or an ‘imminently fatal asbestos-related disease’
within the meanings of the ARDC
Act will be relevant to the nature and amount of
compensation payable under that Act.
an applicant refers a determination of the Commissioner to the Tribunal under s
124, the Tribunal is required to resolve the
referral by making a determination
that the Commissioner could make in relation to the matter.
decision is a determination about whether the applicant has a non-imminently
fatal, or imminently fatal asbestos-related disease
for the purposes of the ARDC
The decision of the original medical panel
questions that were referred to the original medical panel (that are relevant to
this determination) together with the answers
to those questions provided by the
Chair of the original medical panel are as follows:
Question: Does [the applicant] have an imminently fatal asbestos-related
Question: What is the asbestos-related disease or diseases?
Question: Is the contraction of the disease or diseases reasonably
attributable to exposure to asbestos at work?
Yes. The claimant was exposed over a 12 year period ending in 1989 in his
capacity as an apprentice, then qualified carpenter/joiner
Question: Does the person have an imminently fatal asbestos-related disease?
Question: Does the person have a non-imminently fatal asbestos-related
Question: General comments (if any).
A complex determination given the revised opinion regarding the aetiology of his
interstitial lung disease from his treating clinician
(the original diagnosis
was idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and he was prescribed anti-fibrotic
therapy on this basis).
Question: Reasons for decision or reasons why unable to make a decision.
[The asterisks in the answers above refer to the answer to this question] This
was a majority decision in favour of a diagnosis of
asbestosis despite the
absence of benign asbestos pleural disease on imaging, based on the exposure
history with ample time lag and
the UIP [unusual interstitial pneumonia] pattern
seen on lung biopsies (this is common to both asbestosis and IPF).
There was then a split decision in terms of whether this should be considered a
non-imminently fatal or imminently fatal condition,
but it was agreed that
another impairment assessment should be commissioned.
separate answers to the Commissioner’s questions provided by the Chair (as
panel member) and each of the other two panel
members disclose that one panel
member did not consider that the applicant had an asbestos-related disease, and
although the other
two panel members considered the applicant had the
asbestos-related disease of asbestosis, one panel member considered it to be
non-imminently
fatal, and the other considered it to be imminently fatal. In
accordance with the recommendation for further impairment assessment,
applicant was assessed by Dr A Ernst, Occupational Medicine Specialist.
71 of the ARDC Act requires the Commissioner to treat the determination of the
medical panel of the medical question referred
to it as conclusive evidence of
that medical question.
the basis of the original medical panel’s decision, and in accordance with
s 71 of the ARDC Act, the Commissioner determined
that the applicant has a
non-imminently fatal asbestos-related disease.
The referral to
the Tribunal
applicant’s referral to the Tribunal was accompanied by all of the
material that had been filed in support of the application,
together with
additional documentation provided to the Commissioner at a later date,
specifically the results of lung function testing
performed on 29 April 2024,
and an independent expert report of Dr Jonathan Burdon, Consultant Respiratory
support of the referral, the applicant later filed additional medical evidence
which consisted of clinical records of the Fiona
Stanley Hospital where the
applicant has been a patient and a medical report of Dr Meow Cheong Yaw,
Consultant Physician, Advanced
Lung Disease and Lung Transplant Unit,
Respiratory Medicine, Fiona Stanley Hospital dated 2 April
Overview of medical evidence relied upon by the
F Lake, Consultant Respiratory Physician, noted the history relating to the
applicant who had initially been diagnosed with
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
She noted that upon review of recent and previous CT scans small areas of
calcified plaques, consistent
with asbestos exposure, had been retrospectively
identified. Although the calcified plaques had been present for many years it
not ever formally reported on or identified, but later recognised to have
slowly increased over time. It was Dr Lake’s opinion
that the pleural
plaques were induced by asbestos. The applicant’s diagnosis was revised to
that of “asbestos-related
interstitial lung disease (asbestosis) and
asbestos-related calcified pleural plaque”. Professor Lake noted that the
diagnosis would not make any difference to the treating team’s
approach towards the applicant’s future care.
Thomson reviewed radiological scans covering the period January 2006 to October
2023. He noted that the CT examinations
showed evidence of typical raised
calcified pleural plaques on the right side consistent with asbestos-related
pleural disease which
appeared first in April 2022. Specifically, he considered
that the applicant showed radiological evidence of interstitial lung disease
consistent with a diagnosis of asbestosis. He agreed with the opinion of Dr Lake
(as set out above).
Brims’ report disclosed that he examined the applicant on 28 August 2024.
He noted that the term ‘asbestosis’
refers to pulmonary fibrosis
caused by asbestos fibre exposure and inhalation and is clinically and
radiologically indistinguishable
to idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. He emphasised
the significance of a history of exposure to asbestos and opined that pulmonary
could not be considered to be idiopathic in the context of known
exposure to a pro-fibrotic agent, such as asbestos. He also noted
that there is
no known threshold of exposure to asbestos below which individuals will not
develop asbestosis. Professor Brims considered
that where the applicant had
clinical characteristics of pulmonary fibrosis, radiological and biopsy results
consistent with both
UIP or asbestosis, and a clear history of 13 years’
exposure to asbestos dust, the appropriate diagnosis was that of asbestosis.
terms of the applicant’s life expectancy, Professor Brims referred to
statistical likelihood of the applicant’s death
within one, two or three
years as 16.2%, 29.9% and 42% respectively.
Burdon was provided with copies of the materials that had accompanied the
applicant’s claim for compensation and provided
an expert witness report
dated 22 December 2024. Dr Burdon noted the briefing history provided by the
applicant’s solicitors
in relation to the applicant’s employment as
a carpenter and joiner in Tasmania, commencing with an apprenticeship in 1977
and continuing through until about 1990. Dr Burdon considered that the applicant
had had a “past significant exposure to asbestos
containing dust and
materials”.
Burdon also reviewed the applicant’s medical history, including the
results of testing and radiological investigations. In
response to a number of
questions put to him by the applicant’s solicitors, he expressed his
opinion as follows:
The applicant
suffers from benign asbestos-related pleural disease and asbestosis. Dr Burdon
formed his opinion based on the applicant’s
occupational exposure to
asbestos, his medical history and his radiographic and respiratory physiological
findings, which were consistent
with the diagnosed conditions, and noted that
other causes of pulmonary fibrosis had been excluded.
The history of
asbestos exposure and inhalation during the course of the applicant’s
employment and radiographic findings were
consistent with the diagnoses.
Without lung
transplantation the applicant was likely to die within the next two years and
the applicant’s asbestosis would
be the cause of his death or, if not, it
would make the most significant contribution to his death.
Yaw noted that the applicant was known to the Advanced Lung Disease Unit of
Fiona Stanley Hospital in Western Australia as he had
been referred initially
for consideration of lung transplantation as a treatment option for severe
interstitial lung disease. Although
the applicant was initially diagnosed with
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, Dr Yaw noted that the diagnosis was subsequently
to asbestosis, based on the presence of asbestos plural plaque,
radiological and histological findings in keeping with an unusual
interstitial
pneumonia pattern, as well as significant inhalation asbestos exposure in the
past. Dr Yaw noted that the disease was
progressive and there had been recorded
deterioration on various assessments. He also noted the applicant was
symptomatic with breathlessness
on minimal exertion, chronic cough and fatigue
which was significantly impacting on the quality of the applicant’s
on the disease behaviour and trajectory Dr Yaw predicted the applicant would
have a survival of less than two years without
lung transplantation. Dr Yaw
noted the significant medical history of the applicant and noted also that
consideration had been given
to lung transplantation as a potential treatment
option but because of a number of complex issues the applicant was not, at the
of the report, considered to be a candidate for a lung transplant. The
issues noted by Dr Yaw that mitigated against lung transplantation
increased the
surgical risk and potentially correlated to a poor lung transplant
Referral to another medical panel
parties requested that the referral should proceed by the Tribunal notifying the
Commissioner that the Tribunal required the Commissioner
to refer a medical
question to a medical panel pursuant to s 142(1)(b) of the ARDC Act.
accordance with the request from the parties, and being satisfied that it was
appropriate to exercise the Tribunal’s discretion
to do so in accordance
with s 142(2) of the Act, by notification to the Commissioner pursuant to s
142(1)(b) dated 2 July 2025, the
Tribunal required the Commissioner to refer to
a medical panel particular medical questions relevant to the determination of
referral. I will refer to the medical panel convened by the Commissioner at
the request of the Tribunal as ‘the medical panel’.
to be provided to the medical panel, as agreed between the parties, were
provided to the Commissioner. They included all
of the materials filed and
relied upon by the applicant in support of his referral.
1 August 2025, the Tribunal received notice from the Commissioner that the
medical panel had returned answers to the medical questions
referred to it, and
completed documentation from medical panel members was provided to the
The medical panel’s decision
medical panel’s answers to the questions referred to it were set out in
the report of the Chair of the medical panel as
Question: Does [the applicant] have an imminently fatal asbestos-related
Question: Does [the applicant] have a non-imminently fatal asbestos-related
Please provide reasons for your decision
There as [sic] a split decision over whether [the applicant] suffered from
asbestosis or IPF.
[Panel member A] felt that based on the history and the asbestos exposure that
the diagnosis was one of IPF and hence not asbestosis
and therefore prognosis
was not relevant in this case.
[Panel member B] felt that on the basis of history of exposure, histology and
disease progression that asbestosis was the diagnosis.
Given this diagnosis and
the recent lung function then death was more likely within the next two
I concur with [Panel member B] that given the exposure to a fibrogenic compound
over a number of years with a significant lag period
that this could not be
classified as idiopathic. As the histology is similar between the two diagnoses
I am happy to call this asbestosis.
As stated above with [Panel member B] the
recent progression and clinical description would suggest death in the next two
report of the Chair of the medical panel annexed reports from Panel members A
and B. I have considered the reports of Panel members
A and B and am satisfied
they have been adequately summarised by the Chair of the medical panel in his
The Commissioner’s position
the decision of the medical panel, written submissions on behalf of the
applicant were filed and served on 21 August 2025.
On 12 September 2025, the
Commissioner indicated that the Commissioner would not make any written
submissions in relation to this
matter but was content to have the matter
determined on the papers by the Tribunal, as sought by the
The hearing
applicant requests that the Tribunal determine the proceedings on the papers
without an oral hearing. The Commissioner does not
oppose this request.
applicant says that it is appropriate to determine the matter without an oral
hearing and refers to previous decisions of the
Asbestos Compensation Tribunal
(Tas) in support of the application. In particular, the applicant submits that
it is appropriate for
the Tribunal to determine this matter on the papers
without an oral hearing because:
(a) the application for referral raises a limited factual contest about whether
the applicant’s asbestos-related disease of
asbestosis is an imminently
fatal asbestos-related disease or non-imminently fatal condition
asbestos-related disease
(b) the applicant’s exposure to asbestos in the course of employment in
Tasmania is not in contest
(c) the Commissioner determined the applicant’s claim for compensation by
adopting the opinions of the original medical panel
and Dr Ernst
(d) since the commencement of this proceeding, the applicant has provided
further material supporting a finding that his asbestos-related
diseases of
asbestosis is an imminently fatal asbestos-related disease
(e) after the Tribunal required the Commissioner to refer relevant medical
questions to a different medical panel, the medical panel
determined that the
applicant has an imminently fatal asbestos-related disease
(f) the medical panel was provided with all of the material that was provided to
the original medical panel, but also material obtained
since the commencement of
the proceeding, that was not before the original medical panel.
(g) the Commissioner does not rely upon any additional material, does not object
to the Tribunal receiving any of the applicant’s
evidence and does not
seek to cross examine any of the applicant’s witnesses.
(h) there would be costs associated with an oral hearing that would generally be
borne by each party in accordance with s 146 of
the ARDC Act
accept the submissions made by the applicant in relation to the question of how
this hearing ought to proceed. I note the Commissioner
does not oppose the
request for determination of the matter on the papers, and to follow that course
would be consistent with previous
decisions of the Asbestos Compensation
Tribunal under the ARDC Act.
matter will be determined on the papers without the need for an oral
The applicant’s position
applicant submits that the Tribunal ought to make the following
determination:
(a) That the applicant has a compensable disease within the meaning of that term
in s 6 of the ARDC Act in that:
(iii) He has the asbestos-related disease of asbestosis; and
(iv) His asbestos-related disease is reasonably attributable to exposure in the
course of his employment in Tasmania.
(b) He has an imminently fatal asbestos-related disease being asbestosis.
(c) He is a person entitled to compensation under s 29(1) of the Act.
the applicant asks the Tribunal to make the following orders consequent upon the
above determinations:
(a) That the applicant is entitled to compensation under the ARDC Act for the
compensable disease on the basis that:
(i) He has the asbestos-related disease of asbestosis;
(ii) The asbestos-related disease is reasonably attributable to exposure in the
course of the applicant’s work in Tasmania.
(b) The applicant has an imminently fatal asbestos-related disease being
asbestosis.
(c) The Commissioner is to determine the applicant’s entitlement to
compensation under the Act and to pay to the applicant
(via his legal
representatives) his entitlement within 14 days of the determination.
(d) There be no orders as to costs of the proceedings.
The applicant’s submissions about the substantive issues
applicant submits that the Tribunal should accept the majority decision by the
medical panel as determinative of the medical questions
in these proceedings for
the following reasons:
(a) The medical panel was provided with all relevant material including material
that was not available to the original medical panel.
(b) The medical panel has provided cogent and persuasive reasons for its
determination.
(c) The majority decision of the medical panel is consistent with the
applicant’s treating physicians
(d) To date the Commissioner has not filed any expert evidence contrary to the
determination of the medical panel, nor the expert
evidence relied upon by the
Determination
has been acknowledged by a significant number of the medical practitioners
involved in this proceeding, including treatment providers,
independent
specialists and members of the medical panels, that this is a complex matter.
give significant weight to the determination of the medical panel (noting that
it was a majority decision) where the panel had available
to it all of the
material relevant to the medical questions that were ultimately put to it,
including the applicant’s history
of exposure, opinions of treatment
providers and independent experts, and the complete picture of the results of
investigations and
progression of the applicant’s condition up until the
time of the medical panel’s determination.
considered the material provided to the medical panel and the determination of
that panel, including the reasons provided by
the majority of the panel for its
determination, I am satisfied it is appropriate for me to accept the medical
panel’s determination.
accordingly determine:
(a) The applicant has a compensable disease within the meaning of
Asbestos- Related Diseases (Occupational Exposure) Compensation Act 2011
(i) He has the asbestos-related disease of asbestosis.
(ii) The contraction of his asbestos-related disease is reasonably attributable
to exposure to asbestos in the course of his employment
as a worker in Tasmania.
(b) The applicant has an imminently fatal asbestos-related disease being
asbestosis.
(c) The applicant is a person entitled to compensation under
Asbestos-related Diseases (Occupational Exposure)
Compensation Act 2011
the light of the above determinations I make the following orders:
(a) The applicant is entitled to compensation under the
Asbestos-Related
Diseases (Occupational Exposure) Compensation Act 2011
for a compensable
disease on the basis that:
(iii) He has the asbestos-related disease of asbestosis.
(iv) The asbestos-related disease is reasonably attributable to exposure to
asbestos in the course of his employment as a worker
in Tasmania.
(b) The applicant has an imminently fatal asbestos-related disease being
asbestosis.
(c) The Asbestos Compensation Commissioner is to determine the applicant’s
entitlement to compensation under the Act and to
pay to the applicant (via his
legal representatives) his entitlement within 14 days of these orders.
(d) There are no orders as to the costs of the proceeding.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.83 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter