URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASADT/2020/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Williamson v Bedelph (No 2) [2020] TASADT 6 (18 August 2020)
[2020] TASADT 6
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
Williamson v Bedelph (No 2)
[2020] TASADT 6
WILLIAMSON, Rachael
BEDELPH, Drew
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
By written submissions
DELIVERED ON:
18 August 2020
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Tribunal Member Robert Winter
CATCHWORDS:
complainant unsuccessful after inquiry - whether there
should be an order for the payment of the respondent’s costs
Anti-Discrimination Act
Williamson v Bedelph
[2016] TASADT 12
Williamson v Bedelph
Williamson v Bedelph
[2019] TASADT 4
Marrone v University
of Tasmania and Walters
[2016] TASADT 13
State of Tasmania v
Anti-Discrimination Tribunal
[2008] TASSC 23
Cutler v Mayne and DHHS:
Cutler v Martin & DHHS
[2008] TASADT 6
Maree Summers v State of
Tasmania (Department of Education) and Ors
[2020] TASADT 5
The State of
Tasmania v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal & Ors
[2009] TASSC 48
Praksash v Bobb Borg Enterprises
[1999] NSWADT 83
Langley v Niland
[1981] 2 NSWLR 104.
DETERMINATION:
That the complainant pay one third of the
respondent’s costs with respect to the inquiry from the date of the
referral of the
complainant’s complaint for inquiry to the Tribunal on 7
January 2015, to 16 August 2016, being the date of the Tribunal’s
Williamson v Bedelph
[2016] TASADT 12
, such costs to be calculated on
a party/party basis at 80% of the scale of fees presently allowed to
practitioners and counsel under
Supreme Court Rules 2000
REPRESENTATION:
complainant:
respondents:
Solicitors:
complainant:
respondents:
Crotty Legal
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1 Subsequent to the Tribunal’s decision on 30 April 2019
to dismiss the complainant’s complaints against the respondent
(Williamson
[2019] TASADT 4)
, the respondent by written submissions dated 15
August 2019 sought an order that their costs of and incidental to the Inquiry be
paid by the complainant.
2 On 11 September 2019, the complainant’s
solicitors filed submissions opposing the respondent’s costs
application.
3 The question of whether the complainant ought to pay the
respondent’s costs is that which the Tribunal needs to deal with
determination.
is the law?
4 The Act provides:
Subject to S99A, each party to an Inquiry is to pay his or own
“99A Order for costs
(1) The Tribunal may make an order as to costs in relation to any inquiry or
review before it if the Tribunal considers circumstances
justify the
5 In her recent decision, Maree Summers v State of Tasmania
(Department of Education) and Ors
[2020] TASADT 5
delivered on 28 May 2020,
learned Tribunal Member Wilkins undertook an extensive analysis of relevant
authorities in relation to
the matters for the Tribunal to consider in its
determination as to whether it should exercise its discretion to order that the
complainant
pay the respondent’s costs of an Inquiry.
6 Member Wilkins
made reference to the decision of Tribunal Member Brett (as he then was) in
Cutler v Mayne and DHHS: Cutler v Martin
[2008] TASADT 6.
principles enunciated in Tribunal Member Brett’s (as he then was) decision
were as follows:
(a) Section 95 expresses a general rule that parties are to pay
their own costs.
(b) However, that rule “must yield whenever the
Tribunal finds in a particular case, there are circumstances justifying the
making of an order for costs”.
(c) The power to award costs under these
provisions can be distinguished from an unconstrained grant of power. The
outcome of the
proceedings will not have the same primacy that is accorded when
exercising an unconstrained discretion as to costs.
(d) The power must be
exercised judicially, and not arbitrarily, capriciously or as to frustrate the
legislative intent.
(e) The cost discretion must not be exercised on a ground
unconnected with the proceedings. For example, the financial circumstances
party, or an imbalance between the financial resources of the parties, will
ordinarily not be relevant to the exercise of the
discretion with respect to
8 A number of decisions of the Anti-Discrimination Tribunal
since this decision, have referred to these principles, and have confirmed
9 In these Anti-Discrimination Tribunal decisions, the other matters
below have been considered by the Tribunal to be relevant to
the exercise of
discretion in relation to a costs application:
• The conduct of the parties during the
• The motivation of the complainant in making the
• Whether there was reasonable basis to make the
• Whether the complaint was trivial, vexatious or lacking in
• Whether the position taken by the applicant is genuine (if
ultimately found to be misconceived)
• Public interest
considerations.
10 In her decision in Summers, Member Wilkins also referred to
the decision of Evans J in State of Tasmania v Anti-Discrimination
[2008] TASSC 23
where at paragraph 8, His Honour referenced from a decision of
Barsten JA in Hunter Development Brokerage Pty Ltd v Cessnock City
Council (No.
2) [2006] NSWCA:
[2006] NSWCA 292
[2006] 68 NSWLR 177
, that the Tribunal’s discretion to
order costs, is not however confined to previous decisions in relation to
whether Section
99A should apply.
must be taken to avoid broad discretionary powers being inflexibly confined by
comments of the court in previous cases
or by comments in appellate courts.
Whilst explanations as to the exercise of the power may provide guidance in
future cases, the
causation reflected in the observations of Bran J in Norbis v
[1986] HCA 17:
[1986] 161CLR513 at 537, quoted in Oshlack at [35], are
It is one thing to say that principles may be expressed to guide the exercise
of discretion: it is another thing to say that the
practices may harden into
legal rules which would confine the discretion more narrowly than the parliament
intended. The width of
a statutory discretion is determined by the statutes:
cannot be narrowed by the legal rule devised by the court to control its
Conduct of the Parties during the Proceedings
11 The history of the proceedings is of relevance to the
matters the Tribunal is to consider in the exercise of its discretion pursuant
to s99A(1).
12 The complainant’s complaint was referred to the
Anti-Discrimination Tribunal on 7 January 2015.
13 The respondent’s
intent to raise a “jurisdictional argument”, was first raised in a
Directions Conference on
16 March 2015.
14 In a Directions Conference in the
Tribunal on 24 September 2015, with the parties being unable to reach an
agreement to resolve
the complaint, the respondent indicated a desire for a
“jurisdictional issue to be heard”.
15 By notices issued by the
Tribunal to the complainant and the respondent on 20 May 2016, a hearing in
relation to the “jurisdictional
issue”, was listed for 21 June
16 At the hearing of the “jurisdictional issue”, on 21 June
2016, the respondent asserted that the Tribunal should dismiss
allegations made by the complainant against the respondent on the grounds that
they were “misconceived or lacking
in substance”.
Tribunal’s decision Williamson v Bedelph
[2016] TASADT 12
delivered on 16
August 2016, clearly sets out its reasons for its decision to refer allegation
two and three to Inquiry hearing,
and for the dismissal, pursuant to s99(2)(a)
of allegation one, that being “the Julia Drew refusal to postpone - 19 to
2012 allegation”, on the basis as per the respondent’s
Counsel submissions, that this allegation was misconceived and
substance on the basis that the respondent “was not a person who treats
the complainant on the basis of any prescribed
attribute, imputed prescribed
attribute, or a characteristic imputed to that attribute, thus favouring a
person without that attribute
or characteristic as required by Section 14(2), of
18 The Tribunal found clear and unequivocal evidence that
(paragraph 25):
respondent was not responsible for the decision to postpone, as this was clearly
made by Julia Drew in her capacity
as the Arbitrator appointed to deal with the
boundary fence dispute between the parties and in accordance with her
responsibilities
in that role pursuant to the
Commercial Arbitration Act 2011
(at paragraph 26) as a consequence, the complainant was not a person referred to
Section 14(2)
of the Act responsible for the alleged direct discrimination
against the complainant - (paragraph 28) the Tribunal finds that the
complainant’s complaint - allegation one - is misconceived or lacking in
substance and that pursuant to Section 99(2)(a) of
the Act, dismisses this part
of the complainant’s complaint against the
respondent”.
19 With regard to the remaining two allegations, the Tribunal
found that it was necessary for it to first find relevant matters of
relevant to these allegations before any consideration as to the basis of the
matters of law set out in Mr Crotty’s written
submissions (and oral
argument), could be precisely applied to those facts.
20 As a consequence of
this decision, the Inquiry was listed for a hearing, the first day of which
occurred on 19 December 2016.
21 At the conclusion of the complainant’s
case, the respondent made an application to dismiss the complainant’s
pursuant to s99 of the Act, this effectively being a “no case
submission”. Subsequent to hearing oral argument from
Counsel for the
respondent and complainant, the Tribunal reserved its decision.
Tribunal’s decision dealing with the respondent’s dismissal
application was published to the parties on 2 October
2017 - see Williamson v
[2017] TASADT 7.
The respondent’s dismissal application was
itself dismissed. Subsequent to the respondent’s Counsel advising that
respondent intended to give and adduce evidence, the Inquiry hearing was
relisted to resume on 20 December 2017.
23 At the conclusion of the evidence,
and the respondent closing his case, a timetable was set for the delivery of
written submissions
by the parties.
24 The complainant’s written
submissions were received by the Tribunal on 8 February 2018, and the
respondent’s on 2 March
25 The Tribunal published its decision,
dismissing all complaints made by the complainant as against the respondent, on
30 April 2019.
26 By written submissions dated 15 August 2019, the respondent
made the current application that the complainant pay the respondent’s
costs of and incidental to the Inquiry.
27 The complainant’s written
submissions in response to the respondent’s application were received by
the Tribunal on
11 September 2019.
Inquiry Findings
28 In the Tribunal’s decision of 30 April 2019
(Williamson v Bedelph
[2019] TASADT 4)
, from paragraphs 320 to 327, the Tribunal
set out a number of findings of fact before deciding that the
complainant’s complaint
was unsubstantiated, and that it should be
29 Relevantly, the Tribunal found in relation to the allegation of
the complainant saying the words “fat cunt”, to the
complainant on
the weekend of 28/29 July 2012, that the Tribunal preferred the evidence of the
respondent and his witness , his wife,
Ms Shea to that of the complainant and
her husband Mr Williamson.
30 The Tribunal found that the complainant had not
discharged her onus of proving to the requisite standard that the respondent
her a “fat cunt”, on the weekend of 28/29 July
31 The matters detailed in paragraph 324(d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i),
(j), (k), (l), (m), (n) and (o), sets out the matters cited
by the Tribunal as
supportive of the Tribunal’s findings in relation to this
allegation.
32 From paragraph 325 of the Tribunal’s decision of 30
April 2019 (Williamson v Bedelph
[2019] TASADT 4)
, the Tribunal set out its
reasoning for finding that where there was a conflict in the evidence as between
the complainant and Mr
Williamson, and the respondent and Ms Shea, the Tribunal
preferred the evidence of the complainant and Mr Williamson. These findings
related to the allegation that the respondent had written the words “fat
cunt”, on the fencepost between the complainant’s
respondent’s properties on or about 5 November 2012.
33 At paragraph
326, the Tribunal made a finding of fact that the complainant had discharged her
onus, to the requisite standard,
to prove that it was more probable than not
that the respondent did in fact write the words “fat cunt” on the
34 Paragraph 327(a), (b), (c) and (d), of the Tribunal’s
decision of 30 April 2019 set out the Tribunal’s reasoning for
making this
35 From paragraph 328 of its decision of 30 April 2019, the Tribunal
made findings relating to “jurisdictional issues”,
relevant to the
complainant’s complaint of the respondent writing the words “fat
cunt” on the fencepost in the
November period of 2012.
36 In paragraphs
336 to 341, the Tribunal details its reasoning for finding that there was no
evidence to sustain the allegations
concerning the writing of the words
“fat cunt” on the fencepost as at 5 November 2012.
paragraph 342, the Tribunal stated:
light of the above findings, it is not necessary in this decision for the
Tribunal to consider the arguments advanced by
both Counsel for the respondent
and the complainant as to the area of activity of accommodation pursuant to
Section 22(1)(d)
of the Act, being another element of proof required by the
complainant to prove her complaint pursuant to
Submissions as to Costs - respondent
38 In its written submissions, the respondent submits that it
is no longer good law to consider any imbalance between the parties
the decision of His Honour Evans J in State of Tasmania v Anti-Discrimination
39 The respondent submits that there are circumstances in the
current Inquiry which justify the making of an order for costs pursuant
Section 99A, with the basis for this assertion being detailed from paragraph 19
to 33 of their written submissions dated 15 August
40 In paragraph 21
of the respondent’s written submissions, reference is made to the
“first part of the complaint”
being that which led to the
Tribunal’s decision handed down on 16 August 2016 (Williamson v Bedelph
[2016] TASADT 4).
In paragraph 22, the respondent asserts:
Bedelph has therefore been put to the trouble and expense of defending a wholly
unmeritorious and fundamentally misconceived
complaint”.
41 In paragraphs 23 to 25 inclusive of the respondent’s
written submissions, dealing with the Tribunal’s findings in its
of 30 April 2019 (Williamson v Bedelph
[2019] TASADT 4)
, it is asserted that the
proper characterisation of the dismissed complaint against Mr Bedelph is one
which was motivated by monetary
gain. It is asserted that the complaint was not
only misconceived, but if properly characterised as motivated by monetary gain,
the complaint was malicious.
42 At paragraph 25 of the respondent’s
written submissions, it is asserted:
malicious and misconceived complaint are circumstances which provide for the
just making of an order for costs relevant to
that portion of the proceedings
against the respondent”.
43 From paragraph 26 to 28, the respondent makes submissions
with regard to the hearing on 19 December 2016, and the reasons for its
application to dismiss - that the complaint be dismissed as lacking in merit and
44 From paragraphs 30 to 33, the respondent’s solicitors
provide extracts from the Tribunal's findings in its decision of 30
to dismiss the complainant’s complaints and assert (paragraph 31):
respondent says that these findings are sufficient to demonstrate a clear lack
of candour on the part of the complainant,
and support the submission the
motivation of the complaint was financial
45 At paragraph 33, the respondent’s solicitors
“The complaint raises
no matters of public interest and were wholly unmeritorious. There are good
grounds for finding that
the proceedings were
malicious”.
Submissions as to Costs - The complainant
46 In paragraph 1 of the complainant’s written
submissions dated 11 September 2019, the order sought by the respondent is
The complainant’s solicitors assert that there is no sufficient
reason to depart from the statement in Section 95 that each
party to an inquiry
is to pay his or her own costs even in light of Section 99A(1), which provides
that the Tribunal may make an
order as to costs in relation to any inquiry or
review before it “if the Tribunal considers that circumstances justify the
47 The complainant’s solicitors’ submissions in
support of this contention are detailed within the written submissions,
include such matters as:
as each party was represented and granted leave to appear pursuant to Section
79A of the Act, both parties chose to do
so with the knowledge that costs are
usually the burden of each party”.
48 Citing the Tribunal’s decision in Marrone v University
of Tasmania and Walters
[2016] TASADT 13
, the complainant’s solicitors
assert (paragraph 8)
“It can be taken from
this judgment that although the outcome of a matter in the ADT is a
consideration in an application such
as the respondent’s, it is not the
only factor to be considered and in fact has less weight attached to it in the
compared to others. It can further be taken from this decision that
consideration as to the issues of costs must contemplate the
conduct of the
parties, any malice found in the action of the parties, and if the complaint was
trivial vexatious or lacking in substance”.
49 From paragraph 9 of the complainant’s written
submissions, matters relevant to the “conduct of the parties” are
detailed (from paragraph 9 to 16 inclusive).
50 In paragraphs 17 to 23 of the
complainant’s written submissions, the complainant makes (by inference),
further submissions
regarding the conduct of the complaint and the respondent
through the January to August period of 2016, leading to the Tribunal’s
decision in Williamson v Bedelph
[2016] TASADT 12
- delivered 16 August 2016 -
and also relating to the respondent’s application to dismiss the
complainant’s complaint
made at the hearing on 19 December 2016 and
determined by the Tribunal in its decision delivered on 2 October 2017 -
Williamson v
[2017] TASADT 7.
At paragraph 19 of the
complainant’s written submissions, the complainant states:
for that application, the matter would have simply taken its place in the queue
awaiting an allocation of hearing dates.
Instead, an application for summary
dismissal was made, construed in part as a jurisdictional’ argument, that
incurred unnecessary
costs, and undue delay in a determination of the
51 In paragraph 10 of the complainant’s written
submissions, the complainant asserts:
complainant’s conduct in contrast was co-operative, and compliant with the
directions of the investigation process,
and Tribunal process at every stage.
Her complaint was not found to be vexatious by Member Winter in his written
decision - Williamson
[2019] TASADT 4.
She was never subject to any
criticism from the Tribunal for her conduct at any
52 At paragraph 20 of the complainant’s written
submissions, it is stated that the respondent’s assertions that the
findings meant that it found that the complaint was
misconceived and lacking in substance are incorrect. The complainant asserts
that these words have specific meaning under the Act, and the Tribunal’s
decision clearly did not use those words to reflect
his views of the complaint.
It is stated:
“In his decision,
Member Winter cited a preference for the evidence of the respondent and witness
Shea in relation to the limb
of the complaint in relation to the spoken words as
his reasoning for dismissing that aspect of the complaint. He did make a
that the respondent wrote the words on the fencepost, however there was
no evidence to sustain that the written words on the fence
were directed at the
complainant (the risk being they were directed at Mr Williamson, her
53 The complainant’s submissions also state that it
cannot be said that the Tribunal made any findings that the proceedings
brought maliciously, or that there was no reasonable basis for making the
complaint or that the complaint was trivial vexatious
or lacking in substance.
54 The complainant’s submissions assert in paragraph 22 that the
conduct and the nature of this complaint is in stark contrast
to that occurring
in of D Benedetto v Wilson & Wilson [2008] TASADT 04.
complainant’s solicitors next, under the heading “Nature of the
Findings in this Case”, put forward their
position regarding the factual
findings made by the Tribunal, and from paragraph 32, detail matters they assert
support the “public
interest” aspects of the complainant’s
56 From paragraph 38, the complainant’s submissions
respond further to the respondent’s assertions relating to the complaint
being motivated by financial gain.
CONSIDERATION
57 Having considered this matter carefully, the Tribunal has
come to the conclusion that the complainant was not acting maliciously
bringing or pursuing her complaint, nor that the complaint itself, was trivial
or vexatious, or that the complainant was anything
other than genuine in the
making of her complaint in relation to a matter that was significant to
58 The Tribunal does not accept that there is evidence of a monetary
gain being the motivation for the complainant’s lodgement
and pursuit of
her complaint, which the respondent submits would support a finding that it was
brought maliciously and was misconceived.
Although there was evidence before
the Tribunal of the complainant having settled a complaint against the Boundary
Fence Arbitrator,
Julia Drew, for four thousand dollars, the Tribunal accepts
the complainant’s submissions that there was no finding of fact
the assertion that this as supportive of the complaint being motivated by
monetary gain, when it was open to the Tribunal
to have done so.
Tribunal also agrees with the complainant’s submissions (refer paragraph
40), that such a submission holds little weight
given the obvious legal expense,
and the continuation of the complaint against the respondent where both parties
had legal representation
and where leave to appear before the Tribunal has been
granted pursuant to Section 79A.
60 Additionally, and as stated by Member
Wilkins in decision in Maree Summers v Department of Education and Ors
at para 44.
I do not accept the submission that the Tribunal ought only exercise its
discretion to order costs where there is a
malice, lack of good faith or no
genuine belief in the merits of the complaint. The discretion of the Tribunal
is wider than a
simple assessment of the motivations of the complainant , and if
the successful respondents to the proceedings are able to point
to circumstances
(including something other than malafides on the part of the complainant) that
would justify the exercise of the
Tribunal’s discretion to move away from
the starting premise of s95 of the Act, it is likely that an order will be made
their favour.”
61 Save for the Tribunal’s subsequent comments regarding
the conduct of the complainant prior to the Tribunal’s decision
Williamson v Bedelph
[2016] TASADT 12
, delivered on 16 August 2016, the Tribunal
does not find that the complainant acted inappropriately, nor that any such
finding was
made against her.
62 Consideration of the Tribunal’s
decision on 30 April 2019, and the factual findings set out therein, confirm
that it did
not make adverse findings against the complainant, but rather found
that where there was a conflict in the evidence between the complainant
respondent, particularly with regard to the allegation of the respondent calling
the complainant a “fat cunt”
on 28/29 July 2012 allegation, the
Tribunal preferred the evidence of the respondent and his wife to that of the
complainant and
her husband.
63 As has been correctly stated by the
complainant in their written submissions, although the allegation of the
respondent writing
the words “fat cunt”, on the fence post around 5
November 2012 allegation was also dismissed, this was done so on
“jurisdictional”
grounds, where there had in fact been a finding
against the respondent that it was more probable than not that it was he who had
written the words “fat cunt” on the fencepost, and that they were
likely directed at the complainant’s husband.
64 Had no such finding
been made, it would have been necessary for the Tribunal to consider evidence
relevant to the applicable area
of activity, pursuant to
65 Although the complainant has, in this regard, made extensive
submissions that the proceedings were in the public interest, the
Tribunal does
not give this submission significant weight, in its consideration of whether it
should exercise its discretion pursuant
to s99A(1). Although the issue of the
area of activity as accommodation may have been somewhat controversial, the
complainant’s
submissions in this regard are speculative, as it was found
on the evidence that there was no need for this aspect to be considered,
was not so considered.
66 Having considered all the material before the
Tribunal, and the relevant law, the Tribunal has reached the view that insofar
the prosecution of the complainant’s complaint from August 2016 to 30
April 2019 is concerned, it is not appropriate that there
be an order that the
complainant pay the respondent’s costs of the proceedings.
Tribunal, having considered all of the materials before it, has however come to
the conclusion that the complainants ought
to pay some of the respondent’s
costs from the date the complaint was referred to the Tribunal on 15 January
2015, and 16 August
2016 when the Tribunal published its decision Williamson v
[2016] TASADT 12
in which one of the allegations in the
complainant’s complaint was dismissed.
68 The Tribunal’s
decision of 16 August 2016 clearly indicates that there was cogent evidence of
the respondent not being the
person who made the decision to adjourn the
boundary fence matter, that clearly being Julia Drew, such that he was not the
who had discriminated pursuant to
(2) of the Act.
69 The Tribunal
upheld the respondent’s submissions that this aspect of the complaint was
misconceived and lacking in substance.
70 The Tribunal accepts the
respondent’s submissions (paragraph 22), that
Bedelph had been put to the trouble and expense of defending a wholly
unmeritorious and fundamentally misconceived
complaint”.
71 The comments in paragraph 46 of Member Wilkins’
decision in Summers v Department of Education and Ors
[2020] TASADT 5
significant relevance to this aspect.
“Where a complainant
has been legally represented in proceedings before the Tribunal, the question of
whether they hold an honestly-held
belief as to the strength or veracity of
their claim would not carry the same weight as it might in circumstances where a
complainant
is self-represented. This is because the complainant would have
had the benefit of legal advice in relation to the application
of relevant law
to their claim, and the benefit of objective advice in assessing the relative
strengths of the parties’ positions
when making decisions in relation to
the settlement and/or risks of proceeding to hearing. The complainant was much
better placed
to understand her position and the ramification of the
respondent’s express case that an unrepresented litigant with a genuine,
but ultimately misguided belief”.
72 As a consequence of the matters indicated above, as the
Tribunal’s decision of 16 August 2016 dismissed one of the three
allegations set out therein, with the remaining two being referred to inquiry
hearing, the Tribunal considers that it is appropriate
for the complainant to
pay one third of the respondent’s costs relating to the Complaint
proceedings between 15 January 2015,
being the date the complaint was referred
to the Tribunal, and 16 August 2016, being the date of the Tribunal’s
decision to
dismiss one of the three allegations in the complaint.
What is the appropriate Scale of Costs?
73 In her recent decision in Summers, Member Wilkins stated at
paragraph 59:
“I accept that the
practice of the Tribunal has been to set costs at 80% of the Supreme Court
Scale. I can find no reported
decisions where a different scale has been
considered to be appropriate. I can see no reason to depart from that practice,
determine that it is the appropriate scale to be applied to the costs
order in this matter”.
74 These comments are endorsed by the Tribunal in this
75 The Tribunal makes the following orders:
1. That the
complainant pay one third of the respondent’s costs with respect to the
inquiry from the date of the referral of
the complainant’s complaint for
inquiry to the Tribunal on 7 January 2015, to 16 August 2016, being the date of
the Tribunal’s
decision in Williamson v Bedelph
[2016] TASADT 12
costs to be calculated on a party/party basis at 80% of the scale of fees
presently allowed to practitioners and counsel under
Supreme Court Rules
of Schedule 1.
2. That in the absence of agreement as to the
costs ordered in Order 1 above, the costs are to be taxed by the Registrar of
the Tribunal.
R. O. WINTER
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (198 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter