URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASLPDT/2025/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:16:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v John Patrick Eric Walker [2025] TASLPDT 1; (19 February 2025)
Legal Profession Disciplinary Tribunal of Tasmania
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v John Patrick Eric
[2025] TASLPDT 1
Parties: Legal Profession Board of Tasmania Applicant
John Patrick Eric Walker Respondent
Mr David Wallace, Deputy Chairperson
Mr Craig Mackie
Mr Martin Shirley
Hearing Date: On the papers.
Delivered on: 19
of February 2025
Applicant: Ms J O’Farrell
Respondent: Self represented
Solicitors:
Applicant: Tremayne Fay Rheinberger
Respondent: Self represented
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania (‘the Board’) applies pursuant to
s.464 of the
Legal Profession Act 2007
(‘the Act’) for the
Tribunal to hear and determine its complaint against the respondent Australian
lawyer relating to
conduct alleged to be ‘professional misconduct’
or ‘unsatisfactory professional misconduct’ within the meaning
Legal Profession Act 2007 (the
complaint is put in two ways. Firstly, that the respondent ‘
legal practice
’ in Tasmania on the 11
of November 2021
when he was not an ‘Australian legal practitioner’ by appearing for
a Mr Hefny (Mr Hefny) before the
Full Court of the Supreme Court of Tasmania
(‘Full Court’) in breach of ‘the Act’
when he did not have a practising
certificate or the protection of professional indemnity insurance. Secondly,
whilst appearing before
the ‘Full Court’, he knowingly or recklessly
misled it by failing to advise he did not have a current practising certificate,
and he was ineligible to ‘engage in legal
The Tribunal’s disciplinary jurisdiction
in respect of the Respondent
5 of ‘the Act’ provides that-
For the purposes
of this Act –
(a) An “Australian lawyer” is a person admitted to the legal
profession under this Act or a corresponding law;
(b) ...........”
4 (1) of the Act, defines –
admission to the
legal profession
means admission by a Supreme Court as-
(a) a lawyer; or
(b) a legal practitioner; or
(c) –(f) ..........”
4 of the Act which deals with
Complaints and Discipline
practitioners, provides by s.419 (1) of the Act, that Chapter 4 applies to
‘Australian lawyers’ in relation
to conduct occurring while they
were Australian lawyers in the same way as it applies to Australian legal
practitioners ‘
with any necessary
modifications’
evidence before the Tribunal is contained in affidavits from the Board’s
Chief Executive (exhibiting exhibits identified
and the Executive Director of
the Law Society of Tasmania
supporting the application. The respondent, although having been given time to
make and file affidavits and make submissions, he
has not done so, other than in
making and filing an affidavit and relying on a submission replicating its
content, in support of
an interlocutory application he made pursuant to
s.466(7)(c) of ‘the Act’ to summarily dismiss the
application
That affidavit and submission we admit and have considered on this
application.
find the respondent became an Australian lawyer on the 17 September 1993 when
admitted to practice by the Supreme Court of Tasmania.
He ‘engaged in
legal practice’ between 1993 and 1995 as an employee of a community legal
centre without being a ‘legal
practitioner’, being one of the kinds
of legal practice permitted by s.13(2) of the Act. He has been a’ legal
practitioner’
during the following periods-
(a) As an employee between 24 March 1997 until the 31of December 1997;
(b) As a principal for more than 18 years between the 15
February 1999 until the 1st of August 2017 when he surrendered his practising
certificate;
(c) As an employee between the 3 February 2021 and the 30 June 2021; but
(d) Between the 28 July 2022 and 30 June 2023 although issued a practising
certificate, requiring and intending to be an employee
of a Launceston law
practice, the employment did not
find at the time of the conduct complained of the respondent was not entitled to
‘engage in legal practice’ in any
other State or Territory of the
Commonwealth. As of the 11
of November 2021, the respondent’s
most recent practising certificate had expired 4 months and 11 days earlier and
entitled to ‘engage in legal practice in
respondent appeared before the ‘Full Court’ for Mr Hefny (the
appellant) in respect of an appeal from Chief Justice
Blow. The Chief Justice
had determined and dismissed a motion to review a decision of a magistrate in
respect of Mr Hefny’s
summary offence, on grounds relating to procedural
fairness and apprehended bias
transcript of the hearing before the ‘Full Court’
and its Record of
Proceedings
establish the
following –
(a) The ‘Full Court’ sat at 10 am on the 11
of November
2021 to hear Mr Hefnys’ appeal. The matter was called after which the
respondent announced to the ‘Full Court’,
Your Honour, I
on behalf of the appellant Mr Hefny in this matter’;
(b) the respondent went before the ‘Full Court’ not wearing robes.
Almost immediately, the Honourable Estcourt J [the
presiding judge] remarked
‘Yes, well Mr Walker ... we can’t hear you or see you unrobed, so
with the agreement of counsel-with the agreement of
my colleagues rather, we
might adjourn into chambers for a moment’
(c) rather than informing the’ Full Court’ that he was no longer a
‘legal practitioner’, the respondent said,
I can go and do
that, your Honours’
(d) Estcourt J then said ‘
Yes thank you. Well, you’re okay for
the moment because we’ll hear what you want to say in chambers by way of
matters. Are you here this morning to argue the case or to apply for
an adjournment or what – what is- what’s going‘‘
(e) the respondent said: ’
No, to outline Mr Hefny’s position and
yes, to argue the case.’
(f) Estcourt J: ‘
Yes all right’
(g) the respondent said: ‘
Or make submissions on his behalf because he
was unrepresented last time this matter was before Mr Blow
(h) before the Court adjourned from sitting in chambers, some argument from the
respondent about the nature of the appeal, and what
issues had been raised
before Chief Justice Blow took place. The following was then said by the
respondent ‘
In my submission, your honour, the Chief Justice did make
an error in that he alluded to it but did not decide upon the issue when
(i) Estcourt J: ’
Yes all right. Well if you wish to argue that then you
should go and robe, but yes, I think that’s what should happen at the
moment. Yes, so we’ll adjourn for five or ten minutes.’
(j) the Record of proceedings shows the ‘Full Court’ adjourned at
10.10 am and resumed at 10.19 am on the 11th of November
(k) upon the resumption of the proceedings, the respondent was robed, and his
Honour Estcourt J asked if he could have the appearances
again. The respondent
Yes, your Honours I appear for the appellant Mr Hefny in this
(l) the respondent proceeded to address the ‘Full Court’, making
submissions for Mr Hefny, responding to the comments
of Crown Counsel and cited
authority. The proceedings concluded at 10.30 am with the ‘Full
Court’ dismissing the appeal
and advising written reasons for its decision
would be provided.
find that prior to the ‘Full Court’ hearing, in about September 2021
Mr Hefny confirmed to an officer of the Court
that the respondent was his legal
We also find
Mr Hefny advised another officer of the Court by email on the
of October 2021 that ‘Mr John Walker’ will be acting
for him on the appeal in the ‘Full
Record of proceedings discloses counsel for the appellant was ‘Mr J
Walker’ the respondent to this
application
‘Full Courts’ published reasons of the proceedings
[2021] TASFC 14
, record the respondent as counsel for Mr Hefny. Both
their Honours Estcourt J and Pearce J, in their respective reasons for judgement
refer to the respondent being counsel for Mr Hefny the
Respondent’s material
respondent filed an affidavit in support of an application to summarily dismiss
this application by the ‘Board’. An
edited version is set out in the
following paragraph of these reasons. That affidavit, together with a submission
replicating its
content, and the respondent’s correspondence to the
‘Board’ during its investigation of the complaint is the only
information from or attributable to the respondent before the Tribunal. Other
than upon the Tribunal determining the respondent’s
interlocutory
application for summary dismissal, the respondent has made no oral submission or
addressed the Tribunal. He agreed
for the matter to be determined on the papers
including, any further affidavits he would make and file and further submissions
response to those of counsel for the ‘Board’. He has not done so.
He did provide an email for the Tribunal in response
to a request if he was to
file further affidavits, he should inform the Tribunal of his personal
circumstances including his financial
respondent’s affidavit of the 30
of September 2024, omitting
formal parts and the identity of the legal practitioner referenced in its
paragraph 5, is as follows-
1. On the 11 .11.21 I attended
the Supreme Court at the request of my friend who doesn’t speak English
was dressed casually, and not engaged or paid as a lawyer;
is not illegal unsatisfactory, unprofessional or unethical to assist a friend
who cannot speak English properly. Justice Estcourt
politely requested, that I
robe and I did. That did not change my casual friend capacity.
Nicholson asked me on more than one occasion (DPP) was I robing; I said no I am
there as a friend.
sought and received independent legal advice from [ identified legal
practitioner] who advised me - not engaged or paid as a lawyer
is the end of the
Sworn etc” “
’Board’ had written to the respondent on the 3
2022 regarding it making the complaint (a ‘show cause’ letter), to
which the respondent replied on the 4 March
I refer to our telephone conversation of today
and yesterday and my email to you of yesterday addressing your letter.
I confirm as follows; I did attend the Supreme court with Mr Hefny as a
friend to assist him with his Appeal.
I was not robed and attended to assist as a friend, if required as Mr
Hefny is of Syrian descent and does not speak English very well.
I was not expecting to say anything and thought the matter would be
decided on the documents Mr Hefny had filed in Court.
His Honour Mr Estcourt noticed I was not robed and said to me, if you want
to say anything or argue anything on behalf of Mr Hefny,
I will adjourn so you
can go and put your Robes on.
After this Invitation I agreed with his Honour and the matter was
adjourned for me to put Robes on and speak on behalf of Mr Hefny.
As you advised that you could not locate my email of yesterday, I would
request that you confirm by return email that you received
this email.
Kind regards
John Walker
respondent in other correspondence with the ‘Board’ and in his
affidavit, referred to himself as assisting a
‘friend’, or
‘I was there as a friend’
’I attended the Supreme
court at the request of my friend’.
find the respondent did not seek payment from or receive any benefit from Mr
Hefny for his assistance
find the respondent did assist Mr Hefny ‘
As a friend
of his documents’
which were before the ‘Full Court’.
There was no evidence before us as to what they were. We find the respondent
the ‘Board’ that he did not inform Mr Hefny that he
did not have a practising certificate because I was helping him as a
respondent did not advise the ‘Board’ that he had sought and
received legal advice from the legal practitioner identified
in paragraph 5 of
his affidavit. The ‘Board’ had no reason to investigate further
concerning any such advice. The Tribunal
has no details of the advice, including
facts to verify that it occurred, or particulars of when it was sought and when
given. It appears, if advice was given, we are to assume it was given
prior to the 11
of November 2021, and that it was to the effect or
interpreted by the respondent as he being able to appear as counsel would in a
court proceeding, if a friend of Mr Hefny on that familial basis alone. The only
reference to legal advice being sought by the respondent
from the legal
practitioner identified in his 30
September 2024 affidavit, and in
correspondence with the ‘Board’, was regarding advice sought in
respect of a different
matter from the respondent in an
are not satisfied any such legal advice was given to the respondent prior to the
11 November 2021 or any legal advice to the effect
deposed at paragraph 5 of the
respondents’ affidavit, relevantly, that he was permitted to appear as
counsel in the ‘Full
Court’. We are reinforced in that opinion,
because it is unlikely a competent legal practitioner would have advised the
that simply being Mr Hefnys’ friend and without being engaged
or paid for undertaking legal work as counsel, ‘
is the end of the
and enabled the respondent to engage in legal practice’
whilst not a legal practitioner by representing Mr Hefny before the
Court’ as his counsel.
Engage in Legal Practice
question for the Tribunal is whether the respondent ‘
engaged in legal
’ contrary to S.13(1) of ‘the Act’.
are assisted by counsel for the ‘Boards’ careful analysis of the
authorities regarding this question. Relevantly this
matter relates to the
respondent’s lack of a right of audience before a superior court, in this
instance the ‘Full Court’.
Cornall v Nagle
[1995] 2VR 188 JD Phillps J, at 202 considered the right
of audience (i.e. the right to appear before a court) as being reserved
practitioners and self-represented persons, save for where leave is expressly
In superior courts, the right of audience does not
extend beyond the party or practitioner acting for him; only those admitted and
enrolled have a “right” to audience, although a party may always be
heard on his own behalf. But, in addition, the courts
retain a discretion to
allow a party to be heard by an unqualified agent; that is not as of right, but
by leave; see Hubbard Association
in the Full Court. There is moreover, the so
called “McKenzie friend”, an unqualified person who may be permitted
attend in court with the party in person, sitting with him, taking notes and
affording assistance; see McKenzie v McKenzie [1971]
P.33. That assistance, too,
may be allowed in the exercise of discretion, although it has been held that the
discretion ought in
the ordinary case be exercised when application is
made...But the existence of this discretion does not in any way extend
right of audience”: Barrow at 285 C-D. Moreover; both the
discretionary power to hear an unqualified agent as spokesman for
a company and
the discretionary power to allow some unqualified assistance to an individual,
plainly relate only to the manner in
which a litigant, otherwise appearing in
person to conduct his own case, may be permitted to proceed.
accept the submission of counsel for the ‘Board’ that the
‘right of audience’ holds particular significance
in the practice of
law. It is a particular aspect of practice which, unless the court expressly
grants leave or one appears on one’s
own behalf, is the exclusive preserve
of legal practitioners, being those who are not only admitted, but who,
generally speaking,
hold practising certificates too. The rationale for this was
explained by Ipp AJA in
Teese v State Bank of New
South Wales
[2002] NSWCA 219
The general
rule in regard to the representation of parties involved in litigation that
obtains to this country is that where a litigant
is not self-represented, he or
she should be represented by a solicitor or barrister who is duly admitted who
holds a practising
certificate or its equivalent, and is a member of the
relevant professional body such as the Law Society or the Bar Association.
are very strong reasons that underlie that practice.
An admitted solicitor or barrister who appears on behalf of a litigant is
an officer of the Court and as such is subject to the discipline
of the Court.
If such a person holds a practising certificate and is a member of the Law
Society or the Bar Association, he or she
is subject to the requirements as to
professional conduct imposed by statute and the disciplinary regime of those
professional bodies.
The power that the Court is then able to exercise over such
a person, directly and indirectly, is a foundation of the proper functioning
the administration of justice. If a person who is not subject to these
disciplinary constraints is allowed to represent a litigant,
this important
procedural safeguard will be lost.
prohibition in s.13(1) of the
express purpose of protecting ‘
the public interest in the proper
administration of justice by ensuring that legal work is carried out by those
who are properly qualified
to do so’ and to protect consumers by ensuring
that persons carrying out legal work and entitled to do so’
‘Act’ s.12.
legal practitioners must hold practising certificates. Persons who are not legal
practitioners, may engage in legal practice
of specific kinds set out as
exceptions to the prohibition in s.13(2) of ‘the Act’, but the kinds
there are inapplicable
to this application. The holding of a practising
certificate effectively confirms that a practitioner is suitable to hold such a
certificate
, that they are
appropriately insured
Tasmania, they have complied with conditions, including those concerning the
requirements for continuing
entitlement to practice law also means that a legal practitioner is subject to
the relevant conduct rules (e.g. the
Legal Profession (Solicitors Conduct)
Rules 2020 (the Rules)
(Tas). Section 4 of the Act includes the definition
an Australian legal
practitioner who practices as or in the manner of a solicitor”
includes the following -
(1) A solicitor must not deceive or knowingly or recklessly mislead the
A solicitor must take all necessary steps to correct any misleading
statement made by the solicitor to a court as soon as possible
solicitor becomes aware that the statement was misleading.
obligations to that in the
entitlement to practice law includes the duty to the court and whether a
practising solicitor or barrister legal practitioner,
the rules to which they
are subject provide a safeguard to the court that it will not be misled. Also,
that the parties to litigation
are protected by safeguards in compliance with
standards and obligations imposed on practitioners by relevant professional
respondent did not appear in the ‘Full Court’ as a McKenzie friend.
He did not seek leave before the ‘Full Court’
to assist Mr Hefny. He
simply announced his appearance for Mr Hefny before the ‘Full
Court’, as a barrister or solicitor
advocate would. The ‘Full
Court’ plainly thought the respondent was a lawyer entitled to practice.
It was understandably
confused as to why he was not attired in accordance with
the Supreme Court’s ‘Court Attire’ Practice
. He was likely no
stranger to most of the judges having practised for some years in their
submission that at that point it
would have been appropriate for the respondent to inform the ‘Full
Court’ that he was
there to assist Mr Hefny, and to seek leave to appear
or assist as a McKenzie friend if that was what was intended. By the respondent
continuing argument whilst the court sat as in chambers, advising the
‘Full Court’ he could conveniently robe and returning
to court robed
in the short time granted, only reinforced in their Honours minds that Mr Walker
held a practising certificate, and
he was entitled to be before them as counsel
for Mr Hefny.
find the respondent appearing as he did, in presenting the case, making
submissions, such as referring to an alleged error on the
part of Chief justice
Blow and case law the respondent ‘engaged in legal practice’ in
breach of s.13(1) of ‘the
Act’. The respondent was acting in the
profession of law. He was carrying on the profession of law and thereby
. He had no
entitlement to appear and ‘engage in legal practice’ for Mr Hefny
simply because he was his friend.
Knowingly or Recklessly
Misleading the Full Court
we have found the ‘Full Court’ believed the respondent to be
entitled as a legal practitioner to appear and represent
Mr Hefny in the
relevant proceedings. They had no reason to enquire otherwise.
are satisfied the respondent knew he was required to have a practising
certificate to appear and argue Mr Hefny’s appeal
as a lawyer. The
respondent was a very experienced practitioner, being admitted as an Australian
lawyer since 1993 and having held
a principal’s practising certificate for
over 18 years until the 1
of August 2017. He held practising
certificates, such as those for an employee, the last being for a period of 5
months which expired
of June 2021. He was familiar with
the need to have a practising certificate to engage in legal practice. He
evidently when circumstances
arose had surrendered a current practising
certificate effective from 1
. We find, given the
Full Court’s reaction to the respondent first appearing unrobed, as his
honour Estcourt J did, the respondent
would have or should have known the
‘Full Court’ understood him to hold a practising certificate and
have a right of
audience; a fact he knew to be untrue.
respondent admitted to the Tribunal on the 7 November 2024 that in hindsight, he
ought to have notified the ‘Full Court’
he was not a legal
practitioner
the respondent’s appearance before the ‘Full Court’ he did not
correct the apparent misapprehension the ‘Full
Court’ had of his
entitlement to engage in legal practice. He at no time informed the ‘Full
Court’ he was or wished
to be heard as a friend of Mr Hefny or
alternatively there to assist Mr Hefny as a friend. If he had done so, the issue
a McKenzie friend or not would likely have arisen by the ‘Full
some concern to the Tribunal is that there is no evidence, that the respondent
as a very experienced lawyer understood the notion
of a ‘McKenzie
friend’ and how a court may enable, in appropriate circumstances, a party
to proceedings to receive assistance
from such a person, with leave.
the respondent understood by being Mr Hefny’s familial friend who
purportedly had a poor command of the English language,
and being desirous or
encouraged to assist him by appearing before the ‘Full Court’
arguing the case, when not a legal
practitioner, or not seeking leave to assist
as a McKenzie friend might seek to do, such an understanding was more than
unreasonable
but was reckless.
Professional Misconduct
common law, a practitioner who purports to practice or to hold himself or
herself out as entitled to practice, without being the
holder of a practising
certificate, may by that fact alone, be guilty of professional misconduct:
Council of the NSW Bar Association v
. The serious nature
of a breach of s.13(1) of the Act is shown by the fact that it comprises an
. It appears if a breach
of that section was brought before the Supreme Court it would be within its
inherent jurisdiction to imprison
for a breach for up to 6 months.
for the ‘Board’ submitted that since his admission on 17 September
1993, the respondent has been an officer of
. Counsel referred to the
comment by Bass JA that ‘
the duty of a legal practitioner not to
mislead the court is at the heart of his or her duty as an officer of the
We find the
respondent as an ‘Australian lawyer’ was and remains an officer of
the Court and had a duty, which he breached,
not to mislead the ‘Full
or recklessly misleading the Court, depending on the circumstances, but
characterised by the serious nature of the misleading
conduct can amount to
conduct that can properly be characterised as ‘
professional
misconduct’
‘Board’ submits the respondent’s conduct in these proceedings
gives rise to concern. That when the complaint
was before the Board, the
respondent did not concede that he had done anything wrong or
. On the 11
of April 2022 he asked the ‘Board’ to withdraw the
. On the 2nd of October
2024 he made the application to the Tribunal pursuant to s.466(7)(c) of the Act
to dismiss the complaint as
lacking in substance. And, during that hearing the
respondent conceded that he ought to have informed he was acting as a
In the ‘Boards’ submission this demonstrates
not only a lack of candour, but a lack of insight which one would expect
officer of the Court.
concern to the Tribunal is the respondent’s account of his appearance for
Mr Hefny before the ‘Full Court’, as
if it occurred and continued
because the Court invited him to by robing
. The ‘Full Court’
transcript and Record of proceedings, as set out at paragraph [10] of these
reasons show the respondent’s
account in his affidavit of the 30 September
, and contained in his
letter to the ‘Board’ of the 4 March 2022, does not describe the
correct sequence of his appearance
before the ‘Full Court’.
420 of ‘the Act’ defines-
unsatisfactory
professional conduct
includes conduct of an Australian legal
practitioner occurring in connection with the practice of law that falls short
of the standard
of competence and diligence that a member of the public is
entitled to expect from a reasonably competent Australian legal
practitioner
Section 421 of ‘the Act’ relevantly defines-
‘Professional misconduct includes
(a) Unsatisfactory professional conduct of an Australian legal practitioner,
where the conduct involves a substantial or consistent
failure to reach or
maintain a reasonable standard of competence and diligence ; and
(b) .......................................
Section 422 of ‘the Act’ relevantly provides that –
(1) Without limiting section 420 or 421, the following conduct is capable
of constituting unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct:
a) conduct consisting of a contravention of the Act, the regulations or the
legal profession rules;
contravention of Section 13(1) of ‘the Act’ by an Australian lawyer
an Australian legal practitioner is capable of
constituting unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct (see
of the Act). The provisions of Chapter 4 of ‘the Act’ also
are comfortably satisfied that the respondent’s conduct is
professional misconduct’
. Although the events before the
‘Full Court ‘occurred over a short period of time and can be
described as a one-off event
in misleading the ‘Full Court’, whether
knowingly or recklessly, the conduct was serious. In respect of s.420 of
Act’, the facts show the respondent’s conduct was
unsatisfactory professional conduct’
by the respondent as an
Australian lawyer and officer of the Court, that involved a substantial failure
to reach or maintain a reasonable
standard of competence and diligence that a
member of the public was entitled to expect of a reasonably competent Australian
practitioner [or Australian lawyer -s.419 of ‘the Act’] and
professional misconduct’
in breach of that section. That
standard included, that a member of the public would expect a reasonably
competent Australian lawyer
and officer of the court, if not entitled to
practise as a legal practitioner, would not appear as counsel in a court to
or render assistance to a friend, a party to proceedings, without
explaining to the court why and seeking its leave to do so.
Council of the NSW Bar Association v
is a passage from the
New South Wales Court of Appeal that counsel for the ‘Board’ cited
where engaging in legal practice
without a practising certificate and failing to
disclose that fact ‘
undermines the system of regulation of Australian
legal practitioners, the principle objective of which is to protect the
public’, being the identical purpose contained in s.12 of ‘the
Act’. An obligation of candour that is expected not
only of legal
practitioners but admitted practitioners as officers of the
Prior matter and personal circumstances
respondent was previously found guilty of professional
. The circumstances
were unlike the present. It arose from the respondent’s dilatoriness in
noncompliance without reasonable
excuse to comply with a notice from the
‘Board’ pursuant to s.572 of ‘the Act’ in the year 2015.
provides an Australian lawyer who contravenes s. 572 of
‘the Act’ is by virtue of s.586(3) of ‘the Act’ deemed
to be guilty of ‘
professional misconduct’
. There is no
evaluation of the conduct itself by the Tribunal for s.586(3) of ‘the
Act’ to apply. The seriousness of
the professional conduct may be
reflected in the penalty imposed. The respondent was fined, the fine being
wholly suspended on conditions
that were met, and he was ordered to pay the
‘Boards’ costs which were moderate in that instance. He has no other
disciplinary
orders against him.
respondent provided little information as to his personal circumstances although
having been requested to do so by the Tribunal.
He is 62 years of age. On the
of December 2024 the respondent having filed no further affidavit
or a submission in response to counsel for the ‘Boards’
submission,
emailed the Secretary of the Tribunal in respect of these proceedings in the
following terms -
‘I refer to the above and advise as
is not Illegal, Unsatisfactory, or Unethical to help a friend who cannot speak
English properly.
that aside my Personal and financial circumstances are that: I am on a
Centrelink Sickness Benefit relating to Cancer Surgical
removal procedure and do
not have a disposable income.
John Walker L.L.B’
respondent repeated the content of that email in a further email to the
Secretary of the Tribunal dated the 18 December 2024 with
no added information
as to his personal circumstances. At that time the respondent had counsel for
the ‘Boards’ submissions
including it was submitting a fine of
$5,000.00 was proportionate to his conduct being a one-off event, though serious
We do not have confidence the content of the emails is a complete
picture of his financial circumstances.
level of any fine we impose, should account for the seriousness of the conduct,
going as it does to the ramifications for the
wider system of regulating legal
practitioners and candour, being a one-off event and possibly reckless instead
of malicious; in
thinking he could represent a friend as he did. The respondent
did not for example carry on a business as if a legal practitioner
practising certificate as was the case in the
Council of NSW Bar Association
. He did not seek
payment in money or kind for his conduct. There are factors of concern we have
observed that go to competence rather
than maliciousness and aspects as to how
he dealt with the matter do show elements of a lack of candour besides the
misleading of
the ‘Full Court’. The Tribunal needs to exercise
caution in its task of striking a penalty in circumstances where a fine
costs awarded and for the ‘Board’ to enforce may impose too high a
burden in circumstances where the respondent’s
ability to satisfy them is
uncertain. However, it is the protection of the public that overall is the aim
of disciplinary proceedings
instead of punishment. Whether or not the respondent
seeks to return to practice as a legal practitioner, the suitability provisions
of Section 9 (1) (a) and (d)(i) of ‘the Act’ as to whether the
respondent is of good fame and character and whether he
engaged in legal
practice without a practising certificate as occurred, are required to be
considered among all factors before a
practising certificate would then be
the foregoing reasons the Tribunal is of the opinion the following orders should
is declared that the respondent is guilty of ‘professional
misconduct’.
pursuant to s.473 of the Act the respondent pay a fine of $5,000.00 to the
applicant within 30 days of these orders.
the respondent pursuant to s.481 of the Act (as if he were an Australian legal
practitioner) pay the costs of the ‘Board’
of and incidental to its
application to be taxed in accordance with the
Supreme Court Rules 2000
Mr DR Wallace Deputy Chairperson Mr Craig Mackie Mr Martin Shirley
S.13.1 of the Act in its Part
2.1 provides – “A person must not engage in legal practice in this
the person is an Australian legal practitioner. Penalty:
Fine not exceeding 750 penalty units, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding
years, or both “ Also S.6 (a) of the Act provides for its
‘an Australian legal practitioner is an Australian lawyer who
holds a current local practising certificate or a current interstate
certificate’,
dated 24 July 2024 Mr Ederle.
Affidavit dated 5 July 2024 of Luke Rheinberger.
Affidavit 30 September 2024.
The summary application being dismissed on the 7 November
Affidavit of Luke
Rheinberger
Affidavits of Mr
Ederle paragraph 28 and Luke Rheinberger paragraphs 2 and
[2011] TASSC 4
Affidavit of Mr Ederle exhibit FE- 8 transcript p53-64 -Hefny v Constable Alisha
Barnes 11.11.2021
Associate to the Honourable Justice Estcourt -Affidavit of Mr Ederle FE-24
Affidavit Mr Ederle
FE-25 p 146
Affidavit Mr
Ederle FE-26 p 150
Affidavit Mr Ederle FE- 24
Estcourt at paragraph 6
and Pearce J at paragraphs 20 and 22 regarding the submissions of the
respondent.
Affidavit Mr
Ederle FE-5 p43
Affidavit Mr
Ederle Exhibit FE-20 Annexure 4.2 p128 email respondent to the
Affidavit Mr Ederle
Exhibit FE-16 Annexure 4.3 p88 email respondent to the
Affidavit Mr Ederle
Exhibit FE-20.2 Annexure 4.5 p131 email John Walker 2 August 2022 to LPBT a
reference to the legal practitioner
advice was in respect of a person other than
practising for Mr Hefny. The respondent wrote to the Board in the same email
2 distinct matters.
defined in s.4(1) of the Act and includes ‘a local legal practitioner who
holds a current local practising certificate
to practise as or in the manner of
a barrister; ‘
a barrister must not deceive or knowingly or recklessly
mislead the court
or ..’ Rule 24
Legal Profession Uniform Conduct
(Barristers) Rules 2015
NSW incorporated into the
Legal Profession (Barristers)
Direction No 4 2019 Court Attire - Robes
Felman v Law
Institute of Victoria
[1998] 4 VR at
Affidavit Luke
Rheinberger para 2(c)
hearing of his application pursuant to s.466(7)(c) of ‘the Act’ for
summary dismissal.
(Gleeson JA with whom Mc Farlane JA and Sackville AJA
Council of the
NSW Bar Association v Perry
[2007] NSWCA111 at [23] (Mason P, with whom
Hodgson and Santow JJA
See the passage from
Teese v State Bank of New South Wales
[2002] NSWCA 219
paragraph of these reasons.
Guidice v Legal Profession Complaints Committee
[2014] WASCA 115
Fidock v Legal
Profession Complaints Committee
[2013] WASCA 108
Ederle Affidavit at
FE-5 p 43;FE-16
p88;FE-17.p90
Affidavit at FE-11 p74
Paragraph 3 of respondent’s affidavit at paragraph [15] of these reasons
; Also respondent’s letter at paragraph [16]
of these reasons
Paragraph 3 of the
respondent’s
Dwyer [2015]
NSWCA at [45] (Emmett JA with whom Basten and WardJJ
Legal Profession
Board of Tasmania v Walker
(unreported no 01/2017) online LPBT
‘Disciplinary Register Tasmania’ name of
respondent.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (603 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter