URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASPComm/2025/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tasmanian Planning Scheme - Northern Midlands amendment 14-2024 [2025] TASPComm 24 (11 November 2025)
Tasmanian Planning Scheme – Northern Midlands
Planning authority
Northern Midlands Council
Ireneinc for Trader’s In Purple
Date of decision
11 November 2025
On 6 October 2025, Ireneinc Planning and Urban Design
(the applicant), on behalf of Trader’s In Purple, submitted a request
the Commission under section 40B(1) of Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
(the Act). The request relates to a request to
amend (14/2024) the Northern
Midlands Local Provisions Schedule (LPS) and seeks a review of the Northern
Midlands planning authority’s
(the planning authority) decision to refuse
the request to amend the LPS.
The applicant’s letter to the Commission, which outlined the reasons
for the requested review, noted the proposed draft amendment
was supported by a
comprehensive suite of documents and recommended for certification by the
assessing officer. The request was
also accompanied by a copy of the planning
authority’s notice of decision.
To assist the Commission in its review, further information was sought from
the planning authority on 13 October 2025. The information
a copy of the
Council agenda, attachments, and minutes for 15 September 2025; and
material that was relevant to the planning authority’s
The planning authority provided the following documents to
the Commission on
14 October 2025:
a copy of the
Council agenda and minutes for 15 September 2025; and
a copy of the
attachments to the Council agenda for 15 September 2025, including the
applicant’s report and supporting documents.
amendment is an iteration of a similar proposal lodged in 2018. Following
community consultation, the location and overall
design of the proposal evolved.
Most notably, the extent of the land proposed to be rezoned was reduced and
relocated closer to the
Evandale township.
The current iteration of the requested amendment was lodged with the planning
authority in 2024. The matter was considered by the
planning authority at
its meeting on 15 September 2025. The assessing officer recommended the
planning authority prepare and certify
the amendment, which included rezoning of
the land to General Residential, Rural Living, Local Business, Community
Purpose, and Open
Space. The requested amendment also included modifications to
the Evandale Specific Area Plan (SAP) to extend the SAP over the site
its provisions were relevant to the proposed zones. The proposed modifications
to the SAP included two new precincts
(the Evandale Expansion Development
Precinct Masterplan and the Arthur Street Development Precinct Masterplan) and
an amendment to
the Logan Road Development Precinct Masterplan. Diagrams were
proposed, which would show an anticipated subdivision layout for the
Expansion Development Precinct Masterplan and the Arthur Street Development
Precinct Masterplan. Furthermore, Local Area
Objectives were proposed for the
Local Business Zone in the Evandale Expansion Development Precinct.
The attachments to the agenda report included the following documents
submitted by the applicant in support of the requested amendment:
Planning Report,
Ireneinc, February 2025
Residential
Supply and Demand Analysis for Evandale, SGS Economics and Planning, May
Expansion Plan Cost Benefit Analysis, SGS Economics and Planning, August
Agricultural
Assessment Report, Pinion Advisory, September 2023
Engineering
Services Report, MRC Consulting Engineers, December 2023
Preliminary
Water and Sewerage Report, MRC Consulting Engineers, October 2024
Traffic Impact
Assessment (Revision 01), Pitt & Sherry, January 2024
Traffic Impact
Assessment (Revision 02), Pitt & Sherry, December 2024
Masterplan, proposed residential subdivision, Traffic Engineering Peer Review,
Heritage Assessment, Cultural Heritage Management Australia, October 2023
Heritage Assessment Report, Cultural Heritage Management Australia, October
Natural Values
Report, Natural Environment Services Tasmania, November 2022
Preliminary
Flood Hazard Assessment Report, MRC Consulting Engineers, December 2023
Management Report, Ireneinc, 2023
Preliminary Site
Contamination Investigation, Pitt & Sherry, April 2023; and
Landslide Hazard
Assessment, Pitt & Sherry, May 2023.
On 23 September 2025, the
applicant received a notice from the planning authority advising of its decision
to refuse the request for
an amendment. The notice advised the planning
authority had refused to prepare the amendment under section 38(2)(b) of the Act
the following reasons:
Considering the matters referred to in section 38(1) of the Act, the planning
authority is of the opinion that the proposed amendment:
not represent sound strategic planning and co-ordinated action by State and
local government, contrary to Schedule 1, Part 2
(a) of the Act. Specifically,
the Department of State Growth has advised it is appropriate that proposals of
this type, scale and
location are considered as part of the current
comprehensive review of the Northern Tasmania Regional Land Use Strategy, and
rezoning ideally be undertaken in context of the outcomes of the
not protect public infrastructure and other assets and enable the orderly
provision and co-ordination of public utilities and
other facilities for the
benefit of the community, contrary to Schedule 1, Part 2 (h) of the Act.
Specifically,
a) TasWater has advised that:
Most of the land
is outside TasWater’s serviced land for sewage and water supply.
TasWater has no
plans to expand its network in newly rezoned land.
proposed for rezoning will represent a very significant increase in the demand
placed on the sewage treatment plant, vastly
exceeding the licence limit for the
plant and the capacity to treat and dispose of effluent.
b) The design parameters of the proposed by-pass road have not been determined,
and the likely resulting alignment requirements have
not been incorporated into
the proposed Evandale expansion master plan layout.
c) The site is located under or near the departure tracks for runway 14R and the
arrival tracks for runway 32L as shown in the Master
Plan. Hence this
development may be subject to low-level noise from the aircraft using these
flight paths in the future.
not considered the effects on the environment, specifically the green and gold
frog, contrary to Schedule 1, Part 2 (c) of the
its scale, does not conserve areas or places (being Evandale) of historical
interest, contrary to Schedule 1, Part 2 (g) of
Commission consideration
40B(1) of the Act states:
(1) A person, within 14 days of receiving a notice under section 38(3) that the
planning authority has decided not to prepare a draft
amendment of an LPS in
accordance with the person's request, may request the Commission to determine
whether the Commission is satisfied
that the planning authority took into
account, in making its decision, the matters referred to in section 38(1).
38(1) states that a planning authority must be satisfied that a draft amendment
of an LPS will meet the LPS criteria, which
are listed under section 34(2) of
role of the Commission under section 40B(1) is limited. It does not require that
the Commission reviews the planning merit of
the planning authority’s
decision. Rather, it requires that the Commission is satisfied that the planning
authority has properly
considered the LPS criteria.
is noted that the meeting agenda contained a detailed report by suitably
qualified planner that provided a detailed assessment
against the LPS criteria.
The report concluded the amendment met the LPS criteria and was considered by
the planning authority at
its meeting on 15 September 2025.
is clear from the planning authority reasons above, that it did consider 4 of
the Part 2 Objectives in Schedule 1 of the Act, which
are Objectives of the
Planning Processes Established by the Act. However, there is no information
available to indicate that it considered
the merit of the detailed information
provided by the applicant. Further there are no reasons why the position adopted
by the planning
authority has been preferred to the position advanced by the
Consideration of other LPS Criteria
detailed response to outline how the planning authority considered the remaining
LPS criteria was not provided.
example, there is no consideration of the Schedule 1 Part 1(d) objective to
facilitate economic development in accordance with
the three proceeding
objectives in Part 1. There is no consideration of the Schedule 1 Part 2
Objective to promote the health and
wellbeing of all Tasmanians by ensuring a
pleasant, efficient and safe environment for working, living and recreation.
These considerations
are also relevant to LPS criterion s34(2)(c).
there is no consideration of LPS criterion s34(2)(d) which relates to
consistency with each State Policy, the Protection
of Agricultural Land Policy,
being a relevant State Policy.
the information available it is not possible to conclude that the planning
authority gave comprehensive consideration to the request
in light of the
information presented, and took into account all the matters referred to in
section 38(1). None of the remarks given
by the councillors at the Council
meeting clarify same.
Commission accepts that assessment against the LPS Criteria, and indeed within
some of the individual criteria (such as the RMPS
objectives) may lead to
potentially competing outcomes. The challenge for the decision-making process is
to ensure that all matters
related to relevant LPS criteria are taken into
account, to reconcile any competing outcomes where possible, and provide reasons
for a decision having regard to all the information presented.
reviewing the documents provided by the planning authority, I am satisfied the
planning authority was provided enough information
to determine whether the
requested amendment met the LPS criteria. I also consider it clear that the
planning authority did not
give comprehensive consideration to the LPS criteria
as required by section 38(1).
accordance with section 40B(4)(a) of the Act, the Commission directs the
planning authority to reconsider whether to prepare a
draft amendment in
relation to a request made on behalf of Trader’s In Purple, considered by
the planning authority on 15 September
John Ramsay
Executive Commissioner
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.16 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter