URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMC/2024/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Synge v Attorney-General for the State of Tasmania [2024] TASMC 1 (16 February 2024)
[2024] TASMC 01
: MAGISTRATES COURT OF TASMANIA
v Attorney-General for the State of Tasmania
[2024] TASMC
: SYNGE, Patrick
ATTORNEY-GENERAL for the
STATE OF TASMANIA
M/2022/1195
DELIVERED ON:
February 2024
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
13 February
DECISION OF:
Administrative Law – Judicial review –
Grounds of review – Rules of Natural Justice – Failure to give a
complainant an opportunity to respond to factual assertions by the
respondent to the complaint in relation to the sanction to be
imposed - No
breach of the rules of natural justice – no practical
REPRESENTATION
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Respondent:
State Litigator
[2024] TASMC
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 01
File No M/2022/1195
PATRICK SYNGE v ATTORNEY GENERAL FOR THE STATE OF
REASONS FOR DECISION DALY, DCM
16 December 2024
is an application to the Magistrates Court (Administrative Appeals Division) for
a review of a determination of a code of conduct
complaint by the Code of
Conduct Panel (the Panel) dated 3 June 2022. The application for review is
brought under the
Local Government Act 1993
determination of a code of conduct complaint by the Panel is a reviewable
decision for the purposes of the
Magistrates Court (Administrative Appeals
Division) Act 2001
. Under the Act, the ground of appeal is strictly
limited: that the Panel failed to comply with the rules of natural justice: the
Act s 28ZP.
application for review is brought by Mr Patrick Synge. He is the secretary and
president/public officer respectively of the Huon
Valley Residents and
Ratepayers Association Inc. Mr Synge seeks:
review of the determination by the Panel;
reconsideration of the sanction imposed on the councillor by the Panel; and
determination of whether further action is required in relation to any false
information provided to the panel by Councillor Sally
the date of the events relevant to this review Councillor Doyle was a councillor
on the Huon Valley Council (the Council). Cr
Doyle was subsequently elected as
the Council’s Mayor, an office she holds at the date of this decision.
early 2021, the Council was recruiting a new general manager. The Council
engaged Red Giant to be its recruitment consultant in
order to conduct the
selection process. Ms Inches conducted that process on behalf of Red Giant.
When Ms Inches presented a shortlist
of candidates to the Council’s
selection panel, she disclosed that she was in a personal relationship with one
of the shortlisted
applicants, Mr Jason Browne (‘the conflict of
interest’). Councillor Doyle was one of the counsellors who was on the
selection panel. Mr Browne was ultimately appointed as the Council’s
general manager. These events were a source of public
controversy.
1 November 2021, Mr Patrick Synge submitted a code of conduct complaint to the
Panel under the
Local Government Act 1993
. Mr Synge complained that
Councillor Doyle breached the Huon Valley Council’s code of conduct
relating to the conduct of councillors.
The complaint was upheld. The
panel’s determination is contained in the Code of Conduct Panel
Determination Report dated
3 June 2022.
Panel determined that the impugned selection process fell ‘well short of
meeting the requirement to carry out the process
in a professional
manner,’ and that the candidates in the selection process were not treated
fairly, in that they were not
apprised of the conflict nor given the opportunity
to consider the ramification of the conflict and explore legal
“There was an unacceptable ignorance of the proper mode of dealing with
the situation which falls below the standard of conduct
one can reasonably
expect from a councillor. This failure by the respondents is exacerbated by the
respondents taking no notice,
or not sufficient notice, of the eminently
sensible suggestions from
[certain persons]
1. Disrepute
The Panel is of the view that the Selection Panel should have, from the time
that it became aware of the relationship between the
Recruitment Consultant and
Mr Jason Brown, removed the Recruitment Consultant from the recruitment process
and engaged a replacement
consultant to either start again or advise on the
appropriateness of continuing the process that had been begun. In light of the
previous difficulties experienced by the prior Council, the potential for minute
examination of governance processes, the cost to
the community of the General
Manager, and the vital importance of the General Manager to the community as the
new driver of management
in a new Council, this failure of procedure does bring
the Council and the office of Councillor into disrepute. It is irrelevant
the Respondents were not actuated by any improper motive.
The failure was unsatisfactory governance conduct of such significance that
it brought the Council into disrepute. The community deserved
The Auditor General stated in the
"the Tasmanian
community is entitled to have confidence that local government recruitment
processes are carried out in an impartial,
ethical, efficient and professional
The Panel determines that this selection process fell well short
of meeting the requirement to carry out the process in a professional
that the Recruitment Consultant was not removed from the process and replaced.
The Selection Panel, including Crs Doyle
and Newell, were at best naive,
resulting in a loss of public confidence.
2. Treating all persons fairly
In relation to the allegation that the respondents did not treat all persons
fairly, the Panel supports this contention. The candidates
in this selection
process were not apprised of the conflict and were not given the opportunity to
consider the ramifications of the
relationship between the Recruitment
Consultant and Mr Browne, to take legal advice, and possibly to seek an
injunction restraining
the further conduct of the recruitment process in that
way. The Panel concludes that the appointee was also not treated fairly. Given
the amount of public scrutiny relating to this matter, he is now the subject of
all sorts of uncertainty, doubts and criticism, either
genuine or misplaced.
The Panel determines that the behaviour of Councillors Doyle and Newell have
brought the Council and office of councillors into disrepute
and that candidates
for the position of General Manager, including the appointee were treated
unfairly because of this process.”
upheld Mr Synge’s complaint, the Panel then turned to the question of the
appropriate sanction and determined that the
appropriate sanction was that Cr
Doyle would be cautioned in relation to the breaches of the Code of Conduct.
The Panel’s
reasons for imposing that sanction included the
“The Panel also acknowledges that there has been significant public
scrutiny in relation to this matter, which has prompted
Council to ensure that
all councillors receive appropriate training to avoid similar incidents in the
future. The Panel does not
believe that any further apology is warranted as Cr
Doyle has stated that she has already made a public apology.”
Synge contends that the Court has power to review the determination of the
particular sanction imposed by the Panel. His submissions
Procedural fairness
8. I maintain that the Panel should have contacted the complainants for
further comment before deciding on what sanction to impose
rather than solely
relying on Councillor Doyle's unsubstantiated claim that she had 'made a public
apology on more than one occasion'.
9. I contend that the Panel did not adequately test the information provided
by Councillor Doyle and especially so in the context
that when asked by the
Panel what sanction we considered most appropriate we had suggested a public
10.For there to have been a fair hearing further evidence should have been
sought and/or the complainants should have been given the
opportunity to respond
to Councillor Doyle's assertion prior to the deciding what sanction to
11. That not to have tested the evidence and/or not to have been given the
opportunity to respond constitutes a lack of procedural
public apology referred to by the Panel was based on Councillor Doyle’s
email dated 19 May 2022 to Ms Medhurst, executive
officer of the Local
Government Panel where she stated that she had already
“made a public
apology on more than one occasion”
. That assertion was undoubtedly
given significant weight in the process of determining the appropriate sanction.
It is common ground
that the only material supporting the Panel’s finding
is the assertion by Councillor Doyle in her email. The materials before
Panel suggest that Councillor Doyle did not provide any details of the timing,
forum or terms of any public apology. There is
nothing in the Panel’s
reasons that indicate that it looked behind Councillor Doyle’s assertion
in the email.
Synge is aggrieved that the Panel:
to give him any opportunity to respond to Councillor Doyle’s unsupported
assertion about the apology;
the assertion without any evidence to support it; and
the unsupported statement any weight on the question of the appropriate
Local Government Act 1992
, Part 3, Division 3A, Subdivision 3, s 28ZE
provides that in the investigation of the code of conduct complaint, the Code of
Panel must observe the rules of natural justice. The Attorney-General
contends that the duty to afford natural justice to the complainant
extend to the imposition of a sanction under s
Further, the Attorney
General submitted that once a determination has been made at the conclusion of
the investigation
“...natural justice no longer applies to the sanction to be imposed
under s 28ZI(2) as the investigation was completed and the
determined prior to
the imposition of a sanction.”
Attorney General contends that because
with separately to
‘the determination’
following an
‘investigation’
, parliament’s intent is that the extent
of the duty to afford natural justice is restricted only to the investigation
of the process.
satisfied that is the correct approach to the construction of the relevant
provisions of the Act. I agree that the mandated
observance of the rules of
natural justice in the investigation of a code of conduct complaint in s 28ZE
offers some support for
the Attorney-General’s submission, but there is
nothing in the Act which expressly and absolutely excludes the rules of natural
justice in relation to any other stage of the process relating to complaints
against councillors.
the Code of Conduct Panel upholds the complaint, it must then consider the
exercise of its powers to sanction a councillor under
27ZI. The language of
that provision refers to the panel imposing one or more of the listed sanctions
“on the councillor against whom the complaint is made”
suggests to me that the stage of proceedings concerned with sanction are
primarily a matter for the Panel to determine. In
this case, the panel did
indeed invite Mr Synge to make submissions on sanction and he did so. Assuming,
without deciding, that
the rules of procedural fairness required the Panel to do
that, I cannot see that in this case, the panel was required thereafter
conduct a further investigation of the factual matters put by Councillor Doyle
relevant to sentence such as would involve Mr Synge
being given a right to
respond to factual matters put to the Panel by Councillor Doyle.
order for the Court to imply a requirement of procedural fairness into s 28
ZI(2) which governed the Panel’s exercise of
its power to sanction
Councillor Doyle, Mr Synge must satisfy the Court that he had an interest in
that stage of proceedings which
ought to be protected in that
Mr Synge must be able to show
that the Panel’s exercise of its power to sanction Councillor Doyle
affected his interests in
a manner which is substantially different from the
manner in which the Panel’s exercise of that power was apt to affect the
interests of the public generally.
Mr Synge has not identified any interest of his which would be ‘affected
in a direct and immediate way’ as distinct
from his interest as a citizen
affected in the same way as other citizens
positions on the Huon Valley Residents and Ratepayers Association are not
sufficient to confer such any such interest.
assessment is that throughout its investigation and determination, the Panel was
focused on maintaining public confidence in the
standards of local governance
and in so doing, it was required to do as it did, taking into account the public
interest in proper
standards of local governance and the interests of the
candidates in the selection process. The Panel noted that there had been
significant public scrutiny in relation to the matter. The Court notes that
there has subsequently been an election which gave the
Huon Valley community the
opportunity to return a reject candidates standing for election. Respectfully,
I take the view that the
Panel’s focus was always appropriate in relation
to the interests of the public – not the interests of Mr Synge personally.
The subject matter of the complaint and the Panel’s investigation and
determination did not reveal that Mr Synge had any particular
interest of a
direct and immediate nature. These considerations compel the conclusion that in
this particular case the rules of
natural justice did not require the Panel to
provide Mr Synge with any opportunity to respond to Councillor Doyle’s
Attorney General submitted that a breach of the ‘no evidence’ rule,
which requires a decision maker’s decision
to be based upon logically
probative evidence, cannot fall within the scope of the expression ‘failed
to comply with the rules
of natural justice’. Whether or not that is so,
I do not think I need to decide. That is because I accept the
Attorney-General’s
central submission that it was open to the Panel to
accept at face value what Councillor Doyle said in her email dated 19 May 2022
to Ms Medhurst, executive officer of the Local Government Panel: that she had
“made a public apology on more than one occasion”
(see paragraph 31). While that may have been a prudent and transparent step
to take, there was no requirement that the Panel should
not accept Councillor
Doyle’s assertion unless it was reliably corroborated.
Court does not have jurisdiction to review the Panel’s determination on
the ground that it provided insufficient reasons
for its determination or that
it made a decision that was not open to a reasonable decision maker. These
considerations are beyond
the jurisdiction of the Court.
conclusion, I reject the Attorney General’s submission that the
Magistrates Court does not have jurisdiction to hear Mr Synge’s
application because he is not aggrieved by the determination but only the
sanction. However, I uphold the Attorney General’s
submission that the
requirements of procedural fairness were met by the Panel in the circumstances
of this case.
accordance with the reasons set out above, on this review of the determination
by the Code of Conduct Panel, I conclude that Mr
Synge has not made out his
ground of review that he was denied natural justice when the Panel exercised its
powers to sanction Councillor
Doyle after upholding the complaint against her.
No circumstances arise which could justify the Court varying or setting aside
reviewable decision under the
Magistrates Court (Administrative Appeals
Division) Act 2001
Consequently, the Court may not substitute its
own decision for the reviewable decision made by the Panel.
I observe that no evidence has been provided justify any allegation that
Councillor Doyle provided any false information
to the Local Government Code of
Conduct Panel.
order of the Court is that the reviewable decision is affirmed.
This summary appears in the
closing submissions for the Attorney-General, para
Report of the
Auditor-General
of 2021-22: Council general manager recruitment,
appointment and performance assessment
12 October 2021
to the public on Auditor-General's
Attorney-General's
submissions paragraph 16.
Attorney-General submissions paragraph
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
159 CLR 550.
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (136 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter