URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASSC/2025/42.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:22:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stokes v Seevaratnam [2025] TASSC 42 (9 September 2025)
[2025] TASSC 42
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA
Seevaratnam
[2025] TASSC 42
: STOKES, Grant William as
Executor for the Estate of the Late Gwendoline Grace
SEEVARATNAM, Krishnakumar
DELIVERED ON:
9 September 2025
HEARING DATE:
15 July 2025
Shanahan CJ
Appeal and New Trial – Right of appeal – When appeal lies –
From interlocutory decisions – Leave to appeal
– Application to
extend time within which to appeal from an interlocutory decision of the
Associate Judge – Test for
the grant of leave – Case management
under Part 14 Division 1 of the
Supreme Court Rules 2000
– Nature of case
management – Grounds of appeal formulated with no prospects of success
–Appeal is dismissed.
Aust Dig Appeal and New Trial
Legislation:
Supreme Court Rules
Papoutsakis v Tenbensel
[2024] TASSC
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Ross A Hart Barrister
and Solicitor
Judgment Number:
[2025] TASSC 42
paragraphs:
Serial No 42/2025
File No 2514/2020
GRANT WILLIAM STOKES AS EXECUTOR FOR THE ESTATE OF THE
LATE GWENDOLINE GRACE EVANS v KRISHNAKUMAR SEEVARATNAM
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT SHANAHAN CJ
9 September 2025
The proceedings
substantive proceedings in this matter relate to an action by the plaintiff
executor to have a contract for the sale of 364 Argyle
Street, North Hobart,
dated 25 January 2018 and varied on 8 September 2018, set aside on the grounds
of unconscionability or in the
alternative a declaration that the contract is
void or unenforceable. The proceedings were commenced by writ filed on 19
2020. The amended statement of claim was filed on 11 July 2022.
may be an understatement to observe that the matter has a lengthy and extensive
interlocutory history. Certainly, the interlocutory
activity in this matter has
substantially delayed the resolution of the substantive proceedings. The ambit
of interlocutory activity
led to an order by Daly AsJ on 21 August 2024
preventing any party from filing further affidavit material in the proceedings
the leave of the Court.
Division 1 of the
Supreme Court Rules
("Rules") is titled, "Case
Management" it sets out a regime by which the Court case manages certain
matters. The matters are those
identified at r 414(a) and include "a proceeding
which is of a class specified by the Chief Justice as being a class of
proceedings
to which this Division is to apply".
Direction No 1 of 2015 is titled "Case Management" ("Practice Direction") and it
sets out a variety of proceedings to which
Division 1 (rr 414-417) is to
apply including "All proceedings commenced by writ except where damages are
claimed by the plaintiff
in respect of personal injury". The substantive
proceedings fall within this description. The Practice Direction then sets out
the procedure to apply in such instances. It is to be noted that
Division 2 (rr 418-426) do not apply to a matter caught by
(refer to r 418).
management under
Division 1 has the purpose set out at r 414A, "to
ensure that proceedings are conducted justly and efficiently".
deals with directions hearings conducted under
Division 1.
Importantly, the purpose of such directions hearings is "to eliminate any lapse
of time, from the commencement of a
proceeding to its final determination that
is not reasonably required for (a) the fair and just determination of the
outstanding
issues between the parties and (b) the preparation of the case for
trial". It appears in this case that the directions hearings
conducted have not
achieved that purpose. There have been a number of interlocutory applications
and appeals by the defendant.
is to be noted that a judge seized of a directions hearing pursuant to the
provisions of
Division 1 is empowered by r 415(3), and "may make any
order, as part of a directions hearing to ensure that the proceeding is
and resolved justly and efficiently".
sets out examples of the nature of orders that can be made at such a
directions hearing including the most suitable manner to deal
with a proceeding
(r 415(4)(a)), and can take into account the most efficient way to deal with a
proceeding (r 415(4)(b)), and the
allocation of court resources (r 415(4)(c)).
Further, a judge hearing such a directions hearing may dispense with or vary any
of the Rules in their application to the proceeding (r 415(4A)(a)).
The point is that a judge at a directions hearing in respect
of a matter caught
Division 1, such as this, has very broad powers to manage the matter
is to be noted that case management is an organic process, and the demands of
that process can change with circumstances. It
would be antithetical to the
Division 1 were judges bound to approach the matter before
them solely through the prism of earlier orders made in the case management
process. Changing circumstances may require different approaches. An untrained
party, such as a self-represented litigant, may
not fully understand this
process and a judge hearing such matters at such a directions hearing should
seek to explain how case management
works consistently, of course, with the
demands of that process (ie eliminating unnecessary delay). Proceedings in a
case managed
directions hearing may appear cursory, or even brusque, to the
unrepresented litigant.
then to the interlocutory proceedings in the substantive proceedings. On 17
April 2024 Pearce J made orders that the parties
file draft certificates of
readiness after which a directions hearing would be held to settle them.
1 May 2024, the defendant applied for an order restraining the plaintiff's then
solicitor, Mr Beattie, from continuing to act
for the plaintiff in the
substantive proceedings.
17 October 2024, the associate judge refused the application to restrain Mr
Beattie. On 18 October 2024 the defendant appealed
the decision of the
associate judge.
25 February 2025, Estcourt J dismissed the defendant's appeal against the
associate judge's order of 17 October 2025. The defendant
has now appealed to
the Full Court from the decision of Estcourt J, and that appeal is pending.
21 February 2025, the associate judge ordered that a directions hearing in the
nature of a pre-trial conference be heard on 21
February 2025. At that time the
associate judge ordered that the parties file draft certificates of readiness
within 28 days in
accordance with the orders of Pearce J on 17 April 2024.
31 March 2025, the associate judge ordered that he would dispense with the need
for draft certificates of readiness and instead
would make orders to the
requisite effect.
11 April 2025, the associate judge heard the parties in a directions hearing
regarding preparations for trial in the substantive
proceedings.
record of the proceedings on 11 April 2025 indicates that Daly AsJ observed that
the likely disposition of the pending Full Court
appeal would occur before the
trial of the substantive proceedings. He referred the issue regarding r 461 of
the Rules relating
to paragraph [10] of the draft plaintiff's certificate of
readiness, to the trial judge who can make orders in respect to such matters
under r 461(1)(b). Rule 461 deals with the reception into evidence of any plan,
model, photograph, film, tape, disk, soundtrack
or other device in which sounds,
data or visual images are recorded. Daly AsJ also noted that in respect of
paragraph [15] of the
plaintiff's draft certificate of readiness, that no notice
to admit facts has been issued, and the documents sought by the defendant
been provided. In respect of paragraph [7] of the defendant's draft certificate
of readiness, Daly AsJ stated that where documents
have not been agreed it was
not the Court's task to force parties to agree on documents.
application under r 559 of the Rules is necessary,
when that rule
, if questions of law or fact are to be tried at different places or
by different modes of trial or in a particular order.
11 April 2025 Daly AsJ, in respect of any application under r 559, noted that
such an application must be accompanied by an affidavit.
He then referred to
his order of 21 August 2024 requiring the parties to seek leave to file
affidavit material. Whilst his Honour
concluded that order was breached by the
filing of the defendant's 10 April 2025 affidavit, he noted that the defendant
under a mistaken understanding of the effect of the 21 August 2024
orders made by the associate judge on 11 April 2025 and formalised on 1 May 2025
"1 The matter be listed for trial.
Honour grants leave for the defendant to file an affidavit in support of their
foreshadowed rule 559 application."
The application
Seevaratnam, the defendant, brings an application for an extension of time
within which to appeal from interlocutory orders made
by the associate judge on
11 April 2025 ("applicant"). I have described the defendant as the "applicant"
because until leave is
granted there is no appeal on foot, and thus to describe
the applicant as "an appellant" (as the applicant does in various court
documents) is to err because it anticipates the grant of leave.
from the decision of an associate judge are made under r 680A.
680A differentiates between "final judgments" and "interlocutory judgments".
The decision of Daly AsJ on 11 April 2025 was
not a "final judgment" and hence
is an "interlocutory judgment".
time limited for appealing an "interlocutory judgement" is provided for at r
680A(3)(b) which states it must be instituted "within
10 days of the date after
the judgment was pronounced". In this instance any appeal would have to have
been brought within 10 days
after 11 April 2025, as that was the date upon which
the orders at [21] above were
notice of appeal initially filed by the applicant is dated 7 May 2025. The
orders sought by the applicant in his application
for an extension of time
within which to appeal, filed 7 May 2025, ("application") were in the following
"1 That the defendant be granted leave to file a Notice of
Appeal dated 7 May 2025 (which is attached to this application including
affidavit of the same date) in regards to verbal Order(s) made by his Honour,
the Associate Judge, Justice Daly on 11 April 2025
(date of written Orders): 1
May 2025), and
defendant be granted a period of 11 days from the Order to file the Appeal Court
Book concerned and to serve on the other party."
original grounds of appeal filed by the applicant with the application were
prolix and embarrassing. There were 8 grounds, each
ground was afforded a title
and followed by submissions. In summary, the grounds were that Daly AsJ erred
when, (emphasis added):
applicant was "
not being afforded procedural fairness
in relation to the
effect of a draft certificate of readiness";
failed to comply with "
The overriding purpose of the Rules and the Civil
Procedure Act ...
in that he chose to look through a very limited lens and
selectively confined himself to only Rule 401 and 402 of the notices to
facts when other Rules can also be applicable such as r 551(2)(b)(iii), r
542(d), r 549(c) and particularly r 550(2)(g) and
failed to record the plaintiff's refusal to admit facts;
failed to record, by order, in breach of r 551(2)(b)(iii) and/or r 550(2)(h) of
, an admission by the plaintiff being the contents of a letter said to
be filed in the Registry, dated 4 April 2025, titled "Plaintiff's
Admissions of
Facts being payments by the defendant into the home loan account of GG Eaves
between 22 February 2016 and 6 March 2023";
failed to comply with the second order of Pearce J at a directions hearing on 17
April 2024 to the effect that "both parties make
and file draft certificates of
readiness, expressing all of the respective views of the plaintiff and the
defendant about the matters
in the certificate of readiness – both as to
experts, proofs of evidence, agreed documents, estimated time lines and any
interlocutory matters";
failed to adhere to directions made by Pearce J on 17 April 2024;
failed to order that the trial in the substantive proceedings only proceed upon
the determination of the defendant's appeal to
the Full Court to disqualify Mr
Beattie, and
directions hearing was not conducted efficiently and
exhaustively.
test for the grant of leave is set out by Brett J in
Papoutsakis v
[2024] TASSC 13
it includes four matters that are to be
taken into account including (i) length of the delay; (ii) the reasons for the
delay; (iii)
whether the applicant has an arguable case, and (iv) the extent of
any prejudice to the respondent if leave is granted.
this instance delay is not an issue, and the matters at (i) and (ii) can be put
to one side. It is the third issue which is prime,
ie whether the applicant has
an arguable case, and any prejudice to the respondent should be identified and
considered.
heard the application on 13 June 2025. During that hearing, the applicant
sought to amend his grounds of appeal. I directed the
applicant to file a
minute of the proposed amendments. Also at that hearing, counsel for the
plaintiff, Mr Gray, confirmed that
Mr Beattie was retiring on 30 June 2025, and
that a new solicitor was then acting for the plaintiff.
The minute of amended grounds subsequently filed was essentially a set of
further submissions and did little to refine or describe
the applicant's
intended grounds of appeal.
subsequently heard the parties on the application to amend on 15 June 2025. I
spent some time seeking to identify the grounds
of appeal were that the
applicant seeks to pursue. During submissions (Transcript 15 July 2025 from T1)
the applicant reduced the
grounds of appeal to four, with the following
particulars ie, that the associate judge erred in that:
applicant was "
not being afforded procedural fairness
in relation to the
effect of a draft certificate of readiness".
PARTICULARS
(a) Not allowing the applicant time to seek legal advice
(b) The Associate Judge was not impartial or neutral, and
(c) The applicant was denied the right to be heard
failed to comply with "
The overriding purpose of the Rules and the Civil
Procedure Act
PARTICULARS
(a) By setting the matter down without finalising the certificate of readiness
between both sides, and
(b) Failing to ask the parties if there were any other requirements that needed
to be looked at, approaching trial.
the hearings conducted on the 31
of March and the 11
of April, in that he did not order the record of facts admitted by the
plaintiff, despite the defendant's request.
the hearings on the 31
of March, 11
of April 2025, by
refusing to record the non-admissions of fact by the plaintiff in relation to
the defendant's mortgage payments
in January, February, and March of 2023."
decision to extend time involves the exercise of a discretion, which is
unfettered except in the sense that it is to be exercised
judicially.
order to assess whether the applicant has an arguable case it is necessary to
consider how the grounds of appeal relied upon by
the applicant are said to
demonstrate error by the associate judge.
associate judge has a broad discretion in how he case manages matters under Part
14 Division 1 of the
. To succeed on an appeal the applicant would have to
demonstrate (on appeal) that the associate judge, inter alia, acted on a
error of fact or law, or erred by reaching a conclusion which was
unreasonable or unjust, declined or failed to exercise his discretion,
irrelevant or insufficient materials, or misapprehended the facts or failed to
consider a material fact.
ground 1 it is noted that the associate judge granted an adjournment on the
defendant's request from 31 March 2025 to 11 April
2025 at 2:15 pm. The
applicant had the benefit of that adjournment to seek legal advice. The use of
affidavits during the interlocutory
proceedings was subject to the associate
judge's order of 21 August 2024 and the provisions of r 415(9), which precludes
of affidavits at a directions hearing except by order of the Court or a
judge. There was some reference to the applicant's need
for an interpreter but
that is a matter that can be dealt with at anytime prior to any requirement that
he give evidence or participate
in a trial of the substantive matters.
ground 2 it is noted that the applicant, by submission, relies upon rr 542(d),
549(c), 550(2)(g) and (i) and 551(2)(b)(iii), and
those rules all appear in
Division 1 of the
. That Division does not apply to a proceeding, like
these, to which rr 414 and 416 apply, see r 540.
3 and 4 are essentially different ways of expressing the same complaint. As
noted, the associate judge has a very broad
discretion as to how he proceeds at
such a directions hearing. There is nothing that precluded the associate judge
from determining
how evidence or admissions were to be dealt with in the
substantive proceedings.
would dismiss the application for leave on the basis that the grounds of appeal
as formulated are baseless and have no prospects
of success. They are founded
on a misapprehension as to the nature of case management and that orders made
earlier in the case management
process continue to bind subsequent case
management. I can discern no indication that the associate judge acted
partially, indeed
he sought to facilitate the applicant's requests for an
adjournment (on 31 March 2025) and that he be able to make an application
r 559 (on 11 April 2025), despite the requirement for an affidavit to support
such an application and the effect of the associate
judge's earlier order on 21
August 2024.
application has consumed substantial court resources and whilst the Court will
always seek to do justice irrespective of whether
a party is represented or not,
the additional time, cost and delay now evident in this matter emphasise the
need to seek to explain
the nature and rules of case management to such
litigants at the outset of proceedings. That observation is intended as no
of the manner in which this matter has been case managed, and there is
an obligation on self-represented litigants to listen carefully
to judicial
officers tasked with the case management of
proceedings.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (126 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter