URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASRMPAT/2021/31.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:20:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RT & SD Simmons v Kentish Council and EJ Worssam [2021] TASRMPAT 31 (8 October 2021)
RT & SD Simmons v Kentish Council and EJ Worssam
TASRMPAT 31
: Robert Thomas & Sandra Denise
First Respondent
: Kentish Council
: Eileen Worssam
Subject Land:
256 Careys Road, West Kentish
Planning Appeal
Hearing Date(s):
26 & 27 August, 1, 2 and 9 September 2021
Decision Date:
8 October 2021
Delivered At:
M Duvnjak, Chairperson
ME Ball, Member
M Kitchell, Member
A Spence SC / M Edwards
First Respondent:
Second Respondent:
Solicitors:
: Page Seager
First Respondent:
Tremayne Fay Rheinberger
Second Respondent:
Billett Legal
Catchwords:
Planning Appeal –Kentish Interim Planning Scheme
2013 – Rural Resource Zone – Clause 26.3.1 P1(a), (c)(vi) and
– Clause 26.3.2 – meaning of ‘farm stay’ –
Clause 26.4.3 P1(b).
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. The Second Respondent, EJ Worssam, lodged a
development application (DA2021/03) to the First Respondent, Kentish Council
(the Council),
seeking approval for the conversion of an existing temporary
manager’s residence to a visitor accommodation unit, the construction
two additional visitor accommodation units, a manager’s residence and a
function centre at 256 Careys Road, West Kentish
(the Proposal).
2. Council resolved to approve the Proposal subject to conditions set out in
a development permit dated 18 May 2021.
3. The Appellants, RT & SD Simmons, filed a Notice of Appeal on 3 June
2021, challenging the Council’s decision.
The Site of the Proposed Development
4. 256 Careys Road, West Kentish is a 13.85ha property with direct access to
Careys Road. Careys Road is a gravel surfaced local highway.
The overall
property comprises two titles with an area of 23ha, known as Manna Hill Farm.
The site has existing approvals for residential
and visitor accommodation use.
It currently contains a manager’s residence and two visitor accommodation
units. The Second
Respondent operates a small scale sheep farming and breeding
operation at Manna Hill Farm.
5. The Appellants’ land at 225 Careys Road adjoins Manna Hill Farm.
Grounds of Appeal
6. On 15 July 2021, the Tribunal granted an application for the Appellants to
amend their original grounds of appeal. The amended
grounds of appeal are as
“1 The proposed multifunctional space, also referred to in the
development application as a ‘function centre', categorised
as 'Community
meeting and entertainment' use per clause 8.2 of the Kentish Interim Planning
Scheme 2013 (the Scheme) must, but does
not, satisfy cl.26.3.1 P1 of the Scheme
(a) it must, but does not, satisfy P1 (a) because it is not consistent
with the local area objectives set out in cl.26.1.2 of the
Scheme, including but
not limited to objectives (c)(ii) and (g);
(b) it must, but does not, satisfy P1(c) because it has not been (and the
Appellant asserts it cannot be) demonstrated that the 'function
centre' must be
required to locate on rural resource land for operational efficiency in the
context of any of the eight matters set
out in (i) to (viii) (inclusive);
(c) it must, but does not, satisfy P1(d)(ii) because it has not been (and
the Appellant asserts it cannot be) demonstrated that the
'function centre' will
minimise the likelihood for constraint or interference to existing and potential
primary industry use on the
site and on adjacent land, in particular adjacent
land owned by the Appellant and situated at 225 Careys Road, West
PARTICULARS OF GROUND OF APPEAL 1 (c)
(i) The relevant ‘adjacent land’ is the property situated at
225 Careys Road, West Kentish and described as follows:
(A) Certificate of Title Volume 209291 Folio 1 of the Register;
(B) Certificate of Title Volume 166778 Folio 2 of the Register;
(C) Certificate of Title Volume 17376 Folio 1 of the Register;
(D) Certificate of Title Volume 249100 Folio 1 of the Register;
(E) Certificate of Title Volume 49760 Folio 3 of the Register;
(F) Certificate of Title Volume 30360 Folio 1 of the Register.
(here referred to collectively as the Land)
(ii) The relevant existing primary industry use on the Land is:
(A) cattle grazing and cattle breeding/husbandry; and
(B) irrigated pasture for stock grazing and/or fodder
conservation.
(iii) The relevant potential primary industry use on the Land is
irrigated cropping.
2 The proposed Residential use (single dwelling) development referred to
in the development application as a ‘manager’s
residence’ does
not satisfy cl.26.4.3 P1 of the Scheme in that it must, but does not, satisfy
P1(b) because it has not been
(and the Appellant asserts it cannot be)
demonstrated that the development will minimise likely constraint or
interference to existing
and potential primary industry use on the site and on
adjacent land, in particular adjacent land owned by the Appellant and situated
at 225 Careys Road, West Kentish.
PARTICULARS OF GROUND OF APPEAL 2
(i) The relevant ‘adjacent land’ is the property situated at
225 Careys Road, West Kentish and described as follows:
(A) Certificate of Title Volume 209291 Folio 1 of the Register;
(B) Certificate of Title Volume 166778 Folio 2 of the Register;
(C) Certificate of Title Volume 17376 Folio 1 of the Register;
(D) Certificate of Title Volume 249100 Folio 1 of the Register;
(E) Certificate of Title Volume 49760 Folio 3 of the Register;
(F) Certificate of Title Volume 30360 Folio 1 of the Register.
(here referred to collectively as the Land)
(ii) The relevant existing primary industry use on the Land is:
(A) cattle grazing and cattle breeding/husbandry; and
(B) irrigated pasture for stock grazing and/or fodder
conservation.
(iii) The relevant potential primary industry use on the Land is
irrigated cropping.
3 The proposed Visitor accommodation use (change of use and 2 new cabins)
referred to in the development application is, as a matter
of fact and law, a
discretionary use in the Rural Resource zone because at all relevant times the
site did not (and presently does
not) host a ‘farm’ capable of
meeting the “farm stay accommodation” qualification to Visitor
accommodation
imposed by Use Table 26.2. As a result:
(a) the proposed Visitor accommodation must be assessed against cl.26.3.1
P1 of the Scheme but cannot satisfy the requirements of
that control
(i) it must, but does not, satisfy P1(a) because it is not consistent
with the local area objectives set out in cl.26.1.2 of the
Scheme, including but
not limited to objectives (c)(ii) and (g); and
(ii) it must, but does not, satisfy P1(c) because it has not been (and
the Appellant asserts it cannot be) demonstrated that the
proposed Visitor
accommodation must be required to locate on rural resource land for operational
efficiency in the context of any
of the eight matters set out in (i) to (viii)
(inclusive).
(b) The proposed Residential use (single dwelling) development referred
to in the development application as a ‘manager’s
must, but cannot, satisfy cl.26.3.2 P1 of the Scheme, in particular P1(c)(i),
(i) the use is put forward as a manager’s residence required as
part of the proposed Visitor accommodation use; however
(ii) the proposed Visitor accommodation use is not a “permitted
use” for the purposes of cl.26.3.2 P1(c)(i) - it is a
discretionary
Planning Controls
7. The property is subject to the provisions of the Kentish Interim Planning
Scheme 2013 (the Scheme) and is located within the Rural
Resource Zone. There
was no dispute that the Proposal was required to be assessed for compliance
under Clause 26 of the Scheme.
The grounds of appeal specifically call up
consideration of Clauses 26.1.1, 26.1.2, 26.3.1, 26.3.2 and 26.4.3.
8. Clause 26.1.1 provides:
26.1.1 - Zone Purpose Statements
26.1.1.1 To provide for sustainable use or development of resources for
agriculture, aquaculture, forestry, mining and other primary
industries,
including opportunities for resource processing.
26.1.1.2 To provide for other use or development that does not constrain or
conflict with resource development use.
9. Clause 26.1.2 provides:
26.1.2 – Local Area Objectives
(a) The priority purpose for rural land is primary industry dependent upon
access to a naturally occurring resource;
(b) Air, land and water resources are of importance for current and
potential primary industry and other permitted use;
(c) Air, land and water resources are protected against –
(i) permanent loss to a use or development that has no need or reason to
locate on land containing such a resource; and
(ii) use or development that has potential to exclude or unduly conflict,
constraint, or interfere with the practice of primary industry
or any other use
dependent on access to a naturally occurring resource;
(d) Primary industry is diverse, dynamic, and innovative; and may occur on
a range of lot sizes and at different levels of intensity;
(e) All agricultural land is a valuable resource to be protected for
sustainable agricultural production;
(f) Rural land may be used and developed for economic, community, and
utility activity that cannot reasonably be accommodated on land
settlement or nature conservation area;
(g) Rural land may be used and developed for tourism and recreation use
dependent upon a rural location or undertaken in association
with primary
(h) Residential use and development on rural land is appropriate only if
(i) required by a primary industry or a resource based activity; or
(ii) without permanent loss of land significant for primary industry use
and without constraint or interference to existing and potential
use of land for
primary industry purposes.
10. Clause 26.3.1 provides:
26.3.1 – Requirement for discretionary non-residential use to
locate on rural resource land
Other than for residential use, discretionary permit use of rural resource
land is to minimise –
(a) unnecessary loss of air, land and water resources of significance for
sustainable primary industry and other permitted use, including
for agricultural
use dependent on the soil as a growth medium; and
(b) unreasonable conflict or interference to existing or potential primary
industry use, including agricultural use, by other land
Acceptable Solution
Performance Criteria
There is no acceptable solution
Other than for residential use, discretionary permit use must –
(a) be consistent with the local area objectives;
(b) be consistent with any applicable desired future character
(c) be required to locate on rural resource land for operational efficiency
(i) to access a specific naturally occurring resource on the site or on
adjacent land in the zone;
(ii) to access infrastructure only available on the site or on adjacent
land in the zone;
(iii) to access a product of primary industry from a use on the site or on
adjacent land in the zone;
(iv) to service or support a primary industry or other permitted use on the
site or on adjacent land in the zone;
(v) if required –
acquire access to a mandatory site area not otherwise available in a zone
intended for that purpose;
public health or safety if all measures to minimise impact could create an
unacceptable level of risk to human health, life or
property if located on land
in a zone intended for that purpose;
(vi) to provide opportunity for diversification, innovation, and
value-adding to secure existing or potential primary industry use
of the site or
of adjacent land;
(vii) to provide an essential utility or community service infrastructure
for the municipal or regional community or that is of significance
for Tasmania;
(viii) if a cost-benefit analysis in economic, environmental, and social
terms indicates significant benefits to the region; and
(d) minimise likelihood for –
(i) permanent loss of land for existing and potential primary industry
(ii) constraint or interference to existing and potential primary industry
use on the site and on adjacent land; and
(iii) loss of land within a proclaimed irrigation district under Part 9
Water Management Act 1999
or land that may benefit from the application of
broad-scale irrigation development.
11. Clause 26.3.2 provides:
26.3.2 – Required residential use
Residential use –
(a) is required as part of a resource development or other non-residential
(b) does not confine or restrain use of land for resource development or
other non-residential use
Acceptable Solution
Performance Criteria
Residential use required as part of a use must –
(a) be an alteration or addition to an existing lawful and structurally
sound residential building;
(b) be an ancillary dwelling to an existing lawful and structurally sound
single dwelling;
(c) not intensify an existing lawful residential use;
(d) replace a lawful existing residential use;
(e) not create a new residential use through conversion of an existing
building; or
(f) be home based business in association with occupation of an existing
lawful and structural sound residential building; and
(g) there is no change in the title description of the site on which the
residential use is located.
Residential use required as part of a use must –
(a) be consistent with local area objectives;
(b) be consistent with any applicable desired future character
(c) be required to locate on rural resource land if –
(i) the type, scale, intensity, or operational characteristics of a
permitted use make it necessary for a person to live on the site
for the purpose
of undertaking such use;
(ii) residential use will be integral and subservient to the principal use;
(iii) there is no other available dwelling on the site; and
(d) if the required residential use relies on land in two or more titles in
different ownership, the written consent of the owner
of each title to enter
agreement to be registered on the title for each of the lots and
providing -
(i) the dwelling is required as part of a nominated permitted use;
(ii) the lots are not to be sold separately
12. Clause 26.4.3 provides:
26.4.3 – Location of development for sensitive uses
The location of development for sensitive uses on rural land does not
unreasonably interfere with or otherwise constrain –
(a) agricultural land for existing and potential sustainable agricultural
use dependent on the soil as a growth medium,;
(b) agricultural use of land in a proclaimed irrigation district under
Water Management Act 1999
or land that may benefit from the application of
broad-scale irrigation development;
(c) use of land for agricultural production that is not dependent on the
soil as a growth medium, including aquaculture, controlled
environment
agriculture, and intensive animal husbandry;
(d) conservation management;
(e) extractive industry;
(f) forestry; and
(g) transport and utility infrastructure.
Acceptable Solution
Performance Criteria
New development, except for extensions to existing sensitive use where the
extension is no greater than 30% of the existing gross
floor area of the
sensitive use, must –
(a) be located not less than –
(i) 200m from any agricultural land;
(ii) 200m from aquaculture or controlled environment agriculture;
(iii) 500m from the operational area boundary established by a mining lease
issued in accordance with the
Mineral Resources Development Act 1995
if blasting
does not occur; or
(iv) 1000m from the operational area boundary established by a mining
lease issued in accordance with the
Mineral Resources Development Act 1995
blasting does occur; or
(v) 500m from intensive animal husbandry;
(vi) 100m from land under a reserve management plan;
(vii) 100m from land designated for production forestry;
(viiii) 50m from a boundary of the land to a road identified in Clause
26.4.2 or to a railway line; and
(ix) clear of any restriction imposed by a utility; and
(b) not be on land within a proclaimed irrigation district under
Water Management Act 1999
or land that may benefit from the application of
broad-scale irrigation development
New development, except for extensions to existing sensitive use where the
extension is no greater than 30% of the existing gross
floor area of the
sensitive use, must minimise –
(a) permanent loss of land for existing and potential primary industry
(b) likely constraint or interference to existing and potential primary
industry use on the site and on adjacent land;
(c) permanent loss of land within a proclaimed irrigation district under
Water Management Act 1999
or land that may benefit from the application
of broad-scale irrigation development; and
(d) adverse effect on the operability and safety of a major road, a railway
or a utility
13. The Use Table at Clause 26.2 is also called up for consideration by the
grounds of appeal.
The Evidence
14. The following witnesses gave evidence at the hearing:
For the Appellant:
Astrid Ketelaar,
agriculture / natural resource management;
Justine Brooks,
planning and economic development; and
Robert Simmons,
Appellant who gave evidence on his own behalf.
Troy McCarthy,
For the Second Respondent:
Chloe Lyne,
Jason Lynch,
agronomy, irrigated agriculture and pasture production; and
Simon Worssam,
who gave lay evidence.
The area surrounding the site of the
15. The Scheme provisions called up by the grounds of appeal make relevant
those properties which are close to or adjacent to the
site of the Proposal.
Those properties surrounding the site are usefully set out in table that formed
part of Mr McCarthy’s
evidence, which is reproduced below:
Planning Scheme Zone
Current Use Class
Rural Resource
Forestry Production
Careys Road, West Kentish
North/North West
Rural Resource
Agricultural purposes
225 Careys Road, West Kentish
Rural Resource
Residential single dwelling with outbuildings and land used for
326 Careys Road, West Kentish
Rural Resource
Agricultural purposes (also owned by the Second Respondents )
256 Careys Road, West Kentish
Rural Resource
Residential, single dwelling with outbuildings
328 Careys Road, West Kentish
Rural Resource
Residential single dwelling with outbuildings and forestry production
345 Careys Road, Claude Road.
Ground 1 – the Function Centre
16. Ground 1 relates to that part of the Proposal referred to as the
‘Function Centre’. The Function Centre use best
fits within the
Community & Entertainment Use class under the Scheme and is a discretionary
use in the Rural Resource Zone.
As such, Clause 26.3.1 of the Scheme applies.
That clause does not provide for an Acceptable Solution, therefore, the relevant
Performance
Criteria must be met.
17. Clause 26.3.1 P1 provides that the function centre use must comply with
subparagraphs (a) to (d) of P1.
Ground 1(a) – Clause 26.1.2 – Local Area Objectives
18. P1(a) provides that the use must be consistent with the Local Area
Objectives at Clause 26.1.2. With respect to Ground 1(a),
the Appellants’
contention is limited to issues of compliance with Local Area Objectives (c)(ii)
and (g). It is not a requirement
that every one of the Local Area Objectives
apply or have relevance to the proposed
, rather, the use must not be
inconsistent with the relevant
objectives.
19. Local Area Objective (c)(ii) provides that
“air, land and water
resources are protected against”
use that has the potential to exclude
or unduly conflict, constrain, or interfere with the practice of primary
industry or any other
use dependent upon access to a naturally occurring
20. To assess consistency of the function centre use with Local Area
Objective (c)(ii), the Tribunal must first:
the intended uses for the proposed function centre;
the meaning of ‘primary industry’;
the meaning of ‘unduly conflict, constrain or
interfere’;
the existing and potential primary industry uses on the site;
the existing and potential primary industry uses on the Appellants’ land;
whether the function centre use excludes or unduly constrains or interferes with
the practice of primary industry on the
Second Respondent’s property or on
the Appellants’ property.
21. What constitutes ‘primary industry’ is not defined in the
Scheme. The Zone Purpose Statement provides some assistance.
26.1.1.1, the zone purpose is identified as providing
sustainable use or development of resources for agriculture, aquaculture,
forestry, mining and other primary industries,
including opportunities for
resource processing.”
22. What constitutes ‘agricultural use’ is defined in the Scheme
as meaning the:
“use of the land for propagating, cultivating or harvesting plants
or for keeping and breeding of animals, excluding pets. It
includes the
handling, packing or storing of plant and animal produce for dispatch to
processors. It includes controlled environment
agriculture, intensive tree
farming and plantation forestry.”
23. Much of the expert evidence with respect to what constitutes
‘primary industry’ sought to incorporate a commercial
element or a
requirement to be commercially viable. That was the position taken in the
evidence of both Ms Brooks and Ms Ketelaar.
24. Both Ms Ketelaar and Ms Brooks did not accept that the agricultural
activity undertaken by the Second Respondent would qualify
as primary industry
as to do so required larger scale activities than those carried out on site and
must have a commercial intent.
25. Ms Ketelaar adopted the dictionary definition of ‘primary
industry’ but then utilised other dictionary definitions
to determine that
‘industry’ is an activity “
where economics of the activity
need to be considered.”
Her evidence was that to qualify required a
larger scale of ‘viable’ commercial activity on the proposal site,
to constitute a primary industry as contemplated by the Scheme. Her
evidence was that viability requires the generation of sufficient
provide for at least one family and full time employment for one person.
26. It is not in dispute the Second Respondent’s agricultural activity
does not do so.
27. Ms Ketelaar, in consultation with others, has developed what is called
the ‘Enterprise Scale’. The Enterprise Scale
identifies current
enterprise activity, land capability, irrigation, water resources and
connectivity of a site in order to classify
the activity into broad categories
with ‘commercial’, ‘hobby’, and ‘lifestyle’
scale characteristics.
Based on her use of the Enterprise Scale, she concluded
that the proposal site, given it is Class 5 land, and taking into account
existing enterprise (18 breeding ewes grazing upon one hectare of land with some
cattle grazing occurring on 13ha) was unlikely
to generate more than $10,000 per
annum. This agricultural potential land use was classified as
‘lifestyle’ scale under
her Enterprise Scale system.
28. Her evidence was that the current use of the proposal site is
non-agricultural”
and, at its highest, can be classed as
“Lifestyle scale and not a primary industry use”
Ketelaar’s Enterprise Scale classification for ‘Lifestyle’
scale characteristics is reproduced below:
Potential Land Use
Resource (General Characteristics)
Connectivity
‘Lifestyle scale’ Characteristics
Little or no use for Agriculture.
Indicative Gross Income < $10 000
Generally 1-8 ha in area.
Land Capability variable.
Water for irrigation unlikely.
Moderate to significant Constraints.
Residence on the title.
Residences in close proximity.
Little or no connectivity to unconstrained titles.
29. The Enterprise Scale adopted by Ms Ketelaar is based on levels of scale,
commercial intent and viability not contemplated by the
Scheme provisions. For
that reason, the Tribunal cannot accept Ms Ketelaar’s evidence arising
from the Enterprise Scale tool.
30. As noted the Scheme definition of ‘agricultural use’ does not
incorporate a commercial component. The Zone Purpose
Statements, at Clause
26.1.1, also do not incorporate any required scale or commerciality of primary
industry. The Local Area Objective
at Clause 26.1.2(d) provides that
primary industry is diverse, dynamic and innovative; and may occur on
a range of lot sizes and at different level of intensity.”
Objectives are given meaning by the Scheme Standard providing a minimum lot size
in the Rural Resource Zone as one hectare,
except for agricultural purposes
where no minimum lot size is
31. As submitted by the Second Respondent, to ascribe scale and commercial
intent to ‘primary industry’ is not supported
by the Rural Resource
Zone Standards as a whole. Importing concepts of commerciality and scale to
determine whether an agricultural
activity in the Rural Resource Zone is a
primary industry begs the question, where, if an agricultural activity which was
once profitable
but has operated at a loss for a considerable period, would it
lose its status as primary industry and therefore the protection afforded
primary industry uses and development located on Rural Resource land. In the
Tribunal’s view, this cannot have been the
intention of the Scheme
What current and potential further agricultural activities are/could be
carried out on the Appellants’ land?
32. The Appellants’ evidence about their agricultural activities was as
Appellants’ land is comprised of five separate titles;
Prior to 2008,
part of the Appellants’ farm was a dairy farm;
Prior to the
purchase of part of the land in 1985, that part was operating as a mixed dairy
and cropping enterprise with approximately
14.1ha used for potato production.
There is no
current cropping enterprise. Mr Simmons’ evidence was that there has been
no cropping undertaken since 1995 (Canola).
No potato or other crops have been
farmed since 1985;
have undertaken
considerable works to ‘drought proof’ the property,
Construction
of a 60ML compacted earth dam; and
Establishment
of a pumping station with underground pipelines to a high point on the land,
enabling gravity fed irrigation of approximately
In 2014, further
irrigation development and technology occurred which expanded irrigation cover
to a further 16ha of pasture. The
irrigation system allowed water to be
distributed to the entire farm. Current, the Appellants can irrigate 35ha of
pasture. The
Appellants have been granted a further licence for 230ML of water
which will allow irrigation of all pastures on the property.
33. The Appellants currently operate the farm as a commercial operation with
160-200 steers as a ‘cattle fattening’ operation.
presently no constraints preventing the farm from being cropped, although the
evidence before the Tribunal suggests that
due to the topography of the farm,
such cropping would be limited to specific areas. Whether the farm is capable of
producing crops
is relevant to Clause 26.1.2(c)(ii), which requires a
consideration of whether the function centre proposal would “
unduly conflict, constrain or interfere with a practice of primary
34. The Appellants have had their land recently assessed by Simplot. An
assessment report that formed part of Mr Simmons’ evidence
identified 48ha
on the Appellants’ land as suitable for cropping and 11.5ha as suitable
for potatoes. The author of that assessment
did not give evidence before the
Tribunal. The nature of the assessment and what inquiries or investigations were
undertaken are
unknown. The document simply identifies that an assessment of the
farm was undertaken that disclosed that the author accepted suitability
of the Appellants’ land for cropping.
35. Ms Ketelaar’s evidence identifies that part of the
Appellants’ property is capable of supporting crop production.
that evidence was accepted by Mr Lynch.
36. Access to the site is via a public road (Careys Road). The separation
between the Appellants’ closest boundary and the proposed
function centre
is approximately 28m (which includes the road). The Appellants’ main
access gate is directly opposite the Second
Respondent’s land.
37. Reproduced below is a copy of the Masterplan that formed part of the
Development Application documents before the Council. The
Master Plan depicts
the location of the proposed function centre, manager’s residence and the
two new visitor accommodation
units. One of the ‘
existing visitor
accommodation units
’ is the manager’s residence proposed to
be converted to visitor accommodation.
What current and potential further agricultural activities could be
carried out on Manna Hill Farm?
38. The function centre is to be used for incorporating micro-weddings,
artist retreats, corporate functions and as a space for the
gathering of
accommodation guests. The maximum number of guests proposed to use the space is
36, which includes those persons accommodated
in the existing and proposed
visitor accommodation use, with the occupancy capacity for the proposed and
existing visitor accommodation
use being 16 persons. It is proposed, therefore,
that an additional 20 persons could attend / use the function centre if all of
visitor accommodation is occupied. It is intended that weddings would be
limited to 10 times per annum, operating from 9 am to 11
pm. Corporate functions
are intended to occur a maximum of three times per annum, operating from 9 am to
11 pm. The other uses identified,
other than use of the function centre by
visitor accommodation guests, would be limited to operation from 9 am to 5 pm.
39. A small flock of Dorper sheep are reared and bred on the property with
occasional agistment of cattle. The evidence established
the 23ha site is
predominately Class 5 land with some areas being Class 5 + 6. As set out in Mr
Lynch’s evidence, the classes
are defined as follows:
“Class 5 land is defined as:
This land is unsuitable for cropping, although some areas on easier slopes
may be cultivated for pasture establishment or renewal
and occasional fodder
crops may be grown. The land may have slight to moderate limitations for
pastoral use. The effects of limitations
on the grazing potential may be reduced
by applying appropriate soil conservation measures and land management
Class 5+6 land is defined as:
At least 60% land suited to grazing but with moderate limitations, up to
40% land with severe limitations to pastoral use.
Class 6 land is defined as:
Land marginally suitable for grazing because of severe limitations. This
land has low productivity, high risk of erosion, low natural
fertility or other
limitations that severely restrict agricultural use.”
40. The Tribunal accepts the evidence of Mr Lynch that
“the property
is capable of supporting agricultural land use activity that being for pastoral
land use activity with typically
moderate limitations although the Class 6 land
has severe limitations.”
41. The property is not suitable as cropping land.
42. The evidence from Mr Lynch is that the Second Respondents intend to
intensify the present Dorper sheep breeding enterprise and
that the Second
Respondent land has the capability to support an intensification subject to
improvements being made to the property.
Unduly conflict, constrain or interfere – Clause 26.1.2(c)(ii)
– Local Area Objectives
43. These words are not defined in the Scheme and accordingly must be given
their ordinary meaning. To ‘unduly conflict, constrain
or interfere’
is to do so to an “
unwarranted degree or
excessively”
‘conflict, constrain or interfere’ is to “
give rise to an
incompatibility, limitation or restraint or to prevent the carrying out of the
practice of primary
Would the function centre constrain the Appellants’ potential and
existing agricultural use?
44. Mr Simmons gave evidence of constraints that he says may arise as a
result of the proposed function centre use. His evidence was
that the increased
use of Careys Road, which he identifies as essential to existing farming
operations, given its use for the movement
of cattle, would constitute a
constraint. His evidence was that the gravel road would become more compacted by
increase use which
in turn increases the potential for hoof bruising to his
45. Mr Simmons also identifies issues of farm security. His evidence was that
functions involving members of the public will increase
the likelihood of
vandalism and stock theft. Further, he says that the provision of parking bays
required by the permit conditions
would become a “
siting refuge for
”. He cites a potential for direct interference with cattle
arising from “
undisciplined and unruly behaviour”
of function
centre guests.
46. Other issues identified as constraints related to the impact of
the constant incursion of transient people in remote areas”
giving rise to potential biosecurity risks and impacting quality and yield, both
with respect to the existing operations and potential
cropping and poppy
production.
47. Other constraints identified with respect to the potential agricultural
use were impacts of spray drift to the proposal site and
potential issues with
respect to harvesting machine access requiring a clear and unimpeded use of
Careys Road which, in Mr Simmons’
view, would be impacted by the proposed
parking bays conditioned to be provided along this road in Council’s
48. Mr Simmons’ evidence was supported by the evidence of Ms Ketelaar
who agreed, under cross examination, that much of her
assessment of the impacts
of constraints on the existing and potential agricultural use on the
Appellants’ property was based
on instructions provided by Mr Simmons.
49. With respect to the impact of increased traffic, Ms Ketelaar’s
evidence was:
“Traffic volume is modelled by Council in their planning assessment
report, to increase from the current annual average of 15
vehicle movements per
day to 34 movements per day. With a maximum of 60 movements per day on days that
events are held (2 per week).
This will result in:
(i) Increasing the vehicular traffic impacting on the Simmons farm
operations. Traffic will be increased to a level where it will
be difficult for
traffic and stock to safely negotiate the route along Careys Road and the
un-named shared access road between the
main farming infrastructure and the
western farm access, particularly in summer when the function centre will,
presumably, have higher
usage and the farming activity is more intense due to
irrigation, growing and harvesting activities.
(ii) Further increase in road degradation. The current increase in
traffic since the existing accommodation was built at Manna Hill
has resulted in
an increase in road degradation which in turn has resulted in an increase in
hoof bruising for the Simmons’
stock. I have been instructed (pers. comms.
9th July 2021, Mr Robert Simmons) this has not previously occurred in the 35
the Appellant has been utilising the relevant roads for stock
50. With respect to the issue of security risk, Ms Ketelaar’s evidence
“(iii) Increasing the security risk through a change in the genre
of clientele that patronise the function centre in comparison
to those who
patronise the accommodation. The function centre is being marketed to regionally
based patrons and the type of events
being proposed (weddings, family
celebrations, retreats, artist workshops, conferences, mountain bike fraternity)
are targeting a
less transient population. As a result there is greater exposure
of the Simmons holdings’ more remote part of the farm to a
which has potential to access these areas at a later date when traffic volume is
low. The proposed passing bays provide
convenient, secluded viewing points for
viewing and or accessing the remote parts of the property. The Simmons pump shed
on the 60ML
dam is in the gully past the Manna Hill entrance. The combination of
these factors increases the risk for stock theft and vandalism.”
51. She concluded that:
“In my opinion the land associated with the western portion of the
Simmons holding is not adequately protected against the constraint
and conflict
risks presented by the proposed function centre use, and the Proposal is not
consistent with the protection afforded
by the objective in clause 26.1.2
(c)(ii) of the Scheme.”
52. Mr Lynch’s evidence was that the function centre impacts would not
exclude or unduly constrain or interfere with the Appellant’s
potential agricultural activities.
53. With respect to the areas of the Appellants’ land considered by Mr
Lynch, he said there was a low potential risk of constraints
on existing and
potential agricultural use for the reasons set out in his Table 1, as reproduced
Potential Risk to Neighbouring Agricultural Activity
Extent of Risk & Possible Mitigation Strategy
1. Trespass
Risk = low. Mitigation measures include maintenance of sound boundary
fencing, if applicable lockable gates and appropriate signage
to warn visitors
Risk = low. Ensure there is good quality boundary fencing on neighbouring
properties and appropriate signage to deter inadvertent
entry to property;
report thefts to police.
3. Damage to property
Risk = low. As for theft.
4. Weed Infestation
Risk = low. Risks are expected to be negligible, with the proponents
committed to the future development, productivity and sustainability
property and weed control is a key activity.
5. Fire outbreak
Risk = low. Fire risk can be mitigated by careful operation of outside
barbeques and disposal of rubbish, and appropriate management
of vegetation
around the property to mitigate the risk of fire. If applicable a bushfire
management plan would be prepared which
covers the proposed development.
Risk = low. Mitigated by separation distances, presence of current
vegetation (where applicable) and proposed shelter belts, the restriction
visitor numbers and operating hours as per the description in DA2021/03,
presence of managers residence on site to assist in enforcing
the obeyance of
the rules for guests and visitors to the proposed development.
7. Dog menace to neighbouring livestock
Risk = low. Mitigated by ensuring that communication is maintained between
the proponents and potential residents of the neighbouring
properties. Dogs
would be managed as per the regulations determined by the council.
8. Road traffic
Risk = low. Mitigated by the restriction of visitor numbers and operating
hours as per the description in DA2021/03 and passing lane
as required by the
council conditions.
54. With respect to the land on the southern and western boundaries his
evidence was:
“6.12 Due to the separation distances in conjunction with the
elevation and topographic variation and presence of extensive
areas of native
vegetation the proposed development on the property in question it is not
anticipated any negative impacts and/or
constraint would be imposed upon land
use activity in this area.
6.20 Due to the separation distances in conjunction with the elevation
and topographic variation and presence of native vegetation
the proposed
development on the property in question it is not anticipated any negative
impacts and/or constraint would be imposed
upon land use activity in this
6.31 Due to the separation distances in conjunction with the topographic
variation and presence of native vegetation (on the eastern
area of property
title 209291/1) and the proposed shelter belts to be implemented at 256 Careys
Road the proposed development on
the property in question it is not anticipated
any negative impacts and/or constraint would be imposed upon the agricultural
use activity in this area.
6.33 The separation distance between the nearest boundary of property
title 17376/1 and the location of the proposed use and development
at 256 Careys
Road is approximately 250m at the closest point.
6.34 The separation distance between the stockyards and residential
dwelling on property title 17376/1 and the location of the development
property in question is approximately 580m and 710m respectively at the closest
6.35 The proposed development does not limit road access to property
title 17376/1.”
55. With respect to the Appellants’ property east of the function
centre proposal, Mr Lynch’s evidence was:
“6.43 The separation distance between the nearest boundary of the
eastern area of property title 209291/1 and the location of
the closest
development (as per the proposed manager’s residence) on the property in
question is approximately 28m (22m boundary
setback plus the 6m wide road
6.44 The proponent is keen and willing to establish a mixed species
shelter belt along the northern boundary of 256 Careys Road and
also to the east
of the location of the proposed development to improve the visual screening and
strengthen the buffer. The shelter
belt should contain a mix of trees and
shrubbery, be planted to achieve a 3m wide buffer and reach a height of
approximately 10m.
See Figure 1 for the location of the proposed shelter
6.45 Currently the eastern area of property 209291/1 is subject to
southerly winds and cattle grazing on the pastures here would
experience a
higher exposure to wind chill and therefore a higher portion of their feed
intake prioritised to compensate for the
greater amount of dietary maintenance
energy and subsequently animal performance would be reduced and/or a greater
amount of supplementary
feed would need to be offered.
6.46 The establishment of a shelter belt along the northern boundary of
256 Careys Road would actually provide environmental benefits
to the eastern
area of property title 209291/1 and subsequently lead to improved livestock
performance outcomes when wind chill effects
are a factor.
6.47 The potential negative impacts to normal agricultural land use
activity on the western area of property title 2092921/1 and the
grazing habits and productivity of livestock potential issues which could cause
disruption issues are outlined in Table
6.48 Future potential irrigation development could be undertaken, and
subsequently irrigated land use activity be conducted on the
western area of
property title 209291/1 without being prejudiced by the proposed development on
the property in question, as the
potential for irrigation spray crossing the
property boundaries and negatively impacting/interfering with the proposed
development
is negligible due to the separation distances and presence of the
proposed shelter belts.”
56. Mr Lynch concluded that the whole development forming the development
application can be undertaken and operated on the proposal
site without causing
negative impacts on the current livestock production enterprises carried out by
the Appellants and any potential
cropping land use activity.
57. Specifically with respect to the constraints identified by Ms Ketelaar,
Mr Lynch’s evidence was:
“4.2 Domestic Dog
4.3(a) Additional management and logistics issues associated with the
domestic dog at Manna Hill.
4.3 This is an existing risk that is unaltered by the proposed function
centre or new dwelling. There are a number of properties in
the area surrounding
the Appellants’ property which may accommodate a domestic dog.
4.12 Any farm may be exposed to the risk of agricultural theft, vandalism
or trespass. The level of the risk varies dependent upon
numerous factors. In my
experience, properties which are exposed to a higher security risk where they
are located either close to
major population centres or are isolated and
4.13 In the West Kentish rural areas such as this, it is reasonable to
summarise that the behaviours are more likely to be perpetrated
by locals than
visitors, such as the theft of a pump which require knowledge to remove, or
livestock theft which requires a utility
vehicle or truck.
4.14 The potential risk to security typically would rely on an element of
criminal intent and it could well be argued that this is
very much lower with
potential visitors to the 256 Careys Road property than with other members of
the general public.”
58. Under cross-examination, Ms Ketelaar accepted most of Mr Lynch’s
evidence as set out in paragraph 57 above.
59. With respect to Ms Ketelaar’s evidence in relation to traffic
conflicts, Mr Lynch’s evidence was:
“4.17 I understand that the Appellant uses Carey’s Road and
the user road adjacent to Manna Hill Farm to provide access
to portions of the
farm for machinery and moving livestock. Ms Ketelaar identifies that this occurs
both during the day and at night,
involves 180 “temperamental young
steers” requiring 4 people to herd (Mr Simmons identifies 160-200 cattle
on the holding,
refer paragraph 3.1), and occurs on average every 3 weeks
between September and January and monthly outside of this time (refer paragraph
4.18 The presence of additional traffic on the public roads should not
alter the management and logistic measures associated with
the movement of
livestock. Moving livestock on a public road creates a risk to all users of the
road and best practice requires
that signage is displaced while the road is in
use. Cattle must be managed with a farmhand up front of the herd. An
person is required behind the herd or a sheep or cattle dog.
4.19 The number of vehicles anticipated to be on the road does not dictate
whether this practice is adopted. The requirements are
determined by the fact
that the operation is using a public road upon which vehicles may be present at
4.21 Any increase in traffic associated with the proposed function centre
would not be expected to constrain the use of the road for
farm or other
traffic. It is a public road which serves a number of different properties that
support different uses, including forestry
and residences.”
60. The Tribunal also notes, as identified by the Second Respondent, that the
Appellant’s movement of cattle on Careys Road
would be subject to
compliance with the
Road Rules 2019
which place restrictions upon
movement of cattle at night
as imposing other restrictions with respect to movement of livestock on public
roads during the day
. It appeared
that Mr Simmons was not aware of these restrictions.
61. With respect to ‘overspray’, Mr Lynch’s evidence
“4.44 The Code of Practice for Ground Spraying requires that only
registered chemicals are used and that, when spraying, the
applicator must not
allow the agricultural chemical product to move off target to the extent that it
may adversely affect any people,
their land, water, plants or stock. While it is
tempting to think that it is the presence of people on the adjacent property
limits the application of agricultural chemicals by spray, the presence of
livestock and pasture used for grazing must also be considered.
Spraying near
livestock or the pasture which they consume needs to be managed to ensure that
livestock are moved when spraying occurs
and appropriate intervals are provided
between risk of overspray and grazing and slaughter. In my experience, the
expectation is
that when applying agricultural chemicals, overspray beyond
property boundaries is not an acceptable practice irrespective of the
neighbouring use.
4.46 As per the guidelines stated in the DPIPWE Code of Practice for
Ground Spraying, the applications of agricultural chemicals must
accordance with the label directions (as determined by the APVMA) as well as a
number of directions to ensure a high of environmental
and human safety is
preserved. These guidelines also state commercial growers must notify
inhabitants of residential dwellings within
100m of areas to be sprayed. The
existing dwelling is within this range. “
62. Mr Lynch concluded that:
“4.53 The proposed development would not be anticipated to result in
any areas of the Appellants’ property from being
able to be used for
either grazing and / or cropping land use activity which are already not
negatively impacted by existing factors
such as land capability, presence of
existing residential dwellings, proximity to roads and waterways which cross the
63. With respect to issues of noise and, in particular, the Appellants’
and Ms Ketelaar’s reference to the ‘startling
of cattle’ due
to noise generated by the function centre use, Mr Lynch’s evidence
“4.62 Whether or not the function centre is approved, Carey’s
Road and the unnamed user road to the west are public roads
and people use these
roads to access to the south. Eileen and Simon Worssam have advised that in
January 2018, the area to the west
was logged and logging trucks used the road
and locals use the roads on bike, dirt bikes, hors and tractors.
4.63 There is a small airfield located to the south east which likely adds
additional noise sources.”
64. While Mr Lynch accepted that some cattle could be ‘spooked’
by noise emanating from the function centre, his view
was that this could be
managed by limiting the number of attendees and number of events and the
provision of screening. As submitted
by the Second Respondent, the function
centre attendees are limited to 36 with no more than 10 wedding and three
corporate functions
to occur per annum. The proposed location of a shelter belt
that the Appellants are prepared to establish would provide the screening,
Mr Lynch says would further minimise constraints.
65. The Tribunal prefers the evidence of Mr Lynch with respect to whether the
function centre has the potential to unduly conflict,
constrain or interfere
with the agricultural use on the Appellants’ land. While Mr Simmons and Ms
Ketelaar identify the potential
for constraints, as noted by Mr Lynch and
accepted by the Tribunal a number of those issues would arise in any event,
of whether the proposal is approved.
66. The Tribunal is satisfied that the function centre would not exclude,
conflict or unduly constrain or interfere with the Appellants’
agricultural operations. Even accepting the extent of potential cropping
identified by the Appellants to be capable of occurring,
the Tribunal is still
satisfied the function centre use would not exclude or unduly conflict,
constrain or interfere with the Appellants’
existing and potential
agricultural use. The use is therefore consistent with the Local Area Objective
Is the function centre dependent upon a rural location or undertaken in
association with primary industry? (Clause 26.1.2 (g))
67. Ms Lyne’s evidence for the Second Respondent was that the function
centre is a tourism use relying upon the rural location
to provide a rural
setting and experience for guests. That setting incorporates views of Mount
Roland in a peaceful and isolated
rural setting.
68. Ms Brooks for the Appellant does not accept the function centre is a use
dependent upon a rural location. Her evidence was that
it could be located
elsewhere. Further, her evidence was that there is “
occurring on the site that the function centre ‘was
associated’ with.
69. Mr McCarthy’s evidence on behalf of Council was that “
is anticipated that users of the function centre will be attracted to the
natural landscape values in the area including the rural
outlook at the close
proximity to Mount Roland while providing another source of income for the
existing farm. This use is considered
to be dependent upon a rural location and
undertaken in association with the developing primary industry.”
70. The Tribunal is satisfied that the function centre proposal is dependent
upon the rural location. It has clearly been located
to take advantage of the
scenic rural landscape and views of Mount Roland. Even if the Tribunal is wrong
as to that, the Tribunal
is satisfied that the function centre is undertaken in
association with primary industry.
71. As already noted ‘primary industry’ is not defined in this
Scheme but includes agricultural use, the Scheme definition
of which includes
the keeping and breeding of animals. Regarding the Local Area Objectives, Zone
Purpose Statements and Scheme definitions,
the evidence of Mr Lynch and Mr
Worssam establishes that agricultural use is being undertaken on the Manna Hill
Farm site. The existing
activity involves 18 sheep and two rams with breeding
having occurred, which has enabled three new lambs to have been sold. The
property is registered under the
. The evidence of Mr Lynch with
respect to what was proposed by the Second Respondent is consistent with the
development application
which, in the Tribunal’s view, establishes an
intent to grow the Dorper sheep flock structure such that it would allow for
increase in production of lambs annually.
72. The Tribunal prefers the evidence of Mr Lynch and Mr McCarthy and that of
Ms Lyne and finds that the function centre would be
undertaken in association
with primary industry on Manna Hill. The function centre use is consistent with
Clause 26.1.2(g). Ground
1(a) is not made out.
Ground 1(b) – Clause 26.3.1 P1(c)(vi)
73. The Tribunal must be satisfied that the proposed function centre must be
required to locate on rural resource land for operational
efficiency to provide
opportunity for diversification, innovation and value adding to secure existing
or potential primary industry
use of the site or of adjacent land.
74. The words ‘must be required to locate’
“do no more
than provide that the development will demonstrate operational efficiency for
the purpose or condition prescribed
in the relevant subparagraph, by locating
within the Zone”.
this case, the function centre will demonstrate operational efficiency if
subclause (iv) can be met.
75. The Second Respondent relies on the evidence of Mr Lynch, Ms Lyne and Mr
Worssam to demonstrate compliance. The Second Respondent
submitted that the
evidence before the Tribunal was that the proposed function centre intended to
rely on meat sourced from the primary
industry use (sheep breeding) thereby
providing an opportunity to diversify, innovate and value add. While it is at
least arguable
that the function centre will provide the opportunities
contemplated by Clause 26.3.1 P1(c)(iv), the subparagraph requires that these
opportunities ‘secure’ existing or potential primary uses on the
site. The Tribunal must determine what is required
to meet the test of
‘securing’ potential primary industry use. Adopting the ordinary
dictionary meaning of ‘secure’
as required by the Scheme, to
‘secure’ is to “
protect or make safe”
Macquarie Dictionary defines ‘secure’ as:
“Free from or not exposed to danger; safe.”
76. Mr Worssam’s evidence with respect to the farming operations on the
Second Respondent’s property was:
“10. Eileen and I raise Dorper Sheep on the Property.
11. In June 2017, we purchased 5 ewe lambs.
12. In July 2018, we purchased a young ram.
13. The number of sheep has increased through natural reproduction with 18
sheep currently accommodated upon the Property. This includes:
rams (due for sale and replacement).
lams from the most recent season comprising 4 males and 2
other females of varying ages.
14. 3 sheep were recently culled for meat.
15. 3 newly born male lambs have been sold and will leave the Property
once weened.
16. 1 ewe and 1 newborn lambs have recently died.”
77. The development application also asserts that the Proposal including the
function centre will provide diversification to allow
the continuation of the
small scale sheep breeding enterprise”
identifies the “
existing use on the property as including a
‘small scale sheep breeding farm on areas of the land not prone to soil
78. Mr Lynch’s evidence identified fencing, weed management, water tank
installation, secure storage shed, small tractor, a
sheep handling race and a
limited establishment of a shelter belt as infrastructure and equipment
improvements that have taken place
since the Second Respondent purchased the
property. His evidence was that:
“5.20 The proponents have been issued a Property Identification Code
(PIC), as MEKE1409, for the 256 Careys Road property by
the DPIPWE and this
allows livestock to be traded off farm and ensure livestock traceability
compliance, as per the requirements
of the National Livestock Identification
System (NLIS).”
79. There is no evidence that the Second Respondent’s proposed function
centre use would secure the existing primary industry
use. The Tribunal must
then consider the potential primary industry use.
Potential agricultural activities on the Second Respondent’s
80. Mr Lynch’s evidence was that:
“5.6 The property has a total sustainable carrying capacity of 345
dry sheep equivalents (DSE). A dry sheep equivalent (DSE)
is a standard unit
used to compare the feed requirements of different classes of livestock or to
assess the carrying capacity and
potential productivity of a given
5.9 The proponents have extensive experience in agriculture and have been
running a 11 breeding ewes, 2 rams and 7 recently born
lambs on a small section
of the property with good success so far. The sheep appeared to be in good
health with a number of new and
recent lambs were observed.
5.10 An appropriate example of the target flock structure would
- 70 Dorper breeding ewes
- 11 ewe lamb replacements
- 95 prime lambs
This flock represents 350 DSE.”
81. Mr Lynch identified the property improvements required to develop the
carrying capacity of the property as including:
Establish new
Dividing and
fencing the property into 6 paddocks;
Application of
lime and fertiliser;
Install a stock
water system; and
Install browsing
wildlife proof fencing.
at an anticipated cost of $45,000, the sum which Mr Lynch states could not
realistically be paid from income generated from the livestock
enterprise.
82. Mr Lynch considered likely timeframes for the Second Respondent to
undertake agricultural property improvements as being over
a period from 3-10+
years, being dependent upon available finances, scale of activities required,
seasonal conditions and prioritisation
of the various developments.
83. Ms Ketelaar did not agree with Mr Lynch’s assessment of the
livestock carrying capacity of the site. She described the
current breeding
operation as “
lifestyle scale”
based upon an assessment
incorporating her Enterprise Scale. Her evidence was that the carrying capacity
of sheep grazing to be
approximately DSE per hectare which would generate a
gross income of $1,200 per annum.
84. The evidence from both Ms Ketelaar and Mr Lynch regarding the assessment
of carrying capacity and the consequential income generated
revealed that each
expert approached their respective assessments and calculations differently.
However, those differences and the
respective experts’ conclusions are not
of significance to the Tribunal’s consideration of Ground 1.
85. The Appellants submitted that the Tribunal is without evidence to make
any findings as to whether the function centre secures
potential primary
industry. It was submitted that direct evidence is required to demonstrate the
actual intention by the Second Respondent
to operate primary industry on the
site. It was submitted that there being no such direct evidence, that any
inference sought to
be drawn from the evidence of others should be rejected. It
is also asserted that the failure of Mr Worssam to give evidence with
the income and expenses associated with the current activity on site, the income
derived from the existing visitor accommodation
operating on the site, and the
potential proposed agricultural activity and the potential earning capability of
that potential activity
results in the Tribunal having insufficient direct
evidence before it to determine compliance with Clause 26.3.1 P1(c)(iv).
86. The Second Respondent submitted that to achieve the agricultural
potential of the land, she seeks the opportunity to diversify
and value add.
The function centre was described as an ‘innovative solution to provide
related operations to support the primary
industry use. The Second Respondent
relies on the evidence of Mr Lynch and Ms Lyne, submitting that ‘the use
of the property
functions as a related whole- raising sheep for meat, providing
accommodation and small scale functions.’ Such a related entity,
asserted, is consistent with the requirements of P1(c)(vi). The Tribunal does
not agree. Something more than ‘supporting’
the primary industry use
in the manner identified is required by subparagraph (vi).
87. As already stated, the Tribunal is satisfied that there is existing
primary industry use being undertaken by the Second Respondent,
albeit modest.
The Tribunal also accepts Mr Worssam’s and Mr Lynch’s evidence
that there is an intention to expand
the current operation. However, the
potential primary industry use, as identified to the extent opined by either Mr
Lynch or by Ms
Ketelaar, as being capable of occurring on site, must still be
able to demonstrate that it is secured by the function centre use
88. In the Tribunal’s view, there is insufficient evidence to find that
it does so. There is no evidence before the Tribunal
as to whether the current
visitor accommodation activities could of themselves secure the potential
primary industry use given the
relatively modest primary industry investment
identified by Mr Lynch. Indeed, the evidence before the Tribunal would suggest
sufficient income could be generated from the breeding operation itself
following the carrying out of the identified improvements,
such that it could be
self-sustaining. This appears to be the case even if feed for the animals was
required to be purchased.
89. While it may be that issues such as current level of
indebtedness
, or the inability
to obtain financing for the identified required improvements for the potential
farming operation, could establish
that the function centre would secure the
potential primary industry use on the site, absent any evidence before the
Tribunal to
so determine, the Tribunal cannot be satisfied that Clause 26.3.1
P1(c)(iv) is met.
90. Ground 1(b) is made out.
Ground 1(c) – Clause 26.3.1 P1(d)(ii)
91. Clause 26.3.1 P1(d)(ii) provides that the Function Centre use must
minimise the likelihood for constraint or interference to existing
and potential
primary industry use on the site and adjacent land. The requirement to
‘minimise’ identifies that some
constraint or interference is
contemplated by the Clause. To ‘minimise’ is to “
the smallest possible amount or
obligation to minimise is, in the Tribunal’s view, a more onerous test
than that required under P1(a), with respect to
the Local Area Objective at
Clause 26.1.2(c)(ii). However, having regard to the evidence of Ms Ketelaar and
Mr Lynch already referred
to, and preferring the evidence of Mr Lynch, for the
same reasons, the Tribunal is satisfied that the function centre will minimise
the likelihood for constraint or interference to existing and potential primary
industry use on the site and land adjacent to Manna
Hill Farm owned by the
Appellants. In the Tribunal’s view, this is the case regardless of whether
Ms Ketelaar or Mr Lynch’s
evidence is accepted with respect to the
potential primary industry use of the Appellants land.
92. Ground 1(c) fails.
Ground 2 – Manager’s Residence
93. Ground 2 relates to that part of the Proposal referred to in the
development application as the ‘manager’s residence’.
part of the Proposal is a ‘residential’ use and is discretionary
under the Scheme. The use must comply with Clause
26.4.3 P1 of the Scheme as it
is a sensitive use as defined by Clause 4. It is not controversial that the
residential use does not
comply with Clause 26.4.3 A1 so that the Performance
Criteria must be met.
94. The Appellants assert that Clause 26.4.3 P1(b) cannot be met as the
residential use does not minimise likely constraints or interference
to existing
and potential primary industry use on the adjacent land or on the site of the
Proposal itself.
95. For the reasons already set out, the Tribunal is satisfied that
constraints or interference to the existing and potential primary
industry use
on the site would be minimised. The proposed manager’s residence will be
located close to the existing visitor
accommodation enclave. The
manager’s residence is set back 148m from the closest part of the
Appellants’ land. Regardless
of whether the potential primary industry use
is that identified by Ms Ketelaar or that identified by Mr Lynch, the Tribunal
is satisfied
that, for those reasons already set out, that minimisation is
achieved. In that respect, the Tribunal prefers the evidence of Mr
accepts that minimisation may be assisted by the introduction of a shelter belt
as referred to in Mr Lynch’s
96. The Tribunal is satisfied that compliance with Clause 26.4.3 P1(b) is
97. Ground 2 of the appeal is, therefore, not made out.
Ground 3 – Visitor Accommodation and Ground 3(a) – Clause
26.3.1 P1(a) and (c)
98. The Appellants assert that the change of use of the existing
manager’s residence to visitor accommodation and that part
of the Proposal
for new visitor accommodation cabins on site are a discretionary use under the
Rural Resource Zone. The Appellants
submit that, as such, Clause 26.3 applies to
the visitor accommodation use and that the visitor accommodation use does not
the requirements of Clause 26.3.1 P1(a) or (c).
99. The Second Respondent and Council submitted that the proposed visitor
accommodation use is a permitted use, being farm stay accommodation
for not more
than 16 people.
100. The Use Table for the Rural Resource Zone at Clause 26.2 provides that
visitor accommodation is a permitted use if it is ‘farm
accommodation’ and provides for accommodation not exceeding 16 people.
Unqualified visitor accommodation use is a discretionary
use class in the Rural
Resource Zone.
101. ‘Farm stay accommodation’ is not defined in the Scheme, nor
is ‘farm’. Both Ms Ketelaar and Ms Brooks
adopted a definition of
‘farm stay’ which required elements of commercial farming
operations.
102. ‘Farm stay’ is defined in the Macquarie Dictionary as
“a holiday spent on a farm, learning about life on a farm and taking
part in farming activities.”
A ‘farm’ is defined in the
Macquarie Dictionary as
“tract of land or water devoted to some other
industry, especially the raising of livestock, fish etc”
the ordinary meaning as required by Clause 4.1.1 of the Scheme, neither the
ordinary meaning of ‘farm’ or
‘farm stay’ incorporates
any element of commercial intent or any requirement that the farm stay is a
secondary business
to farming activities.
103. Ms Ketelaar adopted the definition of ‘farm stay’ from the
New South Wales (2006 EPI 155a) Standard Instruments /
Principle Local
Environmental, which incorporated a requirement for farm stay that it be a
working farm
” and undertaken as a “
business to primary production”
. Her evidence was that what was
required to qualify as a ‘farm stay’ is that visitors be
accommodated at a
“legitimate working farm”.
adopted the evidence of Ms Ketelaar regarding what was required to qualify as a
‘farm stay’. Her evidence was
that the subject site was
“not operating as a farm, it is a lifestyle block located within a
rural environment”
. She otherwise deferred to Ms Ketelaar’s
evidence on this issue.
104. Ms Lyne considered the meaning of ‘farm stay’ in the context
of the Rural Resource Zone provisions. Her evidence
“3.1.6. The Scheme defines Resource Development use as:
use of land for propagating, cultivating or harvesting plants or for
keeping and breeding of livestock or fishstock. If the land is
so used, the use
may include the handling, packing or storing of produce for dispatch to
processors.
Examples include agricultural use, aquaculture, bee keeping, controlled
environment agriculture, crop production, horse stud, intensive
husbandry, plantation forestry and turf growing.
3.1.7. There is no threshold as to the level of farming activity required
to enable associated visitor accommodation to be classified
stay.’ Some guidance may be taken from the Local Area Objectives which
identify that primary industry is diverse,
dynamic and innovative and may occur
on a range of lot sizes and at different levels of intensity. Not all farms will
be regarded
as primary industry and primary industry is broader than
3.1.8. Whilst not a large flock, the proponent’s do have farm
animals in the form of Dorper sheep as well as agisted cattle.
therefore able to afford their guests a rural experience albeit a more boutique
one than what would be experienced on a
broader scale farming operation. In my
opinion, the property can be regarded as accommodating a farm, and the existing
and proposed
visitor accommodation a farm stay.
3.1.9. For the purpose of understanding what is meant by a farm stay, I
have considered whether it is necessary that managers offer
opportunity to interact with the farm activities in order to be classified or as
farm stay accommodation. I do not consider
that this is a necessary component of
farm stay accommodation. Interactions with animals may be offered on a formal or
informal basis.
An example of an informal interaction would be the opportunity
to walk the paddocks and see the animals. However, farm stay accommodation
not require that interaction and, in my view, accommodation that relies upon the
bucolic amenity of the farm and its surrounds
is appropriately regarded as farm
stay accommodation.”
105. Mr McCarthy also noted the absence of any definition in the Scheme to
assist in the interpretation of farm stay. His evidence
13.5. The Australian Concise Oxford Dictionary defines a
1. An area of land and its buildings used under one management for
growing crops, rearing animals, etc. 2. A place or establishment
for breeding a
particular type of animal, growing fruit, etc (trout farm, blueberry farm) 3 =
FARMHOUSE. . .
13.6. The Macquarie Dictionary (online subscription) defines a
1. a tract of land devoted to agriculture. 2. a farmhouse. 3. a tract of
land or water devoted to some other industry, especially
the raising of
livestock, fish, etc.: a chicken farm; an oyster farm.
13.7. Based on the definitions referred to above the proposed development
is a farm. The definitions do not qualify the size of the
operation before it
can be regarded as a farm.
13.8. According to the Oxford English Dictionary Lexico (online)
“farm-stay” is a noun meaning a “farm offering
accommodation
to paying guests”. The proposed visitor accommodation use will be on a
farm that offers accommodation to paying
13.9. The site of the proposed development known as “Manna Hill
Farm” is a small scale farming operation where guests
can sample the
produce grown on the land and interact with the flock of sheep and the chickens
and view the cattle that graze on
the property.
13.10. The proposed visitor accommodation is farm stay accommodation
satisfying the qualification to be considered as a Permitted
106. The Tribunal prefers the evidence of Ms Lyne and Mr McCarthy regarding
the meaning of ‘farm stay’. The ordinary
meanings of
‘farm’ and ‘farm stay’ do not qualify the size or scale
of the agricultural activity before it
can become a farm. It does not import a
requirement that the accommodation be a secondary business to farming activity
on that farm,
or incorporate elements of commerciality or viability.
107. The definition relied upon by Ms Ketelaar and Ms Brooks relates to a
definition in a planning instrument applicable in a different
therefore, is not directly applicable.
108. As already noted, the Local Area Objectives for the Rural Resource Zone
provide that primary industry, which includes agriculture,
the definition of
includes the rearing of
animals, may occur on a range of lot sizes and at different levels of intensity.
Small scale farming is contemplated
to occur in the Rural Resource Zone. The
evidence before the Tribunal established that the Second Respondent has a small
109. The Tribunal is satisfied that the proposed visitor accommodation use
qualifies as a farm stay and would accommodate not more
than 16 guests. As such,
the proposed visitor accommodation use is a permitted use in the Rural Resource
Zone and compliance with
Clause 26.3.1 of the Scheme is not required.
110. Ground 3(a) is not made out.
Ground 3(b) – whether visitor accommodation is permitted
111. Given the Tribunal’s determination that the proposed visitor
accommodation is a permitted use, Ground 3(b) as articulated,
need not be
further considered.
112. The Tribunal has determined that Ground 1(b) of the Appellants’
grounds of appeal is made out. The Tribunal is not satisfied
the proposed
function centre complies with Clause 26.3.1 P1(c)(vi). The appeal must therefore
succeed. The Tribunal’s decision
the decision of Council to grant a permit with respect to development
application DA2021/03 be set aside and replaced with a
refusal; and
Tribunal will entertain any application for an order for costs in this appeal if
made to the Tribunal in writing with supporting
submissions within the next 21
days. If requested, the Tribunal may reconvene to hear any evidence in respect
of any matter bearing
upon an order for costs. In the absence of any such
application for an order for costs, the order of the Tribunal is that each
bear its own costs.
Starbox Architecture v
Latrobe Council and Anor
[2020] TASRMPAT 7
Clause 26.4.1 A1
Initially in partnership with
a neighbour.
Online Macquarie
Online Macquarie
Rules 356 to
National Livestock
Identification System.
Raff Angus Pty Ltd v Resource Management & Planning Appeal Tribunal
[2018] TASSC 60
are currently registered over the Manna Hill
Online Macquarie
Dictionary.
imposition of a condition which identifies planting, location, dimension,
plantings and species to establish the shelter
‘Agricultural
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (16.9 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter