URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCAT/2025/196.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
KC v Devonfield Enterprises Inc (No.2) [2025] TASCAT 196 (10 October 2025)
KC v Devonfield Enterprises Inc (No.2) [2025] TASCAT
Personal Compensation
KC (Worker)
Devonfield Enterprises Inc (Employer)
Hearing Date:
30 June, 1 July and 5 August 2025
Hearing Location:
Date of Orders:
10 October 2025
Date Reasons Issued:
10 October 2025
RM Grueber – Deputy President
Orders Made:
1. The employer is to reinstate weekly payments of workers compensation to
the worker from 26 May 2024 to be paid in accordance with
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
2. The parties have leave
to apply in respect to the quantum of any back payments of weekly payments of
compensation.
3. Within 14 days the parties are to file a joint
memorandum for proposed agreed orders in respect to the costs of the referral.
4. If the parties are unable to agree proposed orders for the purposes
of (3) then within 21 days the parties are to file and serve
submissions in
respect to costs.
Catchwords:
Workers compensation – Entitlement to compensation – Whether
employer entitled to permanently terminate weekly payments
payments should be reduced in any event
Legislation Cited:
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2020
Evidence Act
Cases Cited:
Graeme Peter Ilsley v Wattle Australia Pty Ltd
[1997] FCA 427
KC v Devonfield Enterprises Inc
[2025] TASCAT 65
White v Vero
Insurance and Police Citizens & Youth Club
[2007] TASSC 88
Crown Equipment Pty Ltd
[2025] TASCAT 195
Holmyard v The Marine
Board of Hobart
[1987] TASSC 22
State of Tasmania v Parsons
[2002] TASSC 59
Bradshaw v Tasmanian Networks Pty Ltd
[2019] TASSC
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Air New Zealand
Limited (No 1
[2012] FCA 1355
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
Kuhl v Zurich Financial Services Australia Ltd
[2011] HCA 11
Portelli v Tabriska Pty Ltd & Ors
[2009] NSWCA 17
v Civil Aviation Safety Authority
[2014] FCAFC 93
Martin v Medical
Complaints Tribunal
[2006] TASSC 73
McKay Investments Pty Ltd
[2025] TASCAT 50
Representation:
Worker: N Willing/P Dordhain – Hall Payne Lawyers
Employer: H
Gupta – Page Seager
W/2024/1553
Publication Restriction:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication.
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Referral and background
worker has filed a referral pursuant to s 42 of the
Workers Rehabilitation
and Compensation Act 1988
(the Act) in connection with a claim arising from
a low back injury sustained by him on 4 May 2023. The worker seeks a
determination
of his entitlement to weekly payments and payment of relevant
worker has at no time since his injury been cleared for his usual duties. He
undertook a graded return to work on restricted duties,
eventually returning to
his full usual hours for a period.
worker then made another claim for a separate psychological injury, and ceased
work. That claim was disputed. During and following
that dispute the worker
continued to provide partial incapacity certificates in respect to his physical
injury, but has not attended
work and has not been paid workers compensation
since determination of the disputed psychological claim.
employer’s position is that it lawfully terminated the worker’s
weekly payments of workers compensation pursuant to
s 86(1)(a) or (b) by reason
of his return to work and earnings.
worker contends that the only issue on the referral is whether there was a
lawful termination pursuant to s 86(1)(b).
employer contends that the issues arising from the s 42 referral include:
whether the worker has an incapacity for work, whether
the incapacity is total
or partial, the cause of the incapacity, the rate of compensation which the
worker is entitled to and the
periods during which payment of workers
compensation should be made.
the reasons set out in
KC v Devonfield Enterprises Inc
[2025] TASCAT 65
am satisfied that the issues raised by both parties are matters arising on the
worker made a claim in respect to his injury on 15 May 2023. The claim was
worker was certified as totally incapacitated for work until 14 September 2023.
He was then certified as partially incapacitated,
and returned to work
eventually progressing to full pre-injury hours of 38 hours per week, or 76
hours per fortnight, but with restrictions.
Fortnightly
pay slips show that the worker worked reduced hours in the pay periods up to 3
March 2024. He then took a period of long
service leave until 12 May 2024. For
the period 13 May 2024 to 23 June 2024 he worked full normal hours, although the
last fortnight
in that period included a public holiday. In the next pay period
from 24 June 2024 to 7 July 2024 the worker worked 68 hours of ordinary
took 8 hours of sick leave. In the following pay period from 8 July to 21 July
2024 he worked full normal hours. In the
next pay period 22 July to 4 August
2024 he worked 64 hours of ordinary time and took 12 hours of personal leave
which was noted
as “time for mental health current work compensation in
place, work related”.
cross-examination the worker accepted that he would have been able to continue
the restricted duties during the various periods
of leave, but for being on
30 July 2024 there was an incident in the workplace, in which the worker used
offensive language. A complaint was made and as a
result the worker was called
to a meeting on 31 July 2024. On 1 August 2024 the worker obtained a workers
compensation medical certificate
for total incapacity due to an alleged discrete
psychological injury. On 13 August 2024 he submitted a new workers compensation
for the psychological injury. The employer took the view that the claim
for the psychological injury arose from the administrative
response to the complaint. The worker contended that the cause was broader than
that. The employer disputed liability for that
injury by a notice to the worker
dated 1 November 2024 and a referral to the Tribunal pursuant to s 81A of the
Act on the same date.
On 15 November 2024 the Tribunal made orders by consent
pursuant to s 81A that the employer not pay compensation in respect to the
psychological injury.
worker ceased work on 1 August 2024 under the separate initial medical
certificate in connection with his claim for the disputed
psychological injury.
He did not assert an ongoing right to compensation for the psychological
condition after the orders made on
15 November 2024.
worker has not returned to work since 1 August 2024, when he provided the
initial certificate in respect to his psychological
injury. Notwithstanding that
for a period the worker had medical certificates for the psychological
condition, he continued to be
covered by separate certificates for his physical
injury throughout that period, and subsequently. The has experienced fluctuating
levels of capacity, but they constitute a single period of incapacity:
v Vero Insurance and Police Citizens & Youth Club
[2007] TASSC 88
worker has not received weekly payments of workers compensation for any reason
since the orders made by the Tribunal on 15 November
22 October 2024, after making the claim for the psychological injury but before
the orders were made by the Tribunal, the worker
was informed by his case
manager that his entitlement to weekly payments of workers compensation for the
physical injury had ended
because he had returned to work.
November 2024 the worker’s workers compensation medical certificates were
generally provided by his general practitioner,
Dr Farideh Bagheri. Thereafter
he received certificates from Dr Carlin White, a registrar in occupational and
environmental medicine.
The worker’s medical records include a letter from
his surgeon, Dr Arvind Dubey, to Dr Bagheri dated 17 September 2024 requesting
referral of the worker to “an occupational physician for his future
employment prospects and restrictions”.
Bagheri’s penultimate certificate covered the period from 22 August 2024
to 22 October 2024. It described the worker’s
symptoms as low back pain,
and certified the worker as fit for full time work, but on suitable duties. The
certificate identified
reduced capacity in respect to pull/push with a lifting
limit of 12kg, and the certificate provides that rest breaks were required.
Bagheri’s last certificate covered the period from 22 October 2024
(incorrectly noted in the certificate as 2014) until 20
December 2024. He
describes the worker’s symptoms as low back pain and limitation on
physical activities, and certified the
worker’s capacity as having reduced
to 4 hours per day 5 days per week, with restrictions in respect to pull/push,
sit, bend/squat/twist,
a lifting limit of 12kg and rest breaks required every 2
hours. In the certificate Dr Bagheri notes that he had referred the worker
White. Subsequent certificates were provided by Dr White.
worker’s next certificate was by Dr White. Dr White examined the worker on
14 November 2024. Although the worker’s
last certificate from Dr Bagheri
would run until 20 December 2024, on 20 November 2024 Dr White provided him with
a certificate for
the period from 20 November 2024 to 13 December 2024. In the
certificate Dr White stated a diagnosis of chronic pain syndrome secondary
lumbar disc protrusion and described the worker’s symptoms as low back
pain, radicular symptoms, reduced range of movement,
low mood, and irritability.
Dr White noted that the worker had undergone surgery for a disc issue on 15 June
2024. He certified the
worker as fit for suitable duties. He did not certify as
to a reduction in hours, but stated that the worker is “not fit for
in current environment”. Dr White extended the physical restrictions of
the worker. The certificate identified reduced
capacity in respect to lifting
weight, pull/push, bend/squat/twist and climb and provided a 5kg lifting limit
with no lifting above
head height, no two person lifts, no climbing, avoidance
of repetitive lifting, twisting or bending, regular rest breaks, in an office
setting, and no sitting for longer than 45 minutes.
the certificate Dr White noted that the worker would not regain sufficient
function to return to his previous role, that redeployment
is the appropriate
goal, and noted that the current work environment “is propagating pain
symptoms”. That opinion is
repeated in subsequent certificates. From 21
February 2024 Dr White added to his certificates an opinion that it is not safe
or appropriate
for the worker “to return to that environment”, which
I infer is a reference to the circumstances of the worker’s
with the employer in the context of the history of the worker’s
compensation claims.
White’s subsequent certificates continued in essentially the same terms,
although from a certificate provided on 21 February
2025 he added to the list of
restrictions that the worker is not fit to undertake CPR training or CPR.
only evidence from medical practitioners directly addressing capacity is the
medical certificates. Neither party called any medical
witness. None of the
documentary material indicates that the worker is, or at any relevant time has
been, fit for his pre-injury
employer called evidence from Mr DJ Stubbs, who is the human resource manager
with the employer. Mr Stubb’s evidence was
that he could not think of a
reason why the worker would not have continued to work if not for the incident
on 30 July 2024. That
is, of course, not evidence of the worker’s capacity
Stubbs described the worker’s role as a team leader in disability support
services. He said that the role is to provide direct
supervision to staff who
work with people with disabilities across accommodation, community based and
to have a hands on role. He said that the
worker’s role was in assisting, mentoring and supervising staff, not
completing work
for them. The role includes supporting participants with
gardening and maintaining the exterior appearance of residences. Mr Stubbs
that after his injury the worker “got a lot of autonomy in his work and
was able to dictate the duties he performed”.
Mr Stubbs’ description
of the work undertaken by the worker emphasised the supervisory nature of his
duties over the physical.
Stubbs said that the worker commenced a graduated return to work in around
August 2023. The worker did not make any complaints
to him in respect to low
back pain and to the best of his knowledge the worker made no complaints to the
worker’s supervisor.
Stubbs said that the worker had been working until the incident on 30 July 2024,
which involved an allegation by a colleague of
swearing by the worker. He said
that the worker knew that the employer would be obliged to look into the
circumstances of that incident
and that the worker was afraid of losing his job.
The inference raised by Mr Stubbs was that the worker has not returned to work
because he is concerned that an investigation and disciplinary process may
result in the termination of his employment. The worker
confirmed in
cross-examination that he understood the seriousness of his conduct and the risk
that he might lose his job as a result.
It was not clear why the employer has
not pursued the disciplinary process.
Stubbs contended that the worker and his doctors had raised barriers to his
certification that the
worker could not undertake CPR training. Mr Stubbs said that on 20 February 2025
an email was sent to the
worker advising that a return to work could be
accommodated in accordance with a return to work plan prepared for the period 13
2025 to 21 February 2025 and that a reinduction session had been
scheduled for 24 February 2025. Mr Stubbs said that the worker did
not respond
to the email and that he was not sure why the worker was refusing to return to
work. The worker did not respond to the
email or attend the reinduction. The
worker says that he did not receive the email, saying that his Bigpond email
account, to which
the email had been addressed, had ceased. Mr Stubbs did not
produce the email to the worker, but produced another email of 20 February
addressed to several people involved in the worker’s claim, that set out
the contents of the email to the worker on the
same date. The email noted that
outstanding and expired training would be addressed at the reinduction session,
including CPR, and
that the worker would be booked into the next CPR course. The
worker saw Dr White on the following day, 21 February 2025, and was
medical certificate on that day in which the restriction “pt not fit to
undertake CPR training or CPR” was introduced
for the first time. The
being untruthful when he denied
receiving the email, and that he must have
advised Dr White of the proposed CPR training as a result of receiving the
email, although
I cannot discount the possibility that Dr White became aware of
the proposed CPR training in some other communication relating to
worker’s rehabilitation. That the worker may have been untruthful in
respect to that evidence does not mean that his evidence
should be rejected in
respect to other matters, but I have approached the assessment of the weight of
his evidence with care:
SD v McKay Investments Pty Ltd
worker gave evidence that his duties involved a combination of hands-on
gardening, crew management and supporting people with
disabilities. He would
also do hands-one physical work with clients, such as using industrial timber
machines, heavy lifting, hedge
trimming and other landscaping work. He said that
since approximately 2018 his work was predominantly garden work and training
clients that required a lot of heavy lifting, climbing of ladders and using
various heavy garden equipment such as brush cutters,
lawn mowers and chainsaws.
In the leadup to the injury on 4 May 2023 he said that he was engaged in several
weeks of physically demanding
work. It was the usual sort of garden work that he
would do but it was particularly strenuous, with a lot of hedge trimming and
trees that required him to work frequently at heights of 2m to 2.5m on
ladders and that he was the only staff member on site who
could do work at
height. He was also doing a lot of replanting work which required digging of
holes and removing of root systems
using long handled shovels and crowbars.
worker said that following the injury he did not return to work for several
months. On 15 June 2023 he underwent surgery. Following
that he gradually
returned to work via a graded return to duties. He said that despite returning
to work he continued to experience
low back pain which he would score as an
average of approximately 5 out of 10, increasing to 8 to 9 out of 10 when
engaged in physical
activity. He said that he never had a day when he was not in
discomfort or on pain relief, but that he persevered at work. He said
to making the psychological injury claim the workplace did not have any coherent
plan for managing his return to work.
The worker’s evidence as to the
continuation of his back pain was not contradicted. Mr Stubb’s evidence
that the worker
had not complained to him or the worker’s supervisor is at
best neutral evidence in respect to the worker’s ongoing back
the worker was presenting medical certificates stating that he had low back pain
and reduced capacity.
worker said that he experienced chronic low back pain triggered by physical
exertion, prolonged standing and bending and that
Dr White had advised him not
to return to his preinjury duties. He said that he was willing to go back to
work with the employer
but that he was following medical advice from Dr White.
employer’s evidence included a copy of a questionnaire completed by Dr
White on 14 May 2025 in response to an email from
a rehabilitation consultant
retained by the employer’s insurer. The email stated that the worker had
participated in a vocational
assessment. In response to a question as to whether
the worker could undertake work as a disability services officer or a motor
or caravan salesperson, with the relevant duties detailed, Dr White
considered that it was possible that the worker could engage
in that type of
work subject to the restrictions in his certificates. He noted that the hours of
work would depend on the nature
of the duties, especially the duration of
driving, and recommended commencing at 12 hours per week. Dr White considered
that a third
vocational option of nursery person/gardener was not appropriate
for the worker due to his physical limitations.
worker said that on 22 October 2024 he had a telephone conversation with his
case manager during which he was told that his weekly
payments of compensation
had ended because he had returned to meaningful work. He advised the case
manager that he was not able to
undertake heavy work. The worker said that on 1
November 2024 he received an email from his case manager stating that he no
had any entitlement to weekly payments and that his entitlement had
ceased on 26 May 2024. The email refers to the incident giving
rise to the
psychological injury claim and goes on to say:
It is very important that you understand again that on your back claim there is
no entitlement to ongoing weekly compensation payments
and that you are only
entitled to medical accounts only [sic] on this claim, your medicals for your
back claim will cease 52 weeks
after the date your weeklies ceased and this
means that from 26
May 2025 there is no ongoing entitlement to
medical treatment for your back.
was no evidence as to when the employer made the decision to terminate the
worker’s payments pursuant to s 86(1), or if
any express decision was in
fact made, but the clear inference is that by 22 October 2024 the employer
considered that the worker’s
entitlement to weekly payments had ceased on
26 May 2024 notwithstanding his ongoing certification of partial incapacity.
that date the worker had for the previous five pay periods been in receipt of
payments equal to his workers compensation weekly
rate. During the first four of
those periods he was in receipt of long service leave and it was only the
immediately preceding pay
period from 13 to 26 May 2024 in which the worker both
worked full hours and received a payment equal to his workers compensation
weekly rate.
Termination pursuant to s 86(1)(a) or (b)
can deal with the worker’s contentions in respect to s 86(1)(b) fairly
briefly. The employer contends that either of s 86(1)(a)
and (b) might apply to
justify the termination of weekly payments.
86(1) provides a power to an employer to terminate or reduce weekly payments
without an order from the Tribunal:
86. Cases in which employer may terminate or reduce payments
(1) Except in pursuance of a determination
made by the Tribunal under
an employer may, subject to this section, terminate or reduce a weekly payment
made to a worker only where –
(a) the payment is in respect of total incapacity
and the worker has returned to work;
(b) the worker is in receipt of the weekly payment
in respect of partial incapacity and is receiving weekly earnings in excess of
the amount upon which the amount of such weekly payment was determined;
(c) a medical practitioner who has examined
the worker has certified that, in his opinion, the worker has wholly recovered
or substantially
recovered, from the effects of the injury in respect of which
the payment is being made or that the worker's incapacity is no longer
wholly or substantially, to that injury; or
(d) . . . . . . . .
(e) a worker's entitlement to weekly payments
has expired as provided by
section 69B(2E)
the recent decision of
SE v Crown Equipment Pty Ltd
[2025] TASCAT 195
determined that the right to terminate or reduce payments under s 86(1)(b)
relates to the specific periods of earnings and does
not permit an employer to
terminate weekly payments permanently regardless of subsequent fluctuations of
capacity occurring within
a single period of incapacity. The right to weekly
payments will continue beyond the particular circumstances giving rise to the
termination or reduction for the relevant period.
employer has invoked s 86(1)(a) and (b), but the circumstances of this case
would fall within s 86(1)(b) as the worker was in
receipt of make-up pay for
partial incapacity at the relevant time. However, the analysis of s 86(1)(b) in
SE v Crown Equipment Pty
Ltd, other than the particular grammar of the
paragraph, would also apply to a termination or reduction under s 86(1)(a).
worker returns to work, but subsequently suffers reduced capacity within
the same overall period of incapacity for the same injury,
the worker will be
entitled to receive weekly payments for the subsequent incapacity.
will not duplicate the reasoning in
SE v Crown Equipment Pty Ltd
reasons for determination, but given the recency of the decision it has not yet
been published on AustLII or BarNet Jade
and I have therefore attached a copy as
an annexure. I adopt and rely on the analysis in paragraphs [10]-[35] of that
any other considerations, the worker would be entitled to a resumption of weekly
payments from his certification of reduced
capacity from 22 October
The further considerations
the employer has raised other considerations that go to the right of the worker
to receive weekly payments and the quantum
of the payments. For the reasons
explained in
KC v Devonfield Enterprises Inc
, I am satisfied that the
matter referred to the Tribunal pursuant to the worker’s s 42 referral is
broad enough to raise related
issues of capacity and rate.
49(2)(b) of the Act provides that in proceedings before the Tribunal “the
onus of proving that a worker is no longer
entitled to the payment of
compensation lies on the employer”.
employer contends that the worker does not have incapacity for work or that any
capacity does not have an economic consequence.
In the alternative the employer
contends that the worker has only partial incapacity which does not amount to a
physical disability.
Further in the alternative, the employer contends that the
cause of any incapacity is the disputed psychological injury. The employer
contends that the worker’s weekly payments ought be reduced by $1,186.70
to reflect his retained earning capacity. The
employer also contends that any
periods of incapacity cannot be identified because there is no evidence of
cessation of the incapacity
stemming from the psychological injury.
last issue can be disposed of fairly simply. The employer contends that on the
balance of probabilities the worker’s incapacity
is not because of the
physical injury but because of the psychological injury. The employer did not
submit any medical evidence as
to any persisting incapacity arising from the
psychological injury.
psychological condition was a supervening condition. A worker’s right to
compensation for incapacity arising from a work
injury is neither reduced nor
increased by incapacity caused by a supervening injury:
Holmyard v The Marine
Board of Hobart
[1987] TASSC 22
. Even if the psychological condition
has incapacitating effects, and I make no finding that it does, those effects
may be ignored
in considering incapacity arising from the physical injury.
broadly, the employer is critical of the conclusions expressed in the medical
certificates of Dr Bagheri and Dr White, but did
not provide any medical
evidence to contradict those conclusions. The employer criticised the
worker’s credibility and pointed
to inconsistencies in his evidence.
employer correctly observed that the question of whether incapacity results from
an injury is a question of fact:
Graeme Peter Ilsley v Wattle Australia Pty
[1997] FCA 427.
The purpose of a medical certificate is to certify as to
incapacity not as to causation:
State of Tasmania v Parsons
[2002] TASSC
, and see also the first instance decision in
Bradshaw v Tasmanian
Networks Pty Ltd
[2019] TASSC 41
. Although the employer contends
that the worker’s incapacity results from the psychological injury, it was
not asserted that
the injury in respect of which the certificates for physical
incapacity were provided was not the compensable physical injury sustained
the worker on 5 May 2023. Given my conclusions in respect to s 86(1)(a) and (b),
and the application of s 49(2)(b), the onus rests
with the employer to establish
that the worker is not entitled to payments. Normally a contention that the
worker is not entitled
to weekly payments would be pursued by an employer by way
of a certificate pursuant to s 86(1)(c) or a referral to the Tribunal pursuant
to s 88. The employer has attacked the evidence of the worker and the medical
certificates, but has produced no evidence itself that
directly contradicts the
existence of reduced capacity evidenced by the medical certificates. Dr
White’s certificates identify
a more nuanced assessment of capacity than
simply an ability to undertake certain work for unrestricted hours.
employer objected to the admission of medical certificates by Dr Bagheri and Dr
White insofar as they contained expressions of
opinion. The test for
admissibility is relevance, subject to procedural fairness:
Competition and Consumer Commission v Air New Zealand Limited (No 1)
[90]. Adopting the formulation in
Evidence Act 2001
evidence that is relevant in a proceeding is evidence that, if it were accepted,
could rationally affect, directly or indirectly,
the assessment of the
probability of the existence of a fact in issue in the proceeding. The medical
certificates meet that test.
I am not bound by the rules of evidence, although
they may be applied and may be used as a guide to fairness: see
Tasmanian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2020
Martin v Medical
Complaints Tribunal
[2006] TASSC 73
Sullivan v Civil Aviation
Safety Authority
[2014] FCAFC 93
, [115]-[116] and [121]. If the
rules of evidence were applied the certificates would be likely be admissible
and exceptions to the
hearsay rule under
Evidence Act
Subject to any issues of farness I am satisfied that the certificates are proof
of their contents.
to fairness, the employer points to the fact that Dr Bagheri and Dr White were
not called as witnesses by the worker. The employer
contends that I should draw
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
inference that
their evidence would not have assisted the worker’s case. It should be
noted that if Dr Bagheri and Dr White
were called as witnesses in respect to the
worker’s capacity, they would provide evidence as experts and be subject
Tribunal’s Expert Witness Code of Conduct, which would require them
to assist the Tribunal and not to act as partisan advocates
for the worker. The
employer had notice that the doctors would not be called, as the evidence of
experts must be proofed and exchanged.
The failure to call the doctors reflected
the worker’s case, which focussed on the operation of s 86(1). It was the
case that raised capacity and the employer has the onus. In
that context, it would have been open for the employer to call Dr Bagheri
White. Putting that to one side, the rule in Jones v Dunkel is that the failure
to call a witness that the worker might be
expected to call would permit an
inference to be drawn that the evidence would not have helped the worker’s
case, or make more
readily acceptable the drawing of an inference otherwise
available and relevantly unfavourable to the worker, but does not alone
a positive inference unfavourable to the worker to be drawn: Kuhl v Zurich
Financial Services Australia Limited
[2011] HCA 11
Portelli v Tabriska Pty Ltd & Ors
. The rule in Jones v Dunkel is a rule of evidence and the
Tribunal is not bound by the rules of evidence. In this circumstance the
certificates speak for themselves. Failure to call the certifying doctors does
not lead me to draw an inference that the certified
incapacity is not correct or
does not result from the work injury.
worker has an ongoing entitlement to weekly payments in circumstances where he
produces certificates to evidence incapacity and
is not earning equal to or more
than his weekly rate of workers compensation: s 69(1) and s 86(1). The evidence
that the worker does
not have an ongoing incapacity reflecting his medical
certification is at best imprecise and circumstantial. The employer has produced
no direct or expert evidence that the worker is not so incapacitated, or that he
is in receipt of earnings. The employer has not
sought a review of the
worker’s weekly payments pursuant to s 88 or sought to terminate them
pursuant to s 86(1)(c). The employer
complains that the worker and his doctors
have raised barriers to his return to work. Insofar as those barriers might
exist and be
unreasonable the employer has not pursued any dispute under the
procedures available in respect to injury management in s143P and
s 143Q. The
employer contends that the worker is in fact not returning to work because he is
concerned that his employment may be
terminated for misconduct. There is no
restriction on the employer pursuing the disciplinary process without a return
to work, and
as the alleged misconduct is unrelated to the occurrence of the
worker’s injury it would not affect the worker’s ongoing
entitlement
to compensation in any event.
issues identified by the employer might with sufficient evidence be capable of
establishing that the worker’s weekly payment
should be reduced, perhaps
to nil, but the evidence does not persuade me to make such a finding in the face
of the medical certificates
and the worker’s
Determination
matters referred to the Tribunal by the worker are the “determination of
his entitlement to weekly payments and to expenses
payable pursuant to Division
2 of Part VI of the Act” and payment of costs of and incidental to the
employer was not entitled to permanently terminate the worker’s weekly
payments. Payments should be reinstated from the
date that they were terminated.
There will be periods in which the worker’s entitlement will be affected
by his earnings. I
will leave it to the parties to determine the quantum of any
backpay owing to the worker, but will provide leave to apply in the
the sum cannot be agreed.
expect that employer ceased paying the worker’s medical and other
expenses, payable under Div 2 of Pt VI of the Act, on 26
May 2025, being the
anniversary of the termination of weekly payments, pursuant to s 75(2). The
reinstatement of the obligation to
make such payments will flow from the order
that I will make in respect to weekly payments without need for an additional
will provide the parties with the opportunity to reach agreement on orders for
costs or to make submissions if agreement cannot
be reached.
Accordingly
I make the following orders and directions:
employer is to reinstate weekly payments of workers compensation to the worker
from 26 May 2024 to be paid in accordance with
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1988
parties have leave to apply in respect to the quantum of any back payments of
weekly payments of compensation.
14 days the parties are to file a joint memorandum for proposed agreed orders in
respect to the costs of the referral.
the parties are unable to agree proposed orders for the purposes of (3) then
within 21 days the parties are to file and serve submissions
in respect to
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.84 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter