URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASHPT/2020/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Medical Board of Australia v Dr Stuart Lynch [2020] TASHPT 6 (13 November 2020)
[2020] TASHPT 6
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL
Medical Board of Australia v Dr Stuart Lynch
MEDICAL BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
LYNCH, Stuart
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
By written submissions received from the applicant on
30 October 2020 and from the respondent on 26 October 2020
DELIVERED ON:
13 November 2020
DECISION OF:
Chairperson Clues
CATCHWORDS: Non-publication order - Breach of non-publication
orders - The Harman obligation applicability to a party’s use
documents or information
Medical Board of Australia v Dr Christopher Kwan
Chen Lee (No 2)
[2019] TASHPT 6
; Harman v Secretary of State for the Home
[1983] 1 AC 280
; Esso Australia Resources Ltd and Ors v Plowman
(Minister for Energy & Minerals) and Ors
[1995] HCA 19
; (1995) 128 ALR 391;
Hearne v Street
[2008] HCA 36.
DETERMINATION:
(a) Any application for non-publication
orders pursuant to
Health Practitioners Tribunal Act 2010
made during any hearing in these proceedings, prior to the publication of the
Tribunal’s determination.
(b) The Harman obligation does not apply to
the following documents from the immediate action proceedings:
(i) For the
• affidavit of Jane Coleman dated 23 December
(ii) For the respondent:
• affidavit of the respondent dated
13 December 2019;
• affidavit of the respondent dated 13 January
• transcript of the respondent’s oral evidence from the
immediate action proceedings on 17 January 2020.
(c) Provided that the documents referred to in order (b)
above or the identities of any patients and notifiers or any information
to establish their identities referred to in the documents is not reported on
any public platform, the use of the documents
in these proceedings does not
breach the non-publication orders.
(d) The issue of the admissibility of the transcript of the
respondent’s oral evidence from the immediate action proceedings
January 2020 is to be determined at any hearing in these
proceedings.
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Respondent:
HWL Ebsworth
[2020] TASHPT 6
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
1. The Medical Board of Australia (the applicant) filed an
application against the respondent practitioner on 21 April 2020 in which
alleged professional misconduct.
2. I conducted directions hearings with
respect to this application on 19 August 2020 and 16 October 2020. In response
arising at those directions hearings on 16 October 2020 I directed the
parties to provide written submissions in relation to the
(c) Whether the Tribunal should make a non-publication order
in these proceedings.
(d) Whether the “Harman obligation” applies
to the following documents that each of the parties intend to rely upon in
proceedings (the documents):
(i) In the case of the applicant:
affidavit of Jane Coleman dated 23 December 2019; and
(ii) In the case of the
respondent:
• affidavit of the respondent dated 13 December
• affidavit of the respondent dated 13 January
• transcript of the respondent’s oral evidence from 17
January 2020.
Non-publication order
3. In relation to the first issue, the power of the Tribunal to
make a non-publication order is to be found in s30(2) of the Health
Practitioners Tribunal Act 2010 (the Act) which provides:
“(2) During
any hearing in proceedings the Tribunal may, on the application of a party to
the proceedings or on the Tribunal’s
own initiative, do either or both of
the following, if it considers that there are compelling grounds to do
(b) make an order prohibiting the reporting or other disclosure of all or any
part of the proceedings or prohibiting the reporting
or other disclosure of
particular information in respect of the proceedings.
(3) Without limiting the grounds that may be relevant for the purposes of
subsection (2), the Tribunal may exercise its power under
that subsection if
(a) it is dealing with privileged information or information that has been
communicated to the National Board or the Tribunal in confidence;
(b) it is dealing with information concerning the personal affairs, finances
or business arrangements of a person; or
(c) the disclosure of the information may be unfairly prejudicial to the
reputation of a person.”
4. The subject matter of these proceedings is related to
earlier proceedings heard in this Tribunal. That proceeding concerned an
by the respondent in relation to a decision of the applicant to take immediate
action pursuant to the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (Tasmania)
Act 2010 (the immediate action proceedings).
5. A non-publication order was
sought and made by consent in the immediate action proceedings.
applicant’s written submissions at [10] it states:
applicant will seek a non-publication order in these proceedings, the specific
terms of which will be announced at the
hearing. The power within the Act
requires that the actual order be made during the hearing and it is therefore
contended that the
order ought be made
7. In support of this submission the applicant relies upon the
decision of Medical Board of Australia v Dr Christopher Kwan Chen Lee
[2019] TASHPT 6
where Chairperson Webster (as he then was)
“There are two
preconditions which must be met before an order can be made under s30(2). First
the power exercised must be
during the hearing of the proceedings and second the
power may be exercised on the application of a party to the proceedings or on
the Tribunal’s own initiative.”
8. The respondent submits that he does not oppose an order
being made in identical terms to the non-publication orders made in the
immediate action proceedings. However, it is premature for such an application
to be considered until it is actually made. The orders
can be made during any
hearing in proceedings (s30(2)), which may include a further directions hearing
or the merits hearing.
9. With respect to the first issue I determine that
any application for non-publication orders pursuant to
Practitioners Tribunal Act 2010
can be made during any hearing in these
proceedings, prior to the publication of the Tribunal’s
determination.
The Harman obligation
10. With respect to the second issue
as to whether the Harman obligation applies, I observe that the Harman
obligation originated
from the decision of Harman v Secretary of State for the
[1983] 1 AC 280.
11. The application of the Harman obligation
was considered by the High Court of Australia in Esso Australia Resources Ltd
v Plowman (Minister for Energy & Minerals) and Ors
[1995] HCA 19
(1995) 128 ALR 391. The respondent summarised the High Court’s position
at [26] to [28] of his written submissions which
state as follows:
the substance of the implied undertaking (or Harman obligation), Brennan J said
(at 406) “The underlying principle...is
that a party who obtains the
production of documents or the disclosure of information for a particular
purpose cannot use the documents
or information for a ‘collateral or
ulterior purpose’” (references omitted). (See also Mason CJ. at 403;
J. at 414).
27. As to release from the undertaking:
(a) Brennan J. said (at 407) “But such an undertaking “can, in
appropriate circumstances, be released or modified by the
court”. That
dispensing power is not freely exercised, but it will be exercised when special
circumstances appear.”
(references omitted); and
(b) Mason CJ. said (at 403) “The implied undertaking is subject to the
qualification that once material is adduced in evidence
in court proceedings it
becomes part of the public domain, unless the court restrains publication of
28. Dawson J. and McHugh J. agreed with the reasons of Mason
12. The Harman obligation was also considered by the High Court
in Hearne v Street
[2008] HCA 36.
13. The High Court’s findings in that
case are summarised in the applicant’s written submissions at [14] to [18]
as follows:
implied undertaking, which is sometimes known as the ‘Harman’
undertaking or obligation, has been described
by the High Court, in Hearne v
Street in the following terms:
‘Where one party to litigation is compelled, either by reason of a rule
of court, or by reason of a specific order of the court,
or otherwise, to
disclose documents or information,
the party obtaining the disclosure
cannot, without the leave of the court, use it for any purpose other than that
for which it was given unless it is received into
implied undertaking will ordinarily have lapsed once the material is adduced
into evidence unless the court has restrained publication
rationale for the implied undertaking is found in the interest of protecting the
has disclosed the information, for
the limited purpose of obtaining justice in the case in which the information is
is recognised that the obligation is owed to the court, and cannot therefore be
waived by the parties alone.
implied undertaking can be released by leave of the court where there are
special circumstances making it just to do so.”
[Footnotes omitted]
14. Based on the High Court authorities referred to above, both
parties agree that the Harman obligation does not restrict a party’s
of its own documents or information.
15. The documents that the parties seek
to rely upon in these proceedings is not material that is received from the
other party in
the immediate action proceedings.
16. I determine that the
Harman obligation does not apply to the documents that the parties intend to
rely upon in these proceedings.
Breach of non-publication orders
the immediate action proceedings non-publication orders were made including an
order that the reporting of identities of any
patients and notifiers or any
information tending to establish their identities be prohibited.
applicant submits that using the evidence from the immediate action proceedings
in these proceedings does not breach that
19. At [24] to [26] of the
applicant’s written submissions it states:
applicant further submits that the use of the evidence in these proceedings will
not breach the non-publication order
from the immediate action proceedings.
That order prohibits the ‘reporting’ of the relevant identities, not
disclosure’
[s30(2)(b)]
. The term reporting is not
defined in the orders. The use of the document in these proceedings involves
nothing more than the provision
of that information to the Tribunal and the same
parties that contested the immediate action
proceedings.
that sense the information is not intended to be disclosed to anybody other than
the Tribunal and the parties. It is not being
disclosed generally nor being
are contended to have
different meanings. Disclosure involves dissemination of information generally
while reporting relates to
publicity to a broader audience at large. The
meaning of reporting is well demonstrated in the authority ABC v Lenah Game
[2001] HCA 63
, [274]-[275] and footnote 366. Disclosure
encompasses reporting but reporting does not necessarily encompass
disclosure.
dissemination of the evidence to the Tribunal and the parties constitutes
disclosure but not reporting. It is not intended to
broadcast the evidence via
any public platform such as newsprint. It is submitted that for the above
reasons use of the evidence
in these proceedings will not breach the
non-publication order."
20. I accept these submissions and I determine that provided
the documents from the immediate action proceeding, or the identities
patients and notifiers or any information tending to establish their identities
referred to in the documents is not reported
on any public platform, the use of
the documents in these proceedings does not breach the non-publication
The transcript of the respondent from the immediate action
proceedings
21. Finally, I note the applicant contends that for reasons
unrelated to the Harman obligation and the non-publication orders that
transcript of the respondent’s evidence from the immediate action
proceedings ought not to be received into evidence in
proceedings.
22. The applicant submits at [30] of its written
submissions:
the Tribunal is not bound by the rules of evidence, in the applicant’s
submission, the use of the transcript
will not result in a more efficient
hearing. There is no benefit to tendering the transcript and to the extent that
there is, the
probative value would be substantially outweighed by the confusion
and time wasting that it will likely
23. The applicant states that questions of admissibility of
evidence should be determined at the hearing. Its objection to the transcript
of the respondent’s evidence being tendered was raised by the applicant in
its submissions “for the avoidance of doubt”.
24. Accordingly,
the issue of the admissibility of the transcript of the respondent’s
evidence from the immediate action proceedings
is to be determined at any
hearing in these proceedings.
Determination
25. The Tribunal determines
(a) Any application for non-publication orders pursuant to
Health Practitioners Tribunal Act 2010
can be made during any
hearing in these proceedings, prior to the publication of the Tribunal’s
determination.
(b) The Harman obligation does not apply to the following
documents from the immediate action proceedings:
(i) For the
• affidavit of Jane Coleman dated 23 December
(ii) For the respondent:
• affidavit of the respondent dated
13 December 2019;
• affidavit of the respondent dated 13 January
• transcript of the respondent’s oral evidence from the
immediate action proceedings on 17 January 2020.
(c) Provided that the
documents referred to in paragraph (b) above or the identities of any patients
and notifiers or any information
tending to establish their identities referred
to in the documents is not reported on any public platform, the use of the
in these proceedings does not breach the non-publication
(d) The issue of the admissibility of the transcript of the
respondent’s oral evidence from the immediate action proceedings
January 2020 is to be determined at any hearing in these
proceedings.
CHAIRPERSON
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (151 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter