URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASSC/2025/52.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:21:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Goshawk Mining Pty Ltd v Hellyer Metals Ltd v Saxby Capital Investments (No 2) [2025] TASSC 52 (29 October 2025)
[2025] TASSC 52
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA
Goshawk Mining Pty Ltd v Hellyer Metals Ltd v Saxby
Capital Investments (No 2)
[2025] TASSC 52
MINING PTY LTD (ACN 657 704 446)
HELLYER METALS LTD (ACN 662 575 073)
SAXBY CAPITAL INVESTMENTS PTY LTD (ACN 661 570 556), and ANOR
DELIVERED ON:
29 October 2025
HEARING DATE:
30 May 2025
JUDGMENT OF:
Procedure – Civil Proceedings in State and Territory Courts –
Discovery and Interrogatories – Discovery and inspection
of documents
– Documents in possession of non-party - Subpoenas – Subpoena to
produce – Considerations relevant
to which is the appropriate process
– Consideration of the exercise of the discretion whether to grant leave
for an early return
subpoena - Legitimate forensic purpose – Not a fishing
expedition – Not premature – Subpoena is the more appropriate
procedure - Non-party discovery is not the more appropriate procedure.
Dig Procedure [1247],
REPRESENTATION
First Defendant
: G Ng SC, J
Solicitors:
Groom Kennedy Lawyers
First Defendant:
[2025] TASSC 52
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 52/2025
File No 3602/2023
GOSHAWK MINING PTY LTD (ACN 657 704 446) v HELLYER METALS
LTD (ACN 662 575 073) v SAXBY CAPITAL INVESTMENTS PTY LTD (ACN 661 570 556),
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT DALY AsJ
29 October 2025
These are my reasons for granting the plaintiff Goshawk Mining Pty Ltd leave to
issue a subpoena to produce documents, with an early
return date. I have
concluded that in light of the issues raised by the pleadings, there is a
legitimate forensic purpose for the
issue of the subpoena. I am satisfied that
the subpoena does not constitute a fishing expedition, is not premature, and is
not designed
to circumvent the rules of court relating to non-party discovery.
In reaching this conclusion I am satisfied that procedural justice
undermined.
A central question for determination is whether the pleadings sufficiently and
relevantly raise the allegation that the proposed
recipient of the subpoena
imposed a condition on the purchase of two parcels of shares in the defendant
Hellyer Metals Pty Ltd, requiring
Hellyer to terminate its business sale
agreement with Goshawk. This dispute relates to whether the documents sought to
be produced
are relevant; and if so, whether the early return subpoena or
non-party discovery is the preferable procedure.
Goshawk has applied for leave to issue a subpoena to Mr Graham Cox requiring
production of certain documents on an 'early return
date' before the date of the
trial. Hellyer was notified of that application and sought to be heard on its
objection to leave being
granted. Hellyer objects to the issue of the subpoena
on the basis that (i) it serves no legitimate forensic purpose; and (ii) it
circumvents appropriate discovery processes; and (iii) is premature. Each party
has made submissions as to the appropriateness of
issuing the subpoena. Mr Cox
is now the CEO of Hellyer, but he was a stranger to that company between the
dates referred to in the
proposed subpoena. He has not been personally served
with the subpoena.
I have had regard to Goshawk's correspondence to the Registrar dated 20
December 2024. In that letter, Goshawk sought leave to
issue the subpoena and
to specify a production date earlier than the trial date (six weeks from the
date of issue), in order to facilitate
efficient preparation for trial and to
assist in the early resolution of the matter. The letter included the request
a statement of the issues in the proceeding and the grounds upon
which leave should be granted to issue a subpoena with an early
return date.
The letter briefly, but expressly, addressed the legitimate forensic purpose for
the subpoena.
The principal proceedings between the plaintiff and the defendant were
commenced by writ filed in December 2023. The pleadings
are now closed. No
trial date has been set. At the date of the hearing there were further
interlocutory steps to be taken prior to
trial. As far as I am aware, discovery
has not yet occurred.
The principal proceedings concern a written business sale agreement (the BSA).
Under the BSA, Goshawk agreed to sell, and Hellyer
agreed to purchase the
business and assets defined in clause 1.1 of the BSA, for a total purchase price
of $25,000,000 inclusive
of GST. It was a condition precedent to the completion
of the BSA that by 31 October 2023, Hellyer would receive at least $15,000,000
in cleared investment funds. Those funds were never received. Goshawk pleads
that the original due date for satisfaction of the
condition precedent was
varied by a deed of variation (dated 22 October 2023) to a new due date (see
pars 5-7 of the statement of
claim) being:
21 days after receipt
by Saxby Capital Investments Pty Ltd and/or any investor of all documentation
respectively required by them
(each acting reasonably) in connection with the
raising of Investment Funds
Goshawk pleads that on 21 November 2023 – ie before the new due date for
satisfaction of the condition precedent - Hellyer
repudiated the agreement in
order to facilitate a sale of its shares to
"Mr Graham Cox of a consortium
called Gaston Group"
(see pars 13 and 19 of the statement of claim).
Goshawk pleads that Hellyer repudiated the BSA for reasons unconnected with any
of its terms. Alternatively, Goshawk alleges that in all the circumstances, and
by no later than 14 December 2023, Hellyer had repudiated
the BSA because it
failed to take steps to obtain the investment funds as required under the BSA
(see par 20 of the statement of
claim). Hellyer admits that it terminated the
BSA but alleges that it was entitled to do so under its express terms. Further,
counterclaims seeking damages from Goshawk, alleging that it engaged in
misleading or deceptive conduct by misrepresenting that it
had investors ready
to contribute the investment funds.
The underlying pleading dispute
The proposed subpoena seeks documents relevant to par 13 of the statement of
claim, which pleads Hellyer's alleged repudiatory conduct:
November 2023 the Defendant stated to the Plaintiff to the effect that it
intended to terminate its Agreement with the Plaintiff
so that the Defendant
could proceed with facilitating a sale of shares held by shareholders in it, to
Graham Cox of Gaston Group.
PARTICULARS
Conversation by telephone call held on 21 November 2023 between Quinten
Villaneuva of the Plaintiff, Bradley Saxby of Saxby Capital
and Karl Adolfsson
director of the Defendant, where Adolfsson said words to the effect of:
Adolfsson: '
Graham Cox of a consortium called Gaston Group is submitting
an offer to purchase Brian Blackman's and Khaled Baluch's shares, as
shareholder, in Hellyer. We want to proceed with this, but in order to proceed
with this, Hellyer has to terminate the agreement
with Goshawk. We have to
terminate the BSA
Par 13 of the defence filed 18 September 2024, pleads:
response to paragraph 13 of the SOC, the Defendant:
(a) admits that a telephone call was held on 21 November 2023 between Quinten
Villanueva and Bradley Saxby, directors of the Plaintiff
at the time, and Karl
Adolfsson, a director of the Defendant.
(b) admits that on this telephone call, the Defendant notified the Plaintiff
that it was going to proceed with facilitating a sale
of shares in the Defendant
to Graham Cox of Gaston group; and
(c) otherwise denies the allegations in paragraph 13 of the SOC."
On the basis of the pleadings as set out above, the plaintiff submits that at
the trial of the action the Court will be called upon
to adjudicate whether
Hellyer terminated – and thereby repudiated - the BSA so that it could
facilitate the sale of Mr Blackman’s
and Mr Baluch’s shares in
Hellyer to Mr Cox and/or 'Gaston Group', as stated by its director, Mr
The subpoenaed documents
The proposed subpoena seeks that Mr Cox produce documents relevant to whether
Hellyer terminated the BSA
"in order to proceed with"
the sale of Hellyer
shares to Gaston Group. The schedule of documents is in the following
"1 Any documents (as defined in
Evidence Act 2001
), pursuant to which you, Gaston Resources Pty
Ltd (Gaston) and/or its related bodies corporate (as defined in the
Corporations Act 2001
(the Act)) proposes or agrees to purchase
shares in Hellyer Metals Pty Ltd (Hellyer) from Brian Blackman (Blackman) and/or
Baluch (Baluch) (the Transaction).
correspondence (including emails, letters, notices, images, text messages or
file notes of telephone conversations or meetings)
between you, Gaston, and/or
its related bodies corporate (as defined in the Act), and one, or more,
(a) Hellyer;
(b) Any related bodies corporate (as defined in the Act) of Hellyer;
(c) Karl Guillermo Adolfsson (Adolfsson);
(d) Tony Tran (Tran);
(e) Pierre Richard (Richard);
(f) Bradley Robert Monks (Monks)
(g) Stephen John White (White)
(h) Blackman; and/or
(i) Baluch –
in respect of the Transaction.
correspondence (including emails, letters, notices, text messages or file notes
of telephone conversations or meetings) between
you, Gaston, and/or its related
bodies corporate (as defined in the Act), and one, or more, of-
(a) Hellyer;
(b) Any related bodies corporate (as defined in the Act) of Hellyer;
(c) Adolfsson;
(e) Richard;
(h) Blackman; and/or
(i) Baluch –
in respect of the business sale agreement between
Goshawk Mining Pty Ltd and Hellyer, dated 14 October 2023."
The period specified in relation to the documents is 31 August 2023 to 14
December 2023 (the day before Mr Cox became a director
of Hellyer). I did not
understand there to be any controversy relating to the spread of dates.
Applicable legal principles
rule 496(6)
provides that:
The date specified
in a subpoena must be the date of trial or any other date as permitted by the
Court or a judge."
When considering whether to permit a subpoena to specify any other date than
the date of trial, the applicable legal principles
subpoena returnable before trial may only be issued with leave of the court:
Fingal Pastoral Pty Ltd v Page Seager Lawyers (a firm)
[2017] TASSC 24
deciding whether or not to permit the issue of an early return subpoena the
Court will consider whether there is a legitimate forensic
purpose to be served:
Weeding Party Hire Pty Ltd v Salters (Tas) Pty Ltd
[2025] TASFC 4
per Brett J (Wood J and Pearce J
agreeing), citing
Comcare v John Holland Rail Pty Ltd (No 5)
[2011] FCA 622
per Bromberg J. The issuing party bears
the onus of demonstrating that the subpoena has a legitimate forensic purpose in
relation to
the issues in the proceedings:
Santos Ltd v Pipelines Authority
[1996] SASC 5578
(1996) 66 SASR 38
Wong v Sklavos
[2014] FCAFC 120
test for the existence of a legitimate forensic purpose is that of 'apparent
relevance' to an issue in the proceeding:
Weeding Party Hire
Sklavos v Australian College of Dermatologists
[2014] FCA 476
relevance to an issue is demonstrated where the material sought could reasonably
be expected to throw light on the issue
in the proceeding and not simply where
the material might permit a case to be made:
Weeding Party Hire
is not limited to the introduction of documents into evidence. Relevance of
documents may lie in giving rise to a line
of enquiry which is relevant to the
issues before the trier of fact, including for the purpose of meeting the
opposing case by way
of cross-examination:
Fingal Pastoral
Stanley v Layne Christensen Co
[2004] WASCA 50
object of the rule permitting an early return of subpoenas is to appraise the
parties of the strengths and weaknesses of their
case at an early stage. Hence,
no narrow view as to the legitimate purpose of a subpoena ought to be taken. In
the interests of
a fair trial, litigation should be conducted on the footing
that all relevant documentary evidence is available:
Fingal Pastoral
court must resolve the tension between the burden of locating and producing
documents and the privacy of the non-party against
the right of a litigant to
access to those documents - even if held by a stranger - to pursue justice and
fully present their case:
at [5] citing
2 NSWLR 414
at 419-420 per Cantor J.
appears there is an issue in the proceeding to which the documents may relate,
then the right of the litigant to access the
documents should prevail over the
right of the witness to their privacy:
Discovery vs subpoena
This is an action to which r 414A applies (see r 414(a) and Practice Direction
No. 1 of 2015). The overarching purpose of case
management is to ensure that
proceedings are conducted and resolved justly and
efficiently.
The Court's rules
should be applied flexibly and fairly, considering the resources of the court
and those involved in, and impacted
by, the proceedings. The Court's approach
to civil procedure should not be dogmatic or stagnant: much depends on the
circumstances
of each individual case. An issue in this case is which is the
correct process to obtain access to the identified documents before
the trial of
the action: the early return subpoena, or non-party discovery? Goshawk submits
that the subpoena is an efficient and
commonly used procedure appropriate to the
circumstances. Hellyer contends that the proposed subpoena "circumvents the
process for
non-party discovery, for which there is a prescribed procedure in
the Rules, namely, r 403FA".
It is relevant to observe some key features of each of the procedures under
consideration:
process is governed by rules which facilitate pre-trial access to documentary
evidence in the possession of a non-party. Non-party
discovery in r 403FA is
located in a part of the rules dealing with pre-trial steps. The rules relating
to subpoenas appear in
, Div 3 which deals with evidence. That
conceptual boundary is illusory in the present context because of the rule
permitting a subpoena
to specify "any other date" than the date of trial: r
procedure for non-party discovery involves an interlocutory application
supported by affidavit evidence which is filed and served
on the non-party and
other parties to the principal proceeding. It could be expected that after
filing, the application would not
be heard for several weeks. An application
for a subpoena with an early return date is by letter to the registrar attaching
proposed subpoena setting out the request, an explanation of the legitimate
forensic purpose and the grounds upon which leave ought
be granted. It could be
expected that, if all is in order, the subpoena might issue within a few
discovery involves the non-party from the outset, whereas an addressee of a
subpoena is not notified until after it has
issued. An order for non-party
discovery may be revoked or varied by a subsequent order of the Court or a judge
at or before trial:
r 403E(5). A subpoena may be set aside in whole or in part
on the application of a party or person having a sufficient interest:
concept of relevance is common to each procedure, whether under the
test of relevance in r
403FA (a train of inquiry which will either advance the party's case or damage
that of its adversary), or the
'apparent relevance' test (see par [14] above)
for a subpoena under r 496(6).
a non-party discovery order, the non-party will be required to form a judgment
question in the proceeding" and
make an affidavit verifying a list of those documents: r 403FA(1). By contrast,
the party requesting
leave to issue an early return subpoena must (a) specify
the documents required to be produced with sufficient precision to enable
addressee to know what they are required to produce; and (b) satisfy the court
that the documents have apparent relevance to
an issue in the proceeding.
Further, where the addressee of a subpoena is required to form their own
judgment about whether a document
is relevant to an issue, it is liable to be
set aside as oppressive:
J Boag and Son Brewing Ltd v Carlton and United
Breweries Ltd and Cascade Brewery Co Pty Ltd
[1996] TASSC 145
discovery requires that the non-party make the documents in their list available
for inspection, whereas the addressee of
a subpoena is required to produce the
documents to the court at or by the appointed time specified. If required by
the registrar,
the addressee of a subpoena must provide a list of the documents
or items produced.
rules in relation to each process confer power on the Court to order the
applicant/issuing party to pay the non-party or addressee
"the amount of any
reasonable loss or expense incurred ... in complying with" the relevant process:
see rr 403FA(4) and 500D.
process is compulsory: non-compliance without lawful excuse with either an order
for discovery or a subpoena may be punishable
by contempt, r 500E and rr 940-942
Reasons for concluding that the documents sought by
the subpoena are relevant
For the following reasons, I determine that the documents sought by Goshawk are
relevant to a fact in issue in the proceedings.
The relevant issue raised by the pleadings relates to the allegation that
Hellyer's termination of the BSA (which is admitted) was
a condition of the sale
of Mr Blackman's and Mr Baluch's shares to Mr Cox of the Gaston group, and that
Hellyer repudiated the agreement
as pleaded in pars 13 and 19 of the statement
of claim (none of which is admitted). Hellyer (relevantly) admits only that:
(a) there was a phone conversation on 21 November 2023 between Mr Villaneuva, Mr
Saxby and Mr Adolfsson director of the defendant;
(b) that the defendant was going to proceed with facilitating a sale of shares
in the defendant to Graham Cox of Gaston group.
Hellyer denies that Mr Adolfsson said words to the effect that it had to
terminate the BSA in order to proceed with that share sale.
The pleadings present a well-defined factual issue for the trier of fact and an
identifiable line of enquiry for the purposes of
the subpoena. Hellyer's
central contention on this dispute - that the allegation in par 13 of the
statement of claim is repudiatory
irrespective of Hellyer's intent - may
ultimately be determined to be correct. But I think that is a matter to be
resolved at the
trial. Hellyer's contentions that (a) its alleged termination
was actuated by a particular purpose; and (b) whether that is relevant
determination of the alleged repudiation of the BSA, are not matters which
should weigh against a grant of leave to issue
of the subpoena. The documents
sought by the subpoena appear to be relevant to an objective determination of
the context and effect
of the pleaded conversation and they are generally
relevant to the events giving rise to the termination of the BSA.
my view, it is reasonable for Goshawk to focus on communications between Mr Cox
and Gaston Resources Pty Ltd (and the related
bodies corporate). In support of
that conclusion: (i) Mr Adolfsson referred to "Graham Cox of the Gaston Group";
(ii) Mr Cox is
now the CEO of Hellyer; (iii) the company extract tendered by
Goshawk which shows that Mr Cox was a director of Gaston Resources
the relevant time; and (iv) Gaston Resources Pty Ltd was, at 15 May 2025, the
largest shareholder of Hellyer. It is apparent
from the company extract that
the individuals named in the schedule of documents in the subpoena are, or were,
directors of Hellyer
during the relevant period. It is alleged that Mr Blackman
and Mr Baluch are the individuals who sold their shares. Therefore,
unreasonable to assume Mr Cox has documents in relation to the transaction and
In relation to category 1 in the schedule of documents in the subpoena, it is
reasonable to assume that the proposal or agreement
to purchase the shares would
be the subject of some documentation. In relation to categories 2 and 3, there
is a reasonable basis
beyond speculation that correspondence (as defined) might
exist in relation to both the transaction (as defined) and to the events
rise to the termination of the BSA as alleged by Goshawk (if that allegation is
I reject Hellyer's contention that the subpoena is a fishing expedition and
that there is only a speculative possibility that any
documents obtained would
assist Goshawk's case. The analysis, above, provides reasonable grounds to
think that 'fish of the relevant
cards' that relevant documents will be elicited by the subpoena:
at [52]-[53];
Alister v R
[1984] HCA 85
per Gibbs CJ at [7];
[1984] HCA 85
(1984) 154 CLR 404
at 414. It is reasonable to
anticipate that documents in each of the three classes may actually exist.
also reject Hellyer's submission that leave to issue the subpoena should be
refused because the documents sought are relevant to
credit alone. I understood
Hellyer's submission in this regard to relate to the credibility rule in the
Evidence Act
The proposed subpoena does not seek documents
relevant only to the credibility of a witness. The documents sought by the
are apparently relevant to the transaction as defined in the subpoena,
and/or the connection between that transaction and the termination
and purported
repudiation of the BSA. The documents might also be used in the
cross-examination of a witness giving evidence about
the transaction as defined
in the subpoena or its connection with the termination of the BSA. The apparent
relevance of the documents
is the assessment of the credibility of the evidence
relating to those issues
which may be given by a witness. Hellyer
submits that it is unknown whether Mr Cox or Mr Adolfsson will be called as
witnesses on
the trial, but that does not alter the assessment, at this stage,
of the legitimacy of the purpose for which the documents identified
are sought. While this proceeding is not the appropriate occasion to deal with
questions of potential admissibility,
it is apparent that there might well be
purposes for which the documents might permissibly be used:
Evidence Act
In any event, the documents sought by the proposed subpoena
are likely to assist Goshawk in an appraisal of the strength or weakness
aspect of its case at an early stage:
Fingal Pastoral
On the foregoing analysis, the documents sought by the subpoena are relevant
for the purposes of either the legitimate forensic
purpose test for a subpoena
or the principles governing non-party discovery. Under either procedure, the
documents sought could
materially assist the plaintiff and add, in some way, to
the relevant evidence in the case in relation to the issues arising on the
pleadings. The assessment of relevance is not unreal, fanciful or speculative.
Reasons for concluding that the subpoena will issue
I reject Mr Ng's submission on behalf of Hellyer that the subpoena is being
relied upon as "an abuse of process, directed towards
the avoidance of
safeguards in connection with third-party discovery...including the possibility
of security being ordered for the
costs of a third party giving discovery". The
Supreme Court Rules 2000
do not contain any rules making separate
provision for 'security for costs' relating to either the subpoena process or
the non-part
discovery process. The court's jurisdiction to direct the issuing
party to pay the reasonable loss and expense incurred in complying
proposed subpoena is conferred by r 500D(1), which is expressed in terms
materially identical to those of r 403G(1) concerning
non-party discovery
— which I assume to be the provision containing the safeguard Mr Ng
submitted was being circumvented.
Hellyer's point might be a fair one if
Goshawk was intending to bypass any particular the rules of court, because that
be a legitimate use of the subpoena process. But I cannot see that
Goshawk intends to do that in this case. No 'safeguard' of the
by Mr Ng is being avoided. I cannot discern any improper purpose as contended
by Hellyer.
I am satisfied that the proposed subpoena is not directed to documents that
ought properly to be the subject of non-party discovery.
Having regard to the
description of the documents sought, Mr Cox will not be required to assess
relevance to the pleadings, because
the documents as described concern factual
matters only, namely the transaction (category 1) and correspondence related to
the transaction
and the BSA (categories 2 and 3). It appears to me that Mr Cox
will not be required to identify any documents to be produced on
subpoena by
judging whether they relate to 'a matter in question in the proceeding' for the
purposes of r 403FA. Therefore, I conclude
that non-party discovery is not the
more appropriate procedure. There is no material presently before the Court
showing that any
'extensive search' will be involved. However, even if I am
mistaken that the documents ought properly to be the subject of non-party
discovery, it appears inevitable that Goshawk would bring such an application,
which would be highly likely to succeed. That course
would not be an efficient
use of resources. I accept Goshawk's submission that the subpoena is a
practical and efficient means of
facilitating access to relevant documents prior
to trial in accordance with the rules.
Goshawk is granted leave to issue the subpoena addressed to Mr Graham Cox with
an early return date of six weeks from the date of
this order.
Goshawk Mining Pty Ltd v
Hellyer Metals Ltd & Others
[2025] TASSC 18
Aon Risk Services Australia
Limited v Australian National University
[2009] HCA 27
Jackamarra (an Infant) v Krakouer
(1998)195 CLR 516 per Gummow and Hayne
JJ at 526-527, 539, 542 per Kirby J.
The Compagnie Financiere et
Commerciale du Pacifique v The Peruvian Guano Company
[1883] UKLawRpKQB 95
(1882) 11 QBD 55
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (203 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter