URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASLPDT/2024/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:16:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Paul Turner SC v Sebastian Buscemi [2024] TASLPDT 9; (6 December 2024)
Legal Profession Disciplinary Tribunal
Citation: Paul Turner SC v Sebastian Buscemi [2024] TASLPDT 9
Parties : Paul Turner SC Complainant
Sebastian Theodore Buscemi Practitioner
Mr D Wallace, Deputy Chairperson
Mr M Kitchell
Hearing Dates: 25 October 2023, 22 November 2023,
Submissions 30 July 2024, 21 August 2024 and 28 August 2024
Delivered on: 6 December 2024
Solicitors for Complainant: In person
Solicitors for Practitioner: The Cangelosi Firm
Complainant: Mr C Gunson SC
Practitioner: Mr T Cox SC
Amended decision
Amendment necessary due to error in decision number in citation. Amended
from 6 to 9
Dated the 23rd day of January 2025
Deputy Chairperson
Reasons for Determination
Background to proceedings
is a rehearing of a complaint against Mr Buscemi an Australia legal practitioner
(in these proceedings called the ‘practitioner’).
The Tribunal is
constituted by the two of us to complete, as the legal practitioner member
constituting the Tribunal vacated the
office of member before this determination
had been made. The
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania (‘the
found the ‘practitioners’ conduct on the complaint
amounted to “
unsatisfactory professional conduct
rehearing pursuant to s. 458(1) of the
Legal Profession Act 2007
‘Act’) is by application from Mr Paul Turner SC the complainant (in
these proceedings also called the
‘complainant’)
complaint is regarding the content of correspondence authored by the
‘practitioner’ and sent in course of his legal
practice to Mr MP the
then Secretary of the Department of Communities Tasmania (‘the
Department’) and to other ‘Department’
officers as well as to
the Minister responsible for ‘the Department’. The relevant content
is detailed later in these
reasons. ‘The Department’ was a client of
the Office of the Solicitor General for Tasmania.
person may make a complaint against an Australian Legal
practitioner.
‘complainant’ held the position of Assistant Solicitor General
(Litigation) Department of Justice Tasmania. The complaint
as well as this
rehearing application were his personally.
‘complainant’ was dissatisfied with the determination of the
‘Board’ including the sanctions imposed,
and he wrote to the
‘practitioner’ in terms that culminated in the following
“whilst the Board ...determined ...that you engaged
in unsatisfactory professional conduct it did not move under s457(1)(b)
Act] to require that you provide an apology to Mr MP. .........”.
I ask: are you prepared to apologise to Mr MP and if so please let me have
a proper formal written apology to submit to Mr MP. Please
respond within 7
days. A failure to respond will be germane to whether I make application to the
Disciplinary Tribunal under s458(1)(a).”
‘practitioner’ responded in writing to the ‘complainant’
that he will not be providing an apology
. This rehearing followed. The
‘practitioners’ response to this application was that the
‘Board’ was incorrect
in sustaining the complaint and he maintained
he had a proper basis for making the allegations he did and using the tone and
of the language in the correspondence.
information before the ‘Board’ when it made its decision is before
us, together with other material admitted by agreement,
as exceptional to that
usually confined on such a rehearing, including a statement of evidence by the
‘practitioner’
and emails between the parties as to a proposed
resolution of the proceedings. As it is a rehearing of the
‘complaint’
determinations of the ‘Board’, they are
irrelevant to the Tribunals determinations but explain how the proceedings came
to the Tribunal.
In 2019 a Ms XY an adult state servant became employed with ‘the
Department’ at the relevant workplace.
January of 2020 a medical practitioner recorded in a medical certificate that a
‘sexualised comment’ (‘the sexualised
comment’) of Ms XY
as depicted of her in a photograph with her family, had been made of her at the
workplace before she commenced
there in 2019. There was no information before us
as to the date when the comment may have been made. There was information that
the ‘sexualised comment’ had been shared in the workplace before she
commenced. The ‘sexualised comment ‘
was most offensive and would
likely distress, cause or contribute to injury of Ms XY when learned of.
Ms XY becoming aware at least by January 2020 of the ‘sexualised
comment’ having been made, she formed a belief according
practitioner “
on a second or third hand report from another staff
, that it had
been a Mr QD, also a state servant within ‘the Department’ as the
source of the comment. She complained
of Mr QD to the ‘Department’.
This became the sexual harassment complaint. There is no material or information
previously raised the allegation with Mr QD prior to her complaint.
There was information before us that at some stage by the 30
June 2021 the
‘practitioner’ had information that Ms XY had informed him that Mr
QD had in her view harassed her by committing
boundary breaches of her
In February 2020 Mr MP as ‘the Department’ Secretary, initiated an
investigation into the conduct of Mr QD .
the Tasmanian
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
workers compensation claim was accepted.
August 2020 Ms XY contacted the ‘practitioner’ with respect to her
workers compensation matter. The ‘practitioner’
was then employed in
a legal firm that undertook such work. He had limited experience in Tasmanian
workers compensation practice.
He provided advice that there was little need for
representation given there was no dispute regarding the claim. He became friends
with Ms XY.
‘practitioner’ commenced his own legal practice in September 2020.
State Service Act 2000
(‘SS Act’) enacts
(‘the Code’) for state service employees which includes
a provision an employee must treat everyone with respect and
without harassment
and they are to comply with all applicable Australian Law.
process for investigation and determination of a breach of ‘the
Code’ and any penalty for a state service employee,
at the time, was
prescribed by Ministerial Direction No 5 (known as ‘
operative from 4 February 2013.
The practitioner had little relevant
practical experience in Code’ type matters and ‘
investigations and determinations.
the 5 of January 2021 a Ms TW of ‘the Department’ informed Ms XY the
’ investigation was nearly complete and when it was, she
will be advised but she will not be advised of the decision, it being
confidential
‘practitioner’ stated that in February 2021 he offered to Ms XY,
that he would chase up the ‘Department’
’ investigation “..
it was not connected to
seeking damages .I was happy to do this ..We had been discussing ways to help
people achieve a greater sense
of ‘justice’ further to what simply
providing monetary damages provides, and this was a good opportunity to try it
the 19 February 2021 Ms TW responded to the ‘practitioners’ enquiry
on behalf of Ms XY as to the progress of the
investigation. She advised by email the investigators report had been received
by the ‘Department’ and that the investigation
was governed by
processes and ‘the Department’ was
taking the next steps. She attached a computer link to the processes on the
Department of Premier and Cabinets website “
for you so you
can see what they are”
processes are set out in clauses 7.10 and 7.11 of the ‘
on the link provided. Depending on Mr QD’s response after having been
provided with a copy of the investigators report, such
as exercising his right
to make submissions and produce any further evidence of his own or from
witnesses for him or the need for
further investigation by the Secretary , a
determination whether a breach of ‘the Code’ had occurred ( the onus
is on the party asserting it, and proof is to be on the balance of
probabilities -clause 6.5), could involve quite a delay. It is
possible the
Secretary bearing in mind the onus of proof required, is unable to determine if
a breach has occurred or being satisfied
that no breach has occurred. A
determination by the Secretary of ‘the Department’ as to whether a
state servant has breached
‘the Code’, was a non-delegable function
for Mr MP as head of ‘the Department’ ( Head of
the 23 February 2021 the ‘practitioner’ emailed Ms TW asking whether
she was able to give an indication when the matter
was due to be finalised. Ms
TW responded within hours with an update, as she did with other enquiries
including one later in March
2021 drawing the ‘practitioners’
attention again to the ‘
process and the head of
agency’s work commitments.
the 27 May 2021 the ’practitioner’ emailed Ms TW copying in Mr MP at
his personal email address within ‘the
Department’ and identifying
its subject as [Mr [QD]
“I note that we are now
going on three months since the investigators report was provided for
determination.
The fact that no determination has been made or that my client has not
been informed of an outcome is entirely unacceptable.
It is very difficult to reconcile this as being anything other than an
attempt to avoid accountability. I am aware that witnesses
reported this
incident contemporaneously and it is unclear how or why it could take 19 months
since a formal report was made by my
client. It appears rather self-evident that
these comments were made and beggars belief that it could take this
Can you please advise where this is at and when a decision is expected.
same day the 27 May 2021 Ms TW responded, copying in Mr MP and another senior
Department official:
A determination has been made and
the outcome provided to the employee. [Mr QD].
We are currently seeking advice about what information we are able to
share with Ms XY as it involves another employee and is therefore
confidential.
Once we have the feedback we will get back to you, hopefully this won’t
take long.”
The Correspondence constituting the Complaint
the 10 June 2021 the ‘practitioner’ wrote the first of the
correspondence the subject of the complaint, by email to
Ms TW copying it to Mr
MP and 2 other state officials of the
‘Department’:
“I note that in prior
correspondence you said there has been a decision in this matter. You stated
that advice was being sought
as to how to best advise Ms YX of the outcome in
line with privacy requirements.
I note that Mr QD is still employed which makes the complete lack of
information provided to my client rather distressing and frankly
unacceptable.
How Mr QD is still employed while my client remains on workers
compensation is ethically and legally corrupt. The
State Service Act 2000
out the code of conduct at section 9.It is obvious that at a minimum Mr
QD’s conduct constitutes a breach of
,(4),(10),(13),(14),and
(15).Each of these non-exhaustive breaches alone reasonably meant that
termination of his employment was the
only appropriate outcome .It warrants
noting that in terms of my clients treatment you and /or the other employees are
,(10),(13),and(14).
It would appear Mr QD’s conduct is being covered up and /or he is
being ‘protected’. At least significantly more
than the victim of
his actions is. Given this, I have advised Ms XY that I am prepared to pursue
this matter at no cost to her (
however will seek costs from the Department on
resolution). It is simply abhorrent to me that an employee of the State who has
sexually harassed is on workers compensation while the perpetrator remains.
This conduct and precedent being set by protecting Mr
QD places other State
Service employees at direct risk. That the Department is knowingly exposing
female State Service employees
to this negligence, is why harassment and abuse
We will pursue any and all avenues available including court action to
ensure the legal protections to my client and others are appropriately,
all, applied. This is a disgrace.”
24.1 On the 30 June 2021 the ‘practitioner’ sent the second of
the correspondence the subject of complaint, ‘the
attached ‘Letter’ to Mr MP addressed personally. It was copied into
Ms TW, and three other senior Department
officials and the then Minister of the
Crown for Children and Youth. The ‘Email’ read:
Dear [ Christian name of Mr MP].
Please find
a letter regarding the mismanagement of a
sexual harassment complaint, and conduct that flowed from that, in relation to
and client, Ms XY.
A number of relevant stakeholders are copied into this email. As shocking
as this has been for Ms XY, we are both concerned about
what this says about the
way sexual harassment and misconduct are treated within the State Service
generally.”
24.2 Sentences in the ‘Letter’ to Secretary Mr MP, are contended
as breaching the ‘practitioners’ obligation
to comply with the
Legal Profession (Solicitors’ Conduct ) Rules 2020 (
as is its general tone and tenor, as well as being a
failure to act in a professional manner as a solicitor. They include the
you appear to actively be covering up the sexual harassment as well as bullying
and harassment that followed reporting, within
one of your workplaces in this
environment is mind boggling
am shocked that you are so brazenly and transparently actively covering up
serious sexual harassment in front of my very
eyes. The sheer hubris is
astonishing
have advised Ms XY that it is in the public interest to know that a government
department is actively covering up sexual
harassment and not only protecting,
but seemingly rewarding the perpetrator.”
culture of accepting misconduct and protecting those responsible for it
is simply staggering that the department even considered placing Mr QD in ...new
role , considering the risk he poses to
...young women .Mr QD has ..indicated he
views women as nothing more than objects for ..sexual gratification and
objectification.
The ...[he ] is a sexual predator....who has demonstrated that
he is incapable of seeing females as anything other than [ ‘
comment’ ]”
20 months to reach a determination for what is quite obviously a clear and
unambiguous breach of the State Service code of
“...conveniently
ensuring that no determination protecting Mr QD would be made prior to the May
2021 State election”;
to tell Ms XY anything regarding the outcome while clearly Mr QD had avoided any
consequences for his abhorrent sexual
harassment ...”
lack of procedural fairness and natural justice in this would be obvious to even
high school legal studies student.”
actual investigation by the ‘independent ‘Investigator is a
particularly transparent attempt at a cover up.”
it is beyond comprehension how Mr QD retained his job on the basis of Ms XY
statement alone.”
it is impossible to understand how the department clearly operates as a fiefdom
not subject to the same legal principles
as everyone else and is trying to deny
her the most basic right of reply, a fundamental tenant (sic) of our legal
system for literally
hundreds of years. The sheer brevity of the
...[investigators inquiries with Ms XY ] and his final statement is astonishing
it not so obviously the case that an adverse finding was being avoided at
have ...become quite accustomed to this type of arrogant and blatantly
transparent type of cover up .”
top of that, I am genuinely shocked, perplexed, and frankly amazed at the sheer
audacity to do this when Ms XY is represented
by myself. The absolute arrogance
of doing so is astonishing. Were it not so prima facie stupid I would be
insulted by the mere attempt.”
am more than happy to forgo my fees to expose this utterly detestable
situations. Rest assured that the Department of Communities
will be exposed for
rewarding Mr QD”
The Allegations of
complaint to the ‘Board’ was that the practitioner by authoring and
sending the correspondence to Mr MP, as well as
copying it to others in the
State service and to the Minister breached one or more of:
in that he has not been ‘courteous’ ;
in that he has engaged in conduct, in the course
of practice, ...’which is likely to a material degree to ...(b) bring the
profession into disrepute’; and
because he has in a ‘communication
associated with representing a client ... (c) used tactics that go beyond
legitimate advocacy
and which are primarily designed to embarrass ...another
breached or not, the complaint was that the conduct was such that it would
constitute either ”
unsatisfactory professional conduct
professional misconduct
” by the ‘practitioner.
‘Board’ formulated a specific allegation which was particularised
and included in its Murray letter of the 2 December
2021 to the
‘practitioner’ stating “
it is considered that there is
conduct raised in the complaint that may amount to “unsatisfactory
professional conduct”
or “professional
misconduct”.
The general allegation was -
practitioner inappropriately wrote the Letter and the Emails to the Secretary,
the contents of which were discourteous, likely
to a material degree to bring
the profession into disrepute and /or were primarily designed to
[The Board particularised the alleged breaches of
the Rules and common law principles applicable]
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct is defined in s.420 of the Act as
unsatisfactory professional conduct
includes conduct of an Australian legal practitioner occurring in connection
with the practice of law that falls short of the standard
of competence and
diligence that a member of the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably
competent Australian legal practitioner.”
Professional
misconduct is defined in s.421 of the Act as
professional misconduct
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of an Australian legal practitioner,
where the conduct involves a substantial or consistent
failure to reach or
maintain a reasonable standard of competence and diligence;
(b).........................”
provides for categories of specific conduct
that are capable of constituting
“unsatisfactory professional
“professional misconduct”
“(a) conduct consisting of a contravention of
this Act, the regulations or the [ Rules].”
referred to previously are fully set out as
fundamental ethical duties (ASCR4 ).
solicitor must also-
(a) act in the best interests of a client in any matter in which the
solicitor represents the client; and
(b) be honest and courteous in all dealings in the course of legal practice
...................
(e) comply with these rules and the law.
and disreputable conduct (ASCR5)
A solicitor must not
engage in conduct, in the course of practice or otherwise, which demonstrates
that the solicitor is not a fit
and proper person to practise law, or which is
likely to a material degree to-
(b) bring the profession into disrepute.
with other persons (ASCR 34)
A solicitor must not in any
action or communication associated with representing a client-
(c) use tactics that go beyond legitimate advocacy and which are primarily
designed to embarrass or frustrate another person.
is noted the
do not apply to barristers and that
8(b) is broad, clearly imposing an absolute
prohibition by a solicitor of discourteous conduct in all dealings in the course
practice. A breach of
) will occur if the relevant
conduct when evaluated is likely to
bring the profession into
disrepute. A breach of
) will occur if the relevant conduct when
evaluated, the tactics used are
designed to embarrass or
frustrate another person.
The Practitioners Contentions to the Board and to the Tribunal
‘practitioner’ contended to the ‘Board’ that his
correspondence was justified, specifically they were
not improper or
unprofessional, and he had a right to
“fearlessly and fully propound
the client’s interests”
may on occasion call for
robust advocacy on the client’s behalf”
the Tribunal the ‘practitioner’ contended that the relevant case law
supported his contentions before the ‘Board.
That he believed that the
allegations were reasonably supported and
He had relied in our
view on a misunderstanding of the authority of
Lander v Council of the Law
Society of the Australian Capital Territory
[2009] ACTSC117 (
The Full Court there rejected a contention that there is a general obligation on
a solicitor to refrain from that which the recipient
might find to be
discourteous, offensive or provocative statements as too broad. That statement,
he viewed as supporting his conduct
in writing the correspondence. The Full
had set aside the finding of unsatisfactory professional
conduct in discourteous and offensive correspondence to the ACT department
education by Mr Lander.
however was not authority for the
proposition that if there was a sound basis for an allegation then it is not
improper for it to
be made in insulting or offensive terms. The earlier
disciplinary tribunal decision of the ACT disciplinary tribunal was set aside
the Full Court not because the conduct was permissible but rather that any
justification for it was not examined by the disciplinary
us, the ‘practitioners’ statement of evidence did not address the
tenor of the language he used in the
correspondence.
He said he would
probably not use such language again after being required to attend a course in
legal writing as ordered by the
‘practitioners’ statement set out a narrative of the chain of
correspondence with Ms TW of the ‘Department’
previously described
in these reasons. They speak for themselves. He then deposed
contend that the allegations made against Mr MP in the subject correspondence
were made with a proper
foundation”
deposed that from work he undertook in respect of a submission to a commission
of inquiry in respect of unrelated matters, his
state of mind at the time of
writing the correspondence to Mr MP was that various Tasmanian State Service
departments including the
Department covered up misconduct and protected
perpetrators of misconduct in various circumstances. He annexed to his statement
copy of his submission to a commission of inquiry. He had not given evidence
at or was he a witness at the commission of inquiry.
It has not assisted the
Tribunal. That he strongly held such a belief is not in issue.
‘practitioner’ did not produce either to the ‘Board’ or
Tribunal when given the opportunity to do so any
documents, such as client
instructions or correspondence, file notes or records that may have objectively
shown some basis for the
allegations or descriptors he made about Mr MP, or
those against Mr QD such as he was a sexual predator and to a lesser extent
in ‘the Department’ such as Ms TW that she personally
breached various provisions of the
State Service
, as in his email to
her of the 10
of June 2021.
‘practitioner’ declined to concede that he had written anything
improper in the impugned correspondence. He did concede
that his language and
technique was less effective than different language might have been. He was
examined to each of the allegations
specifically set out earlier as to his basis
for making them.
Tribunal Findings
find at the time of writing the ‘Letter’ the
‘practitioner’ had no objective basis for the allegations
use the tenor of the language used that was clearly offensive. The letter was
not in regard to the workers compensation
matter, or an equal opportunity matter
he said he was acting upon. The allegations potentially reflected adversely on
the integrity
of Mr MP, particularly alleging he as a senior public servant
delayed his determination until after the May 2021 state election to
QD. The ‘Letter’ was a breach of
of the Rules as not being
courteous when it included statements such as -
actively covering up the alleged sexual harassment of Ms XY as well as
bullying and harassment or
government department (the Department)
was actively covering up sexual
harassment and not only protecting, but seemingly rewarding the
perpetrator;
months to reach a determination was
a clear and unambiguous breach of the
state service code of conduct;
conveniently
ensuring that no determination protecting Mr QD would
be made prior to the May 2021 state election
actual investigation ...is a particularly transparent attempt at a cover
it is beyond
comprehension how Mr QD retained his job on the basis of Ms XY statement
refusing to tell
Ms XY anything regarding the outcome while clearly
Mr QD had avoided
onsequences for his abhorrent sexual harassment.
also find that the allegation against Ms TW that she breached the ‘SS
Act’ as alleged in the ‘practitioners’
email of the
of June had no factual basis. That the allegations in the email
of Mr QD’s alleged conduct being “covered up” and
“was being protected” and he still being “employed was
ethically and legally corrupt” were without an
objective foundation. The
email being sent was a breach of
as not being courteous.
also find that the statement in the ‘Letter’ -“
Rest assured
that the Department of Communities will be exposed for rewarding Mr QD” -
was a threat to both Mr MP and the Minister responsible for the Department
that was made gratuitously and was a breach of
as not being courteous.
agree with the complainant’s complaint that the ‘Letter’ was
interspersed with personal and emotive statements
which were florid and
unnecessary to whatever the ‘practitioner’ was attempting to
achieve. Those statements included
the following words or phrases:
“frankly outstanding”, ”utterly
incomprehensible”, “mind boggling to say the least”, ”I
am shocked that you are so brazenly and transparently covering up serious sexual
harassment in front of my very eyes. The sheer hubris
astonishing”....”it is simply staggering that the department even
considered”, “I am genuinely shocked
,perplexed, and frankly amazed
at the sheer audacity to do this when Ms XY is represented by myself. The
absolute arrogance of doing
so is astonishing. Were it not so prima facie stupid
I would be insulted by the mere attempt”....,”I do not find this
stupidity as funny as I otherwise may have .I do not take kindly to injustice of
any kind”...”but to inflict it upon
someone I so deeply respect
find the ‘practitioner’ wrote the ‘Letter’ even though
he believed that the sexual harassment complaint
of Ms XY had resulted in no
adverse findings against Mr QD and had not been
We do accept he
believed that such an outcome, if that was what it was, was not what his client
had at least expected or what he
thought should have been the result. He
displayed no objectivity in assessing the possibilities why that may have
occurred. Nor did
he wait and see if the Department was to provide some
information about the ‘ED5’ process that was under consideration
that may be given to Ms XY.
allegations by the ‘practitioner’ that Mr QD was a risk to young
women, that women were an object of his gratification
and objectification, and
that he was a sexual predator had no objective basis to have been made to Mr MP
and those in receipt including
the Minister. Those allegations as well as the
other statements made in breach of ’
were likely to
a material degree to bring the legal profession into
We find the
practitioner breached
(c) of the Rules.
copying the ‘Letter’ to the Minister, the ‘practitioner’
intended to pressure and embarrass Mr MP to respond
with otherwise private
details of the ‘ED5’ investigation and the ‘Code of
conduct’ determination
There was expressed in the email to which the ‘Letter’ was attached
to Mr MP that both the ‘practitioner’
and Ms XY were extremely
concerned about “
the way sexual harassment and misconduct are treated
within the State Service generally”
In our opinion there was nothing wrong with that last statement. That could have
been sensibly conveyed in an appropriate letter
explaining civilly what he and
or Ms XY thought were any shortcoming in the ‘ED5’ processes they
believed had occurred
and advocating for some change of policy as to advice to
complainants of outcomes to bring a form of closure if that was what was
‘Letter’ contained no request for Mr MP or the Minister to do
anything. We are satisfied the ‘Letter’
being copied to the Minister
and other department officials whilst addressed personally to Secretary Mr MP
with the threats of ‘exposure’
and accusations of he actively
covering up misconduct was a tactic primarily designed to embarrass or frustrate
Mr MP. It went beyond
legitimate advocacy and was a breach of
A change of position by the ‘practitioner’
‘practitioner’ by his counsel filed a closing submission with the
Tribunal changing his stance and :
accepting that his conduct in writing the letter and emails to the
persons he sent them to, and the content of those documents amounts
‘unsatisfactory professional
Having regard to his evidence before the Tribunal, at the time of the
letter and earlier email, the respondent [practitioner] accepts
that he did not
have a proper basis when considered objectively, to levy [sic] the very serious
allegations he made against Mr [MP].The
severity of the allegations, including
of a cover up were not warranted from his instructions alone and some delay and
material or knowledge he had to hand did not advance his basis to
justify his allegations in the terms he put them. He accepts that,
objectively
considered, he did not have a proper basis to levy the allegations against Mr [M
P] in the terms he did and that his
subjective belief at the time he made the
allegations is not a relevant
consideration.”
Unsatisfactory professional conduct
content of the ‘Letter’ of the 30 June 2021 authored by the
‘practitioner’ sent to Mr MP and others, and
the email of the 10
June 2021 to Ms TW, both breached the
‘practitioner’ had in several pages made serious allegations against
Mr MP personally that had no objective basis,
such as actively covering up
misconduct and rewarding perpetrators. He also made serious allegations against
other department employees
that lacked a proper basis for doing so. We find also
the ‘practitioners’ conduct breached his common law duty to act
civilly and courteously in all dealings in the course of his legal practice.
Whether the breach of one or other of the ‘
common law, the ‘practitioners’ conduct fell short of the standard
of competence and diligence that a member of
the public was entitled to expect
of a reasonably competent legal practitioner and as such was
unsatisfactory professional
Professional Misconduct
‘complainant submitted it was open to the Tribunal to be satisfied the
conduct of the practitioner is ‘
professional misconduct’
defined in s.421 of the Act
was necessary to evaluate whether we are satisfied the ‘
unsatisfactory
professional conduct’
involves a substantial
or consistent failure to maintain or reach a reasonable standard of competence
and diligence“.
we were concerned whether the ‘practitioners’ conduct involved a
substantial failure to maintain or reach
a reasonable standard of competence or
required us to direct our –
attention to the
nature and consequences of the failure, which may be sufficiently serious to
raise questions as to the lawyers competence
and diligence and thereby warrant
the description
substantial
‘complainants’ submission was–
may readily be said that the nature and consequence of the relevant conduct-the
vile correspondence-are serious. Mr MP (and
Mr QD) have been traduced, without
any justification whatever; and for no purpose (other than to abuse and
embarrass).A reasonable
person could readily and properly conclude that the
conduct was professional
misconduct’.”
‘practitioners’ counsel submission was that the conduct complained
of could not be attributed as ‘professional
misconduct’. That at
common law it was not conduct engaged in that could be regarded as disgraceful
or dishonourable by members
of the profession of good repute. In addressing
s.421 of ‘the Act’ counsel submitted a reasonable member of the
would not regard the conduct amounted to a substantial failure to meet
the required standard because it did not involve a substantial
respect of the protection of the public, the reputation of the profession ( in
the public’s eyes) or the administration
of justice.
complainant’s submission in response was that:
in employing the paradigm of a reasonable member of the public, such
mythical person must be imbued with knowledge of the circumstances-of
evidence before the Tribunal. They would know therefore that there was no basis
for making the scurrilous allegations; they would
know that the Solicitors
Conduct Rules had been broken; they would know the Rules regulate the proper
conduct to be expected of solicitors
in the practice of law and that they are
meant to be obeyed. Far from determining the conduct was not ‘professional
misconduct’
such reasonable person may well determine that it
is apparent to the Tribunal the ‘practitioner’ lost sight of or was
ignorant of the requirements to conduct his practice
in the required civil,
honest and courteous professional manner in all dealings including in
correspondence as a solicitor.
we reach no consensus as to whether the ‘practitioners’
unsatisfactory professional conduct
” amounted to the more
professional misconduct”
. Consequently, there is no
finding that it did. The Board was correct in its finding of
unsatisfactory professional conduct
” of the practitioner. We
note that our final decision in respect of penalty would not have been different
if a ‘professional
misconduct’ finding had been made.
Submissions as to penalty
for the ‘practitioner’ submitted that the Tribunal should consider
the following when considering penalty -
(1) The ‘practitioner ‘sought to resolve the matter in May 2023
with an offer of compromise, by apologising to Mr MP
(as originally sought
following the ‘Boards’ decision) and pay the applicants costs to
(2) That Mr MP had not personally sought an apology, a factor he submitted was
(3) That regard should be had to the ‘practitioner’ having
completed successfully the course in legal writing that was
ordered by the
(4) That if the Tribunal determined the ‘practitioner’ should not be
sanctioned further to what the ‘Board’
determined, then the
‘complainant’ had not acted reasonably in bringing the application
and the ‘complainant’
should pay the ‘practitioners’
with the ‘offer of compromise‘, an offer arose following a
discussion between counsel for the ‘complainant’
‘practitioner’.
relevant correspondence between the parties is before the
It shows on the 15 of
May 2023 the ‘practitioner’ offered to provide an apology to Mr MP
in agreed terms, pay the costs
of counsel at an amount then estimated by
counsel, but with the proviso the ‘complainants’ application to the
be withdrawn. That was unacceptable to the ‘complainant’.
Counsel pointing out that withdrawal of the complaint from
the Tribunal may not
be possible.
Counsel responded
that the ‘complainant’ required a resolution of the application by
way of determination of the Tribunal
and set out a process he was prepared to
engage in where the Tribunal could approve an agreed resolution that involved
agreed findings
and sanctions as the ‘Act’
The consequence being
the Tribunals orders would appear on the disciplinary register maintained by the
‘Board’. The practitioner
responded as
I am not willing to proceed as Mr
Turner has suggested following the rejection of my offer of compromise.
I will be instructing counsel to proceed on the basis that my submission
to the Commission of Inquiry substantively reflects a state
of mind consistent
with that set out in Lander, which upon preliminary advice will need to be dealt
with in line with the Act and
relevant directions”.
fact that Mr MP evidently had not sought an apology from the
‘practitioner’ is irrelevant. An apology is a proper
order to make
in the circumstances because the allegations made were without a proper basis
and serious and offensive. Also, these
proceedings are protective in nature of
the public. A lack of civility diminishes public regard for the profession. It
is important
that when a legal practitioner steps so far beyond the bounds of
making courteous correspondence or communications as was the case,
that likely
offend the recipient and others, that the recipient receive a personal
attribution of the conduct from the legal practitioner
by an apology. It goes to
aiding restoration of the reputation of the profession that otherwise was
possibly diminished.
‘complainant’ acted reasonably and properly in bringing the
complaint. He did so because as a legal practitioner he
observed the
correspondence as a serious breach of professional standards that otherwise
would have passed without any professional
scrutiny. He advised the
‘Board’ in his complaint that he had written to an officer of the
Department about the letter
including the following
as a legal practitioner I am appalled that
another legal practitioner would send such a letter ;and publicise it by
circulating to
others. I have never seen, in almost 40 years of practice, such
an offensive communication from another legal practitioner
‘practitioner’ was admitted to practice in Victoria in July 2016 and
practised as a solicitor since January 2017.He
commenced his own practice in
September 2020 and has been a sole practitioner since 9 November 2020. It is
evident his practice largely
deals with child sexual abuse claims. He completed
a course in legal writing approved by the Board as part of its determination
proceeding as it did pursuant to s456 of ‘the
had not been subject to prior disciplinary sanctions.
‘Board’ did not reprimand the ‘practitioner’ or order an
apology be given. A reprimand is a serious professional
sanction and not to be
equated to a slap over the
. We are of the opinion a
reprimand is warranted.
Determination
For the reasons set out the ‘Board’ was correct in finding the
‘practitioners’ conduct was “
unsatisfactory professional
” and to order he undertake and successfully complete a course
in legal writing approved by the ‘Board’.
The Tribunal also makes the following determinations and orders –
pursuant to s471(c) of ‘the Act’ the practitioner be reprimanded.
pursuant to s470(1) of ‘the Act’ the practitioner is to make an
apology in writing to Mr MP, in the same form and
text as he agreed to on the
of May 2023, subscribed by him in the presence of the Secretary
of the Tribunal, his delegate or a legal practitioner and delivered
Tribunal Secretary within 14 days of notice of this decision.
pursuant to s.481 of ‘the Act’, there being no exceptional
circumstances the ‘practitioner’ pays the
legal costs of the
‘complainant’ for his fees for counsel on the basis of the
reasonable amount incurred, to be taxed
in accordance with the
Supreme Court
The Board sustained the complaint following
a hearing of an ‘explanation’ pursuant to s.456 of the Act “
for less serious complaint”. This rehearing is unusual, brought
by the successful complainant. A typical s.458 rehearing is
‘Board’ determination may have summarily dismissed a complaint for
determinations such as referred to in s.458(2)
of the Act.
Rule 3 of the Legal Profession
(Disciplinary Tribunal) Rules 21 provides that the parties to a s.458(1)
application of the ‘Act’
are the complainant or the practitioner
against whom the complainant has made the complaint. Parties to an application
pursuant to
s.464 of the ‘Act’ are referred to as applicant or the
respondent.
S427(1) the
5 Both letters were admitted before the Tribunal as fresh evidence.
Transcript p 135 line
TB at p122 “Letter
30.06.21 “entering her office to discuss non-work-related matters”;
“blocking the exit
to her office when doing so”; “sitting with
his legs spread when doing so”; “leering at her during group
on one meetings.”
22.12.20 and 5.01.21 pp 11-13 exhibit
Practitioner email to Board
27 July 2021. TB Page 131 paragraph 5
Exhibit P3 email chain 3 at
‘ Employment
Direction No 5 clause 6.3 – TB at page
Letter the Board 2
December 21 pages 175-179 TB
Audio recording before Board
of the practitioner oral explanation and his written submission of 22 pages
handed to the ‘Board’
at the s.456 hearing. TB pages 226-241.
Submission 2 March 2023
The parties agreed for
evidence or material to be before the Tribunal on the rehearing additional to
information that which was before
the Board if the ‘practitioner’
was to maintain that a proper basis existed for the impugned allegations.
Exhibit P2 Statement of
evidence of the practitioner dated 28 June 2023 paragraph
Transcript - practitioner
pp 152- 154.
An inference was open to the
practitioner to consider that Mr. QD had not been shown to be the source of the
-practitioner page 126 lines 25-39
Practitioners written
submissions dated 21 August 2024 paragraph
Practitioners written
submissions paragraph 33
Law Society of NSW v Webb
[2013] NSWCA 423
; Legal Profession Board v Barclay
[2022] TASSC
Complainants’
submission 28 August 2024 at
Complainants’
submission 28.8.2025 at [14]
Practitioners’ submission 21.8.2025 [38]
Complainant submission
28.08.24 [18]
s,469 of the
S.479 of the Act -an
instrument of consent agreed to with the
See The Australian
Professional Liability Blog -Stephen Warne 30.11.2020 and cases “noted
that the tariff for rudeness a reprimand.”
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (654 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter