URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCAT/2025/192.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
FNN (Administration) [2025] TASCAT 192 (2 October 2025)
FNN (Administration)
[2025] TASCAT 192
Guardianship
FNN (represented person)
DN applicant
Public Trustee
Hearing Date:
4 August 2025
Hearing Location:
Date of Orders:
4 August 2025
Date Reasons Issued:
2 October 2025
R Holder, Senior Member – Presiding Member
M Trezise, Ordinary
H Lake, Ordinary Member
Orders Made:
Administration order made.
Catchwords:
Guardianship stream –application for administration order –
impaired decision-making ability – need – vulnerability
influence – administration order promotes personal and social wellbeing
– support of independent administrator.
Legislation Cited:
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1995
(Tas); ss 3, 5, 8, 11, 20, 51.
Cases Cited:
Representation:
Tasmania Legal Aid – E Dalgleish
2025/GAB/609
Publication Restriction:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication.
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
is a 30-year-old woman who currently lives in supported independent living (SIL)
which she shares with two others. FNN is a participant
of the National
Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS).
application for guardianship and administration for FNN was filed by with the
Tribunal on the 17 June 2025, by FNN’s father,
DN (the application), who
sought to be appointed guardian and administrator.
application was listed for hearing in Hobart on 4 August 2025. At the hearing,
DN requested the withdrawal of the guardianship
application, which we approved.
hearing was attended in person by FNN, DN, Elizabeth Dalgleish from Tasmanian
Legal Aid; KN stepmother of FNN; BS NDIS Support
Coordinator, KG support worker;
and by telephone EG mother of FNN; and by video link, Karen Baldwin and Rebecca
Bone from the Public
Trustee; and TX from Wise Life Service.
hearing evidence and submissions, we determined to make an administration order
for FNN, appointing Public Trustee as her administrator
for a period of three
request for reasons has been made by DN on the 16 September 2025. These are our
reasons for decision.
Legislation
51 of the Act set out the criteria which must be met before the Tribunal can
make an administration order. These require the
Tribunal to be satisfied that
the person:
(i) has impaired decision-making ability in respect of decisions relating to
financial matters; and
(ii) is in need of an administrator; and
(iii) the Tribunal is satisfied that the order will promote the person's
personal and social well-being.
of the Act as:
financial matter, in relation to a person, means any matter relating to the
estate of the person including the income, assets, debts,
liabilities, real
property, personal property and financial affairs of the person, and includes
any legal matter that relates to
the property or finances of the person;
Decision-making
ability is defined in
of the Act. Section 11(2) of the Act sets out when an adult has
impaired decision-making ability in respect of decisions.
Decision-making ability
(2) For the purposes of this Act, an adult has impaired decision-making ability
in respect of a decision if the adult is unable,
even with the provision of
access to practicable and appropriate support, to –
(a) understand information relevant to the decision; or
(b) retain information relevant to the decision for a sufficient time to make
and consistently communicate the decision; or
(c) use or weigh information relevant to the decision; or
(d) communicate the decision (whether by speech, gesture or other means).
determining the element of need, the Tribunal must consider: the wishes and
preferences of the person; whether need can be met
by other means less
restrictive of the person’s freedom of decision and action; and the wishes
and preferences of any close
family members, carers and other significant
5 of the Act sets out a non-exhaustive list of ways a ‘person’s
personal and social well-being’ can be promoted.
making its decision, the Tribunal must observe the principles contained in s 8
of the Act.
Impaired decision making
Health Practitioner Report (HPR) had been filed from Dr NH, who had been
FNN’s general practitioner for over 20 years and
who had seen FNN on the
12 June 2025. Dr NH’s evidence was that FNN has impaired decision-making
ability for financial matters
as she is unable to understand and use and weigh
information relevant to financial decisions. Dr NH commented that FNN can use an
ATM but does not have skills to pay accounts, or budget and is unable to
calculate correct change, and is susceptible to suggestibility.
DS neuropsychologist authored both a report and HPR after assessing FNN in three
sessions over two weeks, the last session being
on the 24th of July 2025. In her
report she states:
From a decision-making capacity perspective, it is my view that [FNN] does not
have capacity to manage her finances at the current
time. She is not able to
fully appreciate the challenges of managing her own finances and appears to have
minimal awareness of the
risk of exploitation by others and the impact of this
on her independence. She has difficulty understanding the nature and extent
her day-to-day finances, including the amounts in her accounts and her residual
savings. [FNN] also appears to have trouble estimating
how much she would need
to save for future goals and identifying a system that she would use to support
these saving goals.
her HPR Dr DS opined that FNN has impaired decision-making capacity to
understand, retain, use and weigh information relevant to
decisions about
financial matters.
[FNN] has limited understanding of her income and expenditure and the risks
associated with managing her budget independently. She's
not able to problem
solve the risk of overspending and exploitation by others.
[FNN] has some learning capacity, but struggles with complex information, new
information, or when she receives a lot of information
at once due to her poor
working memory and slow processing speed.
[FNN] has difficulty weighing up the risks and benefits and managing her own
money versus having a structure in place.
[FNN] has difficulty managing her budget and cannot problem solve how she can
resolve this. She has felt pressured previously into
giving money to family and
does not understand the implications of this on her.
[FNN] struggles to understand complex information would not be in a position to
safely make more complex legal financial decisions.
[FNN] has severe cognitive impairment associated with developmental disability,
likely including specific learning disorders for
reading, maths, and
comprehension since childhood.
did not wish to comment on the medical evidence.
one at hearing opposed the medical evidence of Dr ND and Dr DS.
on the medical evidence of Dr ND and Dr DS we find FNN has impaired
decision-making ability for financial matters.
application indicates that FNN’s impaired decision-making ability impacts
her ability to manage her finances. The application
confirms that DN has
attempted less restrictive alternatives including providing financial guidance
and budgeting advice to FNN,
but this had not been successful. The application
Despite receiving the Centrelink Disability Support Pension, she struggles to
safeguard her finances, pay bills and comprehend contracts
or financial risks.
Furthermore, she's experiencing coercive control from her mother... putting her
at risk of financial harm.
An administrator will ensure her finances are managed properly, bills are paid,
and her funds are used wisely, promoting her financial
stability and overall
well-being.
gave evidence at hearing, stating he had been FNN’s NDIS support
coordinator for a number of years and had worked closely
with FNN and her
family. BS supported the need for an order. Prior to the hearing, BS had
submitted correspondence to the Tribunal
dated 20 July 2025 (BS’s
correspondence) which states:
[FNN] is currently under sustained pressure from multiple parties regarding her
financial decisions. This has led to considerable
stress and confusion.
I believe that in the past, [FNN] has been unfairly influenced by external
parties regarding her spending, without full consideration
of her financial
situational long-term needs.
[FNN] has told me - and other staff - that at times she does not understand
where her money has gone. As a result, important payments
and direct debits have
occasionally been missed.
I am concerned about [FNN's] ability to fully understand the implications of
entering financial agreements, including repayment terms,
interest in associated
[FNN] has expressed a strong desire to improve her health - and admirable and
important goal. However, her ability to attend the
gym and swimming sessions is
sometimes restricted due to insufficient funds.
While [FNN] may present as someone who understands everything being discussed,
it quickly becomes clear after verbal conversations
that she has not grasped all
aspects of any conversation - particularly financial conversation. This appears
to be linked to cognition
processing limitations.
Despite ongoing support, [FNN] continues to struggle with budgeting,
prioritising essential expenses, and financial planning. I believe
this places
her at long term financial risk.
[FNN] is incredibly social and kind-hearted person, which unfortunately
increases her vulnerability to undue influence -especially
where money is
hearing, DN stated he had been informally managing FNN’s financial matters
for many years and had set up a bank account in
her name which he is a signatory
of and an investment account which has been increasing in amount over time. DN
confirmed FNN has
a debit card which she can use and has allocated personal
spending money. DN stated FNN is a very generous person and when asked
money, she will often give it away.
one at hearing opposed there being a need for an administrator. Ms Dalgleish
stated FNN is wanting independence and the ability
to make her own choices and
not be controlled. Ms Dalgleish added that FNN at times does not feel she is
sufficiently consulted with,
however was supportive of having an administration
order being made.
find FNN needs an administration order. We are satisfied there is no least
restrictive way to proceed at this time and no one is
opposed to there being a
need for an order. An administrator can assist FNN with budgeting, ensure
payment of her expenses and manage
her invested funds and where possible, help
develop her financial skills and financial independence.
personal and social wellbeing
application submits than an administration order will promote FNN’s
personal and social wellbeing in ensuring financial
protection and protecting
her against financial exploitation.
With this kind of support, she can avoid the anxiety of financial uncertainty
and make informed decisions, allowing her to live with
dignity and autonomy.
Dalgleish submitted that an administration order would promote FNN’s
personal and social wellbeing as it would be less restrictive
person and freedom and promote FNN’s quality of life and dignity of risk.
BS’s correspondence to the Tribunal, he states:
...[FNN] would significantly benefit from having an administrator – not to
limit her rights, but to support her wellbeing and
financial security in a
consistent, protective and respectful manner.
on all the evidence before us, we find that an order promotes FNN’s
personal and social wellbeing. An administration order
protects FNN’s
financial wellbeing and reduces the likelihood of others taking financial
advantage of her. An order ensures
FNN’s funds are spent on her needs and
wants and ensures payment of all her expenses. It also allows for steps to be
to support FNN in developing financial skills and greater independence.
Who to appoint?
the application, DN sought to be appointment FNN’s administrator, but at
hearing indicated he supported the appointment of
the Public Trustee as
administrator.
Dalgleish stated that FNN’s will and preference was the appointment of the
Public Trustee as her administrator. Ms Dalgleish
also supported the appointment
of the Public Trustee. Stating FNN having an administrator, who was independent
from family, would
assist in preserving family relationships and remove some of
the tensions that have existed to date.
Baldwin indicated if Public Trustee were appointed, they would work with FNN and
support her in paying some of the bills herself
and find out what financial
goals she wanted to work towards.
BS’s correspondence to the Tribunal, he states:
I believe that the appointment of an independent administrator would not only
protect [FNN], but also alleviate interpersonal tensions,
reduce anxiety and
ensure a more transparent financial framework is in place.
An administrative would also be well placed to assist [FNN] in articulating and
achieving her personal goals by helping to structure
her budget in line with her
aspirations.
Finally, [FNN] clearly has deep affection for her family and support circle.
However, she often worries about upsetting those close
to her and may avoid
discussing her financial struggles openly for fear, of causing conflict or
disappointment.
supported the appointment of the Public Trustee, indicating this had been
FNN’s expressed wish so as to enable her relationship
with her father, to
be solely as father/daughter, rather than a substitute decision maker.
DN did not seek at hearing to be appointed FNN’s administrator, we did not
need to consider his suitability. No other person
sought to be appointed as
FNN’s administrator. We therefore proceeded to appoint the Public Trustee
as administrator for FNN,
noting the will and preference of FNN, and the view of
Ms Dalgleish, BS and TX to appoint an independent administrator.
Consideration of an order and its duration
considering and applying s 8 principles of the Act and finding the criteria in s
20 of the Act is met, we determined to make
an administration order.
medical evidence does not indicate at this time there is a likelihood for change
of FNN’s decision-making ability, or evidence
that there will be changes
to FNN’s circumstances which will mitigate the need of an order. We find
an administration order
is the least restrictive of FNN’s decision and
action as is possible in the circumstances. We determined the duration of order
should be 3 years.
made an order allowing for gifting from FNN’s property, and within the
discretion of the administrator, given FNN has close
relationships with family
members and her housemates.
The Tribunal Orders:
Public Trustee (Tas) is appointed as administrator for [FNN] until 3 August
administrator is to lodge with the Tribunal a financial summary relating to the
financial matters of [FNN] within 6 weeks from
the date of this order.
administrator is authorised to distribute gifts from [FNN’s] property to a
maximum of $300.00 per year. Such gifts are subject
to the administrator’s
discretion.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.84 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter