URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFPT/2009/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:14:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DW Clement obo TB O'Neill v Forest Practices Authority and RB Curran [2009] TASFPT 2 (3 April 2009)
File No:2/07 F D2/2009
DW Clement obo TB O’Neill Appellant
Forest Practices Authority and RB Curran Respondents
This was the hearing of an appeal against the decision of the Forest
Practice Authority to grant an application for declaration of
land at Irishtown
near St Marys, as a Private Timber Reserve.
The appeal was heard at
Hobart on the 16
A Corbould appeared on
behalf of the Applicant
P Taylor appeared on behalf of Private Forests
DW Clement appeared on behalf of the Appellant
Application, decision and appeal
Application
was made for the declaration of Private Timber Reserve No. 1844, on
110 hectares of land at Irishtown near St Marys.
Two objections were made
to the application, one by the Appellant. Private Forests Tasmania made a
recommendation to the Forest
Practices Authority, to approve the application,
which the Authority did.
Appellant, being a ‘prescribed person’ under Section 7(4) of the
Forest Practices Act 1985
as owner of land adjoining the boundaries of
the proposed Private Timber Reserve, lodged the present appeal.
ground of appeal which was ultimately pursued, was that the Appellant would
suffer a direct and material disadvantage, in that
the plantation growth
proposed would have a ‘reasonable potential to reduce or terminate the
water supply to her property permanently
or for significant periods of a year by
reason of its impact on the ground water resource of the catchment in which it
is located.’
Tribunal found on the evidence in the first appeal that a plantation on the
proposed Private Timber Reserve would cause a substantial
diminution in the
water supply in Margison’s Creek, to the Appellant’s land; and that
would put the Appellant to material
trouble and expense in ensuring an
alternative water supply. The Tribunal upheld the appeal and quashed the
decision of the Forest
Practices Authority.
appeal to the Supreme Court of Tasmania the Tribunal’s decision was
quashed. The Supreme Court ordered that the matter be
remitted to the Tribunal
to be determined in accordance with law.
approach directed by the Supreme Court was that in determining whether the
Appellant would suffer a direct and material disadvantage
from the declaration
of the Private Timber Reserve, the appropriate inquiry was as follows. That is,
was the impact of the declaration
of the Private Timber Reserve, such as to
cause direct and material disadvantage to the Appellant.
Tribunal accordingly must determine the situation of the Appellant in the
absence of a Private Timber Reserve, and compare that
with the situation of the
Appellant if a Private Timber Reserve is granted, and determine whether the
difference constitutes a direct
and material disadvantage.
Tribunal conducted a further hearing of the appeal as remitted to it, at which
all of the parties were represented. By agreement,
the evidence taken at the
initial Tribunal hearing was taken into account at the resumed hearing. Some
additional evidence was also
tendered. The evidence will be referred to insofar
as necessary in the course of these reasons.
What is the situation in the absence of a Private Timber Reserve?
following matters were common ground, and the Tribunal makes findings
accordingly.
land the subject of the PTR application lies within the area controlled by the
Break O’Day Planning Scheme 1996, and under
that Scheme in the
‘Natural Resources Zone’. Clause 10(4) relevantly
OBJECTIVE –
To ensure Council’s involvement in
where and how timber harvesting occurs, having regard to the adequacy of road
infrastructure,
impacts on water supply catchments and the water quality
function of rivers and visibility of scenic ridgelines from important tourist
ACCEPTABLE SOLUTIONS
PERFORMANCE CRITERIA
Commercial forest operations on private land outside State Forest
land not declared a Private Timber Reserve
Forest Practices Plan prepared in accordance with S.18 of the
Practices Act 1985
is required for:
(i) commercial forest harvesting operations on land outside State Forest or
land not declared as a Private Timber Reserve; or
(ii) land clearance involving a total area greater than 1ha or an amount
greater than 100t in any one calendar year; or
(iii) vulnerable land as defined in the Forest Practices Code.
forest harvesting on land not declared as a Private Timber Reserve is not to be
visible from a tourist road.
Commercial forest operations on private land not declared a Private
Timber Reserve
performance criteria
commercial harvesting on land not declared as a Private Timber Reserve will be
visible from tourist roads, the applicant is
to demonstrate that the development
will not detrimentally impact on the scenic and landscape qualities available
from a tourist
relevant effect of the general provisions of the Planning Scheme is stated by
Clause 3 as follows: “If a proposed use falls
within a use class that can
occur within the planning area, an application for use or development must also
show that the proposed
use or development is able to perform in accordance with
the planning scheme standards”: Clause 3.1.4.
planning scheme standards consist of Acceptable Solutions and Performance
Criteria. “Where Performance Criteria are not
stated for any issue
referred to in a standard, use or development must comply with Acceptable
Solutions for that issue”:
Clause 3.2.2 “An application for use or
development must demonstrate that it can achieve all relevant planning scheme
standards”:
Clause 3.2.3
use or development is permitted if it can demonstrate compliance with the
acceptable solutions applicable to that use or
development”, and
“Council is bound to grant a permit but may impose conditions or
restrictions consistent with the achievement
of any relevant acceptable
solutions”: Clause 3.3.1 Council must refuse an application unable to
demonstrate it can perform
in accordance with any relevant planning scheme
standard”: Clause 3.3.3.
effect of the above provisions is that in the absence of a Private Timber
Reserve, commercial forest operations on the land subject
to the application,
must be granted a permit insofar as they are in accordance with a Forest
Practices Plan. It was common ground
the subject land is not visible from a
tourist road.
are other provisions of the Planning Scheme which set presently relevant
‘standards’. The conduct of forestry operations
on the land must
comply with those provisions in the absence of a Private Timber Reserve. Before
referring to them, however, it
is necessary to refer to the section of the
Scheme dealing with exemptions from a requirement for a planning permit,
contained in
Clause 6. Clause 6 relevantly reads:
6.1 USE OR DEVELOPMENT NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT UNDER THE PLANNING SCHEME
removal or destruction of vegetation
operations undertaken in State Forests or Private Timber
farming operations including fencing, ploughing, farm dams, private roadways
required as part of farming operation, planting
of crops, animal husbandry, and
any activities incidental to the continuance of the farming operation provided
that these activities
are carried out in areas used for farming purposes before
this Scheme came into force.
was contended for the Appellant, without opposition, that Clause 6.1(d) in its
reference “continuing farming operations including
... fencing ... private
roadways ... planting of crops,” allowed a plantation to be established.
The Planning Scheme however
consistently differentiates between farming and
commercial forestry. For example, in the definition of the “Resource
Development
Use Class” in Clause 5.3.3 the definition is:
“Use of land for primary production which involves the use of land for
planting, growing, harvesting, processing or extraction,
of natural resources.
It includes but is not necessarily limited to: Farming, commercial forestry
2.2.1 in setting out the specific Planning Scheme objectives, settlement
objectives, provides in subclause (c): “land
and resources outside towns
and settlements are to be utilized primarily for agriculture, forestry, tourism,
resource protection
and conservation.”
2.2.2, Resource Development Objectives refers separately to farming and
“d) Farming activities are to use best practice techniques for land and
environmental management.
is to be managed in accordance with the Forest Practices
the general definitions in Schedule 1 neither ‘agriculture’ nor
‘farming’ are defined, but ‘Forest
Practices’ is defined
as “the processes involved in establishing forests, or growing or
harvesting timber, and includes
the construction of private roadways and other
works connected with establishing forests, or growing and harvesting
the above provisions of the Planning Scheme, the exemptions provided for by
Clause 6.1(d) referring to continuing farming operations,
do not extend to
forestry operations. Forestry is not exempt from the requirement for planning
approval on the subject land, in
the absence of a Private Timber
to the status of forestry operations under the Planning Scheme in the absence of
a Private Timber Reserve, standards are
provided, together with objectives, for
use or development in or near wetlands and waterways. Issue 1 relating to
works on or near
wetlands or waterways, has the objective “Works on or
near wetlands and waterways are not to effect the hydrological and biological
roles of waterways and wetlands.”
The Acceptable Solution,
Clause 1.2 is:
Construction within 30m of wetlands
works including dams, weirs, bridges, channel training works, roads or other
structures are to be constructed in or within 30 metres
of the outer
boundary of any wetland or waterway.”
The Performance Criteria 1.2 provides:
Construction within 30m of wetlands
works or structures, are proposed within 30 metres of the outer boundary of
a wetland or waterway it must be demonstrated that:
design and operation of any works or structures on or near the wetland or
waterway is to be in accordance with Best Practice Environmental
Management,
(ii) the natural flow regimes, water quality and biological diversity of any
waterway or wetland will not be adversely affected.”
is defined in the Planning Scheme Schedule 1 as “Includes any changes to
the natural or existing condition
or topography of land including the removal,
destruction or lopping of trees and the removal of vegetation or topsoil, but
include forest practices, as defined in the
Forest Practices Act
carried out in State Forests.”
can be seen that the subject land not being in a State Forest, forest practices
undertaken on the subject site would fall within
the definition of
“works”. There could be no forest practices therefore, within
30 metres of any waterway on the site,
unless they complied with the
Performance Criteria 1.2, particularly 1.2(a)(ii) relating to the natural flow
relevant in this context is Table 18.1 Issue 2 – Riparian Vegetation,
which has the objective “to maintain native
riparian vegetation as natural
filters for nutrients and soluble pollutants, as habitats for native fauna and
to prevent erosion
and increased sediment flows.” The Acceptable Solution
2.1 “Native vegetation removal” is
“a) No native vegetation is to be removed either in or within
30 metres of the outer boundary of
(ii) any waterway”
The Performance Criteria under Issue 2, 2.2 Maintenance of water levels
“a) Development or works which affect the natural water level of any
wetland, recharge basin or waterway are not to adversely
affect natural flow and
there is to be no increase in erosion or sedimentation as a result of the
development or works.”
evidence given at the original hearing and at the subsequent hearing, with
reference to the effect of forestry operations on water
levels, was in substance
that a plantation on the subject site, towards the end of the 13
year growth period of the plantation, would be reasonably likely to cause
periods of weeks up to months at a time, when there was
no useful flow in
Margison’s Creek for the Appellant’s land. This would be a
substantial reduction in the existing flow
of Margison’s Creek to the
Appellant’s land. There was no further evidence submitted which would
make that conclusion
Accordingly,
under Table 18.1 of the Planning Scheme there could be no forestry operations,
and no native vegetation removal, within
30 metres of the outer boundary of
any waterway on the subject land; and if there were to be such works then
reliance would need
to be placed on the Performance Criteria. In that case,
depending on the extent of the forestry operations, that is relevantly of
plantation, within that 30metre reserve area, it may not be possible to
comply with the Performance Criteria which then become
applicable, insofar as
any plantation having the effect of adversely affecting natural flow would not
be allowed.
evidence was that at present there is a plantation established on the subject
land pursuant to a Forest Practices Plan; but that
the Forest Practices Plan
required minimum buffers of up to 20 metres on either sides of
Margison’s Creek, and those buffers
were widened to 30 metres to be
in accordance with the wetlands and waterways code. 10 metre buffers were also
required on either
side of each mapped class 3 and class 4 stream. The evidence
was and the Tribunal accepts that there are 3.4 kilometers of primary
stream mapped on the cleared area within the application area and that there are
a total of 4.4 kilometres of mapped streams in the
total area subject to the
Private Timber Reserve application. Even having regard only to the 3.4
kilometres of primary streams within
the existing plantation, with an exclusion
zone of 30 metres along that length, precluding ‘works’ on
either side of
the stream, there is a total of 6.8 kilometres x
30 metres, a total of 204,000 square metres of land which would be subject
to streamside
protection under the planning scheme. The
204,000 square metres in which forestry would effectively be prevented
on the site, under
the Scheme standards in Table 18.1 Issues 1 and 2, compare
with the 420,000 square metres of cleared pasture in which the current
plantation exists, which the Tribunal finds represents a large part of the
likely area within which forestry may be conducted, on
the proposed Private
Timber Reserve.
was placed for the Applicant and Private Forests Tasmania, on the existing
situation, to the exclusion of any future rotation
plantations. There may
however be future rotation plantations, as of right insofar as they comply with
the relevant Acceptable Solutions
and other provisions of the Planning Scheme,
or as a discretionary use insofar as they rely upon the Performance Criteria.
was also contended for the Appellant that the Siting of Developments Code,
Part D19 of the Planning Scheme, applied. The Siting
of Developments Code
is concerned with use in ‘environmentally sensitive areas’ defined
at Clause 19.3 of the Scheme
as including “Any land that has a boundary
contiguous with a National Park or Conservation Reserve”(19.3.1(d));
land listed on the Register of the National Estate for its natural
values” (19.3.1.(e)); and “Any land identified as
Outstanding Natural Beauty in Table 16.1” (19.3.1(g)); and “Any land
on which it is proposed to carry out
activities which will affect the values of
any area defined in (a) – (g) above” (19.3.1(h)).
evidence was that the St Patricks Head State Reserve has a boundary contiguous
with the land for which application is being made
for the PTR, being UPIS2955,
2958, 0645, 0646, 0647 and 0648 on Tasmap 1:25000 (Ironhouse). St Patricks Head
State Reserve is according
to the evidence listed in Table 16.1 of the
Scheme “Heritage places in the municipality” as a Conservation Zone,
in addition as being on the Register of the National Estate and as an area
of Outstanding Natural Beauty. The land subject to the
PTR application is on
that basis “Environmentally Sensitive Land” under the Scheme
definition 19.3.1(d) and 19.3.1(h).
19.1 Issue 5 – LAND MANAGEMENT IN THE ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS, has
the Objective:
“To ensure that development sites are managed in a manner that is
appropriate to the natural and cultural landscapes of Environmentally
Appellant relied upon Acceptable Solution 5.1 Land management plans, (e) which
“(e) all new plantings are to be undertaken with seeds or rootstock
derived from provenance taken within the boundaries of the
development site, or
the vicinity of the site,”
as preventing an
or other monoculture normally used in
plantations, being provenance not taken within the boundaries of the development
site, coming
from within or in the vicinity of the plantation site, as these
species come from elsewhere in Australia.
Tribunal has some difficulty in that the provisions of the latter Acceptable
Solution, and their corresponding Performance Criteria,
are more consonant with
development involving buildings, pedestrian movement, roads and parking areas
than with forestry. The definition
of “development” in Clause 23
Schedule 1 of the Planning Scheme includes ‘works’ as well as works
buildings. Taken literally, the provisions of Clause 19.1 would apply
to Forest Practices within the proposed Private Timber Reserve
on the basis that
it is an environmentally sensitive area, although that result appears at odds
with the majority of the specified
applications in Issue 5. Issue 5
provisions of a Planning Scheme may of course be changed, but to what is
speculative; the restrictions on forestry operations
under the present Planning
Scheme in the absence of a Private Timber Reserve, are as
Forest Operations with the Declaration of a Private Timber Reserve
of the above restrictions provided by the Planning Scheme or any future Planning
Scheme would apply to the conduct of forest
practices on the site. The only
certain restriction would be the provisions of the Forest Practices Code. In
addition, the requirement
of a Forest Practices Plan in respect of any forest
practices, would apply under the existing legislation. A Forest Practices Plan
must give effect to the Forest Practices Code, but is otherwise in the judgment
or discretion of the relevant forestry authorities.
That is normally initially
a Forest Practices officer, and ultimately the Forest Practices Authority.
respect to waterway reserves, the Forest Practices Code has a minimum
requirement of a 2 metre plantation clear distance from
any class 4 stream
bank; and 10 metres where harvesting is prohibited for any class 1,2 and 3
stream. The present Forest Practices
Plan, on the evidence, required minimum
buffers of up 20 metres on either side of Margison’s Creek, and on
the evidence those
buffers were widened to 30 metres to be in accordance
with the Wetlands and Waterways Code of the Planning Scheme. It also required
10 metre buffers on either side of each class 3 or 4 stream. There
was a contest between the parties as to whether the possibility
of rotation of
plantation over time, should be taken into account; that is, as to whether any
and if so what significance should
be given to the possibility of future
rotation plantations after the plantation which is presently growing, in
assessing whether
declaration of the Private Timber Reserve gives rise to direct
and material disadvantage to the Appellant.
Forest Practices Act 1985
provides by Section 12 for the effect of
declaration of land as a Private Timber Reserve is as described above, and has
no limitations
upon the duration of that effect. Sections 13 and 14 however
provide for revocation of a Private Timber Reserve, respectively at
instigation of the Forest Practices Authority and on application of the owner of
the reserve. Whether the Authority would so
act, and whether the owner would so
apply, are conjectural matters. All that can be said is that in the present
case, there is no
evidence that would justify the Tribunal in finding that there
is any present circumstance likely to result in revocation on any
result is that there is a potential for the protection given by the Private
Timber Reserve to use of the land for forest
practices, to continue
indefinitely. That potential is subject to the possibility of revocation.
is also a restriction upon the use of the land subject to the Private Timber
Reserve, by Section 12(1) of the latter Act. That
restriction is that it
“shall be used only for establishing forests, or growing or harvesting
timber in accordance with the
Forest Practices Code and such other activities
which the Authority considers to be compatible with establishing forests, or
or harvesting timber.” The power of the Authority to instigate a
revocation of the Private Timber Reserve, which is afforded
by Section 13
of the Act, arises where the Authority is satisfied that the Private Timber
Reserve is not being used for the previously
specified purposes. There is in
that sense an obligation on the owner of the land to use the land for those
purposes, for such time
as he desires the Private Timber Reserve to subsist. It
is not however, as contended for the Appellant, an obligation which would
subsist independent of the wishes of the landowner. That much is reinforced by
reference to Section 14 of the Act which enables
the landowner himself to
apply for revocation of the Private Timber Reserve. In that latter
circumstance, the Authority may decline
to grant the application for revocation;
but the owner could still potentially produce the same result by simply failing
land for forestry, in which case Section 13 would become
applicable. In any event, subject to those considerations, the right to
land for forest practices, subsists unless and until the Private Timber Reserve
is terminated, and during that time the provisions
Land Use Planning
and Approvals Act 1993
including any Planning Scheme, do not apply to use of
the land for forest practices.
The Difference between the two situations
the present provisions of the Forest Practices Plan with respect to 20 metre
streamside reserves on Margison’s Creek
and 10 metre reserves on other
class 3 or 4 streams, or whether the present practical application of a 30 metre
streamside reserve,
would actually be continued under any subsequent plantation
rotation, is not a matter upon which the Tribunal is able to make any
The position however is that there is no legal requirement for such
continuation, and a corresponding potential for something
substantially less
than the 30 metre reserve on each side of a waterway required by inter alia
Table 18 of the Planning Scheme.
The difference between the 2 -
10 metres necessarily required under the Forest Practices Code, and the
30 metres for the exclusion
of works and natural vegetation clearing
required by the Planning Scheme, is up to 28 metres to 18 metres on either
side of a stream.
A 28 metre reserve on each side of the
3.4 kilometres of mapped stream alone, is 6800 times 28, or 190,400
square metres. An 18
metre wide reserve would be 6800x18= 122,400 square metres.
evidence was further, that while the present Forest Practices Plan area contains
3.4 kilometres of mapped primary stream, the
area of the Private Timber
Reserve contains 4.4 kilometres of mapped primary stream. Applying the
potential differential of 28 metres
in streamside reserve to each side of that
4.4 kilometres of mapped stream produces a calculation of 8800 x 28,
or 246,400 square
metres. That is over half of the 42 hectares,
420,000 square metres, of the present plantation area; and variously over
or a little
less than half of the 50 to 60 hectares of cleared agricultural
land referred to in the assessment provided to the Forest Practices
Authority in
May 2007, by Mr Taylor. A reduced calculation would apply to an 18 metre
differential, of 158,400 square metres, over
1/3 of the present plantation area.
The Tribunal considers that the substantial effect upon stream flows referred to
in the evidence
of Dr Leaman, given at the previous hearing and adopted in the
subsequent hearing of the Tribunal, would still subsist to a substantial
Tribunal considers the potential for that result, arising from the declaration
of a Private Timber Reserve, to be a direct and
material disadvantage to the
Appellant. That is because the Appellant will be deprived of all or a
substantial part of the natural
flow of Margison’s Creek and its
tributaries, upon which on the evidence she depends, to a substantial if not
total extent,
for periods of weeks up to months.
without the more problematical application of the restrictions imposed by the
Planning Scheme on environmentally sensitive areas,
the restrictions imposed by
the wetlands and waterways clauses of the Planning Scheme would ensure that
aspect of direct and material
disadvantage does not occur. Accordingly the
Tribunal is satisfied that the declaration of the Private Timber Reserve would
in a direct and material disadvantage to the Appellant, for the above
Tribunal is required by Section 37(12) of the
Forest Practices Act
in making its decision to have regard to the financial effect of its
determination on the parties to the appeal. There was no direct
material with
respect to the effect upon the Applicant, of the loss of the availability of any
area of the relevant land, for forest
practices, in the event of refusal of the
Private Timber Reserve; however the Tribunal infers that it would be substantial
sense of up to approximately half of the proposed area. At present,
because the evidence was that there is a plantation with that
restriction in existence, there is no apparent loss to the Applicant; but there
is the potential for that loss should he
be minded to apply for a greater area
under future Forest Practices Plans. The loss to the Appellant is significant,
in terms of
the potential cost of replacing her water supply presently enjoyed
from Margison’s Creek, in respect of future plantation rotations.
Notwithstanding
the Tribunal must have regard to financial effects, Section 8(2) of the Act
requires that a Private Timber Reserve
should be refused if the Tribunal is
satisfied that there is a direct and material disadvantage to the Appellant from
the declaration
of the Private Timber Reserve.
order of the Tribunal is that the Tribunal, pursuant to Section 9(6) of the Act,
quashes the decision of the Forest Practices
Authority and directs the Authority
to refuse to grant Private Timber Reserve application No. 1844.
Tribunal will entertain any application for an order for costs in this appeal,
if made to the Tribunal in writing with supporting
submissions within the next
14 days. If requested the Tribunal will reconvene to hear any evidence in
respect of any matter bearing
on an order for costs.
the absence of any such application for an order for costs the order of the
Tribunal is that each party bears its own costs.
Dated this 3
day of April 2009
KAM Pitt QC
Chief Chairman
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (11.9 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter