URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCAT/2025/206.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
TKD (Application for Treatment Order) [2025] TASCAT 206 (7 November 2025)
TKD (Application for Treatment Order) [2025] TASCAT 206
Mental Health Stream
TKD (the patient)
Dr NU (the applicant)
Dr JM (substitute
Hearing Date:
2 October 2025
Hearing Location:
Date of Orders:
2 October 2025
Date Reasons Issued:
7 November 2025
O Ridley Presiding Member
M McArthur, Ordinary Member
(Psychiatrist)
M Hale, Ordinary Member
Orders Made:
Treatment order made
Catchwords:
Mental Health Stream – Application for treatment order –
Treatment criteria – Impaired decision-making capacity
satisfied treatment criteria met – treatment order made.
Legislation Cited:
Mental Health Act 2013
Cases Cited:
S v Mental Health Tribunal
[2016] TASSC 34
B v Mental Health
[2020] TASSC 10.
Representation:
Felicia Chan (Advocacy Tasmania)
2025/MHT012917
Publication Restriction:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
(the patient) is a 66-year-old woman living in Southern Tasmania.
26 September 2025, Dr NU, filed an application for a treatment order in respect
of ZI pursuant to s 37 of the
Mental Health Act
2013 (the Act).
application was heard on 2 October 2025 and a treatment order was made. In
attendance at the hearing via video link was TKD, TKD’s
friend DQ and
TKD’s advocate Ms Felicia Chan. Dr JM also attended the hearing via video
link as substitute applicant for Dr
NU who made the application. Dr JM was
joined by his colleague, KT who is a social worker with the service.
the date of the hearing, TKD was being treated as an involuntary patient at an
approved facility under the authority of an interim
treatment order made on 26
September 2025.
Felicia Chan requested a statement of reasons on 16 October 2025 on TKD’s
behalf. These are those requested reasons.
Application for
treatment order
application indicates that TKD has a diagnosis of bipolar affective disorder
which was first diagnosed in her later teens. The
application suggests that TKD
has experiences multiple episodes of relapse of her bipolar affective disorder
with mania and/or depression
with psychotic features throughout her life. The
most recent serious relapses occurred in 2017, 2021, 2023 and 2024. TKD was
to hospital for a two-month admission in August 2024 for treatment of
depressive relapse with catatonia, psychosis, severe hypothermia
malnutrition. The application notes that this episode was life threatening for
TKD and required treatment in intensive care.
NU’s outlines the circumstances leading to the application for the
treatment order as follows:
Following discharge [on 22 October 2024], [TKD] was referred for follow up
with... the community team for management of her [bipolar
affective disorder].
She was ambivalent regarding follow up, believing that she had fully recovered
from her recent relapse. On review
by a... psychiatrist in Jan 2025, she was
found to have made good physical recovery but had only partial insight into the
severity and risks associated with her mental illness. At subsequent
...reviews TKD was repeatedly requesting cessation of her medication...
explanation of risks of relapse of catatonia and mania. Cautious dose reduction
occurred with recommendation for close monitoring
by [the service]. In March
2025, evolving hypomania was evident, with a recommendation made for [medication
changes]. [TKD’s]
adherence to medication and engagement with [the
service] subsequently became increasingly erratic, resulting in worsening of her
mental state. This was reflected in increased financial expenditure, plans to
purchase properties (café, factory unit for
her mother, a boatshed and
property), failure to pay debts, escalating financial losses, repeated
acrimonious interactions with care
staff at the [residential aged care facility]
in which her 92-year old mother lives, and law- breaking (driving an
unregistered car).
Legislative Framework
Tribunal’s authority to make a treatment order is set out in s 39 of the
Act. Section 39(1)(b) stipulates that the requirement
under s 37 must have been
met by the application before the Tribunal can be satisfied that a treatment
order should be made. Section
39(c) requires the Tribunal to be satisfied that
the person the subject of the application meets the treatment criteria provided
under s 40:
40. Treatment criteria
The treatment criteria in relation to a person are –
(a) the person has a mental illness; and
(b) without treatment, the mental illness will, or is likely to, seriously harm
(i) the person's health or safety; or
(ii) the safety of other persons; and
(c) the treatment will be appropriate and effective in terms of the outcomes
referred to in section 6(1); and
(d) the treatment cannot be adequately given except under a treatment order;
(e) the person does not have decision-making capacity.
Additionally,
in deciding whether to exercise our discretion to issue a treatment order under
s 39, we must consider the objectives
outlined in s 12 of the Act and the mental
health service delivery principles set out in Schedule 1 of the
Treatment Criteria
The person has a mental illness pursuant to s 40(a)
illness is defined in the Act as:
4. Meaning of mental illness
(1) For the purposes of this Act –
(a) a person is taken to have a mental illness if he or she experiences,
temporarily, repeatedly or continually –
(i) a serious impairment of thought (which may include delusions); or
(ii) a serious impairment of mood, volition, perception or cognition; and
(b) nothing prevents the serious or permanent physiological, biochemical or
psychological effects of alcohol use or drug-taking from
being regarded as an
indication that a person has a mental illness.
the hearing, it was Dr JM’s evidence that TKD has a longstanding diagnosis
of bipolar affective disorder.
was not disputed by TKD who agreed she had been diagnosed with bipolar affective
disorder, although her description was that
she had ‘minimal sessional
issue with bipolar’.
JM’s evidence was that TKD’s current symptoms included elevated mood
with goal directed activity, pressured speech,
circumstantial and tangential
thinking. With respect to goal directed activity, Dr JM noted TKD’s high
level of motivation
to open a café.
Tribunal accepted the undisputed evidence of Dr JM that TKD has a mental illness
being bipolar affective disorder. The tribunal
finds that TKD has a mental
illness within the meaning of the Act. Accordingly, the Tribunal is satisfied
that this criterion is
Without treatment, the mental
illness will, or is likely to, seriously harm the person’s health or
safety; or the safety of
other persons pursuant to s 40(b)
note that this criterion had been interpreted by the Supreme Court in the
following matters.
S v Mental Health Tribunal
[2016] TASSC 34
, Blow CJ said at [22]:
The thresholds for the satisfaction of the criteria in s 40(b) and (c) are
fairly low. To be satisfied as to (b), a medical practitioner
need not be
satisfied of any risk to other persons, nor of any risk to the safety of the
patient. It is sufficient if the practitioner
is satisfied that, without
treatment, the mental illness is likely to seriously harm the person's health,
which of course includes
the person's mental health.
B v Mental Health Tribunal
[2020] TASSC 10
, Blow CJ provided further
comments on the criterion at [14]:
Section 40(b) is concerned with what is "likely". When that word is used in
legislation, it can have various meanings. It can mean
"more probable than not"
or "more than a 50% chance". It can refer to something that might well happen.
It can refer to a possibility
that is more than a remote or theoretical
possibility. The meaning of the word has been considered in a great many cases.
Boughey v The Queen
(1986) 161 CLR 10
Butcheries Pty Ltd v Australasian Meat Industry Employees' Union
(1979) 42 FLR 331
Cream Holdings Ltd v Banerjee
[2003] EWCA
[2003] 3 WLR 999.
Much depends on the legislative context. It is
significant that the principal purpose or object of s 40(b) is the protection of
ill persons and others from risks of harm. Having regard to the purpose
and context of the provision, I consider that "likely" should
be given a wide
interpretation. It should not be interpreted as meaning "more probable than
not". It must be interpreted as meaning
something more than a remote or
theoretical possibility. I think it should be interpreted as referring to
something that might well
happen. Having regard to the evidence that I have
referred to, I consider that it was open to the Tribunal to conclude that,
treatment, the appellant's mental illness was "likely" to result in her
killing herself.
the hearing, Dr JM expressed that in his opinion without treatment, TKD’s
mental illness would be likely to seriously harm
her health and safety or the
safety of others.
JM indicated that without treatment, there is a risk serious of harm to
TKD’s health. In particular, Dr JM raised his concern
that there is a
significant risk that TKD’s mania if untreated may be followed by a
significant depressive episode which has
previously been the case.
JM also raised concern about the risk of serious harm to others if TKD did not
receive adequate treatment for her mental illness.
In particular, Dr JM had
concerns with respect to the wellbeing of TKD’s mother who is 92 years
old, frail and residing in
aged care. Staff at the aged care facility have
recently been concerned by TKD’s decisions including to take her mother
for leave when she had Influenza A, failing to arrange her mother’s
medication for when she is on leave, not returning her
mother at agreed times or
following leave procedures. Staff also reported that TKD’s communication
towards them recently has
been aggressive and on one occasion the police were
called to encourage TKD to leave.
brother was also reported to have raised concerns with the treating team with
respect to his mother’s safety and
felt that TKD’s behaviour was
influenced by mental illness. Dr JM’s evidence was that whilst TKD clearly
cares for her
mother, due to her mania she has been making impulsive decisions
with respect to her mother’s care. TKD has recently expressed
move her mother out of her current aged care facility. Dr JM’s had
concerns for TKD’s ability to provide sufficient
care for her mother if
she wasn’t residing in an aged care facility. TKD has previously provided
care for her mother at home
for a month but this lead to career’s fatigue
and a depressive episode.
JM also raised concerns about TKD attempting to open a small business (cafe) the
following week with limited capital. He noted
that TKD has identified that she
would be relying upon her disability support pension, equity in her home and the
sale of a car which
requires repairs to finance the business. Dr JM raised
concerns about the potential loss of her home should the business fail. He
detailed that TKD was very keen to open the business next week but does not
appear to have written a business plan or entered into
employment contacts for
staff. The treating team have concerns that TKD may not have fulfilled all of
the necessary legal, financial
and employment obligations required to open a
small business in a week’s time although TKD is confident that it will not
a problem. Dr JM was concerned that TKD’s mania may be causing her to
overestimate her abilities and diminish the potential
risks and barriers to her
plans. Additionally, the treating team have concerns that the high cognitive
demands, overstimulation and
stress of opening a new small business the
following week would be detrimental to her mental health.
gave evidence that he was concerned by the involvement of TKD’s brother as
he felt that he had ulterior motives due to ongoing
disputes about family
finances and inheritance.
accept Dr JM’s evidence that, without treatment TKD’s mental health
would likely deteriorate, and that this poses a
serious risk of harm to herself
physical and mental health. In particular we note the evidence of Dr JM that in
August 2024, TKD
was admitted for treatment of depressive relapse with
catatonia, psychosis, severe hypothermia and malnutrition. The undisputed
before the Tribunal was that this episode was life threatening for TKD
and required treatment in intensive care.
on the evidence presented, we are satisfied that without treatment, TKD’s
mental health would likely decline, increasing
her risk of serious harm to her
physical and mental health.
Tribunal is satisfied this criterion is met.
The treatment will
be appropriate and effective in terms of the outcomes referred to in s 6(1)
pursuant to s 40(c)
criterion we must be satisfied of is that the proposed treatment is appropriate
and effective as referred in s 6(1) of the
6. Meaning of treatment
(1) For the purposes of this Act, treatment is the professional intervention
necessary to –
(a) prevent or remedy mental illness; or
(b) manage and alleviate, where possible, the ill effects of mental illness;
(c) reduce the risks that persons with mental illness may, on that account, pose
to themselves or others; or
(d) monitor or evaluate a person's mental state.
JM gave evidence that TKD is currently being treated with antipsychotic and
mood-stabilising medications. He also sought that benzodiazepine
medication and
antidepressant medication be included in the order. Dr JM felt that there was a
role for benzodiazepine medication
in TKD’s treatment to manage insomnia
and any agitation arising from TKD’s mania. Dr JM sought that
antidepressant medications
also be included given TKD’s history of
depressive episodes as there is a high risk of TKD experiencing a depressive
following a manic episode.
was Dr JM’s evidence that there has been some early improvement in
TKD’s current mental state with a small improvement
in her mood liability
and the speed of her speech and thinking.
gave evidence that he has known TKD for a number of years and whilst he has
concerns about her mental health currently, he considers
that inpatient
treatment at this time would be very restrictive, particularly given her plans
to open a café next week.
gave evidence that she is happy to accept medication. However, TKD would like to
leave the facility so that she can open the café
next week. TKD told the
Tribunal that she but would be happy to return two days per week to receive
treatment. TKD didn’t feel
that inpatient treatment was necessary for her
at this time.
asked by the Tribunal if TKD thought she was unwell when first admitted, TKD
explained that she was a little too busy but didn’t
feel that she was
overly unwell at the time.
Chan told the tribunal that TKD is willing to come back to the facility to
receive treatment but TKD should be afforded dignity
of risk to make the
decision to receive treatment not on an inpatient basis.
Tribunal considered the relevant objectives of the Act, particularly those
outlined in ss 12(d) and 12(e), which emphasise that
treatment should be
provided in the least restrictive setting consistent with clinical need, legal
and judicial constraints, public
safety, and the patient’s health, safety
and welfare. The Act also promotes voluntary treatment over involuntary
Accordingly, the Tribunal considered whether the proposed treatment
was appropriate and the least restrictive option in the circumstances.
was evident that TKD did not agree that inpatient treatment was appropriate at
this time. There was evidence that she considered
inpatient treatment
unnecessary and was eager to be in the community to facilitate the opening of a
café the following week.
Tribunal was not satisfied that TKD could receive appropriate treatment as a
voluntary patient in the community at this time.
The Tribunal agreed that
further inpatient treatment was the most appropriate and least restrictive
option available to ensure TKD
received adequate treatment for her mental
Tribunal acknowledges the right of TKD to receive treatment under the Act in
accordance with the mental health service delivery
principles set out in Sch 1,
including at 1(j) ‘to promote the ability of persons with mental illness
to make their own decisions
including decisions about the person's assessment,
treatment and recovery that involve a degree of risk’. However, the
notes that the risk referred to is qualified by the words ‘a
degree of’. The evidence before the Tribunal was that the
risk involved
was considerable and more than ‘a degree of risk’. The risk had been
described as life threatening. The
evidence of Dr JM was that when TKD did not
previously receive adequate treatment she was hospitalised and spent a period of
in intensive care.
accepted the expert evidence of Dr JM that the treatment proposed in the
application is appropriate and effective for TKD as defined
in the Act. We are
satisfied that this criterion is met.
The treatment cannot be adequately given except under a treatment order
pursuant to s 40(d)
JM highlighted TKD’s history of reducing or ceasing medication against
medical advice. Dr JM considered it likely that without
a treatment order, TKD
would reduce or cease medication as she doesn’t currently feel that she is
experiencing mania. Further
TKD feels that her engagement with the mental health
service is as a consequence of her brother’s interference who she has
acrimonious relationship with.
was suggested by TKD’s that she could receive treatment as an outpatient
but return two days per week to the facility for
treatment as required. This
proposition was put to Dr JM who told the Tribunal that he would have concerns
able to receive adequate care if the manner suggested.
highlighted that TKD is currently admitted as a patient which means she people
to encourage her to take her medication, despite
this TKD did not remember to
take her medication that morning. Dr JM was concerned that if TKD was only
having contact with mental
health services two days per week, that
wouldn’t be sufficient enough to have adequate treatment and the risk for
deterioration
of her mental state would be increased.
and her advocate proposed that she be treated voluntarily in the community as an
outpatient and return to the facility two days
per week for treatment
consideration of the evidence, the Tribunal was not satisfied that TKD could
receive adequate treatment in the manner proposed
by TKD and her advocate.
TKD’s mental state was not sufficiently stable to allow for
community-based treatment. It was the
Tribunal’s view that TKD required
more intensive and assertive care than could be delivered on an outpatient
Tribunal was satisfied on the evidence that TKD would not be likely to accept
inpatient treatment if not under a treatment order.
We were satisfied that at
that time TKD required a further period of inpatient admission. Accordingly, we
are satisfied that treatment
cannot be adequately given except under a treatment
The person does not have decision-making capacity pursuant
Act defines “decision-making capacity” in s 7:
7. Capacity of adults and children to make decisions about their own
assessment and treatment
(1) For the purposes of this Act, an adult is taken to have the capacity to make
a decision about his or her own assessment or treatment
(decision-making
capacity) unless a person or body considering that capacity under this Act is
satisfied that –
(a) he or she is unable to make the decision because of an impairment of, or
disturbance in, the functioning of the mind or brain;
(b) he or she is unable to –
(i) understand information relevant to the decision; or
(ii) retain information relevant to the decision; or
(iii) use or weigh information relevant to the decision; or
(iv) communicate the decision (whether by speech, gesture or other means).
JM gave evidence at the hearing that TKD did not have decision-making capacity
due to a serious impairment of mood as a result
of her mania. He explained that
TKD’s ability to appreciate the nature and impact of her longstanding
illness is impaired by
symptoms of mania. Specifically, her decision-making was
impacted by circumstantiality, tangentiality, loosened associations and
impulsivity which limits her ability to reflect and correct errors and
appreciate potential risks. Her elevated mood impacts her
decision-making due to
increased sense of grandiosity and overestimated ability without appreciation of
risks or ability to incorporate
external feedback.
experiencing multiple serious episodes, TKD does not understand the long-term
benefits of medication, the importance of adherence
in preventing relapse or the
potential risks of not receiving adequate treatment.
JM expressed concern that the severity of TKD’s previous episodes has
affected her ability to recall the associated risks
and circumstances involved
in her previous episodes of illness. She also demonstrates rapid thought and
speech with inattentiveness
which diminishes her ability to take on new
information. Dr JM outlined that TKD has difficulty retaining the information
to the decision due to having lots of ideas which impairs her ability
to appreciate external information and keep that in mind when
making decisions.
on the evidence presented, we were satisfied that the presumption of capacity
had been rebutted by the applicant. The Tribunal
found that TKD is unable to
make decisions about treatment due to a disturbance in the functioning of her
mind. The Tribunal was
satisfied that, due to TKD’s mental illness, she is
unable to understand or recognise the nature of her current symptoms or
risks associated with not receiving appropriate treatment, including inpatient
TKD did accept that she has a mental illness, she did not appear to understand
the severity of her condition or the need
for assertive treatment. It is noted
that she described herself as experiencing ‘minimal sessional issue with
Given that TKD was previously hospitalised for two months and
spent some of that time in intensive care, this description does not
accurately reflect TKD’s circumstances.
TKD did not appear to appreciate that she was currently experiencing mania but
rather had been admitted due to her brother’s
interference. As noted
above, TKD did not think she was unwell when she was admitted, just busy. Due
her lack of appreciation of
her current mental state, it is difficult for TKD to
adequately assess her current health needs including if there is a need for
inpatient admission. Although TKD expressed a willingness to receive treatment
in the community, the Tribunal was not satisfied that
the treatment she was
willing to accept would be adequate.
were satisfied on the evidence that due to the impairment in TKD’s mood
that she was unable to weigh up the pros and cons
of treatment and reach a
Accordingly,
we are satisfied that TKD does not have decision-making capacity and this
criterion is satisfied.
a result of the hearing, the Tribunal was satisfied that all of the treatment
criteria set out in s 40 were met and determined
that a Treatment Order should
treatment order was made for a period of six months and is due to expire on 1
April 2026, unless discharged by an Approved Medical
Practitioner sooner or an
application to renew the treatment order is made (in which case the application
to renew will be listed
and heard by a three-member panel of the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.85 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter