URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMC/2024/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Care Park Pty Ltd v Registrar of Motor Vehicles [2024] TASMC 14 (5 November 2024)
[2024] TASMC 14
MAGISTRATES COURT OF TASMANIA
Care Park Pty Ltd v Registrar of Motor Vehicles
[2024] TASMC
Care Park Pty Ltd
of Motor Vehicles
M/2023/1896
5 November 2024
DELIVERED AT:
Written submissions filed
DECISION OF:
Magistrate M
CATCHWORDS:
Supreme Court Rules (2000)– disclosure and discovery – discovery
to identify a defendant
Supreme Court Rules
Vehicle and
Traffic Act
Vehicle and Traffic (Driver Licencing
and Vehicle Registration) Regulations
2021, Rule 159 (1)
Hooper & Ors v Kirella Pty Ltd
[1999] FCA 1584
(1999) 167 ALR 358
Wilson Parking Australia (1992) Pty Ltd v Roads Corporation
Roads and Traffic Authority of New South Wales v Care Park Pty Ltd
[2012] NSWCA 35
Roads and Traffic Authority of New South Wales v Australian
National Car Parks Pty Ltd
[2007] NSWCA
REPRESENTATION:
Somann-Crawford
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Number of Paragraphs:
Serial No. 14/2024
File No. M/2023/1896
CARE PARK PTY LTD v REGISTRAR OF MOTOR VEHICLES
REASONS FOR DECISION Dunvjak M
5 November 2024
applicant, by an originating application filed on 17 August 2023, applies for an
order pursuant to
(2)(b) of the
Supreme Court Rules
the respondent, the registrar of motor vehicles, make discovery of names and
addresses of the registered operators of each of
the motor vehicles, as at the
specified dates (of those operators) identified in an attachment to the
application. The attachment
to the application identifies approximately 2800
registered motor vehicles for whom the names and addresses of the owners are
to be disclosed.
registrar of motor vehicles is required to keep a register of motor vehicles
which identifies the registered
of those vehicles.
registrar forwarded correspondence to the Court advising that he did not seek to
be heard in relation to the application and would
abide by the decision of the
Court. I am satisfied the application and all affidavits relied upon by the
applicant were served on
the registrar. The registrar, nor any representative
appearing on his behalf appeared at the hearing of the application. No
contradictor,
therefore appeared before the Court with respect to the
application.
support of the application the applicant caused to be filed, a number of
affidavits upon which it sought to
They include:
The affidavit of
Catherine Foster affirmed on 8 August 2023
The affidavit of
Catherine Foster affirmed on 2 November 2023.
have also had regard to the legal submission filed by the applicant’s
counsel on 7 November 2023.
Catherine Foster is the South Australian and Tasmanian general manager of the
applicant. The affidavit material discloses that
the applicant owns and operates
60 car parks throughout Tasmania. The evidence is that at each location of the
car parks in Tasmania
the applicant uses one of three alternative sets of
contractual terms and conditions relating to the use of the car park. Those
are displayed at the entrance to all the applicant operated car parks and
additionally displayed within selected car parks but not
Foster's affidavit of 2 November 2023 deposes that the car park terms were
visible and on display on all prospective sites before
the earliest breach by
the operators of those vehicles identified in the annexure to the affidavit
(being identical to the annexure
to the application).
terms and conditions can vary but in general notify the user of the time frame
within which fees apply, the maximum parking time
and the cost of parking. They
also set out the following general terms and conditions inter alia, relating to
use of the car park.
A user of the car park must:
“Obtain a valid ticket or pass and display it on the dashboard of
the vehicle while parked so that it is clearly visible to
a person standing next
to and facing the front passenger side of the windscreen of your vehicle. A
ticket or pass is valid if it
is issued by or on behalf of Care Park and if the
date and time of expiry of the ticket or pass is legible on it and it is not
mutilated, altered or obscured in any way.
Park only in marked bays or as directed by Care Park and comply with
parking signs of maximum parking time limits...
If you fail to comply with item 1 of these terms and conditions or if your
vehicle remains in the car park after the ticket will pass
displayed on the
dashboard of your vehicle expires, you agree to pay liquidated damages of $88.00
to Care Park...”
is the evidence of the applicant that the vehicles identified in the attachment
to the application and the affidavit of Ms Foster
of 2 November 2023 were
parked, on the date and at the time identified, in a car park operated by the
applicant, in breach of the
applicant's terms and conditions.
applicant cannot identify the driver of each of those vehicles at the relevant
time the breaches are alleged to have arisen. The
applicant concedes that the
disclosure sought would not necessarily identify those drivers but says that the
disclosure sought, would
assist it to ascertain the identity of those
applicant does not know the names and addresses of the registered owners of
those vehicles. The registered owners of those vehicles
can only be identified
by obtaining an order from this Court for such disclosure to be made of the
registered owner/s of those vehicles
as recorded by the registrar of motor
vehicles, in the register kept pursuant to
Vehicle and
Traffic Act
power of the court to make an order for preliminary discovery arises pursuant to
Supreme Court Rules
. There is no provision for
preliminary discovery in the
Magistrates Court Rules
1998. Where the
Magistrates Court Rules
are silent, as to a matter of court procedure,
Supreme Court Rules
Supreme Court Rules
403C. Discovery
to identify a defendant:
(1) The Court or a judge may make an order under subrule (2) if –
(a) the applicant is unable to ascertain through reasonable inquiries the
description of a person sufficiently for the purpose of
commencing a proceeding
in the Court against that person (in this rule called "the person concerned");
(b) it appears that another person –
(i) has or is likely to have knowledge of facts tending to assist in
ascertaining such a description; or
(ii) has or is likely to have, or has had or is likely to have had, in that
other person's possession any document or thing tending
to assist in
ascertaining such a description.
(2) The Court or a judge may order the person referred to in subrule (1)(b),
or if that person is a corporation, the corporation by
an appropriate officer,
(a) attend before the Court, a judge or an officer to be orally examined in
relation to the description of the person concerned; or
(b) make discovery to the applicant of all documents which are or have been
in his, her or its possession and which relate to the
description of the person
(3) If the Court or a judge makes an order under subrule (2)(a), the Court or
judge may order the person against whom, or the corporation
against which, the
order is made to produce on the examination any document or thing in his, her or
its possession which relates
to the description of the person concerned.
rule identifies threshold requirements to be met before any discretion can be
exercised by the Court. Reasonable enquires must
be made to ascertain the
description of the person sufficiently for the purpose of commencing legal
proceedings. It must be established
that the person against whom the order is
sought, has or is likely to have knowledge of facts, or has or has had or likely
or have had, in their possession documents or thing that may tend to
assist to identify the person concerned.
Hooper & Ors v Kirella Pty Ltd
considered order 15A r
Federal Court Rules
as they then
were, being similar but not identical in its terms to
Supreme Court Rules
. The Court set out the steps required to be satisfied
of for preliminary discovery as follows:
Order 15A, r 3
[31] An applicant for relief under O 15A, r 3 must show that,
after having made reasonable inquiries, he or she is unable to ascertain
description of a person sufficiently for the purpose of commencing a proceeding
against that person. Order 15A, r 3 plainly contemplates
that the applicant
needs to ascertain the identity of the relevant person in order to institute a
proceeding in the court against
him or her.
[32] Secondly, the applicant must show that “some
person” has or is likely to have knowledge of facts, or the possession
documents, tending to assist in identifying the prospective respondent. The rule
is therefore available even if relief is sought
against a person who is in no
way implicated in the wrongful conduct of which the applicant complains. In
other words, relief is
available against a “mere witness” or
bystander: Stewart v Miller
[1979] 2 NSWLR
at 135 (Sheppard J) (a decision on the New South Wales rule).
To this extent, the rule differs from the equitable bill of discovery.
[33] Thirdly, the applicant is not required to demonstrate the
existence of a prima facie case against the prospective respondent:
McDonald (at 41, 44); Stewart v Miller (at 139-40). Nonetheless,
the power conferred by O 15A, r 3 is not to be used in favour
of a person who
intends to commence “merely speculative proceedings”: Stewart v
Miller (at 140); Levis v McDonald (at
44). A material factor in
the exercise of the court's discretion is the prospect of the applicant
succeeding in proceedings against
the person he or she wishes to sue: Exley
v Wyong Shire Council (10 December 1976, Master Allen, unreported)
noted Ritchie's Supreme
Court Procedure (NSW) para [13,004].
[34] Fourthly, the High Court has emphasised that an applicant
under a rule in the form of O 15A, r 3 must show that the order sought
necessary in the interests of justice. That is, the applicant must show
“the making of the order is necessary to provide him with an
effective remedy in respect of the actionable wrong of which he
John Fairfax & Sons Ltd v Cojuangco
[1988] HCA 54
(1988) 165 CLR
at 357. These observations emphasise the link between identity
discovery and the applicant's complaint that he or she has suffered
actionable wrong.
applicant submitted that in
Hooper & Ors v Kirella,
the Court wrongly
considered, in ascertaining the purpose of commencing proceedings, whether
Kirella’s proceedings were merely
‘speculative proceedings’,
rather than whether Kirella had the requisite ‘desire’ to commence
proceedings.
In support of its application, the applicant relied upon a number
of authorities which, it was submitted, properly identify threshold
considerations for the exercise of the discretion under
decision of
Wilson Parking Australia (1992) Pty
Ltd v Roads Corporation
related to an appeal from a decision of a magistrate refusing a similar
application by the plaintiff for preliminary discovery.
Rule 32.03 of the Victorian
Civil Procedure
(as it then was) is in similar terms to rule 403C. It
Discovery to identify a defendant
(1) The Court may make an order under paragraph (2) if an applicant, having
made reasonable inquiries, is unable to ascertain the
description of a person
sufficiently for the purpose of commencing a proceeding in the Court against
that person (in this Rule called
person concerned
) and it appears
that some person has or is likely to have knowledge of facts, or has or is
likely to have or has had or is likely
to have had in the person’s
possession any document or thing, tending to assist in such
ascertainment.
(2) The Court may order that the person, and in the case of a corporation,
the corporation by an appropriate officer, must—
(a) attend before the Court to be orally examined in relation to the
description of the person concerned;
(b) make discovery to the applicant of all documents which are or have been
in the possession of the person or the corporation relating
to the description
of the person concerned.
(3) If the Court makes an order under paragraph (2)(a), it may order that
the person or corporation against whom or which the order
is made must produce
to the Court on the examination any document or thing in the person’s or
the corporation’s possession
relating to the description of the person
was held by Richards J at [11] :
An applicant for preliminary
discovery need not establish that the information sought will necessarily reveal
the identity of the
prospective defendant. As r32.03 (1) makes clear, it is
enough that the information tends to assist in ascertaining the
defendant’s
identity. The information sought ‘need not be the last
piece in the jigsaw puzzle'."
[footnotes omitted]
at [12] and [13] her Honour said:
This is significant in a case
where the applicant's claims against the driver of the vehicle, who may not be
the same person as the
vehicles registered operator. Clearly, the name and
to assist’ in the identification of the driver of the
vehicle at any given time, even if the registered operator and the driver
different people.
An order for preliminary discovery will not be made where the proceeding
that the applicant proposes to bring against the person concerned
speculative, or based on suspicion or conjecture. While it is not necessary for
the applicant to demonstrate a prima facie case,
it is not enough merely to
assert that there is a cause of action, or the mere possibility of a cause of
action, against the person
concerned."
[footnotes omitted]
J upheld the decision of the magistrate refusing the application for preliminary
discovery but did so on the basis that the
applicant in that matter asserted
that it sought to identify the registered owners of the vehicle so it could
commence proceedings
against those persons for trespass. Her Honour at [24] said
“... Had Wilson parking instead sought preliminary discovery of
information that would assist it to identify the drivers of
the vehicles, the
outcome may have been different."
and Traffic Authority of NSW v Australian National Car Parks Pty
was a Court of Appeal
decision with respect to a dismissal of an application to set aside orders for
preliminary discovery made in
the General Division of the Local Court under the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rule
s 5.2. Again,
proprietors of a car park were seeking preliminary discovery of the details of
the registered owners of vehicles that
parked in its car parks contrary to the
conditions of entry.
5.2 was similar in its terms to rule 403C, save that a definitional paragraph
appears at rule 5.1 which I set out at [26] below.
Full Court in that case identified the general principles relating to the
relevant rule at [10] to [18]. I will summarise the
relevant principles
identified.
was identified that the applicant must demonstrate that it is unable to
sufficiently ascertain the identity or whereabouts of the
intended defendant
despite having made reasonable inquiries. What constitutes reasonable is a
question of fact in all the circumstances.
The cost, delay and uncertainty of
alternative means of obtaining the information is relevant to the rule’s
"reasonable enquiries"
component. The applicant must also show that the
respondent has possession of documents or information that would tend to assist
in ascertaining the identity or whereabouts of the prospective defendant. The
applicant does not have to establish in advance that
the desired information,
document or thing will necessarily reveal the identity or whereabouts the
prospective defendant.
Full Court held that demonstration of an intention to sue the person whose
identity is sought, is pertinent to a favourable exercise
of the discretion to
order preliminary discovery, but the court said ‘
This does not mean
that such intention must be immutably fixed or qualified.’
Roads and Traffic Authority of New South Wales v
Care Park Pty Ltd
Care Park Decision
) the Court of Appeal considered the proper
construction to be given to
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
. As noted, that rule differs from rule 403C in that
definition for the words 'identity or whereabouts':
"identity or
whereabouts"
includes the name and (as applicable) the place of
residence, registered office, place of business or other whereabouts, and the
and sex, of the person against whom the
to bring proceedings, and also whether that person is an individual or a
corporation.
JA held, referring to the decision of Adams J in
Roads and Traffic Authority of New South Wales v
Australian National Car Parks Pty
, held that the
requirement of a "purpose to commence proceedings" was conditional. He referred
to the possible resolution, negotiated
or otherwise and that even with the
additional information, a potential defendant may not be able to be identified,
that the potential
defendant is impecunious or
He held that
means no more than the applicant has an intention
or desire to commence proceedings if, after inquiry, that is still perceived as
the proper course to take.
Honour ultimately held that the Court should not elevate the requirement that
preliminary discovery is sought for the purpose/intention
of instituting
proceedings into a jurisdictional requirement. Rather, as the rule speaks to the
purpose of the applicant, the Courts
must look at the substantial and dominant
purpose, accepting that the purpose can be conditional.
J, with whom the majority agreed, took a different view, with respect to the
construction of the words 'for the purpose of
commencing a proceeding'. His
Honour said at [97] and [98]:
"[98] The "purpose of commencing
proceedings" is thus the yardstick against which sufficiency of information in
the applicant's possession
is measured, not something that the applicant must
have. It is the objective sufficiency of the possessed information to fulfil the
"purpose" of commencing proceedings to which the court must have regard, not the
question whether the applicant has a purpose of
commencing proceedings. That
objective sufficiency will be determined by the requirements of the rules of
court prescribing the particulars
of a defendant to be given in (and in
connection with) an originating process of the kind appropriate to the
particular proceedings.
[99] The mental state that the applicant must be found to have regarding
the bringing of proceedings is indicated by the words "the
person against whom
the applicant desires to bring proceedings". The task of the court is to decide
whether the applicant has established
that he or she has such a
J held that the mental state that the applicant must be found to have regarding
the bringing of proceedings is indicated by
the words "the person against whom
the applicant desires to bring proceedings" set out in the definition. The task
of the Court is
to decide whether the applicant has established that he or she
has such a "desire"."
[105] his Honour said:
"One of the findings on which the power to
make an order depends is a finding that the applicant "desires" to commence
proceedings
against a particular person whose particulars are insufficiently
known to fulfil the purpose of commencing proceedings against him
or her, with
sufficiency for that purpose being determined in the way already
mentioned."
Honour found that the state of mind of the applicant as to the future
commencement of proceedings plays a part in the decision
as to the existence of
the court's power to exercise the discretion, although it may subsequently
become relevant again to the question
As such he found it to
be a threshold consideration.
Honour found that the 'desire' must be a bona fides desire and not merely a
capricious desire unsupported by any ground for believing
that the object of
desire can be realised. It must be a genuinely held and objectively based
desire. A simple assertion is not
rule 403C does not by definition or otherwise import the word "desire" but
rather provides that the information sought is for
the ‘purpose of
commencing a proceeding’, the observations of Justice Barrett at [113] are
of relevance.
"The difference between intention (or purpose) and
desire will be of little consequence in many cases, since a search for what
“desires" will often bring to light the things that they intend"
and demonstrate what their "purpose" is; and likewise telling
that a person
intends or in respect of which they have a purpose is, of its nature, something
that they desire, since, in the ordinary
course, everyone has a desire to
effectuate their intentions and purposes. As a matter of language however, a
desire may be characterised
as something less fixed and certain then an
intention or a purpose. A person with an intention or purpose has progressed to
of determination stronger than that of the person with only a
this Court were to adopt the interpretation accepted by the majority in the Care
Park Decision, the words "for the purpose of commencing
a proceeding" in rule
403C, have no work to do except to describe the required sufficiency of the
information needed to commence
the proceeding. I do not accept that that is a
proper interpretation of rule 403C. While it may have that meaning, it also
the applicant as one who must have an intention to commence
proceedings against the person concerned. That is the purpose or intention
the applicant is required to hold. I prefer the reasoning of Basten JA in the
Care Park Decision. His Honour said at [8]:
"While I accept that
it is appropriate to resolve the ambiguity in
(1) (a) by reference to
the language in the definition in
, I would have reached the same
conclusion without reference to
The critical factor is the context of
rule 5: that context includes the history, which is briefly set out by Hunt J in
Re application
of Cojuangco
(1986) 4 NSWLR 513
at 521. The rule is found in the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
, the purpose of which, as is sufficiently revealed
by the name, is to regulate civil proceedings in the various courts in this
to which the rules apply. The purpose of part five is self-evidently to
facilitate the enforcement of civil causes of action by proceedings
where a person who might otherwise wish to bring proceedings is prevented from
doing so by a lack of information as to
the identity or whereabouts of the
prospective defendant. The rules have no broader or separate purpose.
the purpose of the
Supreme Court Rules
is to regulate civil
proceedings and the rules relating to preliminary discovery facilitate
commencement of a civil proceeding against
a prospective defendant who cannot be
adequately identified. For an applicant to seek an order for preliminary
discovery he or she
must establish as a precondition to the exercise of the
Court's discretion (in addition to the threshold conditions already referred
to), that the order is sought for the purpose of commencing legal proceedings
against the "person concerned".
"purpose" must be a bona fides purpose and not merely a capricious purpose
unsupported by any ground for believing that the object
or purpose can be
realised. It must be a genuinely held and objectively based purpose. A simple
assertion of the purpose is not enough.
The purpose, however, can be a
conditional one.
Have the threshold requirements been met?
accept that the applicant has no other means by which it can identify the
registered proprietors of the motor vehicles. I am satisfied
that while the
information sought will not necessarily identify the driver of the motor
vehicles, it may tend to assist in their
identification as the registered owner
may well be able to and agree to identify the driver at the relevant time. I am
that the information sought is held by the registrar of motor
vehicles, being the respondent to the application.
remaining precondition to the exercise of my discretion is whether the
information is sought for the purpose of commencing proceedings
against the
drivers of the identified motor vehicles.
affidavits relied upon by the applicant identify that the applicant seeks
disclosure for the purpose of ‘
asserting its contractual
. At paragraph 19 of the affidavit of Catherine Foster affirmed
on 8 August 2023, she deposes that:
"Care Park intends to assert
its contractual rights against those persons responsible for the use of the
annexure 2 vehicles, including
to claim amounts it asserts was agreed as payable
to it under the care park terms and conditions, by the respondent
persons..."
Foster further deposes that all vehicles identified in the annexure to the
affidavit were parked at the applicant’s car parks
in breach of the car
parks terms and conditions, that is, they were “left parked without a
valid unexpired ticket displayed
on the dashboard...” or otherwise in
breach of the applicant’s terms and conditions.
deposes that the applicant has not recovered damages with respect to the alleged
breaches nor has the applicant varied, waived
or excused compliance with any of
its car park terms and conditions.
is conceded by the applicant that a prospective defendant may not necessarily be
identified by the granting of the application,
but it asserts that if the
applicant is provided with the names of the registered owners of the vehicles,
it will write to the registered
owner, inform them of the alleged breach and if
they deny they were the registered owner, invite them to “depose within a
declaration that they were not the driver of the vehicle at the
relevant time and provide details of who the driver was if
am satisfied on material before the Court, that it is established by the
applicant that there is an intention by it to commence
proceedings against the
drivers of vehicles it has identified, to recover its loss arising from the
allegations of contractual breach.
I accept that there is a bona fides purpose,
but likely to be a conditional one, to be determined after its proposed
enquiries of
the registered owner of each of the vehicles is made.
threshold requirements to be established before the discretion afforded by
can be exercised have been met and I find that orders allowing preliminary
discovery are appropriate. I make the following orders:
(2) (b) of the
Supreme Court Rules
, the respondent
within 90 days of being served with a sealed order of the Court in this
proceeding, shall make discovery of the names
and addresses, as recorded in the
register kept by the respondent pursuant to
Vehicle and Traffic Act
registered proprietor/s or operator/s of each of the motor vehicles referred to
by the registration number as at the specified
dates both of which are
particularised in the annexure to the application of 17 August 2023.
the applicant pays the respondent its reasonable costs of compliance with order
Vehicle and Traffic Act
(a) (ii) and
Vehicle and Traffic (Driver Licencing and Vehicle Registration)
Regulations
Including affidavits
deposing as to service of the application and affidavits on the
[1999] FCA 1584
(1999) 167 ALR
[2007] NSWCA 114
given the words "may" and
"tends to assist" in rule 5.2 (1) (b), the similar wording in rule 403C "tending
[2012] NSWCA
[2007] NSWCA
affidavit of Catherine Foster affirmed 2 November 2023 at
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (203 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter