URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASGAB/2021/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CMD (Restrictive Intervention) [2021] TASGAB 20 (23 April 2021)
CMD (Restrictive Intervention)
[2021] TASGAB 20
HEARING DATE(S):
23 April 2021
DATE OF ORDERS:
23 April 2021
DATE OF STATEMENT OF REASONS:
30 April 2021
Ms R Holder, (President)
Mr M Trezise, (Member)
Dr C Handbury, (Member)
APPLICATION:
Application for Approval of a Restrictive Intervention
CATCHWORDS:
Environmental restrictive interventions – behaviours of concern
– approval sought for modification of mobile telephone
sought for consent to ongoing monitoring of mobile telephone – capacity to
make decisions about the restrictive
intervention sought – capacity to
make reasonable judgments about personal matters – need for a guardian
decision making with NDIS planning and service delivery
LEGISLATION CITED:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Disability Services Act 2011
Division 3,
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION:
This decision has been anonymised for the purposes of publication.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
disability service provider] made an Application to the Guardianship and
Administration Board (‘the Board’) for Approval
of a Restrictive
Intervention concerning Mr CMD (‘the Application’). The restrictive
intervention sought is an environmental
restrictive intervention.
disability service provider] (‘the Applicant’), is a disability
service provider within the meaning of the
Disability Services Act 2011
CMD is a 25-year-old man who has a funded NDIS plan and is supported by [the
disability service provider] for whole of life services.
CMD exhibits behaviours of concern that involve him accessing child pornography
websites and downloading 17 known images.
Application makes a request for approval of environmental restrictive
interventions.
proceeding to hearing the Board dismissed the Application.
Applicant has requested a Statement of Reasons, pursuant to section 74 of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
The Board heard and determined the Application on 23 April 2021.
In attendance at the hearing were:
BXP Manager of Positive Behaviour Support at [the disability service provider]
(Applicant);
Charley Hodgson, Senior Practitioner under the DSA; and
Valerie Hannon from the Office of the Public Guardian.
CMD was not present at hearing. He had been provided with notice of the hearing
and had been contacted by telephone by the Board
Registry. The Applicant gave
evidence he had reminded Mr CMD of the hearing a couple of days prior to the
hearing but Mr CMD indicated
he was not attending.
Board had before it the following documents:
Application
for Approval of a Restrictive Intervention filed by the Applicant dated 24 March
Professional Report (‘HCPR’) of Dr Mark Rathbone dated 22 March
from the Senior Practitioner, Mr Charley Hodgson, dated 25 March
and Care Plan dated 27 February 2015 from Children & Youth Services;
Assessment Advisory Team Closure Report dated 26 August 2013;
disability service provider] – Protocol for agreed usage of [the
disability service provider] internet, dated 13 May 2020;
from Australian Federal Police to [the disability service provider] dated 2
March 2021;
from D/Sgt Aaron Hardcastle to Mr BXP, [the disability service provider] dated
14 October 2020;
from Tasmania Police to [the disability service provider] dated 22 April
Administration
Order dated 26 October 2018; and
Trustee Report dated 3 November 2020.
Legislation
6 Division 3 of the DSA provides for regulation of restrictive interventions by
4 of the DSA defines a restrictive intervention as meaning:
... any action that is taken to restrict the rights or
freedom of movement of a person with disability for the primary purpose of
behavioural control of the person but does not include such an action that is
(a) taken for therapeutic purposes; or
(b) taken to enable the safe transportation of the person; or
(c) authorised under any enactment relating to the provision of mental health
services or to guardianship.
is defined in section 4 of the DSA as meaning:
relation to a person, means a disability of the person which –
(a) is attributable to a cognitive,
intellectual, psychiatric, sensory or physical impairment or a combination of
those impairments;
(b) is permanent or likely to be permanent;
(c) results in –
(i) a substantial restriction in the
capacity of the person to carry on a profession, business or occupation, or to
participate in
social or cultural life; and
(ii) the need for continuing
significant support services; and
(d) may or may not be of a chronic episodic
DSA is silent as to the issue of whether a person with a disability must also
have decision making incapacity and does not contain
a definition of capacity or
incapacity. The general principles set out in section 5 of the DSA provide some
relevant guidance:
(h) people with disability have the same right as
other members of Australian society to be able to determine their own best
including the right to exercise choice and control, and to engage as
equal partners in decisions that will affect their lives, to
the full extent of
their capacity;
(i) people with disability should be supported
in all their dealings and communications so that their capacity to exercise
and control is maximised in a way that is appropriate to their
circumstances and cultural needs;
(j) people with disability should have their
(2) If this Act requires or permits an act or thing to be done by or in
relation to a person with disability by another person, the
act or thing is to
be done, so far as practicable, in accordance with both the general principles
set out above and the following
principles:
(a) people with disability should be involved in
decision-making processes that affect them, and where possible make decisions
themselves;
At common law the presumption exists that adults have the capacity to make
decisions that affect their own lives unless that presumption
is rebutted.
34 of the DSA defines two types of restrictive
interventions:
environmental restriction
, in relation
to a person with disability, means a restrictive intervention in relation to the
person that consists of the modification
of an object, or the environment of the
person, so as to enable the behavioural control of the person but does not
include a personal
restriction;
personal restriction
, in relation to a
person with disability, means a restrictive intervention in relation to the
person that consists wholly or partially
(a) physical contact with the person
so as to enable the behavioural control of the person; or
(b) the taking of an action that
restricts the liberty of movement of the person.
power of the Board to approve a restrictive intervention is set out in section
42 of the DSA:
(1) The Guardianship and
Administration Board, after receiving under
an application from a disability services provider or funded private person, may
grant, or refuse to grant, approval for the provider
or person to carry out in
relation to a person with disability specified in the approval –
(a) a type of restrictive intervention,
specified in the notice, that is a personal restriction; or
(b) a type of restrictive intervention,
specified in the notice, that is an environmental restriction.
Guardianship and Administration Board may hold a hearing in respect of an
application under
for an approval.
(6) For the purposes of
subsection (5)
, a hearing is to be held under
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1995
as if a reference in that
(a) to an application were a reference to an
application for an approval under this section; and
(b) to medical or dental treatment were a
reference to a restrictive intervention; and
(c) to a registered practitioner were a
reference to the disability services provider, or funded private person, who
made the application.
(7) At the hearing of an application for the
purposes of
subsection (5)
, the Guardianship and Administration Board, in addition to granting or refusing
to grant an approval under
subsection (1)
(a) require a party to the hearing to provide
to the Board any information required to be contained in an application under
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1995
(b) make an order under
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1995
appointing a full or limited guardian in
relation to the person with disability to whom the approval relates, as if the
application
for an approval under this section were an application under
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
of the DSA sets out what the Board must be satisfied of before it can proceed
to approve a restrictive
intervention.
(1) An approval
for the carrying out of a type of restrictive intervention in relation to a
person with disability may only be granted
by the Guardianship and
Administration Board under
if the Board is satisfied that –
(a) the type of restrictive intervention will
be carried out only for the primary purpose of ensuring the safety, health or
of the person or other persons; and
(b) the restrictive intervention is the type of
restrictive intervention that is the least restrictive of the person's freedom
decision and action as is practicable in the circumstances.
(2) In determining whether to grant an
approval under
for the carrying out by a disability services provider or funded private person
of a type of restrictive intervention in relation
to a person with disability,
the Guardianship and Administration Board must have regard to –
(a) the best interests of the person with
disability; and
(b) the consequences to the person with
disability if restrictive intervention of that type is carried out in relation
to the person;
(c) the consequences to the person with
disability, or other persons, if restrictive intervention of that type is not
carried out
in relation to the person with disability; and
(d) any alternative method reasonably suitable and able to be used in
relation to the person with disability to control the behaviour
for which the
(e) the nature and degree of any significant
risks to the person with disability if the restrictive intervention is carried
(f) whether, and the extent to which, carrying
out the restrictive intervention will promote or reduce the safety, health and
of the person with disability.
GAA, the Board may make an order appointing a full or
limited guardian in respect of Mr CMD if it is satisfied that:
a person with a disability; and
unable by reason of that disability to make reasonable judgements in respect of
all or any matters relating to his personal
circumstances; and
is need of a guardian.
means any restriction or lack (resulting from any absence, loss or
abnormality of mental, psychological, physiological or anatomical
structure or
function) of ability to perform an activity in a normal
determining whether or not an order should be made,
requires that:
Board consider whether Mr CMD’s needs could be met by other means less
restrictive of his freedom of decision and action;
Board be satisfied that an order would be in Mr CMD’s best interests; and
Board not appoint a full guardian unless it is satisfied that an order for
limited guardianship would be insufficient to meet
Mr CMD’s needs, and if
a limited order is made, the order must be the least restrictive to Mr
CMD’s freedom of decision
and action as possible in the circumstances.
Board must also have regard to the general principles in
which adds requirements that:
best interests of Mr CMD be promoted; and
wishes of Mr CMD are, if possible, carried into effect.
What restrictive practices are sought?
Applicant has made application to the Board for the approval to restrict Mr
CMD’s access to certain applications on his
mobile telephone and secondly,
to have software installed on his mobile phone to enable a nominated person to
monitor key strokes
(keywords being used) on his mobile phone.
the statement from the Senior Practitioner, Mr Hodgson states:
disability service provider] restricting specific websites to prevent [Mr CMD]
viewing child exploitation material, or restricting
access to his phone
completely would be actions that fall under the definition of environmental
restrictions as [the disability service
provider] is trying to control his
behaviour of concern. This definition, however, does not cover the action of
ongoing monitoring
of [Mr CMD]’s phone usage. Given this proposed action
is a serious infringement on [Mr CMD]’s rights to which he would
or unwilling to provide consent, the Board may need to consider the option of
appointing a substitute decision maker...
the Senior Practitioner is of the view
that the Board appoint a limited guardian under
Services Act 2011
Board concurs with the Senior Practitioner’s view that the ongoing
monitoring of keystrokes on Mr CMD’s mobile phone
by a nominated person or
IT company does not fall within the definition of environmental restriction
of the DSA. Given this, the Board needs to consider whether a
guardian should be appointed for Mr CMD and if so, with what
Evidence and findings on capacity
Board has before it a HCPR from Dr Mark Rathbone, General Practitioner that
states that Mr CMD has an intellectual disability,
which is mild and static; an
acquired brain injury, which is mild and static; and ADHD, which is moderate and
static. A Case and
Care Plan from Children and Youth Services – Child
Protection Services dated 27 February 2015 confirms the diagnosis of Mr
CMD’s disabilities. The medical evidence as to diagnosis was not
Rathbone states in the HCPR that by reason of the stated disabilities Mr CMD
experiences deficits in relation to planning and reasoning
skills, impulse
control and susceptibility to influence/suggestibility. Dr Rathbone opines that
Mr CMD is able to make decisions
not comment on Mr CMD’s capacity to make decisions about the use of his
phone. Dr Rathbone received a notice of hearing but was not present at
the hearing. There is no other medical evidence before the
Board commenting on
Mr CMD’s capacity for decision making relating to the matters before the
Senior Practitioner in his Statement stated: ‘...Mr CMD lacks the insight
and cognitive capacity to realise that his actions
are illegal and potentially
damaging to his psychological well-being. On the other hand, Mr CMD does seem to
have enough cognitive
capacity and money to be able to find solutions to the
attempts made to stop the illegal activity.’ In his oral evidence the
Senior Practitioner commented a number of times on Mr CMD’s ability
‘to stay one step ahead’ and ‘changing
the goalposts in
respect of the behaviours of concern’.
Applicant gave evidence at hearing that he agreed with Dr Rathbone’s
comments. He stated that Mr CMD manages his own social
networks online and in
person, but has a cycle with relationships whereby he gets involved with a
person, the relationship is intense
and then falls apart. The Applicant
indicated it was difficult to comment on Mr CMD’s online relationships.
The Applicant stated
Mr CMD has an idea and then acts on it. When asked by the
Board whether Mr CMD is IT savvy, he responded ‘Yes quite IT savvy.’
The Board put to him whether Mr CMD has capacity when it comes to IT and the
Applicant responded, ‘yes’.
Sergeant Aaron Hardcastle, Australian Federal Police (AFP) in a letter to the
Applicant dated 2 March 2021 states:
it was evident to attending
police that [Mr CMD] had a severely impaired mental capacity ....Police have
observed no positive change
in [Mr CMD]’s mental capacity and despite
exhaustive explanation of the legal implications, his understanding of the
nature of his actions and harm to children has not improved....An
assessment regarding prosecution of [Mr CMD] has been undertaken
by the AFP. Due
to the nature of the mental impairment suffered by [Mr CMD], it is not
considered in the public interest to prosecute
[Mr CMD] as there are no
reasonable prospects of conviction.
appears this assessment of capacity by Police was based on their contact and
observation of Mr CMD, as no medical evidence of capacity
was referred to in the
letter. It is also noted that the assessment regarding prosecution would be on
the basis of whether Mr CMD
would be found guilty of crimes ‘beyond a
reasonable doubt.’
hearing the Board questioned parties as to what evidence it had before it of Mr
CMD’s decision making capacity relating to
Mr CMD’s appropriate
telephone use and the restrictive interventions sought, and no evidence was
Board is persuaded by the medical evidence from Dr Rathbone that Mr CMD is a
person with a disability as defined in the DSA, and
also as defined in the
the principles in the DSA,
common law presumption that a person has capacity unless established otherwise,
the Board considers that the DSA only provides
the Board with power to approve a
restrictive intervention in respect of a person with a disability who does not
have the decision
making capacity to consent, or not, to the restriction for
which approval is sought.
Board is not satisfied on the evidence before it that Mr CMD is incapable of
making decisions about the requested restrictive
intervention that impacts on
the modification of his mobile telephone, and the ongoing monitoring of his
mobile phone. The Board
has no evidence from a psychiatrist or psychologist
that Mr CMD lacks decision making capacity for these matters. Dr Rathbone does
not specifically address these matters.
Board is mindful that capacity can be decision specific and while Mr CMD may not
be found, for example, to have capacity to make
reasonable judgments about his
financial estate or other matters, this does not translate that he lacks
decision making capacity
on the use of the requested restrictive interventions
or other issues. The oral evidence received by parties at hearing was that
CMD is ‘IT savvy’ and appears to have some knowledge and abilities
in this area.
this same basis, the Board finds that pursuant to
of the GAA, it is
not satisfied Mr CMD is unable to make reasonable judgments about the subject of
the Application, that is, to have
software installed on his mobile phone and to
enable a nominated person to monitor key strokes on his mobile phone.
issue of whether there is a need for a guardian to be appointed with any other
power was also raised and discussed at hearing.
The Board heard evidence that
identified no accommodation decisions were required to be made. Mr CMD’s
accommodation is stable
and there is a duty of continuity of care being provided
to him by [the disability service provider] or another provider.
relation to service delivery, this is funded through Mr CMD’s National
Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) Plan. The Applicant
stated Mr CMD possibly
did not have capacity to make decisions about service provision and further
indicated that Mr CMD goes into
planning meetings and sometimes says no to
particular services and the planner responds to that. The Applicant also
commented that
if [the disability service provider] is there to advocate on his
behalf this is not a problem but [the disability service provider]
is not always
notified of the planning meeting.
Senior Practitioner submitted that an expert behaviour support practitioner with
experience in forensic matters, most likely sourced
from interstate would
provide the best outcomes for Mr CMD. A decision about appointment of an
appropriate behaviour support practitioner
would need to be made. The Senior
Practitioner supported that a guardian be appointed for this purpose.
the Board can consider whether there is a need for a guardian to make decisions
regarding NDIS related matters, it needs to
consider whether Mr CMD has capacity
to make his own decisions for NDIS related matters. Under the NDIS a person with
is presumed to have capacity to make decisions that affect his/her
own life. The
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
recognises that there may be circumstances where it is necessary for a person to
be appointed as a nominee of a participant
or have a guardian to make decisions
on behalf of a participant, but only when it is not possible for participants to
be assisted
to make decisions for themselves.
HCPR from Dr Rathbone states specifically in relation to decision making about
the NDIS ‘as Above.’ In relation to
the issue of support services,
which is above the question of NDIS on the HCPR template, Dr Rathbone comments
that Mr CMD’s
decision making is ‘impulsive and poorly
considered.’ Dr Rathbone has ticked the box indicating he believes Mr
disabilities affects his capacity to make reasonable judgements
Applicant gave evidence that Mr CMD is able to manage his NDIS Plan with support
co-ordination and assisted decision making, and
that this is what has been
occurring to date. Ms Hannon confirmed that is how it is meant to work under the
NDIS and noted the key
is having a good support co-ordinator.
Board is not satisfied based on the evidence of the Applicant, and the lack of
detailed medical evidence provided, that Mr CMD
is unable to make reasonable
judgments about NDIS related matters. The evidence indicates Mr CMD is able with
assistance to participate
in the planning meeting with the support co-ordinator
and make decisions about services and service providers. Mr CMD is entitled
make choices about what services he wants and exercise his will and preferences.
Board also notes from evidence at hearing that Mr CMD had attended Family
Planning Tasmania for six sessions of education about
the effects of child
pornography and had attended counselling with a psychologist at the beginning of
last year before it was stopped
because of COVID-19 restrictions, and has
commenced seeing a psychologist this year on a monthly basis. He has attended
all sessions
but one. He has not demonstrated an unwillingness to access
services or meet with allied health professionals.
the above mentioned reasons the Board is not satisfied the criteria in section
20 of the GAA is met.
Board wishes to make the observation that since being contacted by the AFP [the
disability service provider] have appeared to
be proactive in supporting Mr CMD
in the following ways:
disability service provider] have organised and encouraged education and
counselling for Mr CMD by external counsellors and psychologists.
disability service provider] have developed a ‘Protocol for Agreed Usage
of [the disability service provider] Internet;
which has been signed by Mr CMD
and dated 13 May 2020. The Protocol aims to assist Mr CMD to use the internet
appropriately and maintain
the use of [the disability service provider]’s
WIFI internet.
Considering
and upholding Mr CMD’s human rights including those of equality, privacy,
and ability to exercise choice, as articulated
in the United Nations Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
The Applicant gave
evidence that the focus has been on what is the least restrictive measures that
can be put in place while allowing
Mr CMD to maintain social online networks.
Evidence was given that Mr CMD seeks online social connection through use of his
phone and use of apps such as Facebook and chat rooms, which is important
assisted decision making, [the disability service provider] have an agreement
with Mr CMD whereby he can access only mutually
agreed apps on his mobile phone.
To date he has not been denied any apps he wants which includes Facebook, Sony
PlayStation and apps
to access adult pornography sites.
disability service provider] have implemented fortnightly meetings with Mr CMD
to remind him of appropriate internet usage.
While the Board received evidence at hearing as to the criteria in section 43 of
the DSA, there is no need for the Board to set out
that evidence or to make
findings on it, given it is not satisfied on the question of decision making
incapacity.
the reasons set out herein, the Board Orders that the Application for Approval
of a Restrictive Intervention filed by [the disability
service provider] is
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
It is also noted the
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
section 17A(1)
includes a presumption of capacity. ‘(1) People with disability are
assumed, so far as is reasonable in the circumstances,
to have capacity to
determine their own best interests and make decisions that affect their own
The United Nations Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD) which was ratified by
Australia on the 17 July
Persons with disability enjoy their inherent
right to life on an equal basis with others. (Article 10)
Persons with
disabilities are not to be subjected to arbitrary or illegal interference with
their privacy, family, home, correspondence
or communication. The privacy of
their personal, health and rehabilitation information is to be protected like
that of others (Article
Education of persons with disabilities must
foster their participation in society, their sense of dignity and self-worth and
the development
of their personality, abilities and creativity (Article 24).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (270 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter