URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASRPDComm/2009/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:20:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Glamorgan Spring Bay Planning Scheme 1994 Amendment 01/06 [2009] TASRPDComm 27 (29 June 2009)
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Land Use Planning and Approvals
Resource Planning and Development
Commission Act 1997
Decision and Reasons for Decision
GLAMORGAN-SPRING
PLANNING SCHEME
Draft Amendment
Draft Permit
The applications are to:
Amend the plans to rezone land from Open Space to Village at Hazards
View Road, Coles Bay.
Grant a permit for a 58 residential lot subdivision and public
recreation space for land at Hazards View Road, Coles Bay.
In accordance with its decision dated 30 March 2009 and in exercise of
the power conferred upon it by s.8 of the
Resource Planning and Development
Commission Act 1997
, the Resource Planning and Development Commission
delegated to Mr R Nolan and Commissioner S Hogue jointly and
powers and functions under
sections 40
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
in relation to Draft
Amendment 01/06 and Permit Number SU06001 to the Glamorgan Spring Bay Planning
Scheme 1994; and
connection with the exercise of those powers in performance of those functions,
its powers under Part 3 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Date and Place of Hearing
Tuesday, 21 April to Thursday 23
April 2009 at Hearing Room 1, Resource Planning and Development Commission,
Floor, 144 Macquarie Street,
Draft amendment 05/04 for adjoining land comprising the golf course was a
concurrent application. As the representors and issues
were largely common to
both applications, the hearings were held concurrently.
Representations
Representations were received from the following:
Ms Angela Higgins
Mr Christian Bell for Tasmanian Conservation Trust
Mr J Hunter
Mr & Mrs A & M Morgan
Mr & Mrs P & J Godfrey
Mr Luke Henry-Middleton for Department of Infrastructure, Energy and
Ms A Brammall
Mr T Brammall
Mr & Mrs K & D Nunn
H Preston and K Paterson
Mrs J Watkins
Mr A J Gooding
Mr J W Snooks
Mr G Peltzer
Mr A R Campbell
Mr R Heather
Mr A Coltier
Mr C Mason White, Ms M Robertson, Ms H Jessup and Mr S
Ms J Hutchinson
Ms Sophie Underwood
Ms K Barker of Detour Design
Mr & Mrs C & J von Bibra for Dunsinane Pty Ltd
Ms R Morgan
Mr B Williams
Mr R Wilkie
Ms J Masterman of Saltwater Lagoon Pty Ltd
Ms A Dominguez
Mr & Mrs A & C Ernst
Ms M Greaves
Mr & Mrs R S & J A Cooper
Mr I Melrose for Swanwick Community Association Inc.
Ms C Melrose
Mr K Watson
Ms L Eastwood
Mr R M Wilkie
Ms M Morgan
Mr A Morgan
Ms L McCulloch
Mr & Mrs A & N Shurman
Mr & Mrs D & R Linton
Mr W Jones for Environment Division
Department of Tourism, Arts and the Environment
Appearances at the hearing
Mr R Higgins represented Glamorgan Spring Bay Council.
Mr S McElwaine of Counsel on behalf of Cooroolina Pty Ltd who called evidence
from Mr G Davis, Dr JP Cumming, Dr P Barker, Mr WC
Cromer, Mr D
Representors
Ms J Feehely of Counsel represented Ms S Underwood and Ms K Barker with Ms S
Underwood in attendance.
Mr G Peltzer
Issues raised in Representations
A large number of representations were received and the issues raised may be
summarised as:
− lack of strategic basis as no settlement strategy;
− adverse impact on the character of the locality;
− pressure on infrastructure;
− traffic impacts;
− impacts on coastal environment;
− inappropriate housing density and greater restrictions required on the
development of multiple dwellings;
− inconsistent with Freycinet Tourism Development Plan and Green Globe 21:
− inconsistent with the intent and objectives of the planning scheme
including the open space zone, State Policies and Objectives
of the Act.
Council’s response to the representations
Council’s report considered the representations in the context of the
draft amendment and permit and recommended the following:
− The retention of the Open Space zoning contained in the area of proposed
Lots 300, 302, 303, & 304.
− The zoning of lot 201 (now 305 on the amended subdivision plan) as Open
− The submission of a modified subdivision plan (subject to additional
survey) which provides for the relocation of lot 300
to the southern Open Space
boundary and the redesign of lots 302 – 304 within the existing Village
zone only and including
the provision of building envelopes.
− The transfer of land currently zoned Open Space and comprising lots 300
– 301 and lots 302 – 304 (in part) in
addition to the proposed lot
201 to the Glamorgan Spring Bay Council by memorandum of transfer submitted with
the Final plan of Survey.
− The submission of an amended subdivision plan which provides a greater
variety of lot sizes and a graduation of densities
which will achieve a
lessening of the visual impact of the site.
Council also made recommendations in relation to modifying the conditions of the
s.43A permit, in accordance with
s.43F(6)(c)
Land Use Planning and
Approvals Act 1993
Commission’s assessment of the draft
The subject site is part of an area of land that has
been developed for residential subdivision over approximately 30 years.
The draft amendment was certified and permit approved in February 2007.
Development in accordance with the permit was dependent
on the provision of a
wastewater treatment plant for Coles Bay that was itself dependent on the
development of a resort by the Federal
Group at Coles Bay. It was proposed that
the adjoining golf course accept the treated effluent from the plant.
Subsequently the
proposal for sewerage reticulation emanating from the Federal
Group resort was abandoned and the permit application was revised to
appropriate sewage treatment, reticulation and disposal system for the
Although a revised plan of subdivision including altered arrangements for
infrastructure was submitted to the representors and subsequently
hearing, no changes where proposed to the draft amendment.
The Draft Amendment
The draft amendment is to rezone land from Open Space to
Site and locality
The subject site consists of an irregular shaped title
of 15.82 ha in three parcels situated to the north west of the town of Coles
Bay in an area referred to as Swanwick, as detailed below:
Swanwick Road, Coles Bay
Cooroolina Pty Ltd.
The certified plan shows 2 areas proposed for Village zoning. The main area is
principally bounded by Swanwick Road and the Golf
Course and a second smaller
area, to the south and extending to both sides of Hazard View Road. For the
purpose of the decision
the main area and part of the smaller southern area east
of Hazards View Road are referred to as Area 1.
The remaining part of the southern smaller area on the seaward side of Hazards
View Road is dealt with separately as Area 2.
The site is located between 10m and 20m AHD and is characterised by gentle
slopes of 1:40 or 1.5
. The site is crossed by a
number of poorly defined watercourses draining from south to north toward
Swanwick Bay.
Access to the subject site is from Swanwick Road to the north and Hazards View
Drive to the south. Swanwick Road and Hazards View
Drive have separate
junctions with Coles Bay Road. The attached permit provides for the joining of
Hazards View Drive to Swanwick
Road thus providing for an internal road
connection between the 2 parts of the settlement.
The site is generally cleared former improved pasture and does not contain
threatened vegetation or significant wildlife habitat.
The surrounding land to the south and west is zoned Village, land to the north
is zoned Commercial and land to the southeast is zoned
Open Space comprising the
golf course.
The site is vacant. The surrounding land use is residential or recreation
conducted by the Freycinet Golf Club Inc.
This area partly comprises gully land that separates development areas north and
south on the coastal ridgeline and an area of coastal
vegetation and Aboriginal
The planning scheme articulates a hierarchical set of intents, goals and
objectives. Depending on where the emphasis is placed,
a strategic intent as
related to Swanwick can be reduced to the following statements in the planning
In terms of general intents of the scheme the following are relevant from clause
Encourage the orderly and efficient use and development and
management of resources in the planning area.
for the recreational and open space needs of residents and
and provide for the containment and consolidation of the major towns (Swansea,
Bicheno, Coles Bay, Orford and Triabunna) within
the planning area
use or development is consistent with the character of and objectives for the
different districts within the planning area
The Residential land use goals include:
Residential use or development shall not occur unless sewerage,
water, stormwater drainage and road access are
highest priority will be to ensure that existing serviced
is developed before new land is opened up.’
The district objectives for Coles Bay and Swanwick state:
Maintain the current character of Coles Bay and discourage
expansion outside the current confines of the town and more intense development
within the town until appropriate infrastructure is
established.
the full development of Swanwick.
Ensure that public access and enjoyment of the foreshore, beaches
and ocean are protected and enhanced by the provision of appropriate
facilities, the management of access to, along and over the foreshore and the
control of runoff on or over the foreshore.’
The intent for the Village zone
to consolidate and confine new residential use or development
and other comparable uses or developments within the zone so as to maximise
promote the use of existing and future facilities and services;
encourage use or development whose scale and character match the existing scale
and character of the zone; and
ensure that the role the smaller towns within the planning area perform in
providing a specific residential amenity is protected,
and to protect the
residential amenity from conflicting use or development.’
The assessment of the above allows a conclusion that:
The full development of Swanwick is encouraged.
Swanwick is not viewed as a major town within the panning area.
As a smaller town the character of the area and residential amenity is to be
Priority is given to areas with services.
The draft amendment is consistent with promoting the full development of
Swanwick and satisfies the various intents and objectives
of the planning scheme
as a smaller town. For the current Open Space zoning for Area 1, there is no
evidence that the whole site
has been identified as having particular attributes
or need for open space provision. Council did not demonstrate a desire to
the area for future public open space needs. In any event,
notwithstanding the rezoning to Village, the proposed subdivision provides
large area for ‘public recreation’. Despite the view that Area 1
should not of itself retain open space zoning, there
appears to be unresolved
matters relating to the provision of public open space from previously approved
permits. This matter is
discussed below for Area 2.
Mr Davis’s evidence was that
‘Swanwick represents the only area where residential development can
occur on the Freycinet Peninsula. The subject site is
the last remaining
residential development site at Swanwick.’
The Commission agrees with this assessment.
Infrastructure
Mr Higgins’ submitted the there was no intention for Swanwick to be
anything other than a holiday settlement with no intent
for it to be a
self-sufficient settlement.
Reports for the Applicant sufficiently demonstrate the residential use for Area
1 can appropriately proceed in terms of waste water
disposal, stormwater
management and protection of ground and surface water. The proposed arrangement
is for the residential lots
to be reticulated for waste water that will be
treated and disposed of predominately through irrigation of the adjacent golf
Part of the arrangement is irrigation together with bio-retention
areas. The evidence was that the golf course could take all the
treated waste
water and still need to augment the irrigation requirements from other sources.
For storm water, roof run off will
be captured in on-site tanks for domestic
use, all other stormwater and over flows will, through pipes and culverts, be
detention basins and screened through gross pollution traps prior to
eventually entering Swanwick Bay.
The arrangements for stormwater are based on there being no reticulated potable
water. The area has a low rainfall and there is
no ready supply of potable
water for reticulation. The settlement exists with the current arrangement of
on-site water storage.
The additional residential capacity provided by the
amendment does not significantly alter the current situation in terms of demand
for reticulated water but in essence completes the development area defined for
The representors submitted that the impact on fresh water resources, such as the
Apsley River should be assessed. The submission
contended that at times water
would need to be carted for domestic consumption. Sources of additional water,
amounts to be drawn
and impact on those supplies are matters mostly external to
the applications before the Commission. Although water delivery may
be required
at times, the extent of the requirement is not known and environmental impacts
on the water sources are for other approval
processes to regulate. The permit
requires on-site storage and water conservation measures appropriate to the
location. The area
needs to be recognised in the longer term as a small
settlement without reticulated potable water.
The evidence is that Swanwick road capacities are adequate and junction
improvements with Coles Bay Road are proposed to be funded
through a development
levy as a condition on the permit. The formal linking of Swanwick Road and
Hazards View Road is viewed as
a positive outcome allowing internal vehicular
circulation without entering Coles Bay Road.
For the purpose of the draft amendment, there are adequate arrangements for
physical infrastructure.
Area 2 specific issues
Mr Higgins advised that following further consideration and inspection that it
was his opinion that the retention of the Open Space
zoning for proposed Lots
300, 302, 303, & 304 as recommended in Council’
LUPAA was not required. He submitted that development on lots 302-304 would be
appropriate and the proposed road (lot
300) would provide the opportunity for
formal access to the beach.
In contrast the representors claimed that this is one of the most
environmentally sensitive areas remaining on the coast at Swanwick.
was described as being fully vegetated, steep and sandy in places. It was
claimed the area:
− had no vegetation assessment ( A report by North Barker Ecosystem
Services of October 2007 had not been made available until
the hearing);
− no hydrological review of surface or ground water;
− no assessment of waste water disposal or stormwater drainage;
− has Aboriginal heritage values;
− development allowed by the enlarged area of Village zoning will be
visually sensitive; and
− previous commitments or conditions concerning public open space
contributions have not been met.
Weight is given to the claims of the representors in respect to Area 2. The
consultants’ work for the Applicant largely concentrated
on Area 1. Dr
Barker’s investigation on flora and fauna was confined to the area of the
proposed road and carpark. He agreed
that the area surrounding the proposed
road and carpark would suffer adverse edge effects from increased access into
The Representors tabled a report on ‘Aboriginal Heritage Value Assessment
of a proposed new subdivision at Swanwick’
(Leigh Maynard September 2001).
The report was prepared for the Applicant and principally concerned Area 2. The
report shows Area
2 being within the Tasmanian Aboriginal Sites Index (TASI)
8828 and TASI 8829. The report observed that previous illegal ground
disturbance work had occurred without a permit under the
Aboriginal Relics
The report referred to covering Aboriginal sites to prevent
disturbance to those sites. However for Area 2 further disturbance can
avoided by not constructing a road access to the proposed lots and carpark and
this is preferred as a mitigation measure rather
than covering the site to
protect surface material. In any event, an application under the
Relics Act 1975
would have been required for the proposed
On the representors’ submission there is a prima facie case of unresolved
public open space obligation under previous subdivision
permits. Area 2 has
open space zoning that should become public open space. This is a matter for
resolution between Applicant and
Council in terms of meeting commitments and
conditions raised on previously approved permits.
The evidence to the hearing was that sewage and storm water could be
appropriately dealt with for development on lots in Area 2,
but this was not in
the documents provided. Mr Davis submitted that a structured access to the
beach provided by the proposed road
was preferred to regulate activity and
reduce erosion. This opinion is not accepted as the proposed road only partly
distance to the beach front, and increased visitation would increase
the direct impacts and the adverse edge effects referred to
Area 1 has a flood history. The assessments in the consultants’ reports
were that the recommended arrangements for increasing
capacity of culverts and
other stormwater management measures would mean all proposed lots would be free
of inundation. There remains
an existing flood issue for the houses near the
cul-de-sac on the northern extension to Swanwick Drive. This area is outside
site and measures to reduce flood inundation risk needs to be addressed
through other means.
Commission’s assessment of the permit
The s.43A permit grants conditional planning approval
for subdivision. With the altered arrangement for waste water disposal, the
Applicant lodged a revised plan of subdivision. As a preliminary matter the
Commission determined that the changes on the revised
subdivision plan were not
significant. The revised plan had full exposure to the representors and Council
had lodged revised conditions
should the permit be confirmed by the Commission.
The revised subdivision plan is the document before the
Commission.
Another preliminary matter is the status of sewage treatment as a use class
under the planning scheme. The relevant use classes
are public utility (major)
and public utility (minor). The relevance of the use classification is that
sewage treatment is proposed
on a separate lot and public utility (major) is
prohibited in both the Village and Open Space zones whereas public utility
is permitted.
The relevant definitions are as follows:
Public Utility (major)
means the use or development of land for major utility installations and
includes generating works, electrical substation of more
than 66 kilovolts,
maintenance depot, treatment or disposal works for sewage or refuse (including
sanitary fill).
Public Utility (minor)
means the use or development of any land to provide water, sewerage,
electricity, gas, drainage, marine structures (including jetties,
access ramps),
communication or other similar services but does not include anything defined as
a Public Utility (Major)
The representors sought to have the sewage treatment arrangements classified as
public utility (major) and therefore prohibited.
Arguments were submitted to
support and to counter this claim. In consideration of these submissions the
Commission concludes that
the use class for the proposed sewage treatment is
public utility (minor). The primary reason for this conclusion is that the
of use class allocation is initially one of best fit, secondly public
utility (major) is principally stated as ‘use or development
of land for
major utility installations’. The subsequent examples are inclusive of
the sorts of uses that would be considered
major. In contrast the public
utility (minor) use class is to provide ‘...sewerage services’. In
the context of the
definition it is not agreed that public utility (minor) is
just the pipe works and does not include treatment as integral to it being
public utility (minor).
Area 1 proposes a subdivision of 54 lots with roads, public recreation space and
drainage retention/bio-retention basins and an additional
2 lots (lots 305 and
306) fronting Hazards View Drive. Lot 305 is set aside for sewage treatment
Area 2 proposes a 3 residential lot subdivision, with public recreation space,
road and car park to improve access to the beach front
to the west (Great Oyster
As determined below, the draft amendment requires modification to reject Area 2
from the rezoning to Village. Therefore, proposed
lots 300 – 304 can not
be approved and do not require further assessment.
Planning scheme requirements
The proposed subdivision meets the subdivision standards for the Village
Issues raised in representations
Dwelling density and multiple dwellings
The standards for the Village zone do not set a dwelling density in relation to
site area for multiple dwellings. In response to
the representations, the
Applicant proposed a dwelling density of 1 unit to
lot area. Therefore only lots with an area
greater than 1400m
could be used for multiple
dwellings. With 7 lots over 1400m
and none over
, the impact of multiple dwellings in terms of
overall density is assessed as limited. This density for multiple dwellings
be an additional condition on the permit.
Other issues raised by the representors relating to land use, services, drainage
etc have been addressed in the assessment of the
Application of State Policies
State Coastal Policy 1996
The site is within the coastal zone as defined in the Policy. Relevant
provisions of the State Policy are.
1.2.1. Areas within which Aboriginal sites and relics are identified will
be legally protected and conserved where appropriate.
1.2.2. All Aboriginal sites and relics in the coastal zone are protected
and will be identified and managed in consultation with Tasmanian
people in accordance with relevant State and Commonwealth legislation.
Area 2 of the draft amendment is assessed as not being prepared in accordance
with these elements of the State Policy.
2.4.1. Care will be taken to minimise, or where possible totally avoid,
any impact on environmentally sensitive areas from the expansion
of urban and
residential areas, including the provision of infrastructure for urban and
residential areas.
Area 1 is not of environmental sensitivity and
infrastructure in terms of sewage disposal and roads are to be provided. Water
reticulation
is not proposed and on-site water capture and storage is acceptable
for the location. Area 2 is assessed as being an environmentally
sensitive area
where the proposed roadway and additional Village zoning should be avoided.
2.4.2. Urban and residential development in the coastal zone will be based
on existing towns and townships. Compact and contained
planned urban and
residential development will be encouraged in order to avoid ribbon development
and unrelated cluster developments
along the coast.
Development of Area
1 avoids ribbon development and the establishment of unrelated settlement
clusters along the coast. Development
of Area 2 will add to the perception of
closure by the ridge top settlements. This is an area where ribbon development,
settlement can be avoided. Public access to the coast through Area 2
is retained through a pedestrian right-of-way from Hazards
View Road without the
need for a roadway as proposed for the 3 lot subdivision in the area.
2.4.3. Any urban and residential development in the coastal zone, future
and existing, will be identified through designation of areas
in planning
schemes consistent with the objectives, principles and outcomes of this
The applications are consistent with this part of the Policy. Overall the draft
amendment modified to delete Area 2 is assessed
as being prepared in accordance
with the State Policy.
Interim State Policy on the Protection of Agricultural Land 2008
The land is not agricultural land as defined in the Policy. The application is
assessed as being prepared in accordance with the
Interim State Policy on the
Protection of Agricultural Land 2008
State Policy on Water Quality Management 1997
The conditions on the permit should ensure that waste water and stormwater can
be managed in accordance with the Policy. The amendment
is assessed as being
prepared in accordance with the
State Policy on Water Quality Management
National Environmental Protection Measures
The NEPMs are not applicable to the applications.
Schedule 1 objectives
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
(a) to promote the sustainable development of natural and physical resources
and the maintenance of ecological processes and genetic
The proposed Village zoning can provide for sustainable development of the site
through appropriate management of stormwater and
wastewater. Sustainability in
terms of social infrastructure is an existing and longer term issue that the
current draft amendment
will not resolve or make worse. There is no evidence
that the maintenance of ecological processes and genetic diversity are .matters
applicable to the site.
It has not been demonstrated that Village zoning can provide for sustainable
development of the site. Issues for the maintenance
of ecological processes and
genetic diversity are relevant, particularly in terms of edge effects from
greater intrusion into the
area as promoted by improved
accessibility.
(b) to provide for the fair, orderly and sustainable use and development of
air, land and water.
Village zoning provides for orderly development of the Swanwick
settlement.
Village zoning and greater access through road construction is not seen as fair,
orderly or sustainable. Development in this area
has the potential to adversely
impact on coastal vegetation, Aboriginal sites and contribute to the loss of the
reasonable separation
of residential nodes either side of the gully.
(c) to encourage public involvement in resource management and
The draft amendment has been through the formal public processes required by
(d) to facilitate economic development in accordance with the objectives set
out in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) above.
The draft amendment for Area 1 will facilitate economic development consistent
with the preceding objectives.
(e) to promote the sharing of responsibility for resource management and
planning between the different spheres of Government, the
community and industry
in the State.
Development allowed by the draft amendment will involve the sharing of
responsibility by government, community groups and industry.
objectives are
furthered principally in terms of establishing a system of planning instruments
to be the principal way of setting
objectives, policies and controls for the
use, development and protection of land, to secure a pleasant, efficient and
safe working,
living and recreational environment, to conserve areas of
scientific and cultural values and the orderly provision of public
infrastructure.
Conclusion on the draft amendment
The draft amendment for Area 1 provides for the consolidation of the Swanwick
settlement with an appropriate level of infrastructure.
For Area 2 the draft
amendment intrudes on an area with sensitive values that should not be further
encroached upon. The draft
amendment should not include area 2 in the Village
The draft amendment should be approved with a modification to exclude the area
shown for Village zoning by deleting the area comprising
lot 300 and parts of
lots 302-304 as shown on the plan of subdivision for the permit and as described
above as Area 2.
Conclusion on the permit
The permit provides for the subdivision development of lots and the retention of
areas for recreation, the management of stormwater
and as part of the wastewater
disposal process. The permit should be confirmed with the additional condition
that lots 300 (road)
302, 303 and 304 are not approved and a condition added
that multiple dwellings can only be approved on lots greater than 1400
Pursuant to
Section 41(ab)
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
the Commission modifies the draft amendment as set out in Annexure A and
gives its approval to the draft amendment as modified pursuant
to Section 42 of
Pursuant to
Section 43H
(1)(b)(ii) of the
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act
the Commission modifies the permit as set out in Annexure
Robin Nolan
Sandra Hogue
Resource Planning and development Commission
29 June 2009
Attachments:
Annexure A: Amendment to the plan
Annexure B: The permit
Glamorgan Spring Bay Planning Scheme 1994
Amendment 01/06
(i) The plans are amended as follows:
LOCATION: Part of CT144214/4– Coles Bay Road, Coles Bay
CURRENT ZONING: Open Space
PROPOSED ZONING: Village
(ii) The scheme is amended to insert after clause 8.1.3 the
8.1.4 Notwithstanding any other provision any use and development on CT144214/4
is to be conditional on the connection to reticulated
infrastructure.
Resource Planning and Development Commission
GLAMORGAN-SPRING BAY
PLANNING SCHEME
DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION NO. SU06001
Cooroolina Pty Ltd – LCT 144214/4, Hazards View Drive &
Swanwick Road, Coles Bay
development for subdivision must only be undertaken in accordance with the
proposed plan of subdivision 07-018 edition V.05 dated
20/08/08, the
Applicant’s supporting documents prepared for the Commission’s
hearings as bound in the SEMF Pty Ltd for
Cooroolina Pty Ltd 25/08/08 (hearings
commencing 21/04/09) unless otherwise required by this approval as specified in
conditions below.
lots 300, 302, 303, 304 as shown on the plan of subdivision are not approved.
approved lots are to be connected to underground power supply, at the
Applicant’s expense.
lighting is to be provided at the Applicant’s expense and must be designed
to minimize light spill to the night sky,
to the satisfaction of Council’s
General Manager.
land shown as Public Recreation (Lot 122 on the plan) is to be developed and
constructed to the satisfaction of Council’s
General Manager and at no
cost to Council and transferred to Glamorgan Spring Bay Council by Memorandum of
Transfer submitted with
the final plan of survey.
applicant must provide roads constructed to a full construction standard
complete with street lighting, kerb and gutter and concrete
footpaths unless
alternative approved Water Sensitive Urban Design (“WSUD”) elements
are implemented to the satisfaction
of Council’s General Manager.
Applicant must widen Swanwick Road from the proposed intersection with Hazards
View Drive to Coles Bay Road to achieve a minimum
sealed width of 6.0 metres
with 1.0 metre wide gravel shoulders.
Applicant must pay a contribution in the sum of $30,000, (exclusive of GST),
towards the cost of upgrading the Hazards View Drive
junction with the Coles Bay
Tourist Road (the contribution). The contribution must be paid prior to the
final sealing of the plan
of subdivision by the Council and must be paid to the
Council to be held in trust by it. Upon confirmation of receipt of the
contribution
by the Council, the Department of Infrastructure, Energy and
Resources will commence planning of upgrading works. The Council is
contribution to the Department of Infrastructure, Energy and Resources upon it
being satisfied that the Department has
or has caused the upgrading of the
junction with the Coles Bay Tourist Road to be completed. In the event that
upgrading has not
been completed within 5 years of the date of the sealing of
the final plan of subdivision, the contribution must be refunded by the
to Cooroolina Pty Ltd, together with any accumulated interest upon the
contribution. Until the Council pays the contribution
to the Department of
Infrastructure, Energy and Resources, or refunds it to Cooroolina Pty Ltd in
accordance with the terms of this
condition, the Council must invest it, with a
bank, at interest
Applicant must provide to each allotment a standard reinforced concrete access
crossover from the road carriageway to the property
boundary of minimum width
3.0 metres in accordance with Standard Drawing SD 1003. The access crossover is
to be inspected by the
responsible Council officer prior to the placement of
allotment is to be provided with access to standard services with the exception
of water located underground in accordance with
Standard Drawing SD 1002 or as
otherwise approved by Council’s General Manager. All service
installations are to be inspected
and certified by the responsible Council
officer prior to backfilling.
development shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
Sensitive Urban Design Engineering Procedures for Stormwater Management in
Southern Tasmania
, with the recommendations contained in the unpublished
Hydrological Review and Surface Water and Groundwater Management Report,
Cooroolina Subdivision, Swanwick
prepared by W. C. Cromer of William C.
Cromer Pty Ltd and dated 9 August 2008, with the recommendations contained in
the unpublished
Coorolina Pty Ltd Consolidated Report for Stormwater Issues
at Swanwick for a 53 Lot Subdivision
prepared by Dale P. Luck of Dale P.
Luck and Associates and dated August 2008 and to the satisfaction of the
Municipal Engineer.
the event that final engineering design requires the installation of a detention
basin within the proposed subdivision some lots
may need to be deleted or
amended in layout. This will be determined by Council’s General Manager
during the engineering design
Applicant must install a gross pollutant trap to collect the complete stormwater
discharge from the development at a location
approved by Council’s General
Manager unless alternative approved WSUD elements are implemented.
Applicant must provide each lot receiving or disposing of stormwater drainage
the facility of a registered drainage easement and
where applicable, underground
piped stormwater system; pit and/or catch drain.
Final Plan of Survey is to be endorsed to the effect that Council cannot provide
a water supply to any of the lots.
lots are to be sewered and the Applicant shall construct all reticulation, pumps
and associated rising mains to receive the sewage
from the subdivision and
deliver it to the treatment plant.
Applicant is to provide each lot with a new sewerage connection point of 100mm
nominal diameter, complete with a screwed cap and
terminating 300mm into each
lot proper at a depth to command the entire allotment. All connections points
are to be installed in
accordance with Standard Drawings SD3010 and SD3011.
Council will not seal any Final Plan of Subdivision for the development (or any
of its stages) unless and until reticulated sewerage
is connected to a fully
operational sewage treatment plant and available at the boundary of every lot
contained in the Final Plan
of Subdivision to the satisfaction of
Council’s General Manager.
Applicant must provide as constructed drawings certified by a licensed surveyor
to Council for all underground services. The
drawings are to be provided in
digital format and in hard copy. The subdivisional works will not be placed on
maintenance until
the “as constructed” drawings have been received
and accepted by Council’s General Manager.
survey plan that has lots endorsed public open space ”,“ public
access way ”,“ road widening or “road”
accompanied by a Memorandum of Transfer to Glamorgan Spring Bay Council. This
transfer is to be executed by the Vendor,
identifying the lots to be transferred
and accompanied by the required Land Titles Office and Stamp Duty, fees and
charges. Where
such lots are subject to existing Mortgages, registered
agreements, caveats or other registered dealings, then all necessary
documentation
in relation to the discharge of such dealings, in respect to the
lots to be transferred are to be provided with the Memorandum of
Engineering services are to be designed and supervised by a qualified and
experienced Civil Engineer. No work is to start on
site until the drawings and
specifications have been approved by Council’s General Manager.
permit shall not take effect and must not be acted on until a Soil and Water
Management Plan (SWMP) prepared by a consultant
approved by Council’s
General Manager recommending measures to control stormwater runoff from the land
so that runoff does
not cause erosion and sedimentation or discolouration of any
surface water outside the boundaries of the land during the construction
in accordance with HMCA: Guidelines for Soil and Water Management, HMCA, Hobart,
1999 and the State Policy for Water Quality
Management 1997 has been submitted
to and approved by Council’s General Manager.
to any other works approved by this permit commencing, the Applicant must
install temporary run-off, erosion and sediment controls
in accordance with the
recommendations of the approved SWMP and maintain these controls at full
operational capacity until the land
is effectively rehabilitated and stabilised
after completion of the development to the satisfaction of Council’s
General Manager.
Applicant is required to upgrade existing downstream stormwater infrastructure
to cater for any increase in stormwater discharge
from the development to the
satisfaction of Council’s General Manager.
Applicant must enter into an agreement pursuant to
Planning and Approvals Act
prior to the sealing of the final plan of survey
to require the plumbing design of any residential use or development to
incorporate
water saving fittings and appliances to the satisfaction of the
Glamorgan Spring Bay Council Permit Authority.
Applicant must enter into an agreement pursuant to
Planning and Approvals Act 1993
prior to the sealing of the final plan of survey
that prohibits the development of multiple dwellings at a density greater than
dwelling unit per 700m
of lot area.
permit shall not take effect and cannot be acted upon until a bushfire
management plan prepared by the Applicant and approved
by the Tasmania Fire
Service and incorporating the relevant requirements of the
Guidelines for
development in bushfire prone areas of Tasmania,
Tasmania Fire Service,
Hobart, 2005 and
Construction of Buildings in Bushfire Prone
Standards Australia, Sydney is submitted to the satisfaction of
Council’s General Manager.
Applicant must enter into an agreement pursuant to
Planning and Approvals Act 1993
prior to the sealing of the final plan of
survey to require any residential use or development to be carried out and
maintained in
accordance with the approved bushfire management plan.
Applicant must ensure that road reserves, bio-retention areas, lot 122 and north
eastern and south eastern boundaries of the site
are landscaped by trees or
plants in accordance with a landscape plan prepared by a landscape architect or
other person approved
by Council’s General Manager, and submitted to
Council for endorsement with the engineering drawings. The landscape plan must
show the areas to be landscaped, the form of landscaping, the species of plants
and estimates of the cost of the works. Planting
in the road reserves shall be
equivalent to a minimum of 1 tree per lot using advanced plants that suit the
character of the locality.
Planting along the north eastern and south eastern
boundaries of the site shall be designed with fire retardant native species and
to provide a buffer from golf course operations. No plants listed as noxious
weeds within Tasmania, or displaying invasive characteristics
shall be used in
any landscaping.
made pursuant to
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
must be prepared by the Applicant on a blank instrument form to the satisfaction
of the Council and registered with the Recorder
of Titles. All costs associated
with the preparation and registration of the
Agreement must be met by the
305 containing the WWTP and shown on the endorsed plans must be transferred to
the Glamorgan Spring Bay Council by Memorandum
of Transfer prior to the end of
the maintenance period. The requisite parcel of land shall be provided with a
minimum width 3.00m
all weather maintenance vehicle access from Hazards View
Drive to the title boundary constructed and located in accordance with
standards and suitably fenced to the satisfaction of
Council’s General Manager.
Applicant must provide car parking spaces and landscaping on lot 305 to the
satisfaction of Council’s General Manager.
Applicant must adhere proposed lot 305 to the adjoining lot CT 139308/300
(Marked on the proposed subdivision plan as ‘existing
sewer treatment
owner of CT144214/4 (Cooroolina Pty Ltd) and owner of CT 137820/1 (Freycinet
Golf Club Inc) must each enter in to a deed of agreement
with the Council for
the discharge and use of recycled water substantially in accordance with the
draft agreement of 24/04/09, as
circulated to the parties by SB McElwaine by
letter of 24 April 2009 and must at all times comply with the terms of that
must be created over all drains, pipelines, wayleaves and services in accordance
with the requirements of the Municipal
Engineer. The cost of locating and
creating the easements shall be at the Applicant’s full cost.
Engineering
design drawings to the satisfaction of the Municipal Engineer must be submitted
to and approved by the Glamorgan Spring
Bay Council before development of the
land commences.
construction of the WWTP and associated infrastructure must only be carried out
between the following hours unless otherwise approved
by Council’s General
8:00 AM to 6:00 PM
8:00 AM to 6:00 PM
public holidays applying to the area.
10:00 AM to 6:00 PM
This permit is valid for two (2) years only from the date it takes effect
and will lapse if substantial commencement of the use or
development does not
take place within that time.
The SWMP must show the following:
(a) Allotment boundaries, north-point, contours, layout of roads,
driveways, building envelopes and reticulated services (including
telephone and any on-site drainage or water supply), impervious surfaces and
(b) Critical natural areas such as drainage lines, recharge area,
wetlands, and unstable land;
(c) Estimated dates of the start and completion of the works;
(d) Timing of the site rehabilitation or landscape program;
(e) Details of land clearing and earthworks or trenching and location of
soil stockpiles associated with roads, driveways, building
sites, reticulated
services and fire hazard protection.
(f) Arrangements to be made for surface and subsurface drainage and
vegetation management in order to prevent sheet and tunnel erosion.
(g) Temporary erosion and sedimentation controls to be used on the
Appropriate temporary control measures
include, but are not limited to, the following:
site disturbance and vegetation removal;
of up-slope run-off around cleared and/or disturbed areas, or areas to be
cleared and/or disturbed, provided that such diverted
water will not cause
erosion and is directed to a legal discharge point (eg. temporarily connected to
Council’s storm water
system, a watercourse or road drain);
retention traps (e.g. sediment fences, straw bales, grass turf filter strips,
etc.) at the down slope perimeter of the disturbed
area to prevent unwanted
sediment and other debris escaping from the land;
retention traps (e.g. sediment fences, straw bales, etc.) around the inlets to
the stormwater system to prevent unwanted
sediment and other debris blocking the
pits and inlets installed and connected to the approved stormwater system before
the roadworks are commenced; and
Rehabilitation
of all disturbed areas as soon as possible.
Builders waste, other than of a quantity and size able to be enclosed
within a standard 140 Litre mobile garbage bin, will not be
accepted at
Council’s Waste Management Centres. All asbestos based waste must be
disposed of in accordance with the Code of
Practice for the Safe Removal of
Asbestos NOHSC: 2002(1988). No material containing asbestos may be dumped at
Council’s Waste
Management Centres.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.41 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter