URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASWRCT/2021/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:23:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
May Shaw Health Centre Inc. v W. [2021] TASWRCT 21 (25 June 2021)
[2021] TASWRCT 21
WORKERS REHABILITATION AND COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
May Shaw Health Centre Inc. v W.
[2021] TASWRCT
MAY SHAW HEALTH CENT INC.
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
15 June 2021
DELIVERED ON:
25 June 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Commissioner Wilkins
CATCHWORDS:
Entitlement to compensation – whether reasonably
arguable case – notice of injury – whether prejudice to employer
– failure to make a claim within six months – whether
‘reasonable cause’
St Helens Oysters Pty Ltd v Coatsworth
[2007] TASSC 90
MRD Supermarkets Pty Ltd
[2016] TASSC 15
Vos Constructions & Joinery
v Norton-Smith
[2016] TASSC 38
State of Tasmania v Pilling
Wilkins v St Giles Society
[1994] TASSC 172
Wilkins v St
Giles Society
[1995] TASSC 149;
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
DETERMINATION:
That a reasonably arguable case exists.
REPRESENTATION:
Solicitors:
Phillips Taglieri –
Barristers and Solicitors
Terracall and Associates
[2021] TASWRCT 21
Commissioner Wilkins
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. The worker made a claim for compensation on or about 18
March 2021. The claim was in relation to an incident which had occurred
August 2020. In the claim form, the details of the incident that were reported
by the worker were:
Styrofoam box and carrying it, ran into end of trolley and went forward nearly
falling to ground, felt pain in right
buttock area and hip. Trolley not in
usual place. Had been moved. Dr can attest to box being
delivered.”
2. The worker said she had suffered pain in her right lower
back, her hip and her buttock.
3. The claim for compensation was supported by
an initial workers compensation medical certificate dated 18 March 2021. The
certificate
referred to the worker presenting with symptoms “back pain
post surgery spinal decompression L2-3”. The certificate
noted that the
worker had stated her condition had been caused by “General nursing Work
duties as well as fall 18/8/2020”,
and that the claimed condition had
occurred under circumstances of “general work involves leaning over
lifting bending etc”.
The worker was certified incapacitated from 8 March
2021 to 7 May 2021.
4. The employer elected to dispute the claim, and filed a
referral in the Tribunal pursuant to
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1988
(“the Act”). It is the employer’s
dispute in relation to liability to pay compensation to the worker that needs
be determined.
5. The employer says it has a reasonably arguable case to
dispute the claim for compensation because the worker failed to give notice
the injury as soon as practicable after the occurrence of the injury, as
required by
of the Act. The employer further says that it has a
reasonably arguable case to dispute the claim because the worker failed to
a claim for compensation with respect to the injury within six months after the
date of the occurrence of the injury, in accordance
of the Act.
Finally, the employer says that there is a dispute about whether the injury said
to have arisen on 18 August 2020 arose
out of or in the course of the
worker’s employment.
6. In support of the dispute, in addition to the
claim for compensation and the initial workers compensation medical certificate
employer filed and relied upon the following documents:
(a) Incident report dated 18 August 2020.
(b) Email from
the employer’s human resources section to the employer’s workers
compensation insurer dated 5 March 2021.
(c) Email from the employer’s
human resources section to the employer’s workers compensation insurer
dated 23 March 2021.
(d) Email from J Lenthall dated 10 May
(e) Email from Dr E Grey to the employer’s solicitors dated 27
(f) Medico-legal report by Dr G Tschirn dated 24 May 2021 in
relation to the worker.
7. The incident report form dated 18 August 2020 refers to the
incident in essentially the same terms as has been recorded on the
compensation, and indicates that there were no witnesses to the incident
although “Manager Jason aware” and
under the heading
“Action” the worker has filled in “Report to manager (Jason
Watson) and Dr Grey”.
8. In the email of 10 May 2021 from Ms Lenthall,
Jason Watson is described as being a “manager of the host employer”,
not a May Shaw Health Centre officer or employee.
9. Dr Grey’s email of
27 May 2021 advises that she has no recollection of the incident involving the
worker, and nothing documented
in notes for the worker.
Tschirn’s report was prepared following an assessment of the worker on 20
May 2021. Relevantly, in relation to the issues
raised by the employer in its
dispute of the claim, Dr Tschirn provided the following opinion:
is a clear reported incident with potential impact on the lumbar spine. For
approximately two months after [the worker]
reports attending physiotherapy
despite which symptoms continued and a neurosurgical appointment was made for
November, three months
post incident. That appointment had to be postponed and
didn't occur until the end of February.
In the meantime, [the worker] saw her chosen doctor in mid February, had
an MRI scan and saw the surgeon shortly after, thence followed
by an operation
within a few days of that.
There seems to be an unbroken sequence of events.
There are, however, some concerns arising casting some doubt about whether
the 18 August incident continued to be the major or most
significant factor
prompting the need for MRI scanning and semi-urgent surgical treatment whether
something else supervened.
According to
the employer there was no lost time throughout the period from 18 August
Although the
incident was reported at the time no claim was submitted, despite neurosurgical
referrals and physiotherapy treatment
(Indeed the claim wasn't submitted until
after the surgery)
certificate specifies the cause as two pronged "General Nursing work duties as
well as fall". (my Impression of this is that
the fall of itself may not have
been sufficient as the major or most substantial cause.
In addition,
she has evidence of long standing advance lumbar degeneration at L2/3 and L3/4
levels with a lumbar fusion below that.
What would be helpful
if available is the practice notes for the period August to March in
particular.
Notwithstanding that, based on the currently available evidence, the
employment incident of 18 August 2020 was the major/most significant
causing the pre­ existing lumbar spinal disease to again become symptomatic
when it did.”
11. The worker’s solicitors tendered a statutory
declaration of the worker dated 11 June 2021. The worker said in her statutory
declaration:
“I am employed as a registered nurse by May
Shaw Health Centre Inc.
On 18 August 2020 I was directed to work at the Bicheno Medical Centre.
This arrangement had been in place for some time. I was
not supervised by May
Shaw Health Centre Inc. at the Bicheno Medical Centre and my supervisor at the
practice as Jason Watson.
On 18 August 2020 I sustained an injury in the course of my employment at
the Bicheno Medical Centre. I suffered an injury to my
lower back while I was
delivering a box to Dr Elizabeth Gray
at the Centre. I immediately
informed my supervisor Jason Watson that I had injured my lower back and I also
told Jason Watson that
I would fill in an incident report. I then filled out
the incident report as annexed hereto......
At no time on either 18 August 2020 or any time before that date was I
ever told that if I suffered an injury at the Bicheno Medical
Centre I should
report that injury to May Shaw Health Centre Inc. At no time on 18 August 2020
or thereafter was I provided with
a notice of my right to make a workers
compensation claim.”
The worker annexed to her statutory declaration the incident
report which was also relied upon by the employer.
12. The general thrust
therefore, of the materials relied upon by both parties is that, at the time she
was injured, the worker was
employed by May Shaw Health Centre Inc. as a
registered nurse, and over many years prior to the time of the incident which
subject of the claim, there was an arrangement in place between the
Bicheno Medical Centre and the employer whereby the worker worked
at the Bicheno
Medical Centre. She was paid by the employer and the employer invoiced the
Bicheno Medical Centre for the worker’s
13. In relation to notice of an injury, and claim for
compensation, the Act provides as follows:
Form of notice of injury
(1) Notice of an injury –
(a) may be given orally or in writing;
(b) shall be given to –
(i) the employer of the worker or, if there is more than one employer,
to one of the employers of the worker; or
(ii) a person under whose supervision the worker is employed;
(iii) a person designated for the purpose by the employer; or
(iv) a person having authority or apparently having authority to
receive such a notice on behalf of the employer;
(c) shall include the name and address of the person injured;
(d) shall include the nature of the injury, the date on which the injury
occurred, and the cause of the injury.
(2) Where an employer has received notice of an injury, he shall record
that fact in records kept by him for that purpose.”
Employer given notice of injury must inform
worker of right to claim
(1) An employer who is informed by a worker of
an injury to the worker must, within 14 days, inform the worker, in the
form, that the worker may have a right to make a claim for
compensation in relation to the injury.
Penalty: Fine not exceeding 10 penalty units.
Subsection (1)
not apply in relation to an injury if the employer is informed of the injury by
the service on the employer of a claim for compensation.”
“37. Effect of failure to give notice of injury,
(1) The failure to give notice of injury in accordance with section 32 (1)
(a) or any defect or inaccuracy in such a notice does not
affect the worker's
right to claim compensation under this Act if –
(a) the failure or defect or inaccuracy was occasioned by mistake,
absence from the State of the worker or other reasonable cause;
(b) it is found in proceedings relating to the worker's right to claim
compensation under this Act that the employer's defence is
not prejudiced by
reason of the failure.
(2) Without limiting the generality of the expression reasonable cause in
subsection (1) , that expression includes –
(a) the making of a payment to a worker that the worker believes to be a
payment of compensation under this Act; and
(b) any representation that is made to a worker that the worker believes
is made by or on behalf of the worker's employer to the
effect that compensation
under this Act will or will not be payable.
(3) Any dispute relating to the failure of the worker to give notice of
injury in accordance with section 32 (1) (a) may be referred,
by either party to
the dispute, to the Tribunal for determination.”
“38. Effect of failure to make claim
(1) The failure to make a claim for compensation within the period
prescribed by section 32(1)(b) , section 32(2) or section 32(2A)
does not affect
the validity of the claim if the failure was occasioned by mistake, absence from
the State of the worker, or other
reasonable cause.
(2) Without limiting the generality of the expression reasonable cause in
subsection (1) , that expression includes –
(a) the making of a payment to a worker that he believes to be a payment
of compensation under this Act; and
(aa) a failure by the worker's employer to comply with section 33A in
relation to the injury to which the worker's claim for compensation
(b) any representation that is made to a worker that he believes is made
by or on behalf of his employer to the effect that compensation
under this Act
will or will not be payable.
(3) .........”
14. It is recognised that the test for whether an employer has
demonstrated it has a reasonably arguable case was formulated by Evans
Helens Oysters Pty Ltd v Coatsworth
[2007] TASSC 90:
“A case will not
be reasonably arguable unless the case itself is reasonable in the sense that
there is a reasonable prospect
of the claim being rejected following a final
hearing......The very notion of a “reasonably arguable case”, like
very notion of a “prima facie case”, precludes a final
determination of a disputed question of fact......On the face
reasonably arguable case will exist concerning the liability of an employer to
pay a worker if it is reasonably arguable
on the material available in relation
to the claim or identified deficiencies or weaknesses in the claim that,
following a contested
hearing it may be rejected.”
15. The onus is on the employer, under a s81A referral, to
establish that a reasonably arguable case exists (Lamont v MRD Supermarkets
[2016] TASSC 15).
The Act does not require that an employer’s case
ultimately be rejected must be reasonably arguable (Vos Constructions &
Joinery v Norton-Smith
[2016] TASSC 38).
16. In State of Tasmania v Pilling,
[2020] TASSC 13
, Brett J considered the provisions of the Act relating to notice
of injury in the context of a s81A referral. His Honour made it
clear that a
consideration of whether a failure to give notice of an injury as soon as
practicable includes a consideration of whether
s37 might apply to excuse that
failure. His Honour commented:
“There will be
many cases where the nature of the deficiency of notice and the general
circumstances of the case, without more,
lead to the conclusion that there is a
reasonable argument about the applicability of s37. However, there will also be
cases where
the opposite is true, that is the circumstances suggested that the
deficiency in notice is due to mistake, and prejudice is unlikely.
It may also
be that the circumstances suggest that the employer can be expected to have
available to it evidence which will inform
the considerations under s37, if such
evidence exists. For example, evidence relating to the question of prejudice
will almost always
be in the possession of the employer. In a case where the
circumstances of the case appear to demonstrate the probability that the
deficiency of notice has arisen from a mistake or other reasonable cause, the
absence of any evidence of prejudice to the employer
may justify a conclusion
that the employer has not shown an arguable case that s37 does not apply to the
deficiency of notice. Of
course, where the employer can demonstrate that there
is a real issue about the cause of the deficiency, then that alone may establish
a reasonably arguable case, irrespective of the question of prejudice. However,
where the arguable case depends on the existence
of prejudice, then the
evidentiary material upon which the employer intends to rely at the hearing
the referral under s81A.......In respect of a
deficiency of notice, it is difficult to envisage a case in which the existence
such prejudice will not be apparent by the time of hearing of the s81A
17. By analogy, a consideration of whether there has been
failure to make a claim for compensation within six months of the injury
also include consideration of whether the provisions of s38 of the Act might
apply to render the claim valid.
What is the employer’s case?
18. The employer submits that, whilst the worker may have given
notice of injury to the manager of the Bicheno Medical Centre, Mr
Watson, it is
arguable that she did not give notice of injury to any person to whom s33(1)(b)
of the Act applies because Mr Watson
is not employed by the employer.
relation to s37 of the Act, counsel for the employer submitted that Dr
Tschirn’s report is sufficient to provide evidence
employer’s defence of the claim has been prejudiced by the failure to give
notice, in that the employer has lost the
opportunity to investigate the claim,
obtain contemporaneous medical examination and otherwise manage the claim. Dr
Tschirn has
expressed doubts about the mechanism of the original injury, and the
connection to the spinal surgery that has now taken place, and
he has also
identified a discrepancy in the description of the actual incident as reported
to him by the worker, when compared to
the original incident report. Counsel
for the employer also pointed to Dr Grey’s advice that she had no
recollection of the
incident and no relevant notes.
20. The second ground of
dispute is that the worker failed to make a claim for compensation within six
months of the occurrence of
the injury, and that the employer says it is
reasonably arguable that s38 will not assist the worker to validate her
21. In relation to the third ground of dispute, the employer points to
what it says amount to inconsistencies in reporting by the
worker that are
identified by Dr Tschirn, and also that the medical certification refers to
‘general nursing duties’
and ‘general work’ including
leaning over, lifting and bending as having causal contribution.
22. Counsel
for the employer indicated that the first and second grounds formed the central
contentions relating to the dispute,
and for the reasons that I set out below, I
do not need to make any determination in relation to the third ground,
particularly as
it was not part of the main thrust of the dispute put forward by
the employer.
What is the worker’s position?
23. Counsel for the worker submitted that the worker has
complied with all of the provisions relating to the form of notice of injury
s33 of the Act. He submitted that it is clear from the terms of s33(1)(b) that
notice can be given to a person who is a supervisor,
and there is no requirement
that it be given to a person who is an employee of the employer.
Phillips, on behalf of the worker, referred to the decision of Zeeman J Wilkins
v St Giles Society
[1994] TASSC 172.
In that case, Zeeman J accepted the
finding of the Workers Compensation Commissioner that a person who was not an
employee of the
employer was a person to whom notice of injury could be given by
virtue of s33(1)(b)(iv). That finding of the Tribunal was unchallenged
appeal to the Supreme Court, and the Full Court, on appeal from Zeeman J’s
decision, noted the proposition to have been
unchallenged by the respondent,
before dismissing the appeal which had been brought in relation to other
25. Mr Phillips particularly referred to the email in evidence from
the employer to the effect that the arrangement was the worker
was paid by the
employer for her work at the Bicheno Medical Centre, and that Mr Watson was the
manager of the host employer. It
was submitted on behalf of the worker that Mr
Watson, being the manager of the host employer, was “a person under whose
supervision
the worker is employed” in accordance with s33(1)(b)(ii) of
the Act, or “a person.........apparently having authority”
receive a notice of injury in accordance with s33(1)(b)(iv). It was submitted
that to add a requirement that in either case the
person receiving the notice
also had to also be employed by the employer would be inappropriate and contrary
to the beneficial nature
of the workers compensation legislation.
submitted that because the worker has given notice of injury as required by s33,
it is not necessary to consider whether
any of the provisions of s37 might
27. In relation to the alternative ground of dispute, Mr Phillips
conceded that the worker failed to make a claim for compensation
months of the date of injury, but pointed out that s38 does not require
consideration of whether prejudice flows to the
employer because of the
worker’s failure to do so. He referred to the worker’s statutory
declaration that says no notice
of a right to make a claim was given to her by
the employer. On that basis, on the face of it, it is submitted that the
failure to make a claim for compensation within six months of the
date of injury was occasioned by “reasonable cause”,
failure by the employer to comply with s33A in relation to the worker’s
Is it reasonably arguable that notice of injury was not given
in accordance with s33?
28. There is no disagreement that notice of the injury was not
given by the worker to “the employer” under s32(1)(a) of
The question is whether it is reasonably arguable that the worker, by giving
notice of her injury to Mr Watson at the Bicheno
Medical Centre, was not giving
notice to a person referred to in s33(1)(b) of the Act.
29. The provisions of
the Act that deal with what happens after a worker gives notice of injury appear
to presuppose that notice given
under s33(1)(b) will be received by the employer
– both s33(2) and s33A refer to the actions the employer is required to
respectively where “an employer has received notice of an
injury”; and “an employer who is informed by a worker
30. Similarly, the Full Court observed in Wilkins v St Giles
[1995] TASSC 149
, on appeal from the decision of Zeeman J,
remedial purpose of workers compensation legislation, whilst possibly helpful in
interpreting difficult or obscure statutory
provisions in favour of an injured
worker, cannot prevail where the words of the Act are free from ambiguity. The
Act plainly requires
actual notice to one of the persons referred to in
s33(1)(b) accompanied by sufficient detail for the employer to identify the
event, the injurious consequence thereof and the date on which it
31. That a person under s33(1)(b) of the Act need not
necessarily be employed by the employer is something that must have been
by the Tribunal, having heard the evidence and made findings of fact,
in the matter that eventually made its way to the Supreme Court
on appeal in
Wilkins v St Giles Society. Because that particular issue was not raised as an
appeal point, there is no judicial commentary
in relation to the
Tribunal’s findings.
32. In the present instance, the evidence of the
employer is that Mr Watson is the manager of the Bicheno Medical Centre, which
“not associated with or owned by the employer”, and that Mr
Watson is not an officer or an employee of the employer.
33. Although
admittedly neither ‘strong, nor compelling’, the evidence of the
employer is enough to form the basis of
an argument that the notice of injury
given by the worker was not given to a person referred to in section 33(1)(b) of
Is it reasonably arguable that the worker might not be able to
rely on s37?
34. The employer has adduced evidence that Dr Tschirn has
raised “concerns arising casting some doubt about whether the 18
incident continued to be the major or most significant factor prompting the need
for MRI scanning and semi-urgent surgical
treatment or whether something else
intervened”.
35. It is submitted that if it is arguable that the worker
failed to give notice of injury as required by the Act, it is also arguable
the employer’s defence of the claim has been prejudiced by that failure
– because the employer has lost the opportunity
to take any of the usual
steps to investigate or otherwise manage the claim.
36. I accept the
employer’s argument in this regard, and therefore, also that there is a
reasonable argument that the provisions
of s37 would not be available to the
worker to excuse her from any failure to give notice of injury
37. On that
basis, it follows that I am satisfied the employer has demonstrated it has a
reasonably arguable case to dispute the worker’s
claim in accordance with
the first basis of dispute put forward in the s81A referral.
What about the failure to make a claim within 6 months?
38. There is no dispute that the claim was not made within six
months of the date the worker suffered the injury.
39. S38 of the Act
provides that the validity of a claim is not affected if the worker’s
failure to make that claim within six
months was “occasioned by mistake,
absence from the State of the worker, or other reasonable cause”.
“Reasonable
cause” includes a failure by the worker’s employer
to advise a worker that they may have a right to make a claim for
compensation
in relation to the injury for which the claim for compensation
40. It is submitted on behalf of the worker that her statutory
declaration that she had received no notice of her right to make a
compensation is evidence of a reasonable cause for her failure to make the claim
within the statutory time limit.
41. Whether the employer failed to comply
with its obligation under s33A to advise the worker of her right to make a claim
will depend
on whether the employer was informed of the injury by the worker.
The worker’s evidence is that she gave notice of her injury
to Mr Watson.
At this stage, there is no evidence to suggest that there has been a failure by
the employer to comply with s33A, and
no other suggestion of “reasonable
cause” for a failure to make a claim within six months.
satisfied that the employer has demonstrated it has a reasonably arguable case
to dispute the worker’s claim in accordance
with the second basis of
dispute put forward in the s81A referral.
43. There will be orders under
s81A(3)(c) and (d) of the Act.
COMMISSIONER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (138 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter