URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASADT/2020/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:11:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Maree Summers v State of Tasmania (Department of Education) & Ors [2020] TASADT 5 (28 May 2020)
[2020] TASADT 5
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
Maree Summers v State of Tasmania (Department of
Education) & Ors
[2020] TASADT 5
SUMMERS, Maree
STATE OF TASMANIA (DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION)
PEARCE, Trudy
BUCHANAN, Amanda
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
By written submissions
DELIVERED ON:
28 May 2020
DECISION OF:
Tribunal Member Wilkins
CATCHWORDS:
Complainant unsuccessful after inquiry – whether
there should be an order for payment of the respondents’ costs –
scale of costs
State of Tasmania v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal
[2008] TASSC 23
Cutler v Mayne & DHHS; Cutler v Martin & DHHS
[2008] TASADT 6
Marrone v University of Tasmania & Walters
[2016] TASADT 13
Tabain v Department of Education &Anor
[2018] TASADT 6;
Anti-Discrimination Act
DETERMINATION:
That the complainant pay the costs of the respondents
with respect to the inquiry, such costs to be calculated on a party/party basis
at 80% of the scale of fees presently allowed to practitioners and counsel
Supreme Court Rules
of Schedule 1
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant:
Respondents:
Solicitors:
Complainant:
Bishops Barristers &
Respondents:
Office of the Solicitor General
[2020] TASADT 5
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. Ms Summers made a complaint to the Office of the
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner in December 2016, that she had been
discriminated
against by her employer, the Department of Education, on the basis
of a disability, namely a chronic medical condition.
2. The complaint arose
from circumstances where the Department had purported to transfer Ms Summers
from Riverside High School, where
she had been working for about 18 years, to
another school. This was said to be in accordance with the Department’s
Transfer/Assignment of Permanent Duties Industrial Agreement 2013
(“the Transfer Agreement”). On 25 September 2015,
The Department
advised Ms Summers that she was to be transferred to Scottsdale High School in
2016. Following the receipt of medical
information relating to Ms
Summers’ medical condition, she was advised by the Department that the
transfer to Scottsdale High
School had been reviewed, and she was now to be
transferred to Exeter High School. The principal of Exeter High School wrote to
Ms Summers about her class load for the forthcoming school year. In early
December 2015, Ms Summers wrote to the Department to say
that she was unable to
accept the placement at Exeter because of her medical condition, and had decided
3. The Anti-Discrimination Commissioner accepted the complaint,
investigated it, and referred it to the Anti-Discrimination Tribunal
4. In the course of the complaint being made ready for hearing in
the Tribunal, the second and third respondents were joined as parties
5. The inquiry was heard by the former Chairperson of the Tribunal. He
handed down his determination in October 2019. He found the
complaint to be
unsubstantiated. He was not satisfied that the respondents had breached the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
. He dismissed the complaint.
respondents have sought an order that their costs of and incidental to the
inquiry be paid by the complainant. Both parties
have made written submissions
in relation to the issue of costs, and the question of whether the complainant
ought to pay the respondents’
costs is what I need to determine.
What is the law?
7. The Act provides:
Subject to s99A, each party to an inquiry is to pay his or her own costs;
The Tribunal may make an order as to costs in relation
to any inquiry or review before it if the Tribunal considers circumstances
justify the order.”
8. In State of Tasmania v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal
Evans J conducted a review of the relevant authorities in circumstances
where the Tribunal had declined to order costs after a complaint
dismissed following repeated and prolonged non-compliance with the directions of
the Tribunal. In that particular case,
Evans J held that it had been
inappropriate for the Tribunal to take into account the imbalance between the
respective resources
of the parties.
9. His Honour’s review of the
authorities also extracted a number of principles relevant to the award of costs
in the Anti-Discrimination
Tribunal, and they were set out by Tribunal Member
Brett (as he then was) in Cutler v Mayne & DHHS; Cutler v Martin & DHHS
[2008] TASADT 6.
Those principles were as follows:
95 expresses a general rule that parties are to pay their own costs.
that rule “must yield whenever the Tribunal finds in a particular case
that there are circumstances justifying the making
of an order for
power to award costs under these provisions can be distinguished from an
unconstrained grant of power. The outcome of the proceedings
will not have the
same primacy that is accorded when exercising an unconstrained discretion as to
power must be exercised judicially, and not arbitrarily, capriciously or so as
to frustrate the legislative intent.
costs discretion must not be exercised on a ground unconnected with the
proceedings. For example, the financial circumstances
of a party, or an
imbalance between the financial resources of the parties, will ordinarily not be
relevant to the exercise of the
discretion with respect to
10. These principles have been referred to and confirmed in a
number of decisions of the Anti-Discrimination Tribunal since that
11. Other matters which have previously been considered by the Tribunal
to be relevant to the exercise of the discretion in relation
application have included:
• conduct of the parties during the
proceedings;
• the motivation of the complainant in making the
• whether there was a reasonable basis to make the
• whether the complaint was trivial, vexatious or lacking in
• whether the position taken by the applicant was genuine
(if ultimately found to be misconceived).
• public interest
considerations
12. The Tribunal’s discretion to order costs, however, is
not confined to previous decisions in relation to whether s99A should
Evans J referenced in State of Tasmania v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal at
paragraph 8 from a decision of Barsten JA in
Hunter Development Brokerage Pty
Ltd v Cessnock City Council (No. 2) [2006] NSWCA;
[2006] NSWCA 292
(2006) 68 NSWLR 177:
must be taken to avoid broad discretionary powers being inflexibly confined by
comments of the Court in previous cases,
or by comments in appellate courts.
Whilst explanations as to the exercise of the power may provide guidance in
future cases, the
caution reflected in the observations of Brennan J in Norbis v
[1986] HCA 17
(1986) 161 CLR 513
at 537, quoted in Oshlack at
[35], are pertinent:
'It is one thing to say that principles may be expressed to guide the
exercise of a discretion; it is another thing to say that the
principles may
harden into legal rules which would confine the discretion more narrowly than
the Parliament intended. The width of
a statutory discretion is determined by
the statute; it cannot be narrowed by a legal rule devised by the court to
control its exercise'."
Calderbank offers
13. In relation to the conduct of parties before the Tribunal,
some decisions in relation to costs have considered circumstances where
has been a calderbank offer made to the complainant, the complainant has
rejected the offer, but ultimately proceeded to the
dismissal of the complaint
following the hearing.
14. In Marrone v University of Tasmania & Walters
[2016] TASADT 13
, in an application for costs, the respondents’
submissions relied upon the complainant’s refusal to accept an offer in
calderbank letter which contained an offer to pay the complainant $5,000 in full
settlement of the complaint. The correspondence
concluded “bearing in
mind the strength of your case and the range of likely awards of compensation
that will be made to you
if you were successful, we believe the offer is a
generous one. We strongly urge you to seek legal advice in relation to the
and your claim more generally.”.
15. In considering the
calderbank offer that had been made in the context of the principles relating to
the discretion to award costs
in the Tribunal, the Tribunal stated at paragraph
Tribunal accepts that regard ought to be had to this offer in respect of the
costs application but does not accept that
of itself it is circumstance that
would justify an award of costs against the complainant. In this regard the
letter refers to “the
strength” of the complainant’s case but
does not identify the deficiencies in evidence or law so as to put him on proper
notice of the risks he bore in pursuing his complaint. In particular, the
Tribunal was not directed to any material indicating that
notice was given to
the complainant, either whilst the matter was before the Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner or the Tribunal, that
the factual circumstances of the bullying
incident or any other employment issues raised by the complainant could not, as
of law, satisfy the definition of “industrial activity”
under s3 of the Act.”
16. The Tribunal noted that:
“This was a complaint
of some substance to the complainant; he honestly believed that his professional
development and employment
options had been markedly affected by this incident.
On the face of it, given the extent of the evidence considered, it could not
categorised as action by the complainant that was vexatious or lacking in
substance in so far as the factual circumstances were
concerned. It did however
lack substance as a matter of law; but this circumstance does not appear to have
been conveyed to the
complainant either during the ADC [Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner] process or the interlocutory stage before the Tribunal. It
raised by the Tribunal at hearing.”
17. In Marrone, the Tribunal went on to note that it was the
complainant’s mistake and perception of the nature of the events
were mostly found to have occurred) that resulted in the dismissal of the
complaint. The Tribunal declined to make an order
for costs against the
complainant.
18. In Cutler, Tribunal Member Brett was dealing with an
application for costs by the successful respondent. The basis of the
application
was that the solicitor for the respondents had forwarded to the
complainant a calderbank letter in which an offer “without
prejudice save
as to costs” of $15,000 was made in full and final settlement of both
complaints and a workers compensation
19. Tribunal Member Brett, in
considering the calderbank letter as part of the basis for the application for
costs observed that the
mere fact of the calderbank letter did not justify
making the order for costs, but that he ought to have regard to it in his
determination of the application. He said “the relevant
consideration is not simply whether the complainant by failing to
offer has ended up in a worse position at the conclusion of the case, but rather
whether she acted unreasonably in rejecting
the offer, and if she did, whether
that unreasonable conduct justified the making of an order for costs.”
Tribunal Member
Brett referred to Pollard v Baulderstone Hornibrook Engineering
Pty Ltd (No. 2)
[2007] NSWSC 486.
The passage that Tribunal Member Brett was
referring to in Pollard states as follows:
Court may have regard to a calderbank letter when deciding questions of costs
but “in the end the question is whether
the offeree’s failure to
accept the offer, in all the circumstances, warrants departure from the ordinary
rule as to costs,
and that the offeree ends up worse off than if the offer had
been accepted does not of itself warrant departure” – SMEC
Services Pty Ltd v Campbelltown City Council
[2000] NSWCA 323
Bradley (No 2)
[2003] NSWCA 258.
Relevant factors are whether the rejection of
the compromised offer was reasonable in the circumstances and the timeframe in
the offeree had to consider the offer – Crump v Equine Nutrition
Systems Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2007] NSWSC 25
. It is for the defendant to
persuade the Court that the plaintiff acted unreasonably in rejecting the
calderbank offer – Gretton
at [16]. Circumstances to be considered in
determining whether the failure to accept the offer was unreasonable or not
include the
making of an assessment of the strengths and weaknesses of the
plaintiff’s case looking at the claim prospectively at the time
was made. This task is not to be determined with the benefit of hindsight
– Gretton at 924].”
20. In Pollard, the calderbank letter relied upon was dated 21
July 2006. It was expressed to be open until 10.00 am on 24 July 2006.
received by the plaintiff’s solicitors by fax at 11.00 am on Friday 21
July 2006. The hearing of the proceedings was
listed too, and did commence, at
10.00 am the following Monday (that is, the time that the calderbank offer
expired). Hislop J noted
that the plaintiff was a young man, living outside
Sydney, and not well educated. His Honour was prepared to infer that the
met with his legal advisers on the morning of the hearing (but not
before), but did not accept there was ample opportunity to discuss
before it expired. He said “The time allowed was insufficient to discuss
the offer, obtain appropriate advice upon
it, fully consider that advice and
reflect upon the many considerations relevant to whether the offer should be
accepted or not.”
21. In Cutler, Tribunal Member Brett
careful examination of the letter tendered by [counsel for the respondents]
reveals that the offer related not only to both
complaints, but also to a
“workers compensation claim”. Both counsel attempted to give me
information as to the nature
of that claim, from the bar table, but at the end
of the day, I have no evidence as to the merits of that claim at the time the
was made. I have no way of assessing the reasonableness of the offer
having regard to the fact that it was intended to compromise
not only these
claims but also the workers compensation claim. In those circumstances it seems
to me that it is impossible for me
to say that the complainant acted
unreasonably in rejecting the offer.
Furthermore, I note that that the offer remained open for 10 days only. I
have no material before me which would enable me to assess
whether that was an
adequate time for the complainant to properly understand and assess the offer,
particularly given what she was
being asked to
compromise.”
22. Tribunal Member Brett, for those reasons, was not prepared
to conclude that the complainant acted unreasonably in rejecting the
therefore the calderbank letter carried little weight in his consideration of
the application for costs. The application
for costs was rejected.
Correspondence between the parties
23. On 25 August 2017 the Office of the Solicitor-General of
Tasmania, which was acting for the first, and at that time only, respondent
wrote to the solicitors for the complainant. Amongst other things, that
correspondence set out the Department’s position that
the letter from the
Department to Ms Summers on 1 September 2015 [the transfer to Scottsdale letter]
was in line with Departmental
transfer policy. The correspondence went
evidence was sought as Ms Summers had stated she had health issues and a series
of questions were asked of her
GP to clarify the impact of her medical
condition. It is noted that Dr Hughes refers to direct sunlight, and travel
probably one
hour each way would put her at increased risk. Dr Jevtic then
reported on 16 November 2015 that travelling long distances would
put Ms Summers
at risk. A review of the initial transfer then occurred, and on 23 November Ms
Summers was advised that another placement
was available at Exeter High School,
which lessened the travel distance from her home.
On 8 December, your client then advised she would retire, resigning her
It is therefore the Department’s position that it had taken into
account the medical information your client provided and found
an alternative
school which reduced the travel time and risk to your client. After being
offered an alternative school your client
has then resigned, and the Department
was not in a position to make reasonable adjustments, consider any impacts or
seek further
clarification/information regarding her placement at Exeter High
As such it is our view that no discrimination has occurred as claimed by your
client, and should this matter proceed to a hearing
we do not see how your
client will be able to prove her claim.”
24. On 18 April 2018 the solicitors for Ms Summers wrote to the
Solicitor-General’s office in an email that was headed “Without
prejudice save as to costs”. That correspondence rejected offers that
were put by the respondents (at this stage the second
and third respondents had
been joined as parties) which had been made at a conciliation conference. The
email went on:
“Ms Summers’
position remains that, on the information which the respondents had at the time
the transfer decisions were
made, it was clear that travel time to Exeter High
School, and the duties she was to undertake there, would be detrimental to her
health. It doesn’t appear that any enquiry at all was made as to the
duties Ms Summers would be required to undertake if she
were to accept
employment at Exeter High School. Further Ms Summers’ position is that,
when she consulted Dr Jevtic regarding
the travel to Exeter each day his advice
was that would be detrimental to her health. This is at odds with what I
understand to
be the Department’s position that an employee (no longer
with the Department) had a conversation with Dr Jevtic regarding suitable
for Ms Summers to be travelling in a
vehicle........”
25. The email correspondence went on to outline how an offer of
settlement which was contained in the correspondence had been assessed
“Of course submissions
would be made that these amounts should be in excess of this. Costs would also
be sought. The offer
above is based on these very conservative
If this offer is not accepted, and a more favourable result achieved at the
Inquiry, then this correspondence will be relied upon
in relation to the
question of costs.”
26. The office of the Solicitor-General responded by email
dated 30 April 2018, rejecting that offer and making a counter offer without
admission of liability. Ms Brooks, who was acting as solicitor for the
respondent, confirmed that it was the respondents’
position that:
“[Ms Summers’]
medical reports refer to long distances and 15 mins in direct sunlight, which
car travel is not, and that
Exeter school is not a long distance in our view.
Further, your client stated that she had consulted Dr Jevtic again in the same
email as her resignation, which the Department contends ceased their
requirements to look in to the transfer to Exeter further.
Again we reiterate
that the proper avenue for your client was to seek a review pursuant to the
provisions of the Teacher Transfer
Industrial Agreement, however she chose to
resign, which was her decision and not the fault of the respondents in this
27. In early September 2018 the inquiry was set down for
hearing in October 2018. On 20 September 2018 Mr Brooks wrote to the
complainant’s
solicitors She advised that the respondents disputed that
there had been any discrimination, and that the respondents had at all
acted reasonably in all of the circumstances in respect to the transfer of Ms
Summers and acted in accordance with the Agreement
by requesting and taking into
account the medical information received at various times.
28. Ms Brooks set
medical information received provides that:
sunlight with exposure over 15 mins worsens your client’s condition;
Extended car
travel, probably one hour each way will put her at increased risk of skeletal
long distances is prejudicial to her health;
Sun exposure
is hazardous.
It is the respondents’ position that the
transfer to Exeter was reasonable, and in accordance with the Transfer Agreement
medical information available at that time as:
Car travel is
not direct exposure to the sun;
other protection measures, such as clothing, that would provide further
protection against exposure during car travel;
Exeter is not
a “long distance” from her home and is within the one hour stated by
The respondents maintain that no discrimination has
occurred against your client, and that should she have believed that the
requirements
of the Transfer Industrial Agreement were not met by the
Department, there was a process available to her in that agreement for a
29. A settlement offer was made, and was open until midday
Monday 24 September 2018. Ms Brooks specifically indicated that it was
calderbank offer being made and stated that if the offer was not accepted, and
the Tribunal made orders in terms equivalent to
or less favourable than the
terms of the offer she had made, “the respondents may seek orders that you
pay the costs incurred
by the respondents from the date of this correspondence,
on a solicitor and client basis, and that the respondents should not have
your costs, from the date of this correspondence”. The offer sent by
email on Thursday 20 September 2018 at 2:06pm.
The Chairperson’s findings
30. In his comprehensive decision following the inquiry, the
Chairperson made a number of findings of fact before concluding that
complaint was unsubstantiated. These findings of fact included findings that
the medical evidence in the possession of the Department
at the time Ms Summers
was transferred to Exeter was:
• That Ms Summers’ condition was exacerbated by
direct sunlight with exposure over 15 mins.
• Extended car travel
– probably one hour each way – would put her at increased risk of
skeletal problems.
• Sun exposure was hazardous from the point of view
of aggravating her skin condition and because of the risk of skin
• Travelling in a car for long distances daily is prejudicial
to her health.
• Direct sunlight did not mean sunlight through car
window, and preventative measures such as long sleeves and scarves would
31. The Chairperson further found that the first time the
Department understood that driving for a period of more than 10-15 mins
detrimental to Ms Summers’ health was when Ms Buchanan, the second
respondent, saw Dr Jevtic’s statement of
2 October 2018.
Chairperson further found that the Transfer Agreement provisions relating to
review or deferral of a decision to transfer
a teacher, or an appeal with
respect of the decision, were provided for, and Ms Summers was aware of those
provisions but instead
of exercising her rights under the Transfer Agreement she
opted to retire.
33. In relation to medical evidence given in the Tribunal by
Dr Jevtic, the complainant’s treating specialist, that car travel
complainant should be limited to 15 minutes, the Chairperson noted at paragraph
111 of his decision that the determination
of the question of unreasonableness
must relate to the circumstances which pertained at the time of the alleged
discrimination.
Accordingly the only evidence that could be taken into account
was the evidence the respondents had at the time the decision was
transfer the complainant to Exeter High School. The Chairperson noted “at
that time the respondents were unaware Ms
Summers was unable to travel by car
for more than 15 mins.”. The Chairperson went on to consider the
correspondence from the
principal at Exeter High School, and considered it not
to be relevant to the questions before the Tribunal.
Submissions as to costs – the respondents
34. The respondents acknowledged that the outcome of
proceedings is but one factor to be considered in relation to the question of
whether it is appropriate to depart from the starting position that the parties
ought to bear their own costs. However, they submit
that the circumstances of
this matter do justify an order for costs in their favour.
35. They submit
that relevant factors to consider are that the complaint was lacking in
substance and had no reasonable prospects
of success. They submitted I can
conclude that because the respondents have maintained the same position
throughout the course of
the complaint, and that position was ultimately the
decision reached by the Chairperson.
36. They say that the non-acceptance of
the calderbank offer was unreasonable, and that I can be satisfied about that
because the
offer was a generous one in comparison to other awards that had been
made in this Tribunal, and an assessment of the respondents’
case was set
out in various correspondence to the complainant’s practitioners as the
matter progressed. They say also that
the timeframe within which the calderbank
offer was open was a reasonable one and gave the complainant ample opportunity
advice in respect of the offer. They say I can be satisfied about
this because directions were in place that required statements
of evidence to be
filed and served the day after the calderbank offer was due to expire, and
therefore the complainant would have
been in touch with her solicitor at that
time. Further, it was submitted that an offer to settle on the same basis had
already been
made on 30 April 2018, and was rejected by the complainant on 21
37. In general, the respondents say the complainant had been put on
notice about the risks of pursuing her claim by the respondents’
correspondence which identified deficiencies in her case, and that it is
significant that she has had legal representation throughout
the course of these
proceedings.
Submissions as to costs – the complainant
38. In relation to the settlement offers from the respondent,
the complainant says that:
• There was a brief email on 30 April 2018 offering to
settle on the basis that the respondents pay the complainant $10,000,
parties bear their own costs, and there be no admission of
• The calderbank offer of 2:06pm on 20 September 2018
“briefly asserts the basis for the respondent resisting the claim”,
but that the correspondence did not outline in any great detail or with any
great particularity the substantive reasons why the complainant
should accept
• The respondents referred to the review process of the
transfer agreement but did not particularise or identify the process,
out where that process could be found.
• The offer was open only for a
period of two business days.
• The issues involved in this matter were
issues of some breadth and complexity.
39. In the circumstances, the complainant says it was
unreasonable to expect her to be able to consider and make a decision in
to the calderbank offer within two business days. It was submitted
that this was because the respondents’ position was not
particularised in
any great detail, the matters in issue were complicated, and the offer put an
end to the complainant’s entire
action which involved ending a
longstanding employment, and significant personal hurt and financial detriment
to the complainant.
40. It was further submitted that even though findings
were made that the actions of the respondents were not such to amount to
discrimination
or prohibited conduct, there were failings in the way that the
respondents dealt with the complainant, in that they did not seek
clarification
41. The complainant submits that an
order of costs in Anti-Discrimination proceedings should only be reserved for
the very clearest
of circumstances, where the complainant’s actions can be
seen to be motivated by malice, lack of good faith or a lack of belief
merits of the complaint.
42. The complaint ought to be considered to be
litigation in the public interest. The complainant was seeking an apology and
an assurance
that the policies of the Department would be reviewed to prevent
other people being in the same position. The complainant took the
view that the
policies were insufficient to cater for people with disabilities. It was
submitted that the complainant was therefore
seeking a remedy which would
benefit a group of society as a whole, namely teachers with disabilities
employed by the first respondent.
Consideration
43. There is no suggestion in this case that the complainant
was acting maliciously in bringing or pursuing her complaint, nor that
complaint itself was trivial or vexatious, nor that the complainant was anything
other than genuine and making the complaint
in relation to a matter that was
significant to her.
44. However, I do not accept the submission that the
Tribunal ought only exercise its discretion to order costs where there is a
lack of good faith, or no genuine belief in the merits of the complaint.
The discretion of the Tribunal is wider than a simple assessment
motivations of the complainant, and if the successful respondents to proceedings
are able to point to circumstances (including
something other than mala fides on
the part of the complainant) that would justify the exercise of the
Tribunal’s discretion
to move away from the starting premise in s95 of the
Act, it is likely that an order will be made in their favour.
45. There have
been some instances where the Tribunal, in declining to order costs, has placed
weight on a complainant’s honestly
held belief in the merits of their
claim. For example, see Marrone at paragraph 15:
many of the aspects of this complaint did need determination upon the ev idence,
it is unfortunate that the legal
issue that the bullying incident could not have
satisfied the definition of “industrial activity” and did not
any other prescribed attribute under s16 of the Act was not identified
earlier. The complainant was clearly under the impression
that this incident
arguably provided a valid basis of complaint given the result of the
investigation by the ADC and referral for
Inquiry. The complainant was genuine,
the factual circumstances relied upon in the main occurred but it was the
complainant’s
mistaken perception of the nature of those events that
resulted in the dismissal of his complaint.”
46. Where a complainant has been legally represented in the
proceedings before the Tribunal, the question of whether they hold an
held belief as to the strength or veracity of their claim ought not carry the
same weight as it might in circumstances where
a complainant is self-
represented. This is because the complainant will have had the benefit of legal
advice in relation to the
application of relevant law to their claim, and the
benefit of objective advice in assessing the relative strengths of the
positions when making decisions in relation to settlement and/or
the risks of proceeding to hearing. The complainant was much better
understand her position and the ramifications of the respondents’
expressed case than an unrepresented litigant with
a genuine, but ultimately
misguided belief.
47. It was submitted on the part of the complainant that
these were proceedings in the public interest. I accept that the original
complaint to the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner sought that the Department
undertake a more careful consideration of medical evidence
when dealing with
transfers for teachers with disabilities. By the time settlement offers were
being exchanged between the parties,
what the complainant was seeking was an
amount of money representing loss of earning and general damages. The
complainant was completely
entitled to seek settlement of the complaint on any
basis she and her solicitors considered to be appropriate, but I do not think
the circumstances enable me to conclude that the proceedings were conducted as a
matter of public interest.
48. I do not accept the submission that the
respondents’ dealings in relation to the complainant ought to be taken
into account
when considering the question of costs, where those dealings are
submitted to be ‘failings’ on the respondents’
behalf, not
amounting to discrimination or prohibited conduct. A costs discretion must not
be exercised on a ground unconnected
with the proceedings ( See Evans J in State
of Tasmania v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal, paragraph 17). Those actions, which
said the respondents ought to have taken to clarify medical information
towards the end of 2015, have no connection to the proceedings
Tribunal, and are irrelevant to the costs issue.
49. In relation to the
calderbank offer made on behalf of the respondents on 20 September 2018, in its
terms it goes further than
a ‘brief assertion’ of the basis of the
resistance of the claim, as has been submitted on behalf of the complainant.
The offer set out the Respondents’ position about the medical evidence
available to the respondents at the time the decision
to transfer the
complainant to Exeter was made, and the basis upon which that decision was made,
relying on that evidence. The medical
evidence set out as part of the
calderbank offer was essentially consistent with that set out on the letter from
the Office of the
Solicitor General on 30 April 2018 where the same settlement
offer was made, and which was rejected three weeks later. The question
whether the complainant’s failure to accept the calderbank offer was
unreasonable. There are factors which might support
an argument that the
failure was unreasonable, and, in particular, I am mindful that the calderbank
offer made was for the same amount
which had previously been made and rejected,
so it is likely that issues in relation to a potential settlement for that same
are likely to have already been the subject if some previous
consideration. However, I am ultimately not prepared to reach that
conclusion.
This is because, having regard to the surrounding circumstances at the time the
calderbank offer was made, I do not
consider the relatively limited time frame
within which it was open gave the complainant and her solicitors enough time to
consider the offer and its implications. It was submitted on behalf of
the respondents that the fact that a deadline for filing
statements of evidence
in the Tribunal was imminent (that is, within about three business days) at the
time the calderbank offer
was made meant that I could infer that the complainant
would likely have been in communication at that time with her solicitors.
I agree that I can draw that inference, I also note from the Tribunal’s
file that the Complainant’s statement
of evidence was signed on 24
September 2018 (the day the calderbank offer expired), and the
complainant’s solicitors apparently
filed that statement in the Tribunal
by email of 25 September 2018, together with a statement of agreed facts and a
copy of the index
of the book of agreed documents, and advised that the agreed
book of documents was being forwarded by post. Compliance with the
pre-hearing
directions made by the Tribunal would likely have been a pressing issue for the
complainant and her solicitors during
the two business days that the offer was
open, which would have impacted on time available to consider the
50. I am not persuaded that I ought to regard the failure to accept
the calderbank offer as unreasonable in all the circumstances.
That failure
does not, of itself, determine the issue of costs, but I do not discount it
completely in looking at an overall consideration
of whether the discretion
ought to be exercised, because I think it is relevant to the consistency of the
respondents’ position
throughout the proceedings.
51. I have reached
the view that it is appropriate that there be an order that the complainant pay
the respondents’ costs of
these proceedings.
52. In deciding the
exercise my discretion in favour of the respondents, in addition to considering
the factors set out above, I have
taken into account the fact that the
respondents’ position in resisting the complaint was vindicated by the
ultimate findings
of the Chairperson. The respondents’ position in
relation to the medical evidence available to the Department at the time
decision was made to transfer the complainant to Exeter has been consistent
throughout the proceedings. The complainant and
her solicitors had been on
notice about the respondents’ argument in relation to the Transfer
Agreement (that the Department
had complied with the Agreement, on the basis of
the medical information available, until the complainant advised that she was
after which the Department’s obligations under the Agreement
ceased) from the time the complaint was referred to inquiry.
The complainant
and her solicitors had ample opportunity to consider the respondents’
position, assess their own case and make
a decision about the desirability
either compromising the claim , or proceeding to hearing. Although the general
rule under the
Act is that each party be responsible for their own costs, a
party in full possession of information about the other party’s
the applicable law cannot assume that there will be no risk as to costs
I have also particularly taken into account the fact that the
complainant’s solicitors, in the offer by email on 18 April
foreshadowed their own application for costs in the event that the complainant
was successful following the outcome of the
inquiry. The general rule in
Tribunal proceedings is that the parties will be responsible for their own
costs. However, where a
matter has been referred for inquiry, if the parties
approach the Tribunal proceedings in the spirit of ‘costs follow the
litigation, that may be a factor that the Tribunal takes into
account in considering whether to the discretion to award costs ought
exercised. In this case, I have done so.
Party/party or solicitor/client costs?
54. The Respondents have asked that an order for costs include
that costs be paid by the complainant on a party/party basis up until
September 2018 (the date of the calderbank offer) and thereafter on a
solicitor/client basis.
55. I have already determined that the
complainant’s failure to accept the calderbank offer was not unreasonable
circumstances. Even if I had determined to the contrary, that would
not necessarily have led me to conclude that an order including
a proportion of
solicitor/client costs would be appropriate. There will not be any order for
costs on a solicitor/client basis.
What is the appropriate scale of costs?
56. The Respondents have sought costs at 80% of the Supreme
Court scale of fees allowed to practitioners and counsel – that
Supreme Court Rules 2000
, Schedule 1,
The Complainant says that the
scale of costs provided for in Schedule 1 of the
Magistrates Court (Civil
Division) Rules 1998
would be sufficient in the event that I made an order for
57. The Act is silent as to the appropriate scale to be applied where
there is an order for costs under s99A.
58. Tribunal Member Cuthbertson, in
Tabain v Department of Education &Anor
[2018] TASADT 6
reviewed Tribunal
costs decisions and concluded that all reported decisions of the Tribunal have
set costs at 80% of the Supreme
Court scale. In that particular matter, she was
considering the appropriate costs scale where the successful Respondent sought
order for costs at the rate of 85% of the Supreme Court scale. Tribunal
Member Cuthbertson observed at paragraph 27:
decision does not disclose that there was any particularly complexity involved
in this matter that justifies an order that
departs from the usual orders made
by the Tribunal. I am satisfied that the practice of the Tribunal is to award
costs on a party/party
basis to be assessed at 80% of the Supreme Court scale in
the absence of special circumstances”
59. I accept that the practice of the Tribunal has been to set
costs at 80% of the Supreme Court scale. I can find no reported decision
different scale has been considered to be appropriate. I can see no reason to
depart from that practice, and I determine
that it is the appropriate scale to
be applied to the costs order in this matter.
L. D. WILKINS
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (203 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter