URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCAT/2025/187.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
FM (Application for Administration) [2025] TASCAT 187 (24 September 2025)
FM (Application for Administration)
[2025] TASCAT 187
Guardianship
The Public Trustee
Public Guardian
FM (Represented
KN (Applicant)
Hearing Date:
4 September 2025
Hearing Location:
Date of Orders:
4 September 2025
Date Reasons Issued:
24 September 2025
C Street – Ordinary Member
O Ridley – Ordinary
M Hale – Ordinary Member
Orders Made:
The Public Trustee (Tas) is appointed as administrator until 3 September
Catchwords:
Guardianship stream – application for administration – whether
person has impaired decision-making ability – where
no formal health
practitioner report available – where no evidence that requirements of
Section 13 of the Act were met by health
practitioner – whether
requirements in Section 13 of the Act being met are a precondition to Tribunal
making an order –
Administrator appointed.
Legislation Cited:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and Administration Regulations (2017);
Tasmanian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act (2020);
Article 12 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities.
Cases Cited:
CX (Federal Jurisdiction Issue)
[2025] TASCAT 158
JK (Request
to Withdraw Application)
[2022] TASCAT 21
Ship "Shin Kobe Maru" v
Empire Shipping Company Inc
[1994] HCA 54.
Representation:
Separate Representative for FM: T MacGregor, Tasmanian Legal
Advocate for FM: K Verdouw, Advocacy Tasmania
2025/GAB/883
Publication Restriction:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication.
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
is an 86-year-old man who currently resides in an aged care facility in Southern
Tasmania (the Aged Care Facility), together with
his partner of over twenty
years. It is FM’s strong wish that this living situation continues for the
rest of his life.
has impaired decision-making capacity arising against a diagnosis of dementia.
With the support of his advocate, he was an active
participant in the hearing of
this matter and expressed his views and preferences to the Tribunal.
informal decision-making and financial management supports that FM’s
family, particularly his daughter KN and son-in-law
SN, have had in place to
date, are no longer meeting FM’s needs.
has accrued a debt with the Aged Care Facility as a result of the decision of
Services Australia to assess his former home, that
he resided in with his
partner, as joint property. This is notwithstanding the fact that his partner
was the sole registered proprietor
of the property. The result of that decision
is that FM’s care costs exceed his current capacity to pay. The attorney
partner has reportedly refused to assist with FM’s aged
care costs from the proceeds of sale of the former home.
20 August 2025, KN made an application seeking the appointment of the Public
Trustee as administrator for FM. Following a hearing
on 4 September 2025, we
made the order sought in the application.
8 September 2025, Ms Katie Verdouw, advocate for FM, requested that a written
statement of reasons be provided in this matter.
These are the reasons produced
in satisfaction of that request.
The Hearing
hearing of this matter proceeded with FM, supported by his advocate Ms Verdouw,
KN (the applicant), SN (KN’s husband), and
Ms Avon Li and Ms Paige Evans
of the Public Trustee, all present at the hearing in person. We were joined by
video link by SK (clinical
care manager) and TH (accounts supervisor) of
FM’s Aged Care Facility, and the separate representative for FM, Mr Toby
(who appeared as FM’s separate representative pursuant to a
previous order of the Tribunal).
did not have the benefit of a Health Practitioner Report that complied with the
requirements of r 4(1) of the
Guardianship and Administration Regulations
(the Regulations). A letter from Dr XN was provided in support of the
application, as was a Myagedcare assessment of the Southern
Aged Care Assessment
advised that after a number of requests for a Health Practitioner Report by
phone and email over a period of about four weeks,
the Aged Care Provider
procured the letter from Dr XN referred to above. When KN was advised by the
Tribunal Registry of the requirement
for a complying Health Practitioner Report,
further attempts were made to obtain a complying report. The report was due to
be provided
the day prior to the hearing. Due to illness, KN was advised that Dr
XN was unable to complete the report.
accepted KN’s explanation for not providing a complying Health
Practitioner Report and proceeded to hear the application
on the basis that KN
had provided a statement outlining the efforts that had been made to obtain a
complying report and why the report
cannot be provided as required by r 4(5) of
the Regulations.
received written submissions from KN, and we heard oral evidence and submissions
from all persons present at the hearing including
Preliminary
the commencement of the hearing we had before us an application on behalf of the
Aged Care Facility requesting that the Facility
be added as a party to the
proceeding.
application disclosed the reasons that the Aged Care Facility was seeking to be
made a party were that:
had a debt with the Aged Care Facility in the sum of $20,836.12;
FM entered the Aged Care Facility he did so as a fully supported resident;
with FM’s partner also being a resident in the Facility, his circumstances
at some stage were reassessed and he was required
to pay a daily accommodation
payment as well as a basic daily care fee i.e. the financial means of FM and his
partner were assessed
Aged Care Facility was aware through SN that FM’s partner’s family
were refusing to assist with FM’s aged care
costs, and that they were
unsure whether FM had obtained legal advice about any interest he might have in
the proceeds of sale from
the former home.
advocate advised us that FM wanted the Aged Care Facility to participate in the
hearing and provide its view on the application.
explained to TH, the representative of the Aged Care Facility, that we could
hear evidence and take submissions from whomever we
considered appropriate. We
advised TH that it was our intention to hear from both him and SK, whether the
Facility was made a party
to the proceeding or not. With that said, we asked TH
whether the application for the Facility to be joined was pressed, which he
confirmed it was, and reiterated the reasons given in the application.
determining whether a person should be made a party to a proceeding, the
Tribunal must consider the following matters pursuant
Tasmanian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2020
96. Person may be joined as party
(1) The Tribunal may order that a person be joined as a party to proceedings if
the Tribunal considers that –
the person should be bound by, or have the benefit
of, a decision of the Tribunal in the proceedings; or
(b) the person’s interests are affected by the proceedings; or
(c) for any other reason it is desirable that the person be joined as a party.
was recently observed by Senior Member Fougere in the matter of
CX (Federal
[2025] TASCAT 158
, proceedings in the Protective
Division do not generally determine disputes between parties but rather have at
their centre the person
their interests. In that context the number of potential persons that
be bound by, or have the benefit of, a decision by the
Tribunal” in proceedings in this Division is quite limited. The only
substantive decision for us in this matter was whether or not an administrator
should be appointed for FM. The only parties that
could be said to be bound by,
or require the benefit of, such a decision, are FM and whomever we determined to
appoint as administrator.
It follows that we did not accept that the Aged Care
Facility was a person that “should be bound by, or have the benefit of,
decision of the Tribunal in the proceedings.”
Aged Care Facility is owed funds by FM. It is not suggested that the Aged Care
Facility was necessarily driven by its financial
interest in applying to be
joined as a party. That matter is, however, an interest in the proceedings in so
far as the Facility may
have had difficulty with rectifying that issue in the
absence of a substitute decision maker for FM. The question for us was whether
such an interest is sufficient, in an application for administration orders, to
have a party joined to the proceeding. We determined
that it was not. Again,
these proceedings are not adversarial in nature, they are about FM, and the
protection of FM’s interests.
They do not, and could not, determine how
the matter of FM’s aged care debt should be managed. Ultimately, the
specific management
of FM’s affairs is a separate matter for whomever is
appointed as administrator, albeit with a function of the Tribunal in
accept that the Aged Care Facility’s application to be joined as a party
was primarily concerned with supporting FM and promoting
FM’s interests at
the hearing. To the extent that we had stated an intention to hear evidence and
submissions from the staff
of the Aged Care Facility during the hearing, whether
the application for joinder was granted or not, we did not consider there was
any other reason that the joining of the Aged Care Facility as a party was
therefore dismissed the application for the Aged Care Facility to be joined a
party to the proceedings.
The Legislative Framework
power for the Tribunal to make an administration order for a person arises from
s 51 of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
(the Act). To make
an administration order for a person Tribunal must be satisfied:
the person has impaired decision-making ability in respect of financial
the person is in need of an administrator; and
any order made will promote the person’s personal and social
is a presumption in s 11(1) of the Act that a person has decision making
capacity. For the purposes of the Act, for the Tribunal
to be satisfied that an
adult has impaired decision-making capacity we must be positively satisfied that
they are unable, even with
the provision of access to practicable and
appropriate support to (per s 11(2) of the Act):
information relevant to the decision; or
information relevant to the decision for sufficient time to make and
consistently communicate the decision; or
or weigh information relevant to the decision; or
Communicate
the decision by speech or other means.
determining whether there is a need for an administrator, the Tribunal must
consider the wishes and preferences of the person as
far as they can be
ascertained, whether the needs of the person could be met by other means less
restrictive on the person’s
freedom of decision and action, and the wishes
of close family members, carers, and other significant people in the
life (per s 51(2) of the Act).
with any decision made under the Act, the Tribunal is required to observe the
principles contained in s 8 of the Act.
will be seen from the reasons that follow, s 13 of the Act relating to the
requirements placed upon health practitioners undertaking
formal assessments of
decision-making capacity for the purposes of hearings by the Tribunal and
applications pursuant to the Act,
was also put in issue in this matter.
13 of the Act requires that:
(1) If a health practitioner or other person is responsible for conducting an
assessment of a person’s decision-making ability
for the purposes of a
hearing or determination of the Tribunal, that person is to take reasonable
(a) inform the person whose decision-making
ability is being assessed of the nature and purpose of the assessment; and
(b) provide information to the person or the
person responsible for that person about the nature of any conclusions made
assessment and the basis for those conclusions; and
(c) provide the person or the person responsible
for that person with an opportunity to ask questions about the findings of the
assessment;
(d) comply with such other requirements in
relation to the assessment, if any, as may be prescribed.
(2) Where the assessment of a person’s
decision-making ability is being undertaken for the purposes of an application
Tribunal under this Act, the person making that application is to take
reasonable steps to –
(a) inform the person and the person responsible
for that person that an application is being considered; and
(b) identify the matter or matters in relation to
which the application is being considered; and
(c) assist the person or the person responsible
for that person to identify any less restrictive alternatives to making the
application;
(d) advise the person and the person responsible
for that person of the right to seek legal representation or advocacy support;
(e) provide information about access to legal
representation and advocacy support; and
(f) comply with any other prescribed requirements.
The Section 13 Requirements
foreshadowed, Dr XN’s report was not completed on the Health Practitioner
Report form provided by the Tribunal. Whilst it
is not a requirement that the
form be used, there is much to recommend its use. It is a comprehensive
assessment form that outlines
the relevant provisions of the Act, requires
health practitioners to turn their minds to, and certify that they have complied
the requirements of s 13 of the Act, and, properly completed, will be in
compliance with r 4(1) of the Regulations.
Unfortunately,
Dr XN’s report neither complied with r 4(1), nor did we have any evidence
before us that Dr XN had complied with
the requirements in s 13 of the Act.
MacGregor, as separate representative, put to us that we were unable to proceed
to make an order in the absence of evidence that
the requirements of s 13(1) of
the Act had been complied with by Dr XN.
13 of the Act is designed to ensure that persons with diminished decision-making
capacity are treated fairly and are as fully
informed as possible about any
assessment that a health practitioner makes of their decision-making capacity.
The provisions ensure
that a person is given assistance to identify less
restrictive options than the appointment of an administrator, and they are
of their right to legal representation and advocacy support. The
provisions are the legislative embodiment of the principles set
out in Article
12 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
that context, compliance with the provisions of s 13(1) by health practitioners
is an important component of the new legislative
regime arising from the
amendments made to the Act on 1 September 2024. However, we do not agree that
compliance with those provisions
by a health practitioner providing evidence as
to decision-making capacity is a necessary pre-condition to the Tribunal
that evidence for consideration, or to the Tribunal making an order
for administration.
is nothing within the Act that explicitly makes compliance with s 13(1) of the
Act by a health practitioner a mandatory pre-condition
for the making of an
administration order by the Tribunal. The Tribunal has a different set of
limitations and obligations in making
its determination, arising from s 51 and s
8 of the Act. We do not consider that any such requirement to consider
compliance with
s 13(1) arises by implication either. Any requirement that the
Tribunal also consider the compliance of another with s 13(1) of the
not explicitly called on by the Act to do so, would run counter to the principle
enunciated by the High Court in Ship "Shin
Kobe Maru" v Empire Shipping Company
[1994] HCA 54
It is quite inappropriate to read provisions conferring jurisdiction or granting
powers to a court by making implications or imposing
limitations which are not
found in the express words.
requirement that an application could not ever proceed without an assessment
that complies with s 13(1) of the Act would also be
antithetical to the
protective jurisdiction exercised by the Tribunal. As was recognised by
President Schyvens in the matter of
JK (Request to Withdraw Application)
[2022] TASCAT 21
the Tribunal, in its Guardianship Stream, ultimately
exercises a codified form of the historical parens patriae jurisdiction
by the Court. The nature and wording of that codification has changed
over time as society’s understanding and treatment of
persons with
disabilities has rightly changed, but the central tenet of protection of the
interests of a person with a disability
are any number of circumstances in which it is not possible or reasonably
practicable to obtain evidence that complies with
s 13(1) of the Act, such as a
person’s disengagement from medical care, or where due to their
circumstances a person is unable
to access appropriate medical care, or simply
where there is an inability to extract an appropriately drafted report from a
practitioner within a reasonable time period. The Tribunal should not be
prevented from exercising its jurisdiction to protect the
interests of a person
with a decision-making incapacity in those circumstances, where we are otherwise
satisfied that the provisions
of s 51 of the Act are met and we have observed
the requirements of s 8 of the Act.
of the aforegoing should be taken to suggest that consideration of compliance
with the s 13(1) requirements is not a relevant
element of the hearing process
undertaken by the Tribunal. We should consider, and have considered, the extent
to which Dr XN has
complied with the requirements of s 13(1) in considering what
weight to give his evidence.
have also considered the requirements placed on the Applicant to ensure
compliance with the s 13 requirements. Section 50(3)(b)
of the Act requires an
application for an administration order to contain the prescribed information
which includes a declaration
by the person making the application that all
reasonable steps have been taken to comply with s 13 of the Act in accordance
r 5(1)(a) of the Regulations. We take this to mean that the Applicant
declares both that she has taken reasonable steps to comply
with her own
obligations under s 13(2) of the Act, and has taken reasonable steps to ensure
that, where an assessment of decision-making
capacity is carried out, the
requirements of s 13(2) of the Act are complied with by the person carrying out
that assessment.
are satisfied that KN had taken reasonable steps to comply with her obligations
under s 13(2) of the Act. Through the support of
his advocate and his close
family members in KN and SN, FM has been supported throughout the application
and hearing process. We
are satisfied that FM has been informed of the reasons
for the application and the content of the evidence before us and that he
been assisted with understanding that information. Of his own accord, and
through his advocate, FM told us what he thought about
that evidence, and we
have considered those views.
the reasons previously outlined above in [9] and [10], we are also satisfied
that KN has taken reasonable steps to obtain evidence
from Dr XN that complies
with his obligations under s 13(1), albeit unsuccessfully.
therefore determined to proceed with consideration of the
Application.
Decision-Making Capacity
his report dated 16 August 2025, Dr XN advised that he had cared for FM as his
general practitioner for around nine months and
had met FM on 16 August 2025 to
discuss his “financial affairs”. Dr XN supported the appointment of
an administrator
and considered that FM did not have decision making capacity
for any “meaningful or significant” financial matters. Dr
reported that in his discussions with him, FM was broadly aware of the fact that
he a had a bank account, but was not aware of
the balance, or able to recount
any assets of any nature that he owned. He reported that FM suffered from
deficits in orientation
to time and short-term memory loss.
Myagedcare assessment of the Southern Aged Care Assessment Team noted that FM
had recently been diagnosed with dementia and that
he had self-reported some
memory difficulties.
a registered nurse from the Aged Care Facility, gave evidence at the hearing
knew FM very well [in the Aged Care Facility];
agreed with the findings of Dr XN;
had concerns with FM’s ability to make financial decisions as he had a
tendency to forget part way through an activity what
he was doing;
FM had the ability to make small purchases at the facility kiosk, she considered
that he would have difficulty understanding
making bill payments and managing
his pension.
was assisted in understanding the proceeding by his advocate Ms Verdouw. Though
he disagreed that he was unable to manage his own
finances, with the assistance
of Ms Verdouw, he did accept that KN and SN had been assisting with the
management of his finances.
was clear to us that FM was uncomfortable discussing his diagnosis of dementia
and the memory deficits he suffered. We are indebted
to Ms Verdouw for the way
in which she handled that matter, and the sensitive manner in which she assisted
us to hear FM’s
views. With FM’s consent, Ms Verdouw spoke candidly,
and in our view appropriately, about her experience of FM’s memory
deficits and that despite working with FM for a few months, he would often
forget who she was or what they had previously discussed.
on the evidence we received, we have determined that FM is a person with
impaired decision-making ability for decisions about
his financial matters, such
impairment arising from his diagnosis of dementia, which results in him being
unable to retain information
consistently communicate the decision, or to use and weigh information relevant
the decision.
Need for an Administrator
application has arisen in the context of financial difficulties in the
relationship between FM and the Aged Care Facility. We
had written submissions
from KN and heard evidence from KN and SN at the hearing. In
and his partner each reside in the Aged Care Facility.
sole name. Upon their entry into the Facility, the
property was sold by the
attorney for FM’s partner, and the funds form the sale used to fund a
Refundable Accommodation Deposit
for FM’s partner.
has been assessed as being required to pay a Daily Accommodation Payment as a
result of Services Australia assessing his means
on the basis of the joint
assets of he and his partner.
attorney for FM’s partner has reportedly refused to assist in the payment
of FM’s aged care costs or accept that he
had any interest in the proceeds
of sale of the former home.
only income is the aged pension. As a result, FM’s aged care costs exceed
his capacity to pay by around $500.00 per
are concerned that the continually accruing debt with the Aged Care Facility may
lead to his eviction from the facility.
a substitute decision maker, they have been unable to make any type of hardship
application to Services Australia on FM’s
addition, with the exception of some smaller transactions, KN and SN are already
informally managing FM’s financial affairs
on his behalf.
an accounts supervisor for the Aged Care Facility, confirmed KN and SN’s
evidence with respect to the debt accruing and
the reasons for its accrual.
Whilst TH made clear that eviction was an absolute last resort, it is apparent
to us that there is an
immediate need for steps to be taken to resolve the
situation to protect FM’s place in the facility.
told us firmly that his primary concern was remaining in the facility with his
partner and we accept and respect his wishes and
preferences in that
Li of the Public Trustee submitted that on the evidence before the us there was
a need for an administrator and that FM would benefit
from the appointment.
all of the circumstances we are satisfied that there is a need for an
administrator:
ensure the security of FM’s aged care place including but not limited to
hardship and review application with Services Australia;
deal with the debt accruing to the Aged Care Facility; and
take advice in relation to, and consider, any entitlement that FM may have to
the assets of his relationship with his partner.
have considered the least restrictive means possible of meeting FM’s needs
and have determined that there is no alternative
but to appoint an administrator
with plenary powers. FM’s day to day financial affairs appears relatively
settled, but we cannot
discount the need for an administrator to make changes to
those affairs in order to ensure FM’s security of tenure in the Aged
FM’s Personal and Social Wellbeing
have considered the evidence before us and FM’s own wishes and preferences
in relation to the matters raised in the application
and the hearing and the
impact that making an administration order will have on his personal and social
are positively satisfied that the making of an administration order will promote
FM’s personal and social wellbeing by providing
a substitute decision
maker that can take steps to protect his place in the aged care facility and
fulfill his overarching desire
to remain in the facility with his
Appointment of Public Trustee, Gifting, and Length of
as applicant, requested that the Tribunal appoint the Public Trustee as
administrator. No other party has sought or consented
to appointment, and having
determined to appoint an administrator we are compelled in the circumstances to
appoint the Public Trustee
by virtue of s 54(1)(b) of the Act.
heard from FM and KN that FM likes to give gifts from time to time, and we
determined to make an order allowing the administrator
to make gifts from
FM’s estate up to an annual value of $300.00.
have considered the length of order that will be the least restrictive required
in all of the circumstances. Ms Li submitted to
us that it may take up to two
years to resolve issues with respect to FM’s aged care place and
negotiations with Services Australia.
We have accepted that submission and made
an order for two years from the date of the hearing, on the understanding that
allows for review of the order if circumstances change
Tribunal orders:
1. The Public Trustee (Tas) is appointed as
administrator for FM, until 3 September 2027.
2. The administrator is to lodge with the Tribunal a financial summary
relating to the financial matters of FM within 6 weeks from
the date of this
3. The administrator is authorised to distribute gifts from FM’s estate
to a maximum of $300.00 per year. Such gifts are subject
administrator’s discretion.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.84 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter