URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASPComm/2025/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:19:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tasmanian Planning Scheme - Glenorchy amendment PLAM-24-01 [2025] TASPComm 15 (19 August 2025)
Planning scheme
Tasmanian Planning Scheme -
PLAM-24/01 - Insert the Cadbury Visitor Experience Specific
Area Plan at 100 Cadbury Road, Claremont
Planning authority
Glenorchy City Council
ERA Planning and Environment
Date of decision
19 August 2025
The draft amendment is modified under
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
as set out in
Annexure A and is approved under
section 40Q.
Roger Howlett Dan Ford
Delegate (Chair) Delegate
REASONS FOR DECISION
The draft amendment was
lodged under section 37 of the
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
(the Act) by the applicant, ERA Planning and Environment, for a
site-specific qualification (SSQ) to the land at 100 Cadbury Road,
currently developed with the Cadbury chocolate factory. The SSQ was proposed to
Light Industrial
Zone to allow General Retail and Hire, and Tourist Operation as discretionary
uses with the qualification of ‘where
providing for car parking as part of
a visitor experience associated with the Cadbury chocolate factory’,
Industrial Zone to allow Community Meeting and Entertainment, General Retail and
Hire, and Tourist Operation as discretionary
uses with the qualification of
‘where part of a visitor experience associated with the Cadbury chocolate
The applicant’s planning submission dated 4
November 2024 (planning submission) stated (p. 2) that the SSQ was proposed to
the operation of the Cadbury Visitor Experience (visitor experience),
which includes a:
Time tunnel -
where a century of chocolate heritage and accomplishments in Tasmania come to
Arboretum of
live cocoa trees where cacao pods can be observed at different growth stages
while learning about the cultivation and
harvesting process.
kitchen - a small-scale chocolate production line used to develop and test new
flavours and seasonal offerings in partnership
with Tasmanian growers.
Factory control
room - granting exclusive access to the main factory.
Chocolate Lab -
where visitors can participate in real time taste testing and quality
Building your
own bar experience - where visitors can create their own unique chocolate bar to
take home with them.
Mass ingredient
barn - where visitors can discover the various ingredients used in chocolate
production including Tasmanian milk and
its transformation into
‘crumb’, which is the base milk and sugar product used to create
dairy milk chocolate.
Chocolate lounge
- a unique culinary experience for visitors with chocolate inspired dishes
intertwined with other Tasmanian ingredients.
emporium - a place where visitors can purchase a wide and vast variety of
delicious, exclusively made chocolates as well
as the Cadbury favourites.
nestled in the scenic parkland along with a café providing a more casual
eating experience.
The applicant further stated that the following
use classes would apply to the visitor experience:
Meeting and Entertainment
General Retail
Processing, and
Community Meeting and Entertainment, General Retail and
Hire, and Tourist Operation are prohibited use classes in the General Industrial
Zone. Tourist Operation is a prohibited use in the Light Industrial Zone.
Therefore, these uses were proposed to be introduced as
permissible uses through
The planning authority considered that the General Industrial Zone and Light
Industrial Zone of the State Planning Provisions (SPPs)
do not contain adequate
standards for assessing applications for the intended uses and associated
development. As such, the planning
authority modified the applicant’s
proposed draft amendment (relying on SSQ’s) by introducing a new specific
(SAP) that:
inserts Tourist
Operation as a Discretionary use
introduces new
use standards, and
introduces new
development standards for heritage.
The planning authority’s
modified amendment did not provide for the consideration of the Community
Meeting and Entertainment
or General Retail and Hire use classes in the SAP as
requested by the applicant.
The applicant was consulted prior to the planning authority certifying the
draft amendment. In an email dated 19 December 2024, the
applicant advised the
planning authority that it did not support the inclusion of a SAP and requested
that Community Meeting and
Entertainment, and General Retail and Hire use
classes be included in the certified draft amendment.
The planning authority proceeded to modify the proposal by introducing a SAP
prior to certifying the draft amendment, which is the
subject of this
The draft amendment proposes to insert a new SAP,
being the Cadbury Visitor Experience SAP at 100 Cadbury Road, Claremont. The
inserts Tourist
Operation as a Discretionary use, with the qualification:
(a) Tourist Operation associated with the Cadbury Chocolate Factory in the
General Industrial Zone; and
(b) Car Parking for the Tourist Operation associated with the Cadbury Chocolate
Factory in the Light Industrial Zone.
introduces new
use standards, and
introduces new
development standards for heritage.
Site information
The ‘Cadbury Factory’ at 100 Cadbury
Road, Claremont (the site) contains three areas of land under one title, being
of the Register 139355/2. The site has an area of 17.21ha. The eastern
half of the site contains a large factory with various buildings
infrastructure. The western half of the site contains vegetation, walking tracks
and the former Cadbury branch line rail formation.
Car parking is located in the
northern section of the site.
The site is serviced by reticulated water and sewerage. A gas distribution
pipe is also located within the site.
The site has three vehicle access points along Cadbury Road and Bournville
Crescent. The site contains walking and bike tracks, which
are informally
accessible to the public.
The site is split zoned in the General Industrial, Light Industrial,
Environmental Management, and Open Space zones. The factory is
in the General
Industrial Zone, while the factory car park is in the Light Industrial Zone. The
foreshore area is in the Environmental
Management Zone and land to the west is
in the Open Space Zone, which contains vegetation and walking tracks.
The following codes and associated overlays apply to future use and
development at the site:
Parking and
Sustainable Transport Code
Road and Railway
Assets Code
Local Historic
Heritage Code*
Natural Assets
Attenuation
Coastal Erosion
Hazard Code
Inundation Hazard Code
Potentially
Contaminated Land Code, and
Landslip Hazard
*The site is a local heritage listed place under the Glenorchy
Local Provisions Schedule (LPS) known as GLE-C6.1.24 Cadbury Industrial
Issues raised in representations
Twenty-two representations were received. Of these:
representations were in full support or raised no objection
representations opposed the draft amendment, and
1 representation
from the applicant raised concerns about the modifications made to the draft
amendment prior to certifying.
The issues raised in the
representations included:
parklands by the public
loss of trees
and heritage values, such as the historic gates and railway tracks
impact on bird
residential amenity and privacy
traffic and
parking impacts and congestion
amendment allows development which is unsuitable for the area
unnecessary
amendment has limited potential to impact residential amenity
exclusion of the
Community Meeting and Entertainment, and General Retail and Hire use classes
creates uncertainty in whether the uses
could operate at the site
the heritage and
visual landscape provisions are unnecessarily complex for the site, such as the
requirement for a Conservation Management
Plan (CMP) and a Visual Impact
Assessment (VIA), and
the heritage
provisions in the SAP do not satisfy section 32(4) of the Act.
draft amendment was referred to TasWater under
section 56S
Sewerage Industry Act 2008
. In response TasWater made a representation
stating no objection to the draft amendment and that TasWater did not wish to
any hearing.
Planning authority’s response to the
representations
The planning authority considered the representations
and resolved that:
modifications to the SAP be made in response to the representations, and
modifications satisfy section 34 of the Act.
Date and place of hearing
The hearing was held at the Commission’s office
on Level 3, 144 Macquarie Street, Hobart on the 4 June 2025.
Appearances at the hearing
Planning authority: Darshini Bangaru Hyde, Strategic
Angela Dionysopoulos, Statutory Planner
David Parham, Heritage Planner
Applicant: Clare Hester, ERA Planning and Environment
Lucy Burke-Smith, Purcell Architects
David Inches, Cadbury Chocolate Experience
Consideration of the draft amendment
section 40M of the Act, the Commission is required to consider the draft
amendment to the LPS and the representations, statements
and recommendations
contained in the planning authority’s section 40K report and any
information obtained at a hearing.
hearing was convened to assist the Commission in considering the issues in the
representations and the section 40K report.
Commission must also consider whether the draft amendment meets the LPS criteria
as set out under section 34(2) of the Act:
(a) contains all the provisions that the SPPs specify must be contained in an
(b) is in accordance with section 32; and
(c) furthers the objectives set out in Schedule 1; and
(d) is consistent with each State policy; and
(da) satisfies the relevant criteria in relation to the TPPs; and
(e) as far as practicable, is consistent with the regional land use strategy, if
any, for the regional area in which is situated
the land to which the relevant
planning instrument relates; and
(f) has regard to the strategic plan, prepared under
Government Act 1993
, that applies in relation to the land to which the
relevant planning instrument relates; and
(g) as far as practicable, is consistent with and co-ordinated with any LPSs
that apply to municipal areas that are adjacent to the
municipal area to which
the relevant planning instrument relates; and
(h) has regard to the safety requirements set out in the standards prescribed
Gas Safety Act 2019
Specific Area Plan
section 32(4) of the Act, an LPS may contain a local over riding provision only
(including a SAP) if:
(a) a use or development to which the provision
relates is of significant social, economic or environmental benefit to the
a region or a municipal area; or
(b) the area of land has particular environmental,
economic, social or spatial qualities that require provisions, that are unique
to the area of land, to apply to the land in substitution for, or in addition
to, or modification of, the provisions of the SPPs.
the applicant’s planning submission, it considered that the proposed uses
satisfied section 32(4)(a) and (b) of the Act for
the following reasons:
the Cadbury
Visitor Experience project represents a $150 million investment with significant
employment opportunities
the Cadbury
Visitor Experience would attract over 500,000 visitors annually and contribute a
further $120 million in visitor spending
the site has
unique environmental, social and spatial qualities, as it is the only major
chocolate making facility in Tasmania with
social and industrial heritage
the heritage
values date from 1922 when the factory was opened, and
the factory held
tours from 1958 to 2016, which created a unique visitor experience. It was noted
that the tours ceased due to food
and workplace safety
requirements.
is noted that the planning submission was prepared for the applicant’s
proposal of SSQs, not the SAP as modified by the planning
Nevertheless, the criteria for SSQs and a SAP are the same under section 32(4)
of the Act.
its report supporting the draft amendment dated 28 January 2025 (supporting
report), the planning authority stated that the draft
amendment, minus the
Community Meeting and Entertainment, and General Retail and Hire use classes (as
modified), satisfies section
32(4)(a) for the same reasons as the
planning authority considered that the draft amendment satisfies section
32(4)(b) of the Act due to the site’s spatial qualities
that require
unique provisions beyond the SPPs. These qualities include proximity to
residential zones, heritage significance and
prominent location, as detailed
site is adjacent to an established residential suburb in the General Residential
Zone. It considered that this is unusual, as
usually the General Industrial Zone
is separated from the General Residential Zone so industrial uses are not
required to implement
mitigation measures to reduce negative impacts on
residential amenity. It stated that due to this, the General Industrial Zone
no use standards to consider impacts on residential amenity. The
planning authority considered that the Tourist Operation use class
consideration of impacts to residential amenity in other zones. Therefore, given
the site is adjacent to a General Residential
Zone, additional standards are
required to manage potential impacts on residential amenity.
planning authority noted that the site is a local heritage place known as the
Cadbury Industrial Estate - Factory. It advised
that the site is a significant
example of an Australian garden city inspired industrial development, which
retains historical features
including the landscape setting, historical rail
line, and vehicular and pedestrian approaches to the main entrance. The planning
authority stated that the SPPs do not provide for consideration of the
relationship between development and the landscape, and the
location or setting
of development. It considered that as the draft amendment would allow a
non-industrial development to be constructed,
likely along the riverside and
open space setting, unique heritage provisions are required to inform the
assessment of future development.
planning authority advised that the site was chosen for the factory due to its
size and location, as part of Cadbury’s ‘factory
by mountain and
sea’ philosophy. The planning authority submit that the Cadbury peninsula
is a regionally significant and visually
iconic site due to its unique and
pronounced landform. It stated that the central siting of the Cadbury Factory
enhances the peninsula’s
character and emphasises the site’s garden
city design principles. The planning authority stated that the site is visible
many viewpoints and due to this additional controls to protect key visual
aspects of the site are required.
the use classes included in the SAP, in its submission dated 24 June 2025, the
planning authority considered that:
While the introduction of the Tourist Operation use may satisfy the test under
Section 32(4), there is insufficient information to
demonstrate that the
additional use classes - Community Meeting and Entertainment or General Retail
of a visitor experience associated with the Cadbury
chocolate factory meet the same test. Although the proponent has stated that
uses would be limited to facilities supporting the visitor experience, the
introduction of these uses in a vague and open-ended form
could have long-term
consequences. If the site operator changes in the future, the lack of strong and
specific controls could allow
for inappropriate uses under the guise of the
original intent. (p. 3)
its representation dated 19 February 2025, the applicant considered that
proposed development standard GLE-S15.7.1 in the SAP,
which applies to the
siting of buildings, structures and landscape elements, does not satisfy section
32(4) of the Act. The applicant
stated that the provision is not required to
deal with unique features of the site and does not facilitate the
development.
Commission consideration
Commission considers that the visitor experience, which includes several uses,
would provide economic benefit to the region under
section 32(4)(a) of the Act,
as outlined in submissions from the applicant and planning authority.
Commission notes that the planning authority considered that the Community
Meeting and Entertainment, and General Retail and Hire
use classes would not
satisfy the section 32(4) criteria. The Commission disagrees with this opinion,
as acknowledged by the planning
authority these uses would, to some extent, form
part of the visitor experience. The Commission considers that including these
classes (with the qualification that they must be associated with the
Tourist Operation use), meets the section 32(4)(a) criteria
for the same reasons
provided for the Tourist Operation use class.
Commission finds that the draft amendment satisfies section 32(4)(a) of the Act
for social and economic reasons identified by
the applicant and the planning
Specific Area Plan - Use Table
SAP inserts a new discretionary use class, with qualification, in the Light
Industrial Zone and the General Industrial Zone.
applicant advised that the visitor experience would mostly be located on land in
the General Industrial Zone, and car parking
associated with the visitor
experience would be in the Light Industrial Zone (currently developed with a car
park servicing the chocolate
factory use).
applicant acknowledged that the visitor experience would primarily fit within
the Tourist Operation use class, and explained that
the Community Meeting and
Entertainment, and General Retail and Hire uses classes had been proposed for
the following reasons:
The project
intends to have retail offerings available as part of the chocolate emporium
component of the visitor experience. It advised
that the shop, which was
previously located at the Cadbury Factory, was popular. The applicant stated
that while the retail component
could be considered as ancillary and subservient
to the Tourist Operation use class, it sought to add it as a separate use class
to avoid any doubt and future approval risk.
Part of the
visitor experience includes a chocolate lounge, which would be available for
private bookings. The applicant advised that
the Community Meeting and
Entertainment use class was sought to overcome the potential that the facility
may be viewed as a function
centre. It stated that the use class was included to
avoid any doubt and approval risk.
All three use
classes proposed by the applicant included qualifications. The applicant
considered that the qualifications would avoid
the potential for uses unrelated
to the chocolate factory to operate at the site.
its planning submission, the applicant stated:
It is important to understand that mitigating the potential risk that a
component of the Project may be considered prohibited in
the future, is a risk
to the vision for the Project being implemented.
As parameters of when an application is considered ancillary and subservient to
a primary use, can at times be unclear, having confidence
in the allowable uses
on the site is an important part confidently preparing a full development
application. (p. 4)
its supporting report, the planning authority stated that the Community Meeting
and Entertainment, and General Retail and Hire
use classes are not supported, as
Tourist Operation acts as an ‘umbrella’ use class for the
subservient uses.
its representation dated 19 February 2025, the applicant further reiterated that
including the Community Meeting and Entertainment,
and General Retail and Hire
use classes, with qualification as discretionary use is appropriate and removed
ambiguity in its application
at the site. It stated that by not including these
uses in the SAP, they are prohibited and reiterated that it could represent a
risk to future applications. It concluded by stating that the use classes
represent a limited discretionary pathway, which should
alleviate concerns about
allowing a broader range of uses under the Community Meeting and Entertainment,
and General Retail and Hire
use classes (unrelated to the visitor
experience).
matter was discussed at the hearing. Ms Clare Hester for the applicant stated
that the omission of the Community Meeting and Entertainment,
and General Retail
and Hire use classes were not supported, as there is no guarantee that the
planning authority will consider them
as subservient uses in the future. Ms
Hester advised that for certainty, the use classes should be included in the
SAP. To support
this statement, Ms Hester provided a scenario where the public
may visit the site to purchase chocolate, but not attend the visitor
experience.
Therefore, having the potential to not be considered as a subservient use to the
visitor experience under clause 6.2.2
of the SPPs.
the hearing, the Commission asked the parties whether modifying the amendment to
include the Community Meeting and Entertainment,
and General Retail and Hire use
classes in the SAP would constitute a substantial modification under section 40N
of the Act.
its submission dated 18 June 2025, the applicant advised that including all
three use classes has been the position maintained
by the applicant throughout
the whole draft amendment process. It considered that including the use classes
with qualification in
the SAP use table would not constitute a substantial
modification as the documents exhibited during the public consultation period
clearly articulated the applicant’s desire to include these use classes.
The submission stated:
1.12 While it would modify the use table in the specific area plan, it does so
to a limited degree, by including two additional use
classes, but only
‘where part of a visitor experience associated with the Cadbury chocolate
1.13 Importantly it does not seek a broad range of Community Meeting and
Entertainment or General Retail and Hire uses classes and
would be consistent
with the plan purpose under the certified draft amendment to allow for use and
development of a visitor experience
associated with the Cadbury chocolate
factory. (p. 2)
contrast, the planning authority in its submission dated 24 June 2025, stated
that including the additional use classes would constitute
a substantial
modification. It stated that this is because the use classes ‘would
represent a material change in policy relative
to the advertised
controls’. The planning authority considered that this is due to the
applicant’s indication at the
hearing that suggested the additional use
classes may be directly associated to, but not necessarily subservient to, the
its response submission dated 1 July 2025, the applicant stated that the
planning authority’s position that the additional
uses would represent a
material change is strongly refuted. The applicant advised that it has been
clear in its intention for including
the Community Meeting and Entertainment,
and General Retail and Hire use classes throughout this process, as identified
1.2 of its planning submission. It stated that:
The intention has always been that the Chocolate Emporium will operate similarly
to the previous visitor centre shop that was operating
from the site, in that it
will be accessible to the public. Additionally, as described, there may be
community events or functions
held on the premises where tickets that would
otherwise be required to gain access to the experience, are not required. (p. 2)
a review of the submissions, the Commission drafted a modified SAP and provided
a copy to parties to confirm whether it
achieves the intent of the proposal and
is operationally accurate.
the draft modified SAP sought to remove provisions that are already accommodated
in the SPPs and provide clarity on the
requirements for the future visitor
experience. The SAP proposed to include Community Meeting and Entertainment,
General Retail and
Hire, and Tourist Operation use classes with qualification.
The draft modified SAP contained the following use table, which would
addition to, rather than in substitution of the use tables in the Light
Industrial Zone and the General Industrial
Qualification
Discretionary
Community Meeting and Entertainment
Where part of a visitor experience associated with the Tourist
General Retail and Hire
Where part of a visitor experience associated with the Tourist
Tourist Operation
If for a visitor experience associated with the Cadbury Chocolate
its submission dated 28 July 2025, the planning authority raised two concerns
regarding the use table.
it suggested that the qualification for each use class be amended for clarity,
consistency with the SPPs and consistency
with the terminology in the SAP. The
suggested modifications are
Qualification
Discretionary
Community Meeting and Entertainment
If associated with the Tourist Operation.
General Retail and Hire
If associated with the Tourist Operation.
Tourist Operation
If for the Cadbury Visitor Experience associated with the Cadbury Chocolate
the planning authority noted that the Community Meeting and Entertainment use
class is already discretionary in the Light
Industrial Zone without
qualification. General Retail and Hire is a discretionary use class in the Light
Industrial Zone with the
qualification of ‘If for alterations or
extensions to existing General Retail and Hire’.
Commission consideration
Commission acknowledges the planning authority’s opinion that the
Community Meeting and Entertainment, and General Retail
and Hire use classes are
not required in the use table as they will be ancillary and subservient to the
Tourist Operation use class.
However, the Commission accepts the
applicant’s concern that there is no certainty within the SAP that these
uses could occur,
as it is open to interpretation by the planning authority and
may impact the assessment of future applications.
Commission finds that including the Community Meeting and Entertainment, and
General Retail and Hire use classes in the use table
with the qualification
suggested by the planning authority is suitable for the intended use of the
Commission considers that as the SAP is specific in its application, that is for
the visitor experience use and development, duplicating
Community Meeting and
Entertainment, and General Retail and Hire in the Light Industrial Zone will not
cause uncertainty for future
planning permit application processes. This is
because any Community Meeting and Entertainment, and General Retail and Hire use
associated with the visitor experience would be assessed against the SAP
use table, rather than the Light Industrial Zone use table.
Commission notes that the application of the use table is contrary to the usual
formatting for SAPs. The Commission considers
that as the SAP purpose statements
are specific to the site and the visitor experience, in this instance including
the use table
‘in addition to’ the underlying zone’s use table
is appropriate, and more so than ‘in substitution to’
(essentially
duplicating the zone’s entire use table) as has been common practice.
Commission considers that including the additional use classes in the SAP would
constitute a modification rather than a substantial
modification. This is
because the qualifications for the use classes ensures that the uses must be
associated with the Tourist Operation
use. The intent for the use remains the
same as that advertised during the exhibition period. Furthermore, the
Commission notes that
the additional uses are discretionary, which will afford
the public opportunity to view and comment on any future proposals during
exhibition period.
Commission finds that the Community Meeting and Entertainment, General Retail
and Hire, and Tourist Operation use classes with
qualification, as shown in
Annexure A, are appropriate for the site.
Specific Area Plan - Use Standards
SAP would introduce use standards for uses under the Tourist Operation use
class. The use standards are in addition to the provisions
of clause 19.3 of the
General Industrial Zone, and cover matters including hours of operation,
external lighting, commercial vehicle
movements, and land use conflict.
its supporting report, the planning authority advised that the standards were
included due to concerns raised by the planning officers
future Tourist Operation use and development on residential amenity. It stated
that there are currently no sufficient
provisions in the General Industrial Zone
to assess impacts on residential amenity.
planning authority stated in its supporting report that the use standards are
required because:
... Code C9.0 [Attenuation Code] would not be applicable for the Tourist
Operation use (or the proposed Community Meeting and Entertainment
and General
Retail and Hire uses), which could introduce new challenges not covered by the
current planning scheme. (p. 100)
the hearing, Ms Hester queried why clause GLE-S15.6.1 A4/P4 of the SAP is an
automatic discretionary standard given that the visitor
experience will be
located on the same site as the industrial use. For reference, clause
GLE-S15.6.1 A4/P4
No Acceptable Solution.
A Tourist Operation use must not compromise the industrial use of the site
having regard to:
(a) the characteristics of the site;
(b) the size scale, and location of the proposed use; and
(c) the industrial functions of the site.
Furthermore,
Ms Hester noted that the Tourist Operation use class qualification states that
it must be associated with the industrial
use at the site, being the Cadbury
Angela Dionysopoulos of the planning authority advised that the standard was
included because clause 19.3.1, which clause GLE-S15.6.1
A4/P4 is based on,
applies to use on other (external) sites and would not apply to the subject
site. Ms Darshini Bangaru Hyde of
the planning authority added that the proposed
uses at the site are only associated by name. All development is separate from
other, whereas the previous tours were part of the Cadbury Factory
building. Ms Bangaru Hyde considered that the operation between
the two uses is
quite different to that previously provided.
the hearing the Commission requested submissions from parties on the inclusion
of clause GLE-S15.6.1 A4/P4 of the SAP and
whether clauses 18.3.1 and 19.3.1 of
the SPPs would adequately address the matter.
its submission dated 24 June 2025, the planning authority considered that clause
GLE-S15.6.1 A4/P4 is included to ensure Tourist
Operation uses do not compromise
the primary (industrial) use of the site. It stated that clauses 18.3.1 and
19.3.1 of the SPPs achieves
the intent only when the non-industrial use is on a
separate site. In this case, the industrial and non-industrial uses would be
provided on the same site. It stated that the non-industrial use is anticipated
to be under separate ownership from the industrial
use, which may be
accommodated through a long-term lease. Due to these matters, the planning
authority considered that clause GLE-S15.6.1
A4/P4 is required in the SAP.
its submission dated 1 July 2025, the applicant considered that clause
GLE-S15.6.1 A4/P4 is not necessary as the owner of the land
will have ultimate
control. It stated that:
Council’s assumption that the proposed uses classes requested by the
applicant, are ordinarily incompatible with industrial
activity is incorrect.
The requested uses do not fall within the definition of a sensitive use and are
commercial land uses in characteristic.
modified SAP prepared by the Commission proposed the following changes to the
use standards:
application of clause GLE-S15.6.1 A1/P1, A2/P2 and A3/P3 so it applies to the
three use classes listed in the use table,
rather than just the Tourist
Operation use class
remove reference
to the Low Density Residential and Rural Living zones in clause GLE-S15.6.1
A1/P1, A2/P2 and A3/P3,
remove reference
to ‘on a site’ from clause GLE-S15.6.1 A1/P1, A2/P2, and
remove clause
GLE-S15.6.1 A4/P4.
submissions dated 25 July 2025 and 28 July 2025, the applicant and planning
authority noted that ‘on a site’ in A1/P1
and A2/P2 was omitted from
the draft modified SAP.
Commission consideration
Commission accepts the introduction of use standards for hours of operation,
external lighting and commercial vehicle movements
associated with the visitor
experience. However, the Commission finds that a standard for land use conflict
is unnecessary and already
addressed through the zone standards of the SPPs. The
relevant clauses are clause 18.3.1 of the Light Industrial Zone and clause
19.3.1 of the General Industrial Zone. Furthermore, the Commission notes that
any potential land use conflict within the site would
be internally managed by
the owner and respective operators.
Commission notes that there is no Low Density Residential or Rural Living zoned
land in the vicinity of the site, nor is there
likely to be in the future. The
Commission finds that removing these zones from consideration of clause
GLE-S15.6.1 A1/P1, A2/P2
and A3/P3 is appropriate.
Commission considers that the inclusion of ‘on a site’ is
unnecessary given the existing nature of the site and the
distance from
developable land in the site to residential use. The Commission considers that
deleting it from clause GLE-S15.6.1
A1/P1, A2/P2 and A3/P3 is consistent with
the drafting of the SPPs.
Commission finds that the modified use standards, as shown in Annexure A, are
appropriate for the site.
Specific Area Plan - Development Standards
SAP includes a new development standard for the siting of buildings, structures
and landscape elements at clause GLE-S15.7.1.
At the hearing, the planning
authority advised that the clause only relates to Tourist Operation uses. The
SAP states that this clause
is in substitution to the provisions of the Local
Historic Heritage Code clause C6.6.4.
its supporting report, the planning authority advised that the clause has been
included in the SAP due to the site’s unique
historical and cultural
significance, particularly its ‘garden-city principles’ and
‘industry in the garden’
philosophy.
its representation dated 20 February 2025, the applicant considered that the
development standards are not required in the SAP
as ‘there are no
inherent characteristics of a ‘tourism’ use that require a different
approach’. (p.2)
Leigh Woolley was engaged by the planning authority to prepare the Cadbury
Peninsula – Cadbury Industrial Estate Visual Qualities
Review dated
October 2024 (visual qualities review). Mr Woolley advised that:
It is my firm opinion that there should be a requirement to consider the visual
quality of any new development, and its potential
impact on the factory from key
viewing points.
Woolley identified ten viewing points in the visual qualities review,
Cadbury Factory
entry/carpark
Cadbury Factory
waterside entry/avenue
foreshore community playground
Parade/foreshore
Point/reserve
Montrose Bay
Reserve/Elwick Bay
East Derwent
Highway, and
foreshore/hillside.
response, the planning authority included a requirement for a VIA to be prepared
for the site based on 5 of the 10 viewing points
identified in the visual
qualities review.
its representation, the applicant stated that the planning authority
interchangeably refers to a range of matters including the:
heritage values
of the factory site
heritage values
of the Cadbury precinct including residential areas
visual landscape
value of the peninsula, and
overall spatial
applicant submitted that if the planning authority considered that the Cadbury
peninsula has specific spatial and landscape values,
it should complete a
thorough strategic planning exercise to identify these values and protect them
through the planning scheme.
Doing the exercise in response to a draft amendment
is reactionary rather than strategic. It considered that protecting the garden
estate peninsula could be better achieved through another mechanism, such as a
heritage precinct.
applicant engaged Purcell Architects to review the SAP development standards. In
the applicant’s representation, Purcell
stated that:
Any visual landscape values should be assessed by a comprehensive study and be
included within GLE-Table C6.3 Local Historic Landscape
Precincts, and/or
GLE-Table C8.1 Scenic Protection Areas as appropriate. (p. 3)
concluded by stating that the scenic values of the area have not been proven and
the requirement for a VIA is unreasonable.
its section 40K report dated 14 April 2025, the planning authority stated in
response to the applicant’s representation that:
... upon further consideration it is agreed that mandating a Visual Impact
Assessment is unnecessary. Additionally, rather than stipulating
key views to
the factory through Figure GLE-S15.3 as in the advertised SAP, it is considered
more effective to describe them.
planning authority provided the Commission with a modified SAP for
consideration.
SAP also required the preparation of a CMP ‘focussed on the riverside
setting, landscaped/open space frontage, approaches
and connections to the
Cadbury factory’.
the applicant’s email to the planning authority dated 19 December 2024, it
raised concerns about the requirement for a CMP.
In its supporting report, the
planning authority considered that the requirement for a CMP is appropriate
given the importance of
the site’s open space setting and that the
requirement is consistent with clause 7.4.3 of the SPPs (relating to changes of
use to a heritage place).
its representation, the applicant considered that the inclusion of requiring a
CMP is unreasonable and would be an improper use
a CMP, a mechanism not designed
for that purpose. It further stated that while clause 7.4 of the SPPs has regard
to a CMP, this is
because the clause allows consideration of a prohibited use to
facilitate restoration, conservation and future maintenance of a heritage
The situation is different for the visitor experience which would be in a new
building. The applicant confirmed that there
was no intention that the uses
would facilitate any of these outcomes.
its response to the representation, the planning authority stated in its section
40K report that a CMP is also required in clause
22.4.3 of the Sullivans Cove
Planning Scheme 1997.
Commission modified the SAP in response to discussions at the hearing and
submissions received. The draft modified SAP proposed
the following changes to
the development standards:
development standards to all three uses in the use table, rather than just
Tourist Operation
provisions of clause GLE-S15.7.1 P1(a), (b) and (c) of the SAP to align with the
heritage values within the site rather than the area itself, and
requirement for a VIA and CMP, noting that the requirement for a VIA was
recommended for removal by the planning authority
in response to
representations.
its submission dated 25 July 2025, the applicant noted a typographical error in
clause S15.7.1 P1.
its submission dated 28 July 2025, the planning authority stated that it does
not support the removal of the requirement for a
CMP. It stated that:
Council remains very firmly of the view that any use, and associated
development, prohibited in the zone should be considered within
a conservation
management framework given the pre-existence of this requirement in the SPPs and
the unique qualities of the Place.
Additionally,
the planning authority considered that the removal of the requirement for a CMP
would constitute a substantial modification
to the draft amendment.
Commission consideration
Commission considers that the development standards identified in the SAP go
beyond what is reasonably required for an assessment
of a local heritage listed
place. Specifically, this is in relation to the requirement for a VIA, CMP and
consideration of visual
impacts from distances outside the site.
Commission agrees with the applicant that if visual values from surrounding
areas are important, the planning authority should
complete a strategic review
of the area to determine the most appropriate protection measures. The
Commission considers that the
requirement for a VIA and consideration of views
from distances outside the site are not necessary inclusions in the SAP.
Furthermore,
any visual impact on the site as viewed from key places would be as
a result development rather than and irrespective of the use.
Commission notes the planning authority’s opinion that a CMP should be
required as the SAP provides for new and currently
prohibited uses to operate at
the site. The Commission disagrees with this approach. This approach focuses on
clause 7.4 of the SPPs,
which allows the consideration of prohibited uses if it
assists in conserving and restoring a heritage place. The draft amendment
process reviews whether the proposed uses are appropriate for the site. In this
instance, the Commission agrees with the applicant
and finds that the uses are
appropriate as qualified discretionary use classes in this circumstance.
Furthermore, these future uses
will be accommodated in new buildings, not the
existing factory. While future development will be required to be sensitive to
heritage values of the site, the uses are not intended to be used as a
mechanism to conserve or restore them.
Commission acknowledges the heritage values at the site and the need to consider
them for future planning permits. The planning
authority has demonstrated that
some additional provisions specific to the site could be incorporated into the
SAP. These matters
include view lines of the approaches to the factory, being
the tree-lined vehicle and pedestrian paths, the Check Lodge, clock tower
industrial plant, and the former Cadbury Branch Line rail formation. However,
the Commission finds that the requirements for
a VIA and CMP go beyond what is
necessary for the heritage considerations at the site.
Commission finds that the development standards, as shown in Annexure A, are
appropriate for the site and should be included in
Regional land use strategy
relevant regional land use strategy is the Southern Tasmania Regional Land Use
Strategy 2010-2025, amended 19 May 2025 (regional
the applicant’s planning submission, it stated that the draft amendment is
consistent with the regional strategy as:
development would need to be designed and constructed in a way that protects the
existing heritage values of the site
locating the
tourism use and existing industrial use at the site would allow for efficient
use of land that is unlikely to be used
for other purposes, and
the tourism use
would build on the existing Cadbury Factory legacy, which adds a regionally
competitive tourism experience.
Specifically,
the applicant noted that the draft amendment is consistent with the regional
policies for tourism. It stated that the
draft amendment would facilitate
tourism that can protect and enhance the local features and character of the
its supporting report, the planning authority considered that the draft
amendment is consistent with the regional strategy for
the following
the site has
been significantly altered from its natural state. The draft amendment would
have minimal impact on the natural values
that remain on the site
the site would
retain all existing planning controls for coastal values, which is consistent
with the water resources and the coastal
policies of the regional strategy
amendment does not propose to remove or modify existing overlays at the site.
The landslip, coastal erosion and flood hazard
overlays would still apply.
Therefore, the draft amendment is consistent with the managing risks and hazards
amendment introduces new standards for heritage considerations, which is
consistent with the cultural values policy
public access to
the site is not proposed to be removed as part of the draft amendment.
Therefore, the draft amendment is consistent
with the recreation and open space
policy, and
amendment supports a new tourism use while ensuring the protection and
enhancement of the local features and character of
Commission consideration
Commission is satisfied with the justification provided by the applicant and
planning authority.
Commission considers that the draft amendment is specifically consistent with
the tourism policies and objectives, as the visitor
experience is expected to
attract over 500,000 visitors annually and contribute a further $120 million in
visitor spending, as stated
by the applicant.
Commission finds that the draft amendment is, as far as practicable, consistent
with the regional strategy.
Strategic plan
relevant strategic plan is the Glenorchy City Council Strategic Plan 2023-2032
(strategic plan), March 2023.
its planning submission, the applicant stated that:
Unlike the previous strategic plan, the current GSP [strategic plan] has minimal
direction relevant to the proposed amendment. That
said, the Project aligns with
the strategy of maintaining a progressive approach that encourages investment
and jobs associated with
‘We encourage responsible growth for our
City’ under the open for business community goal. (p. 22)
its supporting report, the planning authority considered that the draft
amendment aligns with the strategic plan as it would promote
investment and job
creation while protecting the local heritage place.
Commission consideration
Commission is satisfied with the justification provided by the applicant and
planning authority.
applicant finds that the draft amendment has regard to the strategic plan.
State Policies
State Coastal Policy 1996
its planning submission, the applicant considered that the draft amendment would
retain all planning controls associated with use
and development in the coastal
applicant advised that the proposed location of the future uses would be in the
coastal zone, and that the location has been considered
against the State
Coastal Policy 1996 (Coastal Policy), which will be subject to provisions and
standards under state and federal
legislation.
its supporting report, the planning authority considered that future use and
development, including a potential ferry-based water
access, may have potential
negative impacts to the Derwent Estuary. It stated that any future use and
development would be assessed
against the relevant zones and codes to ensure the
coastal values are protected. The planning authority considered that the draft
amendment aligns with the Coastal Policy.
State Policy on Water
Quality Management 1997
applicant advised in its planning submission that the land is serviced with
reticulated services. It stated that future development
would require connection
to existing infrastructure and therefore it is unlikely that there would be
direct impact on water quality
from the future visitor experience use and
development.
its supporting report, the planning authority stated that the draft amendment
would not result in an increase in sediment transport
to surface waters. It
advised that appropriate water quality management measures would be applied at
the planning permit stage. The
planning authority considered that the draft
amendment aligns with the State Policy on Water Quality Management (Water
Quality Management
State Policy on the Protection of
Agricultural Land 2009
site is not identified as agricultural land. Therefore, the State Policy on the
Protection of Agricultural Land 2009 is not applicable.
National Environment Protection Measures
its planning submission, the applicant advised that the site has an industrial
history and had an active underground petroleum
tank which is now
decommissioned. Due to this, there is potential for contamination at the site.
The applicant considered that this
matter would be addressed through the
Potentially Contaminated Land Code at the planning permit stage.
planning authority stated in its supporting report that the draft amendment
allows new use, which is not a sensitive use. It agreed
with the applicant that
given the nature of the site, contamination issues would be appropriately
addressed under the Potentially
Contaminated Land Code.
planning authority further stated that matters in relation to air and water
quality would be addressed through the SPP stormwater
provisions, the Natural
Assets Code, the Attenuation Code, the
Urban Drainage Act 2013
Environmental Management and Pollution Control Act 1994
It considered
that the draft amendment aligns with the National Environment Protection
Measures (NEPMs).
Commission consideration
Commission considers that the provisions in the SAP would not impact on the
objectives and policies of the State Policies and
NEPMs. The Commission is
satisfied with the justification provided by the applicant and planning
Commission finds that the draft amendment is consistent with each State Policy.
Resource Management and Planning System
its planning submission, the applicant considered that the draft amendment
furthers the objectives of the Act. It stated that the
draft amendment would
facilitate additional uses at the site which would allow for a visitor
experience. It considered that this
would facilitate economic development for
the region. Additionally, it stated that the draft amendment would provide for
development opportunity that maximises the use of the land.
its supporting report, the planning authority agreed that the draft amendment
furthers the objectives of the Act. It considered
that the draft amendment would
... for economic growth in an urban location with no threatened species or
vegetation communities on or near the subject land...
The recommended SAP will
not harm the environment, provided that adequate assessment measures are applied
to future development,
as ensured by the existing code overlays within the SPPs.
Additionally,
the planning authority advised that the site is a local heritage listed place
and that the heritage provisions in the
SPPs and SAP will be applied at the
planning permit stage. It considered that this furthers objective Part 2(g) of
Commission consideration
Commission is satisfied with the justification provided by the applicant and
planning authority.
Commission considers that the draft amendment would specifically further Part
1(d) and Part 2(g) of the Act, which relate to economic
development and places
of historical interest.
Commission finds that the draft amendment furthers the objectives of the Act.
Modifications required to draft amendment
section 40M of the Act the Commission must consider whether modifications to a
draft amendment of an LPS ought to be made.
Commission considers that modifications are required to the draft amendment. The
Commission makes the following modifications:
amendments to
the plan purpose to focus on the specific reason for the SAP
amendments to
the application of this plan to include the uses directly related to the Cadbury
Visitor Experience
amend the use
table to be in addition to the Light Industrial Zone – Clause 18.2 and the
General Industrial Zone – Clause
19.2 rather than in substitution of the
zones use tables
amend the use
table to include Community Meeting and Entertainment, and General Retail and
Hire with qualification
apply the use
standards to the Community Meeting and Entertainment, General Retail and Hire,
and Tourist Operation use classes, rather
than only the Tourist Operation use
requirement for distances to be measured ‘on a site’, to be
consistent with the SPPs
objective of the use standards to match the provisions of the clause
minor amendments
to the use standards to remove reference to the Low Density Residential Zone and
Rural Living Zone
remove clause
GLE-S15.6.1 A4/P4
development standards to the Community Meeting and Entertainment, General Retail
and Hire, and Tourist Operation use classes,
rather than only the Tourist
Operation use class
objective of the development standards to guide the provisions of the
provisions relating to a VIA and CMP in the development standards, and
remove Figure
GLE-S15.3 Key public views to the Cadbury Industrial Estate – Factory.
written submissions following the hearing, the planning authority considered
that the above modifications would constitute a substantial
modification,
stating that the intent is different to that of the exhibited draft
Commission considers that the above changes can be considered a modification
rather than a substantial modification. The Commission
finds that it was the
intent throughout the whole draft amendment process to provide for the limited
(or qualified) Community Meeting
and Entertainment, General Retail and Hire, and
Tourist Operation use classes to operate at the site. Furthermore, the
considers that the use and development standards still achieve a
similar intent to those exhibited, but through less onerous provisions.
Therefore, while use classes have been added and standards have been modified,
the SAP still achieves and reflects the intent as
exhibited in the draft
Additionally,
it is noted that each of the proposed new uses are qualified to ensure they are
associated with the Cadbury Visitor
Experience. Their discretionary use status
will afford the public to engage in the statutory exhibition processes at the
application and ensure natural justice.
Decision on draft amendment
to the modifications described above, the Commission is satisfied that the draft
amendment meets the LPS criteria and gives
its approval.
Attachments
Annexure A - Modified amendment
Modified amendment PLAM-24/01 to the Tasmanian
Planning Scheme - Glenorchy
the Cadbury Visitor Experience Specific Area Plan overlay to 100 Cadbury Road,
Claremont, as shown below.
the GLE-S15.0 Cadbury Visitor Experience Specific Area Plan, as shown
GLE-S15.0 Cadbury Visitor Experience Specific Area
GLE-S15.1 Plan Purpose
The purpose of the Cadbury Visitor Experience Specific Area Plan is:
GLE-S15.1.1 To allow for the use and development of a Cadbury Visitor
Experience, associated with the Cadbury Chocolate Factory.
GLE-S15.1.2 To ensure that the Cadbury Visitor Experience and associated uses
do not cause an unreasonable loss of residential amenity
in the adjacent
residential zones.
GLE-S15.1.3 To ensure that development associated with the Cadbury Visitor
Experience is designed to respect the heritage significance
of the Cadbury
Industrial Estate - Factory local heritage place.
GLE-S15.2 Application of this Plan
GLE-S15.2.1 This specific area plan applies to the area of land designated as
GLE-S15.0 Cadbury Visitor Experience Specific Area Plan
on the overlay maps and
in Figure GLE-S15.1.
GLE-S15.2.2 In the area of land this plan applies to, the provisions of the
Specific Area Plan are in addition to and a modification
to the provisions
(a) Light Industrial Zone;
(b) General Industrial Zone; and
(c) Local Historic Heritage Code,
as specified in the relevant provision.
GLE-S15.2.3 This specific area plan applies to the following Cadbury Visitor
Experience uses:
(a) Community Meeting and Entertainment;
(b) General Retail and Hire; and
(c) Tourist Operation.
GLE-S15.3 Local Area Objectives
This clause is not used in this specific area plan.
GLE-S15.4 Definition of Terms
This clause is not used in this specific area plan.
GLE-S15.5 Use Table
This clause is in addition to the Light Industrial Zone - Clause 18.2 Use
Table and General Industrial Zone - Clause 19.2 Use Table.
Qualification
Discretionary
Community Meeting and Entertainment
If associated with the Tourist Operation.
General Retail and Hire
If associated with the Tourist Operation.
Tourist Operation
If for the Cadbury Visitor Experience associated with the Cadbury Chocolate
GLE-S15.6 Use Standards
GLE-S15.6.1 Cadbury Visitor Experience impact
This clause is in addition to the provisions of the General Industrial Zone
– Clause 19.3 Use Standards.
That uses do not cause an unreasonable loss of residential amenity to
residential zones.
Acceptable Solution
Performance Criteria
Hours of operation within 50m of a General Residential Zone or Inner
Residential Zone, must be within the hours of:
(a) 7.00am to 9.00pm Monday to Saturday; and
(b) 8.00am to 9.00pm Sunday and public holidays.
Hours of operation within 50m of a General Residential Zone or Inner
Residential Zone, must not cause an unreasonable loss of amenity
residential zone, having regard to:
(a) the timing, duration or extent of vehicle movements; and
(b) noise, lighting or other emissions.
External lighting within 50m of a General Residential Zone or Inner
Residential Zone, must:
(a) not operate within the hours of 11.00pm to 6.00am, excluding any security
lighting; and
(b) if for security lighting, be baffled so that direct light does not extend
into the adjoining property.
External lighting within 50m of a General Residential Zone or Inner
Residential Zone, must not cause an unreasonable loss of amenity
residential zone, having regard to:
(a) the level of illumination and duration of lighting; and
(b) the distance to habitable rooms of an adjacent dwelling.
Commercial vehicle movements and the unloading and loading of commercial
vehicles within 50m of a General Residential Zone or Inner
Residential Zone,
must be within the hours of:
(a) 7.00am to 9.00pm Monday to Saturday; and
(b) 8.00am to 9.00pm Sunday and public holidays.
Commercial vehicle movements and the unloading and loading of commercial
vehicles within 50m of a General Residential Zone or Inner
Residential Zone,
must not cause an unreasonable loss of amenity to the residential zone, having
(a) the time and duration of commercial vehicle movements;
(b) the number and frequency of commercial vehicle movements;
(c) the size of commercial vehicles involved;
(d) manoeuvring required by the commercial vehicles, including the amount of
reversing and associated warning noise;
(e) any noise mitigation measures between the vehicle movement areas and the
adjoining residential areas; and
(f) potential conflicts with other traffic.
GLE-S15.7 Development Standards for Buildings and Works
GLE-S15.7.1 Siting of buildings, structures and landscape elements
This clause is in substitution of the provisions of the Local Historic
Heritage Code – Clause C6.6.4 Siting of buildings and
structures.
That the siting of buildings, works and landscaping for a Cadbury Visitor
Experience:
(a) is compatible with the local historic heritage significance of the Cadbury
Industrial Estate - Factory local heritage place;
(b) considers the site’s heritage setting.
Acceptable Solution
Performance Criteria
No Acceptable Solution.
The siting of buildings, works and landscaping for the Cadbury Visitor
Experience must be designed to be compatible with the local
historic heritage
significance of the Cadbury Industrial Estate - Factory local heritage place,
having regard to:
(a) the historic heritage values of the local heritage place as identified in
GLE-Table C6.1 Local Heritage Places;
(b) any historic heritage values identified in a report prepared by a suitably
qualified person;
(c) the topography of the site;
(d) the size, shape, and orientation of the lot;
(e) retention of the clear connection between the Cadbury Factory and its
extensive open parklands and setting west of the industrial
buildings and plant
including historical vehicular, pedestrian and tree-lined approaches to the
Check Lodge and views through to
the clock tower and industrial plant beyond, as
shown in Figure GLE-S15.2; and
(f) the legibility of the former Cadbury Branch Line rail formation, as shown in
Figure GLE-S15.2, in the landscape.
GLE-S15.8 Development Standards for Subdivision
This clause is not used in this specific area plan.
GLE-S15.9 Tables
This clause is not used in this specific area plan.
Figure GLE-S15.1 Cadbury Visitor Experience Specific Area Plan
Figure GLE-S15.2 Aerial map of the site showing selected heritage
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (18.4 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter