URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASGAB/2020/56.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DEV (Review of Enduring Power of Attorney and Guardianship) [2020] TASGAB 56 (23 October 2020)
DEV (Review of Enduring Power of Attorney and Guardianship)
[2020] TASGAB
HEARING DATE(S):
23 October 2020
DATE OF ORDERS:
23 October 2020
DATE OF STATEMENT OF REASONS:
11 November 2020
Mr R Grueber, Member
Clin/A/Prof R Wallace, Member
Mr A Mihal, Member
APPLICATION:
Application to Review an Enduring Power of Attorney and Application for
Guardianship
CATCHWORDS:
Guardianship – need for guardian - revocation of enduring power of
attorney – appointment of an administrator –
conflict within family
– proposed represented person’s wishes
LEGISLATION CITED:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication
STATEMENT OF REASONS
Applications
an Application dated 2 September 2020, Mr HKV applied to the Guardianship and
Administration Board (‘the Board’) for
a Guardianship Order in
respect to Ms DEV. Mr HKV is Ms DEV’s son. The Application proposed that
either Mr HKV or the Public
Guardian be appointed as Guardian.
an Application dated 9 September 2020, Mr KC applied for the Review of an
Enduring Power of Attorney (‘EPA’) by Ms
DEV appointing Mr HKV as
her Attorney. The EPA was made on 19 November 2018 and registered on 28 January
2020 with number PA 122092.
Mr KC is Ms DEV’s carer. The Application
raised no issue in respect to the validity of the EPA. The Application sought
amendment of the EPA to substitute the Public Trustee as Attorney or to
appoint the Public Trustee as Administrator of the estate
request for a Statement of Reasons was received by the Board from Mr HKV on 3
November 2020.
Applications were heard by the Board together on 23 October 2020.
following persons appeared at the hearing:
HKV (the applicant in respect to the Application for Guardianship);
(the applicant in respect to the Application for Review of the
DEV (the proposed represented person and donor of the
Ben Harris (Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania as counsel for Ms DEV);
Claire Morgan (Advocacy Tasmania as advocate for Ms DEV);
Jessica Watson (Public Trustee);
Maddy Russell (Office of the Public Guardian);
Kellie Bolch (NDIS Support Co-ordinator);
Sharon Webber (Carer);
Kim Bevan ([the residential care facility], Social Worker);
Michelle Garland ([the residential care facility], Manager of Community
Services); and
Jo Dobson ([the residential care facility], case manager).
the hearing the Board considered the following documents:
Application
for Guardianship including appendices;
Application
to Review the Enduring Power of Attorney with
attachments;
Enduring Power of Attorney Registered Number PA[XXXXXX];
Professional Report by Dr Jane Tolman dated 5 September 2020;
from Dr Tolman to Dr Katelyn Brooks dated 16 August 2020;
from Dr Brooks addressed ‘To whom it may concern’ dated 30 July
Hobart Hospital Inpatient Discharge Summary dated 25 May 2020;
Doctors Health Summary Sheet dated 4 August 2020;
of Us account details dated 10 September 2020;
Disability Support Pension claim form;
of the Board dated 1 October 2020 adjourning the Applications to hearing on 23
October 2020;
from Mr HKV to the Board dated 15 October 2020;
from Ms Michelle Garland, Manager of Community Services, [the residential care
facility], to the Board dated 16 October 2020;
Criminal Intelligence Commission Criminal History Check Certificate in respect
to Mr HKV dated 21 October 2020.
Guardianship & Administration Act 1995
section 20 of the
Guardianship & Administration Act 1995
GAB Act’) the Board may make an Order appointing a full or limited
Guardian in respect of Ms DEV if it is satisfied
is a person with a disability; and
is unable by reason of that disability to make reasonable judgments in respect
of all or any matters relating to her personal
circumstances;
is in need of a guardian.
determining whether or not an Order should be made section 20 of the GAB Act
the Board consider whether the needs of Ms DEV could be met by other means less
restrictive of her freedom of decision and action;
the Board be satisfied that an order would be in Ms DEV best interests;
the Board not appoint a full guardian unless it is satisfied that an order for
limited guardianship would be insufficient to
meet the needs of Ms DEV, and if
an order is made appointing a limited guardian that the order be the least
restrictive to Ms DEV’s
freedom of decision and action as possible in the
circumstances.
Board must also have regard to the general principles in section 6 of the GAB
Act which adds the requirements that:-
best interests of Ms DEV be promoted; and
the wishes of Ms DEV are, if possible, carried into
of Attorney Act 2000
power of the Board to make Orders in respect of Enduring Powers of Attorney are
set out in section 33 of the
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
33(1)(d) of the PA Act provides that on Application by a person the Board
believes has a proper interest in the matter, the
Board may hold a hearing in
accordance with Division 1 of Part 10 of the GAB Act to review an EPA.
33(2) of the PA Act provides that on review the Board may make certain Orders
following a review including to:
a term of, or a power conferred by, the EPA (section 33(2)(a));
a substitute attorney (section 33(2)(b));
an Administrator of the estate of the donor (section 33(2)(c));
the EPA and appoint an Administrator of her estate (section 33(2)(f)).
33(3) of the PA Act provides that the appointment of a person as an
Administrator under section 33(2)(f) has the same effect
as if the appointment
had been made under Part 7 of the GAB Act.
51(1) of the GAB Act provides that the Board may make an Order appointing an
Administrator in respect to a person’s
estate if it is satisfied
person is a person with a disability; and
person is unable by reason of that disability to make reasonable judgments in
respect of matters relating to all or any part
of his or her estate;
person is in the need of an administrator of his or her estate.
determining whether or not an Order should be made section 51(2), (3) and (4) of
the GAB Act require that:-
Board must consider whether the needs of that person could be met by other means
less restrictive of his freedom of decision and
action; and
Board must not make an order unless it is satisfied that the order would be in
the best interests of that person; and
an order is made it must be the least restrictive of that person’s freedom
of decision and action as possible in the circumstance.
Board must also have regard to the general principles in section 6 of the GAB
Act which add the requirements that:-
best interests of the person be promoted; and
wishes of the person are, if possible, carried into effect.
two Applications were dealt with by the Board together and evidence in each was
taken as evidence in the other.
DEV was born on [date of birth] and at the date of the hearing was 63 years old.
She lived in Devonport and had worked as a cleaner
and hospital aide until
settling a worker’s compensation claim. After settling the claim she moved
from Devonport to [the town
in Tasmania].
DEV has three children, including Mr HKV. Mr HKV lives in Western Australia. He
had a career in the military and now works in project
management. He has
tertiary and post-tertiary qualifications. He is close to his mother. She
appointed him as her Attorney under
the EPA. Since 2017 she has entrusted him
with substantial funds of hers.
DEV met Mr KC in early 2012. Within two weeks they were engaged, but have not
married. Until recently they managed a long-distance
relationship with Ms DEV
living in Devonport and Mr KC in [the town in Tasmania]. Mr KC travelled the
State regularly in the course
of his business. Mr KC described the relationship
as a romantic one. They did not live together until fairly recently, following
the settlement of Ms DEV’s worker’s compensation claim. As a result
of that settlement Ms DEV was subject to a preclusion
period for receipt of
Centrelink benefits and she took up a suggestion by Mr KC that she move to his
where she could live rent free until she was
eligible to receive a Centrelink benefit.
mid-December 2019 Ms DEV experienced a subarachnoid haemorrhage. She was
admitted to the Royal Hobart Hospital on 13 December 2019
and underwent a right
fronto-temporal craniotomy on 14 December 2019. Her condition was complicated
by a number of secondary and
subsequent medical conditions. She was transferred
from acute care to rehabilitation in May 2020, at which time she was
experiencing
a severe left sided hemiplegia affecting both her upper and lower
limbs, and severe left sided sensory and visual effects. She had
significantly
lowered cognition with short term memory loss and disorientation, and limited
insight into her condition. She was subsequently
discharged to Mr KC’s
DEV was referred to Dr Jane Tolman, a geriatrician, on referral from her GP, Dr
Katelyn Brooks. Dr Tolman assessed Ms DEV on 7
and 14 August. In a report to Dr
Brooks dated 16 August 2020 Dr Tolman wrote:
It is clear to me that Ms DEV does not have the
cognitive capacity to manage her own finances, and I base this on her poor
function, her lack of insight, her poor appreciation of her own
deficits and in general her ongoing impaired cognition as a result
of her brain
I do not think that Ms DEV has the cognitive capacity to make an informed
decision about her medical care, personal care or accommodation
needs, and I
base this on: Ms DEV’s ongoing dysfunction, poor insight (anosognosia),
confabulation and other cognitive deficits.
Tolman reported that Ms DEV’s physical symptoms had improved and that the
improvement in her function was likely to continue,
depending on provision of
appropriate therapy. In a Healthcare Professional Report dated 5 September 2020,
Dr Tolman referred to
the letter to Dr Brooks and noted that Ms DEV’s
cerebral haemorrhage had damaged her executive function resulting in major
deficits in insight, problem solving, common reasoning and planning. She noted
that there had been gains in Ms DEV’s physical
function but not in
cognitive function.
KC is Ms DEV’s primary carer. He has assistance from [the residential care
facility] (which is primarily an aged care provider),
Glenview (an NDIS approved
provider) and Ms Kellie Bolch who is her NDIS Co-ordinator. Mr KC remains fully
employed in his own business,
which is flexible enough to enable him to attend
to care for Ms DEV if required during the day. Issues had arisen in respect to
the level of Ms DEV’s care. In particular, Mr KC has concerns in respect
to the level of service provided by [the residential
care facility] which
required his attendance and involvement to assist with matters such as lifts,
provision of medication and toileting.
Those issues have resulted in a level of
carer fatigue and a degree of conflict between Mr KC and [the residential care
The level of care is being addressed by Mr KC and Ms Bolch with Ms
DEV’s engagement. Ms Bolch described Ms DEV as having significantly
improved. She said that Ms DEV is now fully engaged in conversations about her
care. She will have her say and is not reluctant to
argue with Mr KC. Ms DEV
took part in and contributed to an NDIS review including budget considerations.
Ms Bolch did not consider
that there was a need for a substituted decision maker
in respect to NDIS services given the level at which Ms DEV was able to engage
in supported decision making.
Board had a clear impression that both Mr HKV and Mr KC have Ms DEV’s best
interests at heart. Ms DEV is clearly fond of
and trusts both of them.
Unfortunately, the relationship between Mr HKV and Mr KC has broken down. Mr HKV
does not support his mother’s
relationship with Mr KC. As is common in
such circumstances, there was a significant amount of evidence from each of Mr
KC criticising the actions or inactions of the other. An example of
the resultant dysfunction was in respect to applications for
Ms DEV to obtain a
Disability Support Pension (‘DSP’). Mr HKV partially prepared an
application but contended that it
was not completed because Mr KC failed to
provide information about his finances. Mr KC contends that that information was
not required
because of the nature of his relationship with Ms DEV and he
arranged a separate application with the assistance of a social worker
residential care facility], but claims that Mr HKV interfered with the
processing of that application. Ultimately Ms DEV
was granted a DSP. There is no
need to detail the criticisms made by Mr HKV and Mr KC of each other, nor to
make findings in respect
to the facts alleged. Mr HKV made the Guardianship
Application because he was concerned that Mr KC was limiting his access to Ms
DEV, that Mr KC wanted Ms DEV to invest in property dealings and that Mr HKV was
not receiving information in respect to Ms DEV’s
circumstances. Mr KC
applied for a review of the EPA because he was concerned about the transparency
of Mr HKV’s dealing with
the proceeds of Ms DEV’s worker’s
compensation settlement and perceived limitations on Ms DEV’s ability to
Ms DEV’s experienced her subarachnoid haemorrhage, Mr KC has been paying
her general living expenses. He has not sought
and does not seek repayment of
those expenses. He manages payments for her care through her NDIS package. He
does not have any joint
financial holdings with Ms DEV and says that their
finances have always been separate and that he has no interest in her financial
HKV has received funds from Ms DEV from time to time since 2017. Mr HKV said
that the reason that Ms DEV provided him with the
funds was to hide them from Mr
KC who wanted her to invest in real estate. He currently holds about $150,000.00
for her. That includes
the proceeds of the settlement of her worker’s
compensation claim which were a little under $70,000.00. The funds are held
an account which is his, not an account managed or in trust for Ms DEV. That
account includes funds of Mr HKV and his wife which
are roughly equal to those
of Ms DEV. Payments have been made out of that account to or on behalf of Ms DEV
from time to time. Mr
HKV maintains a spreadsheet to keep track of the funds
paid to him by Ms DEV and payments of her funds out of the account. Mr HKV
no issue with mixing his funds with those of Ms DEV during the currency of the
EPA. Mr HKV made some changes to Ms DEV’s
banking arrangements. He
cancelled her credit card, which had a $6,000.00 limit, to reduce any risk of
undue influence. He opened
a National Australia Bank (‘NAB’) account
with a balance of about $500.00 with a debit card for Ms DEV’s
discretionary
spending. She has a Bank of Us account with a balance of $6000.00
- $7,000.00. Ms DEV’s ability to access her bank accounts
has not been
limited by Mr HKV. Notwithstanding this it appears that Ms DEV had not accessed
her own funds for discretionary spending.
Harris, counsel for Ms DEV, told the Board that Ms DEV did not believe that she
needed a Guardian. She wanted to continue with
the current accommodation
arrangements, living with Mr KC. She understood that her situation placed a lot
of stress on Mr KC and
that he could use more support. She is focussed and
driven to recover her physical capacity to walk. She feels that she can manage
her day to day finances but has not been able to access her funds in order to be
able to do so. Ms DEV is engaged with the decision-making
process around
provision of services. She is concerned about the level of support. She is
adamant that Mr KC had not limited her
communications with her family. She
always kept her financial arrangements separate from Mr KC and does not feel
that he has any
financial influence over her. She considered that she had
sufficiently recovered to take back management of her financial arrangements,
but that if the Board took a different view her preference would be that the EPA
be revoked and the Public Trustee appointed as her
Administrator. Her rationale
for this was to remove the point of conflict within her family between Mr HKV
Morgan, Ms DEV’s advocate, described similar instructions from Ms DEV. Ms
DEV did not believe that she required a Guardian
or an Administrator. She was
happy with the current accommodation arrangements with Mr KC. Once she recovered
sufficiently she would
like to return to the North West Coast. If a Guardian or
an Administrator was to be appointed she would prefer it to be the Public
Guardian and Public Trustee. This was because of the level of family conflict.
She would prefer this issue to be removed for the
benefit of her family
relationships.
DEV expressed similar views directly to the Board. She told the Board that she
was happy to remain in Mr KC’s home. When
asked what services she required
she said that Mr KC was doing a fantastic job although he could do with a bit of
a break. She appointed
Mr HKV as her Attorney because he trusted him. She still
trusts him. However, if anyone is to be appointed by the Board to manage
financial affairs, she would prefer that person to be independent. She would
prefer her relationship with Mr HKV to be that of
mother and son. She is upset
sure how to improve that
relationship. Ms DEV believed that she had come a long
way in terms of her recovery. She was able to tell the Board that she had
account and a Bank of Us account, but had some confusion about the name of that
financial institution. She was aware that Mr
HKV had changed her arrangements
and opened the NAB account. She believed that she still had a credit card. When
asked about how
much money she had sent to Mr HKV she referred to it being
easier to send money to him for the purchase of Christmas and birthday
When it was suggested to her that she had sent large sums to Mr HKV and she was
asked how much her answer was not responsive
to the question, but that she had
been over there (Western Australia) last Christmas. When asked how much she had
received from the
worker’s compensation settlement, she said that she had
no idea. When asked what happened to the funds from that settlement
that she had no idea. She had no recollection of receiving a settlement. She had
some idea that solicitors had acted for
her, but when asked about the outcome
she said that she could not remember anything about it. When asking how she
would access her
funds she said that she would sometimes go with Mr KC. When
asked about ongoing phone expenses she said that she had a phone plan
insurance. She did not describe how she arranged those payments.
Does Ms DEV have a disability?
report of Dr Tolman indicates that Ms DEV experiences significant deficits in
executive function, particularly in respect to insight,
problem solving,
reasoning and planning. There is no expert opinion to the contrary. The Board
accepts Dr Tolman’s evidence
and finds that Ms DEV has a
disability.
Is Ms DEV, by reason of her disability, unable to
make reasonable judgments in respect to all or any matters regarding her
circumstances or her estate?
Tolman’s opinion is that Ms DEV lacks the cognitive capacity to make
informed decisions about her needs because of her disability.
In her evidence to
the Board it was apparent that Ms DEV had limited understanding of the extent of
her estate and that her view
that she could manage her finances was not
reflected in her actually having taken any steps to do so since her suffering
the subarachnoid
haemorrhage. The Board is satisfied that she has an inability
to make reasonable judgments in respect to her estate and financial
reason of her disability.
Is there a need for a Guardian?
Notwithstanding
her reduced ability to make reasonable judgments by reason of her condition, Ms
DEV is clearly well engaged in the
decision-making process surrounding her
services, with the support of Mr KC and Ms Bolch. Although there have been
limitations in
respect to those services it appears that those limitations are
being addressed. It is not apparent to the Board that there is an
immediate need
to appoint a Guardian to facilitate decision making in respect to this area.
There is not compelling evidence of
need in respect to any other areas of
decision making.
Is there a need for an Attorney or
Administrator?
current arrangements in respect to managing Ms DEV’s financial affairs are
not satisfactory. Substantial funds of hers are
mixed with funds of Mr HKV and
his wife. She is not accessing her funds for discretionary purposes. She does
not have an understanding
of the extent of her estate. There is clearly a need
for an Attorney or Administrator.
What are Ms DEV’s
DEV made it clear to the Board that her preference, if anyone was to be
appointed, would be to appoint the Public Guardian or Public
Trustee in respect
to Guardianship or Administration of her estate respectively. She had provided
consistent instructions to Mr Harris
and Ms Morgan. Her rationale for this, to
avoid a point of friction within her family relationships, was apparently well
considered.
Can Ms DEV’s needs be met by less restrictive
alternatives?
least restrictive approach to Ms DEV’s needs relevant to Guardianship is
for the current arrangements to continue. Her needs
are apparently well met
through supported decision making without the need for substituted decision
making. In respect to Administration
the current arrangements are not working
and there appears to be no less restrictive way of managing Ms DEV’s
finances other
than by a substituted decision maker.
DEV’s best interests
is in Ms DEV’s best interests that her finances be administered in a
transparent manner that is responsive to her needs.
For the reasons set out
below it is also in her best interests that this be done by the Public
Is a Limited Order sufficient to meet Ms DEV
respect to Administration, the least restrictive approach would be an
unrestricted authority to an Attorney or Administrator to
manage her estate and
day to day finances.
Should the Enduring Power of Attorney be
revoked and an administrator appointed?
there is no suggestion that Mr HKV has anything other than Ms DEV’s best
interests at heart it is not appropriate that
her funds be intermingled with
funds belonging to him and his wife. The current arrangements in respect to the
application of Ms
DEV’s funds for her needs and benefit are not
satisfactory, and it is apparent that the distrust between Mr HKV and Mr KC
contributes
to that. Ms DEV has expressed a very clear and considered preference
that, if her affairs are to be managed, it should be by an independent
in this case the Public Trustee. Her reasons for that position, being the
removal of a source of family conflict and the
normalisation of her maternal
relationship with Mr HKV, are clear, logical and compelling in the
circumstances. There is no automatic
oversight or audit of an EPA. The
appointment of an Administrator would engage the reporting requirements in
section 63 of the GAB
Act and contribute to the transparency that all parties
desire. In all the circumstances the Board’s view is that the EPA
to be revoked and an Administration Order be made appointing the Public Trustee
as Ms DEV’s Administrator.
respect to the Application for Guardianship the Board’s order is:-
Application for Guardianship is dismissed.
In respect to
the Application for Review of the Enduring Power of Attorney the Board’s
orders are that:-
Enduring Power of Attorney PA 122092 dated 19 November 2018 made by the Donor
DEV is revoked.
Public Trustee (Tas) is appointed as Administrator of the estate of DEV.
Order remains in effect to 22 October 2023.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (155 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter