URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCCA/2025/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bailey v Tasmania [2025] TASCCA 13 (16 October 2025)
[2025] TASCCA 13
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (COURT OF CRIMINAL
Bailey v Tasmania
[2025] TASCCA
: BAILEY, Sharon Maree
CCA 1546/2025
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Pearce J, Brett J, Cuthbertson J
Criminal Law – Appeal and new trial – Appeal against sentence
– Grounds for interference – Other matters –
Error of fact
– Need to establish material error – Error capable of having
affected the outcome.
Criminal Code, s 402(4)
Kentwell v The
[2014] HCA 37
, 252 CLR 601, considered.
Jenkins v Tasmania
[2019] TASCCA 12
30 Tas R 179
Aust Dig Criminal Law [3525]
Criminal Law – Sentence – Relevant
factors – Nature and circumstances of
offender – Prior criminality –
misappropriation in position of trust – Offender with long history of
dishonesty committed further offences of similar
Veen (No 2)
; 164 CLR 465, applied
Aust Dig Criminal Law [3258]
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Tasmania Legal
Respondent:
Director of Public Prosecutions
[2025] TASCCA 13
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 13/2025
File No CCA 1546/2025
SHARON MAREE BAILEY v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
CUTHBERTSON
16 October 2025
imposed by Marshall AJ on 7 April 2025 set aside.
convicted on counts 1 to 86 on indictment 223/2022, excluding counts 3, 4, 7, 9,
10, 11, 22, 28, 32, and sentenced to imprisonment
for two years from 13 November
2024 with eligibility for parole after having served fifteen months of that
Serial No 13/2025
File No CCA 1546/2025
SHARON MAREE BAILEY v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
16 October 2025
a sentencing appeal. On 13 March 2025 the appellant pleaded guilty to 77 counts
of fraud contrary to the
Criminal Code
(Tas), s 253A. On 7 April 2025 she
was sentenced by Marshall AJ to a global term of imprisonment for three years
from 13 November
2024 with eligibility for parole after having served half of
are four grounds of appeal. The first ground of appeal is that the sentence was
manifestly excessive. The remaining grounds,
added by amendment at the
commencement of the hearing of the appeal, allege specific error. For the
following reasons, grounds 3
and 4 of the amended notice of appeal are made out.
It is not necessary to determine ground 1. I would allow the appeal and
re-sentence
the appellant.
The factual background
early 2016, when the appellant was aged 54, she applied for employment as a
support worker with Community Based Support, a not
for profit organisation which
provided in-home care for older persons and persons with disabilities. As part
of the application the
appellant was required to provide a national police
check. At that time, as will later be explained in more detail, the appellant
had numerous prior convictions for offences of dishonesty. The first such
conviction was in 1987 when she was 26 and the most recent
was in 2012 when she
was 50. Correctly appreciating that her criminal record would preclude her from
employment, the appellant dishonestly
removed reference to those convictions in
the police check document she submitted with her application. Her application
was successful
and she commenced employment with Community Based Support on 23
March 2016. She remained in that position until 4 October 2018. During
period of employment she was paid a total sum of $124,017.55. The first count on
the indictment arose from the fraud involved
in her employment application.
remaining counts on the indictment concerned fraudulent payments made by the
appellant from the accounts of a client of Community
Based Support, John
Fitzgerald. The appellant was one of a number of carers who provided in home
support to Mr Fitzgerald. He was
confined to a wheelchair and did not leave his
2016 and, for one hour each week, helped him with daily living tasks,
cleaning and shopping. He operated two bank accounts: a credit
card with one
bank and a debit card with another. From September 2017 the appellant used both
cards, by 76 separate transactions
over the following 11 months, to purchase
items or pay accounts for herself and her husband. She did so after having
written down
the card and CCV numbers. She manually entered the card details
into her own Afterpay account, a buy now and pay later service offered
retailers which allowed customers to pay for purchases by four interest free
instalments. She then used the accounts to pay for
Afterpay purchases from many
different retailers, some of which were for non-essential items such as
jewellery and handbags. She
also used the credit card to pay Telstra accounts
and vehicle registration fees for herself and her husband, for concert tickets
and other debts and, in March 2018, to fund a trip to Queensland for herself,
her husband and her daughter.
Fitzgerald was defrauded of the total sum of $10,753.85. The offending started
to become apparent when, in May 2018, Mr Fitzgerald's
credit card was
unexpectedly declined when he was shopping. When the outstanding balance on the
card continued to increase Mr Fitzgerald
sought assistance from a bank officer
and fraudulent transactions were identified. His credit card was cancelled in
June 2018 by
which time the balance outstanding was in excess of $18,000. The
fraud was not reported to the police until August 2018 because Mr
was, at first, adamant that no-one he knew, including the appellant, could have
been responsible. The appellant continued
to dishonestly use the debit card
until it was cancelled in September 2018.
chief executive of Community Based Support was advised of the police
investigation. On 5 October 2018 the appellant presented
at the police station
in relation to the investigation and admitted responsibility for the payments,
although she falsely claimed
that Mr Fitzgerald had, in March 2018, offered to
The appellant resigned before her employment could be terminated.
appellant was charged on 17 April 2019 and pleaded not guilty. She first
appeared in the Supreme Court concerning the fraud against
her employer on 16
March 2020 and on 12 October 2020 for the fraud against Mr Fitzgerald. There was
a substantial delay before the
sentencing hearing was conducted commencing on 13
March 2025.
the crimes were committed the appellant was aged between 55 and 57. At the time
of sentence the appellant was aged 63. She was
married and had been living in
Queensland. She was raised in Tasmania. Her father was a violent alcoholic and a
gambler. He left
the family when the appellant was 11, whereupon the appellant
school in year 9 and commenced employment. She had been married three times and
had three adult children. Her first marriage,
at age 19, was marred by abuse
which had a traumatic effect on her for a considerable
Grounds 2 to 4 - specific error
is convenient to deal first with these grounds, which assert that the sentencing
judge, in arriving at the sentence, made specific
errors by imposing sentence on
the basis of mistaken facts, each asserted mistake being the subject of a
separate ground of appeal.
amended notice alleges:
by ground 2,
that the learned sentencing judge erred in fact in sentencing for 86 counts of
fraud contrary to s 253A of the Code;
by ground 3,
that the learned sentencing judge erred in fact by taking into account an
incorrect prior conviction;
by ground 4,
that the learned sentencing judge erred in fact in sentencing upon an incorrect
factual basis surrounding the timeframe
of offending behaviour between count 1
and counts 2 to 86.
reference to specific error means error of the first type identified in
(1936) 55 CLR 499
"If the judge acts upon
a wrong principle, if he allows extraneous or irrelevant matters to guide or
affect him, if he mistakes the
facts, if he does not take into account some
material consideration, then his determination should be reviewed and the
court may exercise its own discretion in substitution for his if it
has the materials for doing so."
specific error is identified, this Court must set aside the sentence and
exercise the sentencing discretion afresh unless, in
the separate and
independent exercise of its discretion it concludes that no different
sentence should be passed:
Criminal Code
, s 402(4):
[1999] HCA 46
198 CLR 111
at per Hayne J at [130];
Kentwell v The Queen
[2014] HCA 37
, 252 CLR 601;
Tasmania (No 2)
[2007] TASSC 85
and [15]. In
AB v The Queen
Hayne J said, in a passage subsequently adopted by French CJ, Hayne, Bell
and Keane JJ in
"The difference between cases
of specific error and manifest excess is not merely a matter of convenient
classification. It reflects
a fundamental difference in what the appellate court
does. In the former case, once an appellate court identifies an error, the
imposed below must be set aside and the appellate court is then
required to exercise the sentencing discretion afresh. The offender
re-sentenced unless, of course, in the separate and independent exercise of its
discretion the appellate court concludes
that no different sentence should be
passed. By contrast, in the case of manifest excess, the error in reasoning of
the sentencing
judge is not discernible; all that can be seen is that the
sentence imposed is too heavy and thus lies outside the permissible range
dispositions. Only then may the appellate court intervene and, in the exercise
of its discretion, consider what sentence is to
be imposed."
function of an appellate court under s 402(4) of the Code when specific error in
the exercise of the sentencing discretion is
demonstrated was considered in
detail by Porter AJ, with whom Marshall AJ agreed, in
[2019] TASCCA 12
. His Honour reviewed
and decisions of intermediate courts of appeal in other
Australian jurisdictions. I respectfully agree with his Honour's conclusions
which he summarised at [139]-[140]. Once any error on the part of the sentencing
judge is established, the court must exercise the
sentencing discretion afresh.
If the exercise of that discretion results in a conclusion that a lesser
sentence is "warranted in
law", then the court must re-sentence the offender.
The independent exercise of the sentencing discretion that the court is obliged
to undertake if it finds error cannot be performed by "merely adjusting the
sentence actually passed to allow for the error identified":
at [40], citing
Baxter v The Queen
173 A Crim R 284
Porter AJ explained, by reference to authority, that not every
error justifies appellate intervention. His Honour concluded at [123]
specific error complained of must be a material one, in the sense that it
related to the exercise of the discretion and affected
or could have affected
the outcome. His Honour, in considering the question of materiality, adopted the
approach of Basten JA in
Newman (a pseudonym) v The Queen
NSWCCA 157.
According to that approach, an
immaterial error does not lead
to a conclusion that the exercise of the discretion has miscarried. An
extraneous factor which does
not guide or affect the determination involves no
miscarriage. However, an appellant need not establish that an error has had
effect on the sentence imposed, only that it has "the
capacity to influence the sentence":
at [11], since applied
in New South Wales in many cases including
Ibbotson (a pseudonym) v The
[2020] NSWCCA 92
Benn v The Queen
[2023] NSWCCA 24
. As Porter AJ pointed out, the same approach was
applied by the Court of Appeal of Western Australia in
Harding v Western
[2015] WASCA 27
, a decision subsequently followed in that
has also been applied by the Court of Appeal in Victoria,
for example in
Barbaro v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 277
. Thus, the
approach to material error applied by this Court in
followed. What then is required is demonstration of an error which is material
in the sense that it affected, or was capable
of affecting, the sentence
actually imposed.
The indictment setting out the charges against the appellant was dated 14
September 2022 and contained 90 counts. On 27 July 2023,
the State filed a
nolle prosequi
informing the Court, in accordance with the Code, s 350,
that the Crown did not proceed with counts 3, 4, 7, 9, 10, 11, 22, 28, 32,
88, 89 and 90, 13 counts in all. The result, by operation of s 350(1)(b), was
that the appellant was, from 27 July 2023, discharged
on those counts. Her pleas
of guilty were to only the remaining 77 counts and it was those counts for which
she was to be sentenced.
ground arises from comments made by the learned sentencing judge in his
sentencing remarks. In the opening passage the learned
sentencing judge stated
that the appellant had "pleaded guilty to 86 counts of fraud..." His Honour then
referred to count 1, describing
it as falling into one category, and that in
"the second category there are counts 2 to 86". Subsequently, his Honour
referred, in
a number of places and in a range of contexts, to the conduct
comprised in "counts 2 to 86". One such reference was immediately before
announcing the sentence, having already convicted the appellant on count
"The Court also convicts [the appellant] on counts 2 to 86
Taking into account all 86 counts, including count 1, the Court imposes the
following sentence..."
the sentencing judge imposed sentence for counts on the indictment to which the
appellant had not pleaded guilty then error is
established and this ground must
succeed. However, I am satisfied that no such error occurred. The memorandum of
sentence subsequently
prepared correctly recorded that the appellant was
convicted on only those counts from counts 2 to 86 which had not been subject
nolle prosequi
. No order convicting the appellant of counts other
than those to which she pleaded guilty was perfected. Properly understood, his
Honour's references to counts 2 to 86 were shorthand for only the counts in that
range which were not specified in the
nolle prosequi
. The correctness of
that proposition may be demonstrated by reference to other parts of the
sentencing comments. His Honour must
have taken the terms of the
into account because no mention was made of counts 87 to 90
inclusive on the indictment. Those counts alleged fraud against persons
than Mr Fitzgerald and no reference was made to any such allegations during the
sentencing hearing or in his Honour's sentencing
remarks. Secondly, the sum
alleged to have been obtained as a result of the fraudulent acts in "counts 2 to
86" was $10,753.85. That
was the amount referred to in sentencing and was the
amount of the compensation order his Honour made. It was the total of the
referred to in those counts excluding the sums which were the subject of
counts 3, 4, 7, 9, 10, 11, 22, 28 and 32 included in the
nolle prosequi
His Honour also referred to the use of the card details in "76 on-line
transactions". Because each count concerned a separate transaction,
it was clear
that the sentencing judge was not mistakenly dealing with 89 counts, if counts
87 to 90 were included, or 85 counts
if they were not.
is not demonstrated and this ground is not made out.
3 asserts that the learned sentencing judge erred in fact by taking into account
an incorrect prior conviction. As to the
relevance of the appellant's criminal
history of offences of dishonesty to sentence, the appellant referred, in a
different context,
to the judgment of Mason CJ, Brennan, Dawson and Toohey JJ in
Veen (No 2)
[1988] HCA 14
;164 CLR 465 at 477:
antecedent criminal history of an offender is a factor which may be taken into
account in determining the sentence to be imposed,
but it cannot be given such
weight as to lead to the imposition of a penalty which is disproportionate to
the gravity of the instant
offence. To do so would be to impose a fresh penalty
for past offences:
Director of Public Prosecutions v. Ottewell
, at p 650. The antecedent criminal history is relevant, however, to show
whether the instant offence is an uncharacteristic aberration
or whether the
offender has manifested in his commission of the instant offence a continuing
attitude of disobedience of the law.
In the latter case, retribution, deterrence
and protection of society may all indicate that a more severe penalty is
warranted. It
is legitimate to take account of the antecedent criminal history
when it illuminates the moral culpability of the offender in the
instant case,
or shows his dangerous propensity or shows a need to impose condign punishment
to deter the offender and other offenders
from committing further offences of a
like kind. Counsel for the applicant submitted that antecedent criminal history
was relevant
only to a prisoner's claim for leniency. That is not and has never
been the approach of the courts in this country and it would be
at odds with the
community's understanding of what is relevant to the assessment of criminal
penalties."
appellant's record included the following:
on 3 July 1987,
when the appellant was 26, she was made subject to probation for forgery,
uttering and 25 counts of dishonestly obtaining
a financial advantage. She had
prepared a false application for a credit card which had previously been refused
and then used the
card to run up a debt she could not pay;
on 26 November
1997, when the appellant was 36, a magistrate imposed a suspended fine for
attempted deception;
on 15 August
2001, when the appellant was 40, she was sentenced to imprisonment for two
months, wholly suspended, for stealing and
three counts of using a computer with
intent to defraud;
on 13 December
2001, the appellant was sentenced to imprisonment for 18 months for stealing. In
1997 the appellant was entrusted with
the operation of her mother-in-law's bank
account. Her mother-in-law was elderly and in poor health and the account
contained her
life savings. The appellant dishonestly misappropriated $30,000.
The sentencing judge referred to the appellant's lack of remorse;
on 7 January
2002, the appellant was sentenced by a magistrate to a cumulative term of one
month for stealing on 13 August 2000;
on 3 December
2003, the appellant was sentenced in the Supreme Court to imprisonment for three
months, wholly suspended, for attempted
fraud on a creditor committed on 9 March
2001. On this occasion the appellant made another false credit card application,
previously been refused. The sentencing judge described the crime as a
"thoroughly dishonest" act deserving of imprisonment, but
suspended the term
because he had "reason to believe that the previous sentence [the appellant]
served was a salutary lesson";
on 13 March
2012, the appellant was sentenced by a magistrate to imprisonment for three
months, wholly suspended, for stealing and
four counts of using a computer with
intent to defraud.
issue of a mistaken reference to a prior conviction arose in this way. In the
course of the sentencing hearing the prosecutor
handed up the appellant's
criminal record. The document included the entry from the Supreme Court on 3
December 2003, referred to
above, for one count of attempted fraud on a creditor
on 9 March 2001 for which a three month wholly suspended term was imposed.
However the record also included an entry from the Court of Petty Sessions on 24
October 2003 referring to the same complaint for
one count of attempted fraud on
a creditor committed 9 -13 March 2001 stating "Pleaded Guilty - Conviction
Recorded". On this appeal
it is common ground that both entries concern the same
offence. The appellant pleaded guilty in the Court of Petty Sessions but was
committed to the Supreme Court and convicted and sentenced in that court. The
entries related to one conviction, not two. However,
before the sentencing
judge, both entries were referred to by prosecution counsel, from which it was
to be inferred that they were
separate convictions. The error was not picked up
either by defence counsel or the Court.
the sentencing proceedings, the appellant's prior convictions were relevant to
count 1 because that charge specifically related
to the appellant's dishonest
removal of the prior convictions for dishonesty from the police check which
accompanied the appellant's
employment application. The sentencing judge
"The effect of the deletions from the National Police Check
document was that the following convictions were not disclosed:
26 November 1997
– one count of attempted deception;
15 August 2001
– three counts of using a computer to defraud and one count of
7 January 2002
– one count of stealing (which involved one months' imprisonment);
24 October 2003
– one count of attempted fraud on a creditor;
3 December 2003
– one count of attempted fraud on a creditor;
13 March 2012
– one count of stealing and four counts of using a computer with intent to
passage contained no error. The entries for both 24 October 2003 and 3 December
2003 were in fact removed from the employment
application, and it was irrelevant
that the entry for 24 October was erroneously identified as a separate
conviction. However, the
appellant's prior convictions were also relevant to the
exercise of the sentencing discretion in the manner described in
. In that context the sentencing judge was given details of the offence
committed on 9 March 2001 by being given the 2003 comments
of the sentencing
judge. When sentencing the appellant Marshall AJ referred to her record in these
"I also take into account her significant criminal history
involving dishonesty.
That was referred to earlier in these Comments on
Passing Sentence.
Although the last of that offending occurred over 13 years
ago, it should be borne in mind that some of the earlier offending involved
conduct which occurred in similar circumstances to the current matter, where a
breach of trust by Ms Bailey was able to see her gain
a financial benefit. The
sentencing judge in a matter in December 2001, noted that Ms Bailey had shown no
remorse for her conduct
on that occasion. The Judge noted that, 'the life
savings of an elderly woman were systematically pillaged. The offender has shown
no remorse.'." (Emphasis added.)
[2019] TASCCA 12
30 Tas R 179
was also a case in which it was
asserted that the sentence was imposed on the basis of an erroneous
understanding of the appellant's
prior convictions. The majority concluded that
the error was not one which was, in the circumstances of that case, capable of
the sentence. In this appeal the appellant points to the risk that the
error, namely that the two entries in 2003 concerned separate
offences, led the
sentencing judge to form a more serious view of the appellant's past dishonesty.
That contention is not beyond
argument. The mistaken "conviction" was more than
20 years before sentence. No details were offered of any separate offence (for
the obvious reason that there was no separate offence). The sentencing judge was
correct, despite the error, to conclude that the
appellant had a "significant
criminal history regarding dishonesty". However, I have concluded that, whether
or not the error actually
affected the sentence, it had the capacity to do so.
In the particular circumstances of this case, the appellant's record was a
important matter in sentencing. It was one of the dominant factors in
assessing the appellant's moral culpability and the need for
retribution,
deterrence and protection of society. The sentencing judge expressly took into
account an even older prior conviction
in 2001. I think that the mistaken
addition of a conviction of the same type did leave the impression that the
appellant's record
was even worse than it in fact was.
Any doubt about whether the error referred to in ground 3 had the capacity to
affect the sentence which was imposed does not exist,
to my mind, in relation to
the error asserted in ground 4. This ground concerns count 1 on the indictment.
It was submitted to the
sentencing judge by the appellant's counsel that
dishonest removal of the prior convictions from the employment application was
motivated by the appellant's greed, but by the need for a wage to support
herself and her family. It was readily to be inferred that
the appellant knew
that if her history of dishonesty was disclosed that she would not be employed.
The force of the submission was
that the appellant's initial fraud was not
motivated by a plan or design to put herself in a position to offend against
Community Based Support.
the submission about the motivation for that dishonesty was put to the
sentencing judge his Honour asked "Well, how long had
she been employed when the
offending started". Counsel for the prosecution advised his Honour that it was
"two months, less than
two months" and that "the first charge in relation to Mr
Fitzgerald was 17 May". There followed a further exchange with counsel for
appellant. His Honour commented that until 17 May there were "no alarm bells,
she was just like any employee doing their job"
but that during the offending
period she was "taking advantage of her job to do things." Counsel for the
appellant then repeated
the submission that the motivation for count 1 was not
greed, but "because she needed to earn money for her family" to which his
replied "Well that's why most people apply for work". After having been
employed, the appellant completed a three month probation
period and was offered
further contracts of employment for permanent part-time work on 3 October 2016
and 30 March 2017.
facts put to the sentencing judge about when the appellant's offending started
were incorrect. The appellant commenced employment
with Community Based Support
on 23 March 2016 and began to work with Mr Fitzgerald on 17 May 2016. However,
the first fraudulent
transaction specified in the indictment was not until 11
September 2017, about 18 months after the appellant was first employed,
than two months later as his Honour was informed. I would accept the submission
made to this Court by counsel for the appellant
that the result of the exchanges
just referred to was that the sentencing judge was left with the clear but
mistaken impression that
the appellant began employment on 23 March 2016 and
began offending less than two months later. The error was not corrected before
his Honour proceeded to sentence. This ground of appeal advances the proposition
that the error gave the submission that the appellant
was not motivated by greed
in obtaining the employment much less force. His Honour did not specifically
refer to the erroneous dates
in the sentencing remarks, but
"Count 1 involves significant offending. The deceit engaged in
by Ms Bailey in obtaining employment, aided by incompetent vetting
enabled her to access a vulnerable person who was an easy target for her
dishonest conduct."
Honour's comments may be read in a number of ways. One way in which they may be
read is that it was merely a statement of an
undisputed fact, that by reason of
the appellant's employment she was in a position to offend in this way. However,
in my view, there
exists a distinct possibility that his Honour concluded, or
took into account, that part of the motivation for the appellant's initial
deceit was to "[
] her to access a vulnerable person who was an easy
target" (My emphasis). That was an inference which was much more likely to be
drawn if the dishonesty had begun within two months, rather than after 18
months. In the course of the sentencing submissions the
sentencing judge had
specifically asked about the interval between the start of employment and the
start of the offending. It must
follow that it was a matter of interest to his
Honour, presumably because of the possible relationship between the initial
and the later dishonesty. The information with which his Honour was
provided was quite wrong and, I would accept, either did or could
have added to
his Honour's view of the level of the appellant's culpability. In my view, the
error was also capable of affecting
his Honour's assessment of the appellant's
culpability for the later offending. If it were the case that her subsequent
was linked to her earlier fraud, in that it formed part of a plan or
intention from the start to take advantage of her employment
to be dishonest,
then the level of her overall culpability for the later offending was
conclusion that the errors referred to in grounds 3 and 4 each had the capacity
to affect sentence is reinforced when the cumulative
effect of the errors is
considered. The combined force of an erroneous reference to an additional
relevant prior conviction and the
error concerning the date at which the
dishonesty commenced after the initial fraud was clearly capable of affecting
the sentencing
judge's view of the overall culpability of the appellant and the
need for deterrence and punishment.
result is that grounds 3 and 4 should be allowed. In both cases the error arose
principally because wrong information was given
to the sentencing judge. However
the mistaken facts, both individually and collectively were, at least, capable
of affecting sentence.
The exercise of the sentencing discretion miscarried and
the sentence imposed by the learned sentencing judge on 7 April 2025 must
Re-sentence
a result of the finding of specific error it is not appropriate to consider the
ground that the sentence imposed by the sentencing
judge was manifestly
excessive. This Court is not to assess whether the sentence imposed was "within
at [42]. It must exercise the sentencing
discretion afresh, taking into account all matters relevant to sentence. The
circumstances
of the offences and appellant are set out earlier in these
reasons. The Court heard argument about whether the sentence was manifestly
excessive. Although determination of that ground is no longer necessary, the
submissions are relevant to re-sentence. Taking into
account all matters
relevant to sentence I have concluded that a lesser sentence is "warranted in
law" and should be imposed.
to count 1, the appellant submitted that the objective seriousness of that
crime was reduced because:
there was no
identified loss suffered by Community Based Support as a result of the
the amount of
wages paid to the appellant during her employment was not a loss because the
appellant performed her work as required
and Community Based Support received
the benefit of that work;
Community Based
Support contributed to its own misfortune by failing to check an "obviously
doctored" police check document.
of those submissions should carry any weight. I would attach no importance to
the issue of whether the wages paid to the appellant
as a result of her
fraudulent application constituted a loss. Her receipt of wages which would not
have been paid but for the fraud,
and the otherwise satisfactory performance of
her employment duties, were not to the point. The appellant was to be sentenced
the criminality involved in her own conduct, which was not lessened by any
perceived failings of her employer. However, the respondent
does not assert that
the fraud included any plan or intention to steal from clients if the employment
application were successful.
The subsequent conduct, which commenced about 18
months later, cannot be considered to aggravate the objective seriousness of the
initial dishonesty:
Director of Public Prosecutions v England
, 2 VR 258 at 263
R v Wilkinson (No 5)
Shield v Tasmania
[2017] TASCCA 6
Brett J. Nevertheless, when considering the total sentence, the fraudulent
employment application places the later dishonesty
in context. Having
fraudulently hidden her past dishonesty to obtain employment, the appellant took
advantage of her appointment
to benefit herself through many more dishonest
reference was made by counsel for the appellant to delay. The appellant was not
sentenced until about seven years after her
offending was discovered. However,
delay was not a factor in the appellant's favour of any weight. Delay of itself
between the commission
of an offence and the disposition of proceedings is not
generally a mitigating factor although it may work in favour of an accused
is not attributable to his or her fault:
Prehn v The Queen
[2003] TASCCA
. As Jago J, with whom Estcourt J and Porter AJ agreed, recently
explained in
Lockwood v Tasmania
[2025] TASCCA 6
, delay as a
mitigating factor focuses on two principal contentions: first, the anxiety and
stress of the offender who waits a long
time for the determination of the
charges and, second, where there is demonstrated or suggested rehabilitation
during the period
of delay. The second factor had no part to play in this case.
The only evidence of the first factor was an assertion in mitigation
appellant found the uncertainty of outcome stressful. Some delay arose from the
time taken to prepare the matter for trial.
When it became clear that the
appellant intended to maintain her plea of not guilty, the allocation of further
prosecution resources
was required to marshal and prepare evidence from
financial institutions and about on-line transactions. The process was slowed by
the pandemic and was not completed until October 2022. After that, the delay was
caused by various factors attributable to the appellant.
representation was complicated. There were protracted negotiations for a plea.
When a sentencing hearing was eventually
set down in September 2023, the
appellant submitted medical certificates asserting that, because of her own
health and her responsibility
to her sister, the appellant could not travel from
her home in Queensland to Tasmania. Whilst some certificates were genuine it
that two certificates produced by the appellant in November 2023 were
false. She conceded that her ill health at that time included
anxiety about the
possible outcome of the proceedings. When the appellant failed to appear at
sentencing hearing scheduled for 2
October 2024 a warrant was issued for her
arrest. She was taken into custody in Queensland on 13 November 2024 and
extradited to
Tasmania. The learned sentencing judge correctly ordered that the
term of imprisonment he imposed commence on that date.
only mitigating factor of any weight was the appellant's plea of guilty. It
facilitated justice and avoided the need for what
may have been a lengthy and
complicated trial. However it was not an early plea and the timing of it did not
avoid the allocation
of a great deal of the resources of prosecution authorities
in the facilitation of proof. The plea did not carry any indication of
remorse. Her repeated offending excluded any such claim:
DPP v Harington
[2017] TASCCA 4
; 27 Tas R 128 at
. She acted with calculated dishonesty on
many separate occasions for almost a year, and her dishonesty ceased only when
it was discovered.
Her submission of false medical certificates to delay the
sentencing hearing and the requirement for extradition were also inconsistent
with genuine remorse. The appellant made no attempt to repay the money
fraudulently taken from the bank accounts. The bank took responsibility
Fitzgerald's credit card losses, but it was a loss nevertheless.
would accept that, by comparison with some cases which have attracted long
sentences, the appellant did not steal a large sum and
the period of offending
was not as prolonged. However, in my view, there were other reasons which, in
the circumstances of this case,
suggested the need for a strong sentence, giving
predominance to punishment, denunciation, general and specific deterrence and
of the public. There was no suggestion that the appellant's
blameworthiness was affected by some mental health impairment. Her offending
was, at least in part, motivated by greed and the objective seriousness of it
was greatly aggravated by her breach of trust. She
was in a position of trust
with her employer, but more significantly, she was trusted by Mr Fitzgerald.
Clients of community based
care organisations are almost invariably vulnerable
and trusting, as Mr Fitzgerald was. The trust invested in carers is of
importance. Clients, the family and friends of clients, employers and
the community generally rely on the honesty of those entrusted
with the care of
those who, by age or disability or other reason, are less able to care for
themselves. Breach of that trust substantially
undermines the community's faith
and confidence in carers and their employers generally.
for the appellant submitted that the objective seriousness of the appellant's
crimes was less than the offences considered
in a number of decisions of this
Court concerning persons guilty of serious fraud:
[2010] TASCCA 21
the appellant was re-sentenced to
imprisonment for six years with eligibility for parole after 3½ years. She
pleaded guilty to
346 counts of computer-related fraud having had stolen over
$1.2 million from her employers over a period of more than three years.
mental health was a factor in sentencing:
Director of
Public Prosecutions v Kendall
[2021] TASCCA 10
35 Tas R 128
the misappropriation by a bookkeeper of $420,000 over 21 months. The respondent
was re-sentenced to imprisonment for four
years, one year of which was
suspended. The respondent was a person of good character, had no significant
prior convictions, pleaded
guilty on her first appearance in court and had made
significant reparations.
[2022] TASCCA 5
the appellant was re-sentenced to a suspended
term of nine months, after having served five months of very restrictive home
for fraudulent transfers totalling just over $28,000 made as
treasurer of a golf club. Mr Hill was 70, pleaded guilty and was otherwise
good character.
of Public Prosecutions v Allen
[2017] TASCCA 24
27 Tas R 260
the respondent
was re-sentenced to imprisonment for 2 years and 6 months for, over about six
months, fraudulently using guest credit
card details he had obtained during his
employment in a hotel to dishonestly obtain $101,900 and attempt to obtain
considerably more.
Mr Allen was a young man and had not been to prison
Broomhall misappropriated $398,534.28 over a period of about eight years in the
course of her employment in the Tasmanian
Health Service. Her mental health was
a relevant factor in sentencing. She was sentenced to imprisonment for three
years, with one
year of that sentence suspended. This Court dismissed an appeal
on the grounds of manifest excess:
Broomhall v Tasmania
, at [11], Estcourt J made reference to, and summarised the effect
of, a table which had been compiled by counsel for the State with
reference to
sentences from the Court's database of matters relating to frauds mostly
committed in circumstances of a breach of trust
in an amount of between $20,000
and $49,000.
appellant emphasised that the appellant's fraud, in distinction to the large
sums involved in most of the cases just referred
to, amounted only to just over
$10,000 and was for the period of less than a year. The appellant also submitted
that this case did
not involve the unusually tragic or damaging consequences
which existed in some cases, for example as was the case in
There were no attempts by the appellant to hide or disguise her wrongdoing and
her dishonest conduct was not sophisticated. For
those reasons, it was
submitted, a lesser sentence should be imposed. Counsel for the appellant also
referred to some other sentences
imposed at first instance in cases she
suggested were worthy of comparison also involving repeated dishonesty in
positions of trust:
Johnson-Ploughman was employed as a companion for a quadriplegic who required 24
hour care. She stole more than $40,000 by
90 fraudulent transactions from bank
accounts over about eight months. She had no prior convictions. She was
sentenced to imprisonment
for nine months, most of which was suspended.
Aleisha Direen
was the bookkeeper at an RSL club. On 26 occasions over about four months she
dishonestly transferred a total of just
under $30,000. She had some prior
convictions including for dishonesty but mostly related to a drug problem. She
was ordered to serve
Rhonda O'Sign
was president of a children's sporting organisation from which she
misappropriated over $10,000 over about 32 months.
She was aged in her late 50's
and had no significant prior convictions. She was sentenced to imprisonment for
three months wholly
suspended with 140 hours of community service.
Alison Leslie
stole more than $350,000 from her employer by 490 separate transactions over 3
1/2 years. She had one significant prior
conviction for similar dishonesty which
she had failed to disclose. She was sentenced to imprisonment for 3 1/2 years
with eligibility
for parole after half.
Rachael Walden
was a school finance officer who misappropriated $142,700 over 19 months. She
had one prior conviction for dishonesty
when she was much younger and had an
undiagnosed psychiatric condition relevant to sentence. She was sentenced to
for 10 months.
Emma Groves
stole about $21,000 from her employer over about 4 1/2 years. She had no prior
convictions. She was sentenced to imprisonment
for six months, wholly suspended,
with 140 hours of community service.
Consideration
of what has been done in other cases is a proper sentencing exercise. Past cases
can provide some measure by which
a sentencing court can attempt to achieve
consistency in sentencing and in the application of principle:
[2016] HCA 48
259 CLR 256
. However, as was pointed out in
[2010] HCA 45
242 CLR 520
, the sentencing consistency
sought is "consistency in the application of the relevant legal principles, not
some numerical or mathematical
equivalence". All of the cases referred to by the
appellant are different for various reasons concerning both the circumstances of
the crimes and the offender. One factor is of particular importance in this
appeal. At least in most cases, persons who commit crimes
of this type have no
or few relevant prior convictions. The explanation for that circumstance is
that, if past serious dishonesty
is known, especially involving breach of trust,
persons are not generally entrusted to positions where the opportunity to offend
may arise. In this case the appellant, by dishonestly concealing her criminal
past, found herself into a position to offend.
apply the passage in
quoted earlier in these reasons to this case,
the crimes for which the appellant was sentenced, even though the amount of
money misappropriated
was not large, constituted a continuation of the criminal
dishonesty she had demonstrated repeatedly for over thirty years. It was
example of a serious breach of trust. Past sentences had not deterred her. Her
criminality resumed within about four years
of having been given a suspended
sentence for dishonesty. Retribution, deterrence and protection of society
indicated a strong need
for a harsh penalty. The high level of her moral
blameworthiness and her propensity to offend in this way showed a need for
punishment" to deter her and others from further offences of a like
was not the first time the appellant had been sentenced to actual imprisonment.
In light of the appellant's record and the absence
of remorse and any sign of
reform, she should serve something more than the minimum term before becoming
eligible to apply for parole.
appellant does not assert that anything which is relevant to sentence has
occurred between when she was first sentenced and the
hearing of the appeal: the
Code, s 402(4A).
would order that the appellant be convicted on counts 1 to 86 on the indictment,
excluding counts 3, 4, 7, 9, 10, 11, 22, 28, 32,
and that there be one sentence
for all those offences, a term of imprisonment of two years from 13 November
2024 with eligibility
for parole after having served fifteen months of that
Serial No /2025
File No CCA 1546/2025
SHARON MAREE BAILEY v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
16 October 2025
For the reasons expressed by Pearce J, I would also uphold the appeal, set
aside the sentence at first instance and resentence as
indicated by his
Serial No /2025
File No CCA 1546/2025
SHARON MAREE BAILEY v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
CUTHBERTSON J
16 October 2025
have read the reasons for judgment of Pearce J and agree that the appeal should
be upheld and the sentence imposed by Marshall
AJ be set aside for the reasons
he has given. I also agree the appellant should be resentenced in the terms he
has proposed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (223 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter