URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASRPDComm/2009/33.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:20:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Burnie Planning Scheme 1989 Amendment 47 [2009] TASRPDComm 33 (28 July 2009)
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Planning and Approvals Act 1993
Resource Planning
and Development Commission Act 1997
Decision and Reasons for Decision
BURNIE PLANNING SCHEME 1989
Amendment 47 is to:
Amend the plans to rezone the eastern portion of the site at West
Park Burnie from Community Purposes to Open Space zone; and
amend the scheme at clause 4.10(n) for use and development for the
West Park Precinct Burnie.
Date and Place of Hearing
Thursday 14 May 2009 Council Chambers Burnie.
In accordance with its decision dated 30 March 2009 and in exercise of the power
conferred upon it by s.8 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission
, the Commission delegated to Mr J Vandenberg and Mr R Nolan jointly
and severally:
powers and functions under
sections 40
(2), of the
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
in relation to draft amendment
47 to the Burnie Planning Scheme 1989; and
connection with the exercise of those powers in performance of those functions,
its powers under Part 3 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Representations
Five representations were received during the public exhibition period
The representors are listed as follows:
John Whittington for the (then) Department of Primary Industries and Water
Perviz Marker for the Penguin Monitoring Group
Norm McIlfatrick for the Department of Infrastructure, Energy and Resources
Michael Lynch for the Tasmanian Heritage Council
Philip Petersen, Rail Management Unit, Department of Infrastructure, Energy and
Appearances at the hearing
Mr P Earle represented the Burnie Council.
Representor:
Mr L Henry-Middleton represented DIER.
Issues raised in representation
The representations raised issues in the following contexts
contains habitat for Little Penguins (
Eudyptula minor
) which is listed as
Protected Wildlife in Schedule 2 of the
Wildlife Regulation 1999
fenced 30m wide buffer inland from the high tide level should be provided to
protect Little Penguin habitat from development and
light and noise intrusion.
An additional
clause should be inserted in to the draft amendment recognising the extent of
the Little Penguin colony and provide
adequate buffer zones especially
surrounding the foreshore on the south eastern corner of the site.
Precinct contains Cooee Precambrian Dolerite and is registered as a
geo-conservation site. Future development needs to take
into consideration the
geo-conservation status of the site.
To maintain the
safety of the Bass Highway through ensuring provisions in the Outline
Development Plan satisfy the Department of Infrastructure,
Energy and Resources
traffic planning and road management interests.
The site is
bisected by a railway line which is currently not in use. The impact of rail
traffic, including noise and vibration, on
future use and development needs to
be taken into consideration should railway operations recommence.
Council's response to the representations
Council’s report examined the issues raised in the representations and
recommended that the draft amendment be modified to
specify, in an outline
development plan, the requirement to have regard to the operation and safety of
the rail line and to acknowledge
potential impacts of rail operations on use and
development of land within the precinct.
Commission's assessment of the draft amendment
The draft amendment
The draft amendment seeks to rezone the eastern portion of the West Park area
Burnie from Community Purposes to Open Space zone,
allowing a single zone to
apply to the site defined as the West Park Precinct.
The draft amendment also proposes to insert a specified departure under Clause
4.10 ‘Specific Site Provisions’ for the
West Park Precinct. The
objective is to make provision for the integrated public and private development
of the site. The draft
amendment defines three use and development sectors
(land areas) within the Precinct.
The draft amendment sets out the objectives and requirements for the preparation
of a West Park Precinct Outline Development Plan
(ODP). Use and development of
land within the Precinct must be in accordance with an ODP which is to be
approved by Council.
The draft amendment proposes a public notification period for the ODP and states
that ‘there is no right of appeal on the Council’s
decision to
approve a draft Plan or Plan amendment’. The draft amendment requires an
ODP to be registered on the title of all
land to which it applies.
The draft amendment was certified with the direction to insert clause 4.10(n)
into the scheme. It would appear that this is an existing
clause so the next
clause for this application is 4.10(o). The next matter is that proposed clause
4.10(o) contains detailed requirements
and 3 schedules that would be better
styled as a schedule to the planning scheme (Schedule I) with the flag for the
schedule contained
at clause 4.10(o). Under this arrangement the proposed 3
schedules can be reassigned as tables within the schedule. As an
inconsequential
amendment the existing Telecommunications Infrastructure
Schedule requires labelling as Schedule H.
A number of issues arise from the representations and above description that are
examined below.
The site comprises West Park and surrounding land bounded by the Bass Highway
and Bass Strait. The current zoning is Open Space
and Community Purposes.
Whilst the zoning extends to high water by reference to the plans the area
between high water and low water
is deemed to be in the Open Space zone.
Current structures and use on the site include the West Park oval and bowling
green, the rail line, carpark, the former West Park
School and informal
recreation including skate boarding. Rebuilding on the site of the former adult
education centre, for uses such
as the paper makers workshop, museum and visitor
information is occurring.
The site is 11.3ha in area, comprised of a number of titles owned by Council and
the Crown. The Crown titles are to be transferred
to Council except for Crown
land forming the rail and road corridors. There are some minor encroachments of
the rail corridor beyond
the boundaries of its reservation.
The draft amendment follows a number of consultants’ reports to Council.
Council’s report pursuant to
Land Use Planning and
Approvals Act 1993
(LUPAA) initiating the draft amendment set out the
strategy for the area stated in terms of three major sectors:
and active recreation based on West Park oval.
space including foreshore habitat.
recreation, tourism and cultural space that incorporates some residential and
commercial elements.
The 3 sectors in the strategy are carried into the draft amendment with use and
development provisions defined for each sector.
Further to the strategy, the purpose of the draft amendment was stated as:
‘to allow integrated public and private investment in use and
development for a variety of community, cultural, entertainment,
sporting and tourist related purposes, together with a limited component of
commercial and residential use on land known
as the West Park precinct generally
in accordance with the principles contained in the ‘West Park Precinct
Development Strategy
2008’ prepared by Moore Consulting Pty
Council’s strategy for the draft amendment appears sound and does not
require further consideration. The matter for resolution
then centres on the
provisions and standards in the draft amendment.
Council’s report examined two options for implementation of the strategy.
Their preferred option was to establish a mechanism
through an outline
development plan (ODP) for detailing development standards for a site and then
to attach the ODP to the relevant
land title through an agreement pursuant to
of LUPAA. Therefore the draft amendment primarily provides the
parameters for an ODP to contain the standards and mechanisms required
address design and operational requirements attaching to the land.
Open space zone provisions and other relevant provisions of the
Clause 3.9 sets out use intentions and development standards for the Open Space
zone that are different to the provisions in the
draft amendment. For example,
Clause 3.9 intends that the Open Space zone be used primarily for recreational
and open space purposes,
with development limited to a permitted height of 6m.
By contrast, the character statement and standards for Sector 3 at West Park
envisage a major building complex occupying 35% of the
precinct area, with no
specified height limit, a maximum lot coverage of 50% and maximum plot ratio of
100%. Other design parameters
are left for a future ODP to determine, subject
only to the limits on floor area and apartment numbers established in Clause
4.10(n)(ii)(d)(iii)
For the vision for West Park to be supported then the draft amendment needs to
ensure the provisions of new clause 4.10(o) take precedence
applicable clauses of the planning scheme. The following modification is
proposed for clause 4.10(o), to add:
‘Schedule I prevails over any applicable provision in the planning scheme
to the extent of any inconsistency.’
Subservient use
Clause 4.10(n)(ii)(d)(i) proposes that schedule 3 (of the draft amendment) for
discretionary uses requires those uses to be:
‘directly associated with a subservient part of a schedule 2
In Schedule 3 the qualification for use refers to ‘(uses)
conjunction with
...(certain stated uses)..’.
The concept of ‘subservient’ is contained elsewhere in the planning
scheme at clause 11.6 where there are principal use
and multiple use provisions.
Conceptually this is different to ‘subservient in clause 11.6’.
Clause 4.10(n)(ii)(d)(i)
is not required and should be deleted.
Outline development plan approval process
Clause 4.10(n)(iii)–(v) states:
and development of land in the West Park Precinct must be in accordance with a
West Park Precinct Outline Development Plan
approved by the Council and designed
to ensure the orderly and coordinated use and development of the land consistent
with the objectives
and requirements of this Clause.
(iv) The Council must not approve or amend a West Park Precinct Outline
Development Plan without first giving notice of the draft
Plan and allowing a
period of 21 days for public examination and comment, and it must take into
consideration the matters set out
in representations relating to the draft Plan
made during the notification period. There is no right of appeal on the
decision to approve a draft Plan or Plan amendment.
(v) The West Park Precinct Outline Development Plan must be registered on the
title of all land to which this Clause applies as an
agreement made in
accordance with
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
Two matters are relevant to the intended process for an ODP.
First, the above clauses require an ODP to set the development standards for the
site. These development standards are then applied
agreement on the
title presumably as part of conditions on a granted permit. The use of an ODP
to set the use and development standards
without being brought into the planning
scheme is not acceptable. It is the function of the planning scheme to set such
and to give statutory weight to their implementation.
The second matter is the proposal to set up an alternative approval process of
public notification, taking representations and approving
or refusing the ODP
without appeal rights. Mr Earle submitted that the ODP under the draft
amendment is not an incorporated document
of LUPAA but was
within power and allowed under LUPAA as
provides as
(f) require specified things to be done to the satisfaction of the ... planning
(h) provide that any use or development of land is contained on an agreement
being entered into under
the prohibition, restriction or regulation of use or development
agreement).
Mr Earle’s submission that LUPAA allows for a separate approval process to
that in the Act to be established through planning
scheme provisions is not
Whilst it is in order for a planning scheme to require an outline development
plan to show how an area may be developed, such a plan
cannot set provisions and
standards contrary to or external to the planning scheme and unless incorporated
into the scheme cannot
be given status through a permit that may embody the ODP
or part thereof.
In Council’s model there is established a public process that where
objections are raised, they cannot be adjudicated beyond
the Council’s
decision making process. This is contrary to processes under the Act for
notification of permit applications
and appeals to the Tribunal and processes
for planning scheme amendments where representations are determined by the
Commission.
At different times Council’s process would be unsatisfactory
for the community that has been consulted or for an applicant
seeking a permit.
The provisions of 4.10(n)(iii)-(v) should be deleted and instead require a
permit application to examine the matters that were destined
for an ODP under
the draft amendment. In addition schedule 1 requires modification to delete,
under the development standard columns,
reference to ‘compliance with the
Precinct Outline Plan’ for Sector 1, ‘precinct outline plan’
2 and ‘Precinct Outline Development Plan’ for Sector
Use or development standards
The draft amendment includes three schedules:
− Schedule 1 sets out the three sectors (land areas), their purpose and
character statements, the ‘development footprint’
as a percentage of
the whole precinct and the development standards. The development standards
include those set by the precinct
− Schedule 2 sets out permitted uses, applicable sectors for those uses
and qualifications for those uses.
− Schedule 3 is similar to schedule 2 except this schedule defines
discretionary uses.
As determined above, to delete the requirement for the ODP to set development
standards, removes the opportunity to set standards
specific to a site. Mr
Earle submitted that the draft amendment did not seek to overly predetermine
standards such as building height
and bulk and this was preferred to be set on a
project basis. With the removal of the ODP as a requirement of the statutory
it will be for the application and permit with conditions (including
any Part 5 agreements) that set these matters. The schedules
provide sufficient
direction for outcomes without being too prescriptive yet the fundamental
matters of use, site coverage and plot
ratio are specified.
The contents of the draft amendment aside, ultimately Council has authority over
use or development as land owner.
Subdivision
The draft amendment does not cover subdivision. Clause 3.9 for the open space
zone only allows minor subdivision where in accordance
with the requirements of
clause 3.9.1. Clause 3.9.1 is only helpful if the subdivision is for recreation
and public open space purposes.
It can be expected that the development of the site will require changes to
titles. At minimum, boundary adjustments between the
railway reservation and
some adjoining titles will be desirable. Clause 7.6 of the scheme allows minor
subdivision for adjusting
a boundary. Any other title change will require
appropriate provisions in clause 4.10(n) through an addition to the development
column of schedule 1. Therefore schedule 1 should be modified to
insert in the development standards column for each of the sectors
1, 2, 3 the
‘Subdivision is permitted where lots are consistent with the purpose and
character statements of the sector. There is no minimum
size or dimensions of
The site has a frontage of some 540m to the Bass Highway. The Bass Highway in
this location is a divided dual carriageway limited
access road. Currently
there are four accesses (three used) to the site. Submissions at the hearing
reported on progress with discussions
between the DIER and Council. These
discussions were towards reducing the number of accesses and the development of
a main access
to the site through opening a fourth leg to the West Park Road /
Bass Highway intersection.
The view of Council is that access to the site will be resolved through the
outline development plan. As this mechanism, proposed
in the draft amendment,
is rejected by this decision it will be a matter for a permit(s) to address.
The draft amendment requires
a traffic management plan and the specification of
its content that should be capable of ensuring transport matters are adequately
addressed on a permit application. Clearly, functional and safe vehicular and
pedestrian access to the site is critical. Following
resolution of traffic
planning, consideration should be given to a draft amendment to give effect to
proposals through the planning
The site is bisected by the rail line. The representation from the Rail
Management Unit in DIER referred to the consideration of
rail traffic for a
reactivated line. The line is within a railway reserve and is currently in
place but not used. The intent expressed
in the representation is to ensure the
ability to reactivate the line is retained.
Council in response to the representation has recommended the draft amendment be
modified to:
‘require arrangements for maintaining the operation and safety of the
rail line and for managing the impact of rail operations
on adjoining use and
development.’
Council’s recommended modification will flag rail as one of the
considerations in site planning. This recommended modification
should be made
and, to cover the situation with the line not currently being used, the clause
should in addition refer to ‘protecting
the operational
requirements.....’.
The site contains one item on the Tasmanian heritage register being the former
domestic arts classroom. No heritage items are listed
in the planning scheme
for the site. As part of the developing assessment of the precinct, items such
as the West Park oval grandstand
may warrant heritage status.
Heritage is not a specified matter for consideration in the draft amendment.
However the provisions concerning physical and visual
linkages with adjacent
urban development and open space should provide sufficient clues to reveal the
heritage of the place.
Little Penguins
The representations for the Department of Primary Industry and Water and the
Penguin Monitoring Group identified the foreshore of
West Park precinct as
important breeding habitat for a colony of little penguins. Little penguins are
protected under the Wildlife
Regulations 1999. Representations sought
provisions that recognised the extent of the colony and the implementation of a
‘development
free buffer and visual amenities
Council’s response to the representations was for the issue to be deferred
to an outline development plan as the means to identify
foreshore management
requirements, protection of habitat and establishment of foreshore setbacks.
The foreshore is currently recognised for penguin activity and a viewing hide
(The Little Penguin Interpretation Centre) has been
constructed covering a small
area of the northernmost foreshore. The Penguin Management Group also
identified the south east corner
of the precinct as a nesting area that been
reduced through fencing. The representation comments that penguins have been
the past to nest over a much greater area (prior to the restrictive
All the foreshore is in sector 2 which is all the area seaward of the rail line.
The provisions in the draft amendment for sector
2 are capable of ensuring
habitat is protected. No further modifications to the draft amendment are
considered necessary.
Geo-conservation
The representation for the then Department of Primary Industries and Water
‘The entire foreshore of the West Park precinct is an important
geo-conservation site in the form of Precambrian dolerite.
geo-conservation site is listed on the Tasmanian geo-conservation database. Any
future development activities in the coastal
fringe of the amendment zone should
seek to ensure minimum impact to the geo-conservation
Council’s response was to refer to provisions in the draft amendment for
foreshore management through an ODP.
Much of the foreshore of the precinct has been highly modified through dumping
of soil, former building material etc. However it
is understood that the
geo-conservation site is seaward of high water and largely constitutes the shore
platform of the intertidal
zone so there is exposure of the site at low water.
Unless development extends seaward of high water it would appear the
conservation
site would not be affected by activity in the precinct. No further
modifications are considered necessary to the draft amendment.
Application of State Policies
State Coastal Policy1996:
The draft amendment involves land in the coastal
zone as defined by the Policy. Many aspects of the Policy have application to
site and the draft amendment is assessed as being prepared in accordance
with the Policy. As particular sites are assigned for particular
developments a refined assessment against the Policy will be required.
Policy on Water Quality Management 1997
The draft amendment will allow for a range of uses and developments on the site.
Such applications will provide the opportunity to
manage storm water runoff and
deal with waste water consistent with the Policy.
National environmental protection measures
National environmental protection measures are State Policies under
State Policies and Projects Act 1993
. The National Environmental
Protection (Assessment of Site Contamination) Measure 1999 may have application
for use or development
of the site and this will require assessment for specific
uses and developments.
Schedule 1 Objectives
(a) to promote the
sustainable development of natural and physical resources and the maintenance of
ecological processes and genetic
amendment furthers the objective for sustainable development of natural and
physical resources through setting requirements
for the assessment of specific
uses. The ecological processes and genetic diversity are issues for the
foreshore, seaward of the
foreshore and inland to an extent to be determined.
The provisions of the draft amendment are capable of ensuring the natural
environment
on the site is properly assessed.
(b) to provide for the fair, orderly and sustainable use and development
of air, land and water;
The draft amendment, as modified, furthers the
objective for fair and orderly use and development through the investigations
on the site and the setting of requirements for the assessment of
specific uses and developments.
(c) to encourage public involvement in resource management and
The draft amendment has included public processes and with
modification allows for further assessments in accordance with the Act.
(d) to facilitate economic development in accordance with the objectives
set out in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c);
The draft amendment furthers this
objective consistent with the above objectives.
(e) to promote the sharing of responsibility for resource management and
planning between the different spheres of Government, the
community and industry
in the State.
The draft amendment furthers this objective through the
required involvement over time of all levels of government, the community
Part 2 objectives
The Part 2 objectives are furthered principally
in terms of:
- establishing a system of planning instruments to be the principal way of
setting objectives, policies and controls for the use,
development and
protection of land aside from the proposed approval process for outline
development plans; and
- securing a pleasant, efficient and safe working, living and recreation
environment.
The draft amendment provides a framework for the
development and redevelopment of the West Park precinct for a range of uses.
strategy for the amendment appropriately seeks to facilitate public and
private initiatives that should realise the potential offered
by this prominent
site. Matters of process involving an outline development plan(s) are not
accepted and this has led to the identification
of modifications. The draft
amendment as modified should be approved.
Pursuant to
Section 41(ab)
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
the Commission modifies the draft amendment as set out in Annexure A and
gives its approval to the draft amendment as modified pursuant
to Section 42 of
John Vandenberg
Robin Nolan
Resource Planning and Development Commission
28 July 2009
Attachment: Annexure A
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Burnie Planning Scheme
Draft Amendment 47
(i) The Scheme is amended as
next after Clause 4.10(n) the following –
Clause 4.10(o)
West Park Precinct
Use or development of land at West Park Precinct must be in accordance with
Schedule I.
Schedule I prevails over any provision in the planning scheme to the extent of
any inconsistency.
Schedule I as follows:
WEST PARK PRECINCT
Schedule to clause 4.10(o)
SD 1 This clause applies to land known as the West Park Precinct, Burnie as
marked on the plan by heavy black edging and notated ‘Land
to which Clause
4.10 (o) applies’.
SD 2 The objectives for the West Park Precinct are –
(a) to allow integrated public and private use or development within the West
Park Precinct;
(b) to define the precinct to contain three (3) use and development sectors in
accordance with the purpose and character statements
contained in Table 1 to
this clause as indicated on the plan;
(c) to allow use and development for community, cultural, recreation, social and
tourism uses only in accordance with Table 2 to
this clause as permitted use to
which clause 11.3 applies;
(d) to provide opportunity for commercial and residential use only in accordance
with Table 3 to this clause as discretionary use
to which clause 11.4 applies
is at a scale and type that will not challenge or detract from the function and
performance of any land in a zone defined under
the Scheme to have such use as
its core purpose; and
total combined floor area for all business and professional, food servicing and
refreshment, and retail and hire uses is not to
exceed 8,500
total number of apartments is not to exceed 50 dwelling units.
(e) to ensure functional and safe arrangements for vehicular access between the
Precinct and the Bass Highway;
(f) to ensure adequate and functional arrangements for the movement and parking
of vehicles and the passage of pedestrians within
the Precinct; and
(g) to ensure orderly, safe and sustainable development having regard to the
capability, characteristics and values of the land.
SD 3 An application for a permit must contain the
(a) a landscape and site management plan for the whole of the Precinct to
of the foreshore management area, location and nature of provision for human
access, and measures within the Precinct for enhancing
and protecting
performance of habitat;
destination and connection points for internal movement pathways and linkages to
external places;
envelopes, including setbacks from land boundaries, foreshore management area
and transport corridors;
alignment, placement, height, massing, proportion and scale for built forms;
location and the form and character of open space and public areas, including
themes and treatments for planting, pavement,
lighting, signage, furniture and
other embellishments;
of car park and other utility spaces to view from external places and from key
internal spaces;
of utilities;
arrangements
for energy and resource efficiency; and
arrangements
to accommodate the rail line through the site to protect the operational
capacity of the rail infrastructure, the impacts
of rail operations on adjoining
land use and any direct impacts in the form of rail crossing or overpasses.
(b) a climate change risk management plan defining vulnerability of
the land to the impacts of extreme weather events, and of sea
level rise,
coastal erosion and storm surge and wave inundation using the IPCC A1F1 scenario
and a 1% annual exceedance probability
for the asset life span of each proposed
use and development.
The plan must identify the level of acceptable risk for each class of use and
development and the appropriate adaptation measures
to be applied for the whole
of the asset life.
(c) a traffic management plan for the Precinct detailing –
arrangements
for access at the Bass Highway frontage;
for core vehicle and pedestrian movement and circulation within the Precinct;
for traffic lanes, facilities for car parking, loading and unloading and
passenger transport vehicles, and pedestrian and
cycle pathways relative to
building envelopes and key activity spaces;
arrangements
for vehicular and pedestrian crossing of the railway alignment; and
mechanisms for implementation of alternate access arrangements to the Bass
West Park Precinct Sector
Character Statement
Development
Development standards
Sport and Recreation
To provide opportunity for sport and related recreation including
multi-purpose out door, sports playing surface, amenities and training
facilities, spectator facilities, and sports administration and social
(i) structured and formalised physical recreation complex based on the
existing competition sports ground and cycle track, and
to include retention of
existing grandstand and the provision of associated buildings and amenities;
(ii) common vehicular access from a location on the Bass Highway frontage to
service all use and development within the Precinct;
(iii) provision of adequate car parking spaces to satisfy requirements for the
sector and co-located with parking facilities common
to needs of all use and
development within the precinct;
(iv) car parking areas screened to external view and integrated within precinct
landscape plan.
Not less than 35% precinct area.
Subdivision is permitted where lots are consistent with the purpose and
character statements of the sector. There is no minimum size
or dimensions of
(i) to provide opportunity for a mix of informal and unstructured recreation
activity and landscaped spaces;
(ii) to maintain a physical setting that allows visual expression of the Bass
Strait foreshore for the full extent of the precinct;
(iii) to provide physical and visual linkage with adjacent open space areas at
Burnie Park and West Beach; and
(iv) to protect and manage habitat and risk within the coastal foreshore
(i) retention
of a significant open character to acknowledge both the physical and ecological
capabilities and the character and
values of the site as a prominent coastal
coordinated landscape treatments featuring use of indigenous coastal plantings
within the foreshore fringe, and phasing to more
formal treatment along the
southern margins to frame and integrate schemes for both public and private
areas in adjacent sectors,
and with Burnie Park and West Beach;
(iii) number
and scale of building restricted and limited to low set structures;
(iv) a range
of human scale places, improvements and facilities incorporating hard and soft
landscaping, internal connections and
outlooks - and to include play and
contemplation spaces, pedestrian and cycle pathways, shelter, seating and
signage, and retention
of skate park and Little Penguin Interpretation
(v) restricted
and defined access to the foreshore and ecological habitat area;
(vi) clearly
legible and physical connection with themes, treatments and activity spaces
elsewhere within the precinct, and with
Burnie Park and West Beach;
(v) common vehicular access from a location on the Bass Highway frontage to
service all use and development within the Precinct;
(vi) provision of adequate car parking spaces to satisfy requirements for the
sector and co-located with parking facilities common
to needs of all use and
development within the precinct; and
(vii) car parking areas screened to external view and integrated within precinct
landscape plan.
Not less than 30% precinct area
(i) maximum
lot coverage for buildings not to exceed 10% of
total Sector 2 site area;
(ii) maximum plot ratio for buildings not to exceed 10% of total Sector 2 site
building to exceed two (2) stories.
(iv) Subdivision is permitted where lots are
consistent with the purpose and character statements of the sector. There is no
size or dimensions of lots.
Community Recreation and Tourism
(i) to provide opportunity for an integrated community and visitor space
incorporating facilities for cultural, recreation, social
and tourism based
(ii) to provide opportunity for commercial and residential use;
(iii) to provide physical and visual linkage with adjacent urban development
south of the Bass Highway and with open space areas
at Burnie Park and West
building complex located predominantly onto the south-eastern portion of the
precinct and aligned to reinforce the coastal
(ii) design and
finish of buildings and structures respond to multiple frontages and sight-lines
into and within the precinct;
(iii) consolidated
development envelope featuring an integrated balance of built form and open
(iv) placement,
height, massing and scale of built form responds to values of the site as a
prominent coastal headland, the pattern
of external development, and the
protection of outlook and solar access for other buildings and spaces within the
(v) clearly
legible visual and physical connection to themes, treatments and activity spaces
elsewhere within the Precinct and at
Burnie Park and West Beach;
(vi) common
vehicular access from a location on the Bass Highway frontage to service all use
and development within the precinct;
(vii) provision
of adequate car parking spaces to satisfy requirements for the sector and
co-located with parking facilities common
to needs of all use and development
within the Precinct; and
parking areas screened to external view and integrated within precinct landscape
Not more than 35% precinct area
(i) lot coverage for buildings not to exceed 50% of total Sector 3 site
(ii) maximum plot ratio for buildings not to exceed 100% of Sector 3 site
(iii) Subdivision is permitted where lots are consistent with
the purpose and character statements of the sector. There is no minimum
dimensions of lots.
Precinct Location
Qualification
Community Services
– community, cultural, social,
entertainment and recreation purposes
Community building;
Civic building;
Education establishment
Natural and Cultural Values Management
– protection,
conservation and management of ecological systems, cultural sites and
Sport and Recreation
– leisure, recreation or sporting
purposes whether in an indoor or outdoor setting
Active recreation; Amusement machine centre; Community building;
Civic building;
Health studio;
Passive recreation
Tourist Accommodation
– overnight accommodation facilities for
tourists or travellers
Holiday unit;
Residential building
Tourist Operation
– use and development specifically to
attract tourists
Tourist operation
Public utility
Only in conjunction with an approved use within the precinct.
Vehicle Parking
– parking of motor vehicles
Only in conjunction with an approved use within the precinct.
Precinct Location
Qualification
Business and professional services
Business; Consulting Rooms/Health Centre;
Health studio;
Sector 1 and 2 only in conjunction with community services, sport and
recreation, tourist accommodation or tourist operation.
to be contained in a building having a discrete purpose as a business or
professional premises.
Food services and refreshment
– preparation and sale of beverages
(including alcohol) and food servings for consumption on or off the premises.
Licensed Establishment; Restaurant;
Sector 1 and 2 only in conjunction with community services, sport and
recreation, tourist accommodation or tourist operation.
to be contained in a building having a discrete purpose as a food service or
refreshment premises.
Retail and hire
– sale or hire of goods.
Sector 1 only in conjunction with community services, sport and recreation or a
tourist operation.
including retail and hire use defined in the scheme as a ‘major
shop’, or in the nature of a supermarket, department
store or bulky goods
to be contained in a building having a discrete purpose as a retail or hire
Residential
to be contained in a building having a discrete purpose as a residential
apartment building
(ii) The Plan is amended as follows:
Plan Sheet No. 2 to rezone land at West Park from Community Purposes to Open
Space and to delineate sectors 1, 2 and 3..
a notation on Plan Sheet No 2 indicating the land shown edged heavy black is the
land to which clause 4.10(o) applies.
(iii). Amend the scheme to show the Telecommunications Infrastructure
Schedule as Schedule H.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.82 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter