URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCAT/2025/201.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
NM (Application for Treatment Order) [2025] TASCAT 201 (29 October 2025)
NM (Application for Treatment Order) [2025] TASCAT 201
Mental Health Stream
NM – the patient
Dr NC – the applicant
Hearing Date:
17 September 2025
Hearing Location:
Date of Orders:
17 September 2025
Date Reasons Issued:
29 October 2025
Ms O Ridley, Presiding Member
Dr M McArthur, Ordinary Member
(Psychiatrist)
Ms M Hale, Ordinary Member
Orders Made:
Treatment order made
Catchwords:
Mental Health Stream – Application for treatment order –
Treatment criteria – Impaired decision-making capacity
satisfied treatment criteria met – treatment order made.
Legislation Cited:
Mental Health Act 2013
Cases Cited:
S v Mental Health Tribunal
[2016] TASSC 34
B v Mental Health
[2020] TASSC 10.
Representation:
2025/MHT012856
Publication Restriction:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
(the patient) is a 40-year-old who is currently residing in Northern Tasmania
but has recently lived in New South Wales.
12 September 2025, Dr NC (the applicant) filed an application for a treatment
order in respect of NM pursuant to
Mental Health Act
(Tas) (the Act).
application was heard on 17 September 2025 and a treatment order was made. NM
was unrepresented at the hearing, however on 7 October
2025, Mr Nicholas Kumar
of Tasmania Legal Aid filed a notice of appearance on his behalf and requested a
statement of reasons. These
are those requested reasons.
the date of the hearing, NM was being treated as an involuntary patient at an
approved hospital under the authority of an interim
treatment order made on 12
September 2025.
respect to the current admission, Dr NC particularises that NM was brought into
the emergency department on 11 September 2025 and
subsequently admitted for
inpatient treatment.
Legislative Framework
Tribunal’s authority to make a treatment order is set out in
Section 39(1)(b)
stipulates that the requirement under
must have been
met by the application before the Tribunal can be satisfied that a treatment
order should be made.
Section 39(c)
requires the Tribunal to be satisfied that
the person the subject of the application meets the treatment criteria provided
40. Treatment criteria
The treatment criteria in relation to a person are –
(a) the person has a mental illness; and
(b) without treatment, the mental illness will, or is likely to, seriously harm
(i) the person's health or safety; or
(ii) the safety of other persons; and
(c) the treatment will be appropriate and effective in terms of the outcomes
referred to in
section 6(1)
(d) the treatment cannot be adequately given except under a treatment order;
(e) the person does not have decision-making capacity.
Additionally,
in deciding whether to exercise our discretion to issue a treatment order under
, we must consider the objectives outlined in
of the Act and the mental
health service delivery principles set out in Schedule 1 of the
Treatment Criteria
The person has a mental illness pursuant to s 40(a)
illness is defined in the Act as:
4. Meaning of mental illness
(1) For the purposes of this Act –
(a) a person is taken to have a mental illness if he or she experiences,
temporarily, repeatedly or continually –
(i) a serious impairment of thought (which may include delusions);
(ii) a serious impairment of mood, volition, perception or cognition; and
(b) nothing prevents the serious or permanent physiological, biochemical or
psychological effects of alcohol use or drug-taking from
being regarded as an
indication that a person has a mental illness.
the application, Dr NC details that NM has a diagnosis of schizophrenia and has
previously received psychiatric treatment in both
Queensland and New South Wales
(NSW). NM was previously prescribed antipsychotic medication but didn’t
feel that it helped
him, so he ceased taking it. NM had been in Tasmania since
2024 and had been sleeping in his car in the few weeks prior to admission.
had been known to the Crisis Assessment and Treatment team but had refused
engagement in the weeks leading up to admission.
NC outlined that at the time of writing the application NM’s
‘presentation suggests a psychotic relapse of an untreated
schizophrenia’. Prior to admission, NM had been living in his car in a
small town in Tasmania. NM was brought into
emergency by police from a GP
practice in the town. A doctor from the practice reported that NM’s
behaviour had ‘escalated
over recent days, culminating in verbal abuse of
staff, following a female [staff] member home and defecating on the bench at the
front of the practice’.
hospital review, NM was observed to have a persistent fixation on the belief
that the medical practice was involved in a cover-up
involving the illegal
cooking and distribution of methamphetamine intended to harm people. He also
displayed tangential and disorganised
thinking, with an agitated and irritable
the hearing, Dr NC confirmed NM’s diagnosis of schizophrenia and described
his symptoms as including guarded and restricted
affect, ongoing paranoia,
psychosis, delusions, irritability, disorganised behaviour and thought
processes, tangentiality, rigidity,
and persistent fixations. She noted that NM
was particularly fixated on two female doctors from the GP practice, whom he
he knew from childhood in Queensland. NM is convinced these doctors
hold a longstanding grudge against him and have orchestrated
his hospital
gave evidence at the hearing disputing the diagnosis of schizophrenia or a
mental illness. NM’s evidence was that the correct
diagnosis is
‘high functioning autism gifted’. NM explained that he as a good
idea with respect to physics which he has
written an essay about which is at a
PhD level, and he has an IQ of 121. NM also told the Tribunal that he
experiences aphasia.
told the Tribunal that he did attend school with the two female GPs and believes
they are mistreating him due to past bullying.
He claimed to suffer from a
“possum bug” that has caused chronic diarrhoea and alleged that one
of the GPs is actually
a psychiatrist affiliated with ‘Ipswich Mental
Tribunal accepted the evidence of Dr NC that NM has a mental illness. As a
psychiatrist, Dr NC has specialist expertise in the
diagnosis and treatment of
mental illness.
Tribunal is satisfied that NC has a diagnosis of schizophrenia. The tribunal
finds that NM has a mental illness within the meaning
of the Act. Accordingly,
the Tribunal is satisfied that this criterion is met.
treatment, the mental illness will, or is likely to, seriously harm the
person’s health or safety; or the safety of
other persons pursuant to s
note that this criterion had been interpreted by the Supreme Court in the
following matters.
S v Mental Health Tribunal
[2016] TASSC 34
, Blow CJ said at [22]:
The thresholds for the satisfaction of the criteria in s 40(b) and (c) are
fairly low. To be satisfied as to (b), a medical practitioner
need not be
satisfied of any risk to other persons, nor of any risk to the safety of the
patient. It is sufficient if the practitioner
is satisfied that, without
treatment, the mental illness is likely to seriously harm the person's health,
which of course includes
the person's mental health.
B v Mental Health Tribunal
[2020] TASSC 10
, Blow CJ provided further
comments on the criterion at [14]:
Section 40(b) is concerned with what is "likely". When that word is used in
legislation, it can have various meanings. It can mean
"more probable than not"
or "more than a 50% chance". It can refer to something that might well happen.
It can refer to a possibility
that is more than a remote or theoretical
possibility. The meaning of the word has been considered in a great many cases.
Boughey v The Queen
(1986) 161 CLR 10
Butcheries Pty Ltd v Australasian Meat Industry Employees' Union
(1979) 42 FLR 331
Cream Holdings Ltd v Banerjee
[2003] EWCA
[2003] 3 WLR 999.
Much depends on the legislative context. It is
significant that the principal purpose or object of s 40(b) is the protection of
ill persons and others from risks of harm. Having regard to the purpose
and context of the provision, I consider that "likely" should
be given a wide
interpretation. It should not be interpreted as meaning "more probable than
not". It must be interpreted as meaning
something more than a remote or
theoretical possibility. I think it should be interpreted as referring to
something that might well
happen. Having regard to the evidence that I have
referred to, I consider that it was open to the Tribunal to conclude that,
treatment, the appellant's mental illness was "likely" to result in her
killing herself.
the hearing Dr NC expressed her opinion that without treatment, NM’s
mental illness would be likely to seriously harm his
health and safety or the
safety of others.
NC evidence indicated that, without treatment there was a serious risk of
deterioration of NM’s mental state which would
leave him quite vulnerable.
This was of particular concern given NM’s current itinerant lifestyle and
his level of social isolation
having only arrived in Tasmania relatively
also outlined concerns involving NM’s behaviour with respect to the
aggressive and abusive behaviour towards staff at the
GP practice and following
a staff member home which resulted in NM being banned from the practice.
was asked by the Tribunal if he felt that the staff at the GP practice were at
any risk from him. The tribunal noted that that
evidence suggested that they
were frighted of him due to his behaviour. NM said that he didn’t feel he
posed any risk to them
and ‘they were probably just saying that’. NM
advised the Tribunal that he had always been polite to them and he’d
‘had a violent charge’.
accept Dr NC’s evidence that without treatment NM’s mental health
would likely deteriorate and that as a result, his
health may be seriously
harmed. We note that NM’s current presentation and admission to hospital
is in the context of non-adherence
to medication and disengagement with mental
health support services.
are satisfied on the evidence presented that without treatment, it is likely
that NM would be at increased risk of harm to others
– specifically the
staff at the GP practice which he believes are mistreating him. We note that
prior to admission NM followed
a staff member home and has behaved abusively and
aggressively towards staff at that practice.
Tribunal is satisfied this criterion is met.
The treatment will
be appropriate and effective in terms of the outcomes referred to in s 6(1)
pursuant to s 40(c)
criterion we must be satisfied of is that the proposed treatment is appropriate
and effective as referred in s 6(1) of the
6. Meaning of treatment
(1) For the purposes of this Act, treatment is the professional intervention
necessary to –
(a) prevent or remedy mental illness; or
(b) manage and alleviate, where possible, the ill effects of mental illness;
(c) reduce the risks that persons with mental illness may, on that account, pose
to themselves or others; or
(d) monitor or evaluate a person's mental state.
the hearing, Dr NC gave evidence that NM is currently being treated with
antipsychotic and benzodiazepine medication with inpatient
treatment to continue
for a period of time until he was ready to be discharged into the community.
NC’s evidence was that the proposed treatment is in keeping with hospital
and college guidelines for a psychotic relapse
of schizophrenia. Dr NC noted it
is intended that the that antipsychotic medication will stabilise NM’s
mental state to allow
NM to return to the community safely.
reported that doctors in NSW had previously tried him on two antipsychotic depot
injections but decided not to continue with them.
NM indicated that in his view,
because they didn’t continue him on the depot medication, it follows that
he does not have a
mental illness or require treatment for mental illness.
accepted the expert evidence of Dr NC that the treatment proposed in the
application is appropriate and effective for NM as defined
in the Act. We are
satisfied that this criterion is met.
The treatment cannot be
adequately given except under a treatment order pursuant to s 40(d)
NC noted that even within the hospital setting, the treating team has
encountered challenges in engaging with NM. In her application,
she stated that
NM does not accept his diagnosis of schizophrenia. During the hearing, she
further explained that NM does not believe
medication is beneficial, and he has
expressed a desire not to remain in hospital or engage with mental health
observations were consistent with NM’s own statements during the hearing,
where he rejected the diagnosis of schizophrenia
and denied any need for
treatment related to that condition.
accept the evidence of Dr NC that NM would not be likely to accept treatment if
not under a treatment order. Accordingly, we are
satisfied that treatment cannot
be adequately given except under a treatment order.
does not have decision-making capacity pursuant to s 40(e)
Act defines “decision-making capacity” in s 7:
7. Capacity of adults and children to make decisions about their own
assessment and treatment
(1) For the purposes of this Act, an adult is taken to have the capacity to make
a decision about his or her own assessment or treatment
(decision-making
capacity) unless a person or body considering that capacity under this Act is
satisfied that –
(a) he or she is unable to make the decision because of an impairment of, or
disturbance in, the functioning of the mind or brain;
(b) he or she is unable to –
(i) understand information relevant to the decision; or
(ii) retain information relevant to the decision; or
(iii) use or weigh information relevant to the decision; or
(iv) communicate the decision (whether by speech, gesture or other
NC gave evidence at the hearing that NM lacks decision making capacity due to an
acute disturbance of his mind in the context of
untreated schizophrenia.
explained that in her view, NM isn’t able to understand the information
relevant to the decision due to the symptoms of
his schizophrenia. According to
Dr NC, NM is very preoccupied by on his own reality, particularly concerning to
the GP practice,
which leads to rigid, concrete thinking. This impairs
NM’s ability to fully understanding the information presented by the
treating team.
NC went on to add that NM’s fixated thinking particularly regarding the GP
practice, is causing him distress and inferring
with his ability focus and
concentrate on information given. As a result, he has difficulty retaining the
information which is given
to him by the treating team about his mental health.
NC also expressed that NM is unable to use or weigh relevant information due to
his disorganised thinking and fixation on specific
issues. She noted that
NM’s tangential thought patterns, irritability, and lack of focus hinder
his ability to communicate
effectively, as he often veers off-topic and cannot
asked about his views on decision-making capacity, NM stated that he disagreed
that lacked decision making capacity. He cited
his ability to write PhD level
essays on physics as evidence of his decision-making capacity
questioned about the effects of his current medication, NM said the only
noticeable impact was that it was keeping him up at
night. He also mentioned
that in NSW, doctors had trialled two different depot antipsychotic medications
but ultimately discontinued
them which he felt demonstrated they were
unnecessary, and he didn’t have a mental illness.
asked about the two GPs and his defecation outside their building prior to
admission, NM told the Tribunal he wanted them investigate
whether he had a
‘possum bug’ which is causing his diarrhea. NM indicated that they
had taken a blood sample, but attributed
the issue on smoking, failed to do an
x-ray of his lungs or given him an asthma puffer.
expressed frustration that they refused to investigate further, despite his
ongoing symptoms. NM’s evidence was that he had
gone to school with these
two doctors and that it had been ‘going on for years’.
on the evidence before us, the Tribunal was satisfied that the presumption of
capacity had been rebutted by the applicant. We
found that NM was unable to make
decisions about the treatment of his mental illness due to a disturbance in the
functioning of his
mind. This was due to the symptoms of his illness,
particularly his delusional beliefs and disorganised thinking. The Tribunal was
satisfied that, due to DM’s mental illness, he is unable to understand or
recognise the nature of his current symptoms or the
risks associated with not
receiving appropriate treatment.
Tribunal accepted Dr NC’s evidence that NM’s rigid and delusional
thinking prevented him from recognising these beliefs
as symptoms of his
illness. NM was unable to understand that his views about the GP practice and
its doctors were paranoid delusions.
Dr NC evidence was that NM was deeply
fixated on these beliefs and did not acknowledge that he was experiencing a
psychotic relapse
due to untreated paranoid schizophrenia. NM believed his
correct diagnosis was “high functioning autism gifted” and that
primary health concern was a “possum bug.”
Additionally,
NM did not appear to understand the symptoms of schizophrenia. He believed his
intelligence and ability to write essays
proved he did not have a mental
illness. The Tribunal notes that intelligence is not indicative of mental
illness and is not part
of the definition of mental illness under s 4 of the
also failed to appreciate that defecating outside the GP practice was an
extremely unconventional way to express dissatisfaction
with their treatment. He
did not recognise that such disorganised behaviour and thinking were concerning
symptoms of his mental health
did not appear to acknowledge any need for ongoing treatment. He believed that
because doctors in NSW had trialled and discontinued
two depot antipsychotic
medications that this meant he did not have a mental illness or require further
Due to his delusional and disorganised thinking, the Tribunal
was satisfied that NM could not understand that he was unwell, identify
symptoms, or recognise the need for ongoing treatment.
were also satisfied on the evidence that due to NM’s disorganised and
delusional thinking he was unable to use and weigh
the information relevant to
the decision. Due to NM’s fixed views with respect to the GP practice he
is unable to consider
the possibility that they may be delusional in nature.
Whilst NM is certainly entitled to place his own weight and value on information
when making a decision, he needs to first be able to understand and comprehend
the information before considering what value to attribute
to it. We were
satisfied that NM was unable to use or weigh the relevant information, as
understanding the relevant information is
a necessary foundation for using or
weighing the information.
Accordingly,
we are satisfied that NM does not have decision making capacity and this
criterion is satisfied.
a result of the hearing, the Tribunal was satisfied that all of the treatment
criteria set out in s 40 were met and determined
that a Treatment Order should
treatment order was made for a period of six months and is due to expire on 16
March 2025, unless discharged by an Approved Medical
Practitioner sooner or an
application to renew the treatment order is made (in which case the application
to renew will be listed
and heard by a three-member panel of the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.82 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter