URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASADT/2021/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:11:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Wilson v The State of Tasmania (Department of Police, Fire & Emergency Management) & Anor [2021] TASADT 4 (28 June 2021)
[2021] TASADT 4
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
Wilson v The State of Tasmania (Department of Police,
Fire & Emergency Management) & Anor
[2021] TASADT
WILSON, Steven
THE STATE OF TASMANIA (DEPARTMENT OF POLICE, FIRE & EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT)
WILLIAMS, Debbie
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
14 December 2020 & 24 February 2021
DELIVERED ON:
28 June 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Tribunal Member K Cuthbertson
CATCHWORDS:
Human Rights – Tasmania – Anti-Discrimination
Tribunal – practice and procedure – directions conference –
application for notice to attend a directions conference and provide and produce
information and documents.
Rollins v B
[2005] TASADT 9
Brinkley v Davies Bros. Limited
[2008] TASADT 7
Damberg & Damberg
[2001] NSWCA 87
X v Commonwealth
(1999) 2000 CLR 177;
Anti-Discrimination
DETERMINATION:
The application made by the complainant pursuant to
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
is granted.
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant:
Zeeman and A Thompson
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Complainant:
Wallace Wilkinson
& Webster Lawyers
Respondent:
Tasmania Police Legal Services
[2021] TASADT 4
REASONS FOR DECISION
Application
1. This interlocutory determination concerns an application
made by Mr Steven Wilson (the complainant) pursuant to s.80(2) of the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998 (the Act) requesting that the Tribunal issue a
written notice requiring Commander Debbie Williams (the
second respondent) to
attend a directions conference and provide and produce the originals or copies
of the following information
and documents, including any of them which are
stored on a computer, or computer storage device, or any other type of storage
or storage device namely:
(a) the “advice from legal services” referred to
in para.1 of the second respondent’s letter to the complainant
November 2019, a copy of which is annexed and marked “A”; and
(b) all that information that comprises “all other information”
as referred to in para.1 of the second respondent’s
letter to the
complainant dated 21 November 2019, a copy of which is annexed and marked
2. The parties have each filed written submissions in respect
of the application. The last of those submissions was received on 3
March 2021.
The Complaint
3. The complainant is a serving police officer. In February
2009, he injured his right knee chasing an offender. That injury culminated
him undergoing a total knee replacement in May 2017. As the complainant’s
injury had been incurred during the course of
his employment, he pursued a
worker’s compensation claim. The medical evidence obtained in the course
of pursuing that claim
assessed the complainant’s whole person impairment
at between 20% and 30%. His employer, the first respondent, settled the
worker’s compensation claim which included a payment of a whole person
impairment lump sum.
4. That settlement occurred in November 2018.
the 10 years following the injury in 2009, the complainant was classified as fit
for full operational duties for approximately
44 months of that period.
Information provided in support of his complaint includes reference to the
complainant being absent from
the workplace for extended periods after
sustaining the injury.
6. Shortly after the settlement of the
complainant’s workers compensation claim, his general practitioner
certified that he
was able to perform all activities that would be required of a
front-line operational police officer. Further reports were obtained
Ernst and Mr Furzer to the effect the complainant was fit for operational
7. On 21 November 2019 the second respondent wrote to the
complainant advising him that she had determined that he was not permitted
in the complainant’s s.80(2) application.
In her letter, she indicated
she had considered the various medical reports and formed the belief that it was
clear that the complainant
would have ongoing impairment and symptoms which
result in him being unfit for full operational duties. She noted that if he
to return to operational duties he would be subject to substantial
limitations which would pose a risk to the safety of his colleagues
and members
of the public. It was also noted that a return to operational duties would
clearly carry a significant risk of re‑injury
8. The letter
outlined that he was specifically not to:
• undertake operational patrols and exercise police
powers that may require the use of firearms, handcuffs, batons or capsicum
• perform crowd control duties at community events or
demonstrations;
• respond to situations that required the maintenance
of public order; and
• run, if in pursuit of offenders.
9. The letter outlined that the complainant was able to safely
handle and fire a firearm on duty and that he was permitted to assist
operational skills training. He was advised that in respect of any other
non‑operational duties he was permitted to perform
tasks provided they did
not carry the potential of heavy loading. He was advised that his
non‑operational tasks were to be
determined by his Inspector.
10. Against this background, the complainant alleges that the respondents
are ignoring his more recent medical reports. The outcome
he is seeking is that
he wants to be made fully operational again. He refers to his sleep being
affected and the restrictions on
his work resulting in him being paid less. In
his complaint, he alleges that he is being discriminated against because of
or that he has been offended, humiliated, intimidated, assaulted or
ridiculed because of his disability.
11. The complaint was accepted by the
Anti‑Discrimination Commissioner on the basis that it shows possible
breaches of the Act,
(a) direct discrimination (as defined in s14) on the basis
of disability or an irrelevant medical record in connection with employment;
(b) conduct that is offensive, humiliating, intimidating, insulting or
ridiculing of the complainant on the basis of disability in
connection with
employment.
12. In her letter addressed to the complainant, the second
respondent stated as follows:
wish to advise that I am now in receipt of advice from Legal Services regarding
whether you should be permitted to return
to operational duties. The decision
as to your operational capacity rests with me as Commander, Western District
and, along with
all other information, I must take this advice into account in
making this determination”.
13. The complainant, by his application, seeks access to the
advice from Legal Services referred to in that opening paragraph of the
together with the details of “all other information” the second
respondent took into account when making her
determination.
respondents opposed the making of the order sought.
Section 80(2)
15. Sections 80(2), (3) and (6) of the Act provide as follows:
Tribunal, by written notice, may require any person to -
(a) attend a directions conference; and
(b) provide and produce specified information and documents to a directions
conference.
(3) A person, without reasonable excuse, must not fail to comply with the
requirement notified under subsection (2).
Penalty: fine not exceeding 10 penalty units.
(6) The Tribunal may give any directions it considers necessary to ensure
that the inquiry is conducted fairly and
expeditiously.
16. In Rollins v B
[2005] TASADT 9
, the Tribunal constituted by
Chairperson Wood (as she then was) made the following observations concerning
s.80 of the Act:
it is clear from the terms of s80 of the Act that the Tribunal is granted
discretion to issue a notice and that the process
of issuing a notice is not
merely an administrative function that involves an automatic granting of any
application for a notice.
The word ‘may’ in s80(2) indicates that
the Tribunal has a discretion. Furthermore, it is noted that the Tribunal may
of its own initiative issue a notice suggesting that the process of issuing a
notice involves a consideration by the Tribunal of
the nature of the complaint
and whether it is appropriate to issue a notice to a person to produce the
Tribunal’s power to issue a notice under s80 applies at a preliminary
stage before the Inquiry. This power is in addition
to the general power
granted to the Commissioner, an authorized person or the Tribunal to require any
person to provide specified
information or specified documents that the
Tribunal, Commissioner or authorized person believes may be relevant to the
s97 (the Tribunal also has power to require any person to appear
before it to give evidence at Inquiry: s87(2)). Accordingly, if
the Tribunal
becomes aware of documents at an inquiry the Tribunal may make a requirement
under s97 of the Act for a person to produce
specified documents. Noting that
the test at Inquiry stage is where the Tribunal believes that those documents
may be relevant it
seems sensible that the test at the directions conference
stage should not be any more onerous.
80(6)] provides guidance to the Tribunal in determining the approach to be
followed with respect to issuing notices under
s80 of the Act. It would not be
appropriate for the Tribunal to issue notices to produce documents that would
see the Tribunal process
delayed because the Tribunal was engaged in
consideration of peripheral matters that have no tangible connection with the
in the case. It would be contrary to the intention of Parliament to see
a protracted course of proceedings involved with the production
of documents
that are unlikely to shed any light on the issues to be considered at inquiry.
considered the guidance provided by various sections of the Act, the nature of
the proceedings, and the cases referred to me,
noting the observations I have
made about those cases, I conclude that the test for whether a notice should be
issued is whether
the specific documents sought may be relevant to the
complaint. The Tribunal accepts that the test should be a generous one and
it seems to the Tribunal that the documents could be relevant to the complaint
then the notice may be issued. However, it also
seems to the Tribunal that the
Tribunal should not issue notices in those cases where there is only a
speculative chance or remote
possibility that the documents may be relevant. It
seems contrary to the intention of Parliament to see time expended on gathering
potential evidence that only has a remote connection with the issues in the
The complainant’s initial submissions
17. The complainant notes that to establish a breach of s. 14
of the Act, it is necessary to identify whether he was treated less
than a notional person similarly placed without the attribute but in like
circumstances. The complainant relies on the
decision of Chairperson Wood (as
she then was) in Brinkley v Davies Bros. Limited
[2008] TASADT 7
where she identified that the resolution of the comparative exercise required
under s.14 “will most often be resolved in practice
by consideration of
the reason for the conduct and whether the true reason was due to the
attribute”. On this basis, it was
submitted by the complainant that the
Tribunal is required to consider the true reason for the second
respondent’s determination
that the complainant was unfit to perform full
operating duties in order to properly undertake the necessary exercise. As such
is submitted that the “advice from Legal Services” and “all
other information” that helped inform that decision
is relevant to the
Tribunal’s task of ascertaining the true reason for the determination the
subject of the complaint. It
is submitted that it is not a case where
“there is only a speculative chance or remote possibility that the
documents may be
relevant”. This is because the information sought was
directly referred to by the second respondent as informing or helping
The respondents’ submissions
18. The respondents submit that the orders sought by the
complainant are not necessary as the Tribunal will not be required to ascertain
whether the determination the subject of the complainant’s complaint was
made because of the complainant’s disability.
According to the
respondent, there is no question that the decision was made because of the
complainant’s disability. So
much can be ascertained from the letter from
the second respondent setting out the basis for her determination. The
respondents
in their submission admit that the decision that the complainant
would not be permitted to return to full operational duties was
based on his
disability and constitutes direct discrimination as defined by s.14(2) of the
19. The respondents argue that the only issue in dispute between the
parties, therefore, is whether the second respondent’s
decision falls
within the exception created by s.45(a) of the Act. That section provides as
“45. Employment
based on disability
A person may discriminate against another person on the ground of disability
in relation to employment if –
(a) the other person –
(i) is unable to carry out the inherent
requirements of the employment; or
(ii) in order to carry out those inherent
requirements would require services or facilities not reasonably required by a
person without
a disability, the provision of which would impose unjustifiable
hardship on the person so discriminating”.
20. On that basis, the respondent argues that the only issue to
be determined by the Tribunal is whether the determination to not
complainant to return to full operational duties falls within the scope of the
exception created by s.45(a) of the Act.
That, it is submitted, would not
require the Tribunal to consider the reasons for the determination made by the
second respondent.
The complainant’s reply submissions
21. The complainant submits that the admission set out in the
respondents’ submissions falls short of an admission that one
respondents treated the complainant on the basis of disability, or a
characteristic imputed to that attribute, less favourably
than a person without
that attribute or characteristic. It is submitted that it is not enough to
simply say that the determinations
have constituted direct discrimination
without expressly attaching such admission to one or both respondents.
22. The complainant also refers to the decision of Heydon JA in Damberg
[2001] NSWCA 87
(2001) 52 NSWLR 492
to [160] to support
the proposition that the Tribunal is not bound to act on any admissions. That
decision, however, was concerned
with Courts acting on admissions or agreements
admitted or agreed. In that case, Haydon JA noted that Courts will act on
admissions or agreements about matters of fact where there
is no reason to doubt
their correctness: at [160]. At [154] his Honour also noted that a party may
utilise techniques to permit
concentration on what is bona fide in dispute, such
as by making concessions before a trial or during a trial. The effect of
utilisation
of such techniques is to narrow the issues in dispute which can in
turn have the effect of restricting the evidence to be tendered
and prevent
evidence being called to the contrary.
23. In addition, the complainant
submits that the respondents’ position overlooks that the
complainant’s complaint alleged
that a step in the process of making the
determination constituted direct discrimination for the purposes of s. 14(2) of
It is said that after the second respondent received a medical report
from Dr Ernst, the complainant provided her with reports from
Mr Furzer and Dr
Berryman. It is said that the second respondent did not make further inquiries
of those two medical practitioners,
but concluded in her letter that they
“appear influenced by the favourable accounts of symptoms and limitations
provided to
them by you and the physical demonstrations performed in their
consulting rooms. These demonstrations were limited and there is
no knowledge
as to whether they were assisted by medication or of any after effects following
their performance”.
24. On that basis, the complainant contends that he
was directly discriminated against by the first and/or second respondent in that
they failed to make inquiries with those two doctors before making their
determination. More specifically, he contends that if the
relevant notional
comparator had presented a medical certificate from his general practitioner
stating that he was fit for operational
duties, together with a similar report
from his treating specialist, the second respondent would have made further
inquiries with
them. Further, the complainant contends that the second
respondent would have had the notional comparator reassessed by Dr Ernst,
was the first respondent’s independent medical specialist, seeking his
opinion on such reports before making the determination.
25. As such, it is
alleged that s. 45(a) of the Act is not the only matter in dispute, but that the
Tribunal is still required to
undertake the comparative exercise referred to in
their initial submissions.
Respondents’ further submissions
26. The respondent was given leave to provide further
submissions in light of what they described as the prejudice caused by the
complainant
raising an allegation not particularised in his initial submissions
in support of the application. The complainant did not oppose
affording the
respondents that opportunity.
27. The respondents submit that the
complainant’s articulation of the relevant notional comparator is
misconceived as the person
referred to must have been adjudged by the
Department’s independent medical specialist to have been suffering from a
too for the prospect of further inquiries being made of the
person’s treating specialist and re-assessment to arise. It is
that basis that the person would not be a valid comparator, as what is being
alleged is discrimination with regards to the
treatment of two persons with a
disability. Further, the respondent argues that the complainant’s
expanded articulation of
his complaint is based on his subjective view of how
competing medical reports should be dealt with by his employer. The respondents
note that there is no statutory provision or practice requiring further
inquiries or the reassessment suggested. As such, the respondents
submit that
the omissions complained of are incapable of constituting direct discrimination.
In turn it is submitted that there is
no material before the Tribunal which
would provide a basis for a belief that the legal advice referred to in the
second respondent’s
letter would assist in establishing the reason for
discrimination.
28. In so far as the complainant’s complaint concerns the
decision of the second respondent to not allow him to return to full
operational
duties, the respondents’ admissions that the decision was based on the
prescribed attribute of disability is relevant
to the determination of this
application. There is no reason to doubt the factual and legal basis of those
admissions. The second
respondent treated the complainant, a person with the
prescribed attribute of disability (or imputed disability or characteristic
imputed to disability) less favourably than a notional police officer without
that attribute in a like circumstance by refusing to
allow him to perform full
operational duties; so much is clearly evident from the second
respondent’s correspondence. Those
admissions may be accepted as
narrowing the issues in dispute to whether s. 45(a) of the Act provides the
respondents a defence in
the circumstances.
29. The onus is on the
respondents to establish that s.45(a) applies in respect of the decision of the
second respondent. Although
s.45(a)(i) and (ii) are expressed in the
alternative, it has been held that such a provision is to be read as a whole:
see X v Commonwealth
(1999) 2000 CLR 177
per McHugh J when discussing the
operation of
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
[38]-[40]; see also Gummow and Hayne JJ in that same case at [190]. For
discrimination falling within
to be not unlawful, the respondents must,
therefore, demonstrate that they discriminated against the complainant because
(a) unable to carry out the inherent requirements of fully
operational police officer without assistance;
but was also
(b) able to do so only with assistance (or services or
facilities) that would impose an unjustifiable hardship on the respondents
provide: see X v Commonwealth per McHugh JA at [39].
30. It may be accepted that absent the respondents’
admissions, the requested material may be relevant to assessing the true
for the second respondent’s decision which is the subject of the
complaint. But the respondents’ admissions have
narrowed the focus of the
issues to be determined by the Tribunal. The question then is whether the
requested material may be relevant
to other issues that remain in dispute.
31. Noting the scope of the matters to be considered in the application of
, the reason or reasons for the second respondent’s decision are
relevant to that assessment. If, for example, matters extraneous
referred to in
were the basis of the decision, the defence falls away.
It follows that the materials referred to by the second respondent in her
of 21 November 2019 as having been relied upon in arriving at her decision may
be relevant to the issues to be determined
by the Tribunal.
32. On that
basis, I will make the order sought by the complainant. Having done so, I
recognise that it may be open to the respondents
to claim legal professional
privilege in respect of the “legal advice”. If such privilege is
claimed, that is a matter
to be considered at the directions conference to which
the second respondent will be directed to attend pursuant to orders made under
s.80(2) of the Act.
33. The Tribunal orders pursuant to s.80(2) of the Act that
Commander Debbie Williams attend a directions conference on a date to
no earlier than 14 days from the date of this decision and provide and produce
the originals or copies of the following
information and documents, including
any of them which are stored on a computer, or computer storage device, or any
other type of
storage medium, or storage device namely:
(a) the “advice from legal services” referred to
in para.1 of the second respondent’s letter to the complainant
November 2019; and
(b) all that information that comprises “all other
information” as referred to in para.1 of the second respondent’s
letter to the complainant dated 21 November 2019.
K CUTHBERTSON
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (176 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter