URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASSC/2025/45.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:21:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mures Fishing Pty Ltd v Holloway & Anor [2025] TASSC 45 (24 September 2025)
[2025] TASSC45
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA
Fishing Pty Ltd v Holloway & Anor
[2025] TASSC
: MURES FISHING PTY LTD (ACN 069 572
HOLLOWAY, Patrick Gerard
HOLLOWAY, Suzzette Mary
DELIVERED ON:
24 September 2025
HEARING DATE/S:
3, 4, 10 and 12 September
JUDGMENT OF:
Contract Law – Building, engineering and related contracts – The
contract – Construction of particular contracts
and implied conditions
– Claim for damages on basis that defendants breached agreement to lease
and lease – Content
of Lessors work – Architectural plans alone did
not contain all of the details of the Lessors work and were not to be read
isolation from mechanical drawings referred to in them – No ambiguity or
inconsistency found in or between the words of
the Agreement to Lease and Lease
– Defendants liable for damages for work not performed and defective
Aust Dig Contract Law [256]
Contract Law – Building, engineering and related contracts –
Performance of work – Remedies for breach of contract
– Measure of – Quantum of damages in light of breach.
Contract Law [262]
Legislation:
Supreme Court Civil
Procedure Act 1932
Supreme Court Rules
Broadcasting Commission v Australasian Performing Right Association Ltd
[1973] HCA 36
Electricity Generation Corporation v Woodside
[2014] HCA 7
251 CLR 640
Toll (FGCT) Pty Ltd v Alphapharm
[2004] HCA 52
; 219 CLR 165
Wright v Lemon
[2024] WASCA
Tabcorp Holdings Ltd v Bowen Investments Pty Ltd
[2009] HCA 8
Bellgrove v Eldridge
(1954) HCA 36
[2017] SASFC 72,
128 SASR 165
REPRESENTATION
McTaggart KC, D Deayton
: G O'Rafferty, G
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Guy Frederick Abel
[2025] TASSC 45
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 45/2025
File No 444/2020
MURES FISHING PTY LTD (ACN 069 572 149) v PATRICK
GERARD HOLLOWAY
and SUZZETTE MARY HOLLOWAY
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT ESTCOURT J
24 September 2025
The plaintiff, Mures Fishing Pty Ltd (Mures), is a long-established Tasmanian
family fishing and seafood business, established in
1973 at Hobart. In addition
to a restaurant business on Franklin Wharf at Victoria Dock on the Hobart
waterfront, Mures operates
a commercial fishing and retail fish sales
Prior to 2013, in order to process its catch, involving washing, filleting,
smoking and other related activities, Mures occupied
factory premises at
That factory was old and expensive to operate. The floor layout was not ideal
for operating forklift trucks and other equipment
used to move stock from
processing areas to dispatch areas. (Notably however, the factory did have air
conditioning).
The first defendant, Patrick Holloway was and is a plumber and was known to the
managers of Mures through plumbing work he had undertaken
for many years at both
the factory and the restaurant premises. He and the second defendant, Suzzette
Holloway, his wife, owned a
vacant block of industrial land at 243 Kennedy
Drive, Cambridge.
As a result of conversations between Mures managers and Mr Holloway, a plan
emerged in 2013 whereby Mr and Mrs Holloway would construct
a new factory on the
Cambridge land, purpose-built for Mures, and would thereafter lease the facility
to Mures on a long-term basis.
On 22 October 2014, Mures executed an agreement entitled "Agreement to Lease
– Major Construction", which set out as annexure
"A" a document entitled
"Lease" which recited, relevantly, as follows:
"...in consideration
of the rent...and the covenants...the Lessor does hereby Demise and Lease unto
the Lessee all that the premises
described in item 5 of the Reference Schedule
('the demised premises') together with (if any) the furniture furnishings plant
equipment in the demised premises described in Item 6 of the Reference
Schedule ('the plant and equipment') ...".
The Reference Schedule at Item 6 provided:
"Plant and Equipment: as
and performance specifications in accordance with which
the improvements
on the demised premises
constructed and
including but not limited to those items specified in the list annexed hereto
and marked "A"" (emphasis added).
Annexure "A" to the lease document, entitled, "Plant and Equipment" provided,
amongst other things:
"Equipment to be supplied & installed by
Pat Holloway
All refrigeration & air conditioning, other than Ice Maker, Blast Freezer
& Waste Chiller..."
Clause 2(a) of the Agreement to Lease also obliged the defendants to "cause the
Lessors work to be completed in a good and workmanlike
manner and to the stage
of practical completion on or before 15
February 2015".
The "Lessors work" was defined in clause 1 of the Agreement to Lease as meaning
"the work referred to in the
and specifications". (Emphasis
In turn, the term "Plans and specifications" was defined in clause 1 as meaning
"the council permit conditions in Annexure B and
the drawings and performance
specifications in Annexure C".
Annexure C provided as follows:
"Annexure C
Drawings and Performance Specifications
The Drawings and Performance Specifications are generally in accordance with
set of plans and specifications
prepared by
Preston Lane Architects (
version 17/9/2014
) contained on a compact disk
titled '243 Kennedy Drive Cambridge 2014-422'." (Emphasis added.)
It is common ground that while there were plans and specifications on a CD that
were prepared by Preston Lane (the Preston Lane
plans), there was no "version
17/9/2014". Rather, the date that the folder on the CD was created was shown as
"Sep 17 2014" and a
file in the folder named "Architectural" was shown under the
heading "Date modified" as "17/9/2014 11.05 AM". Also in the same folder
files named "Civil & Structural", "Electrical", "Hydraulic & Drainage"
and "Mechanical".
When inserted into a computer, the CD displays the title "2014-422 date
17_9_2014". The plans in the CD file named Architectural
are shown as prepared
by Preston Lane with the final revision shown as "Revision" "6", dated "20/8/14"
and denoted "CLC" (Clarence
I find, notwithstanding a conflicting agreed fact prepared before trial, that
the files were placed on the CD by a building surveyor,
Nigel Grice. The
evidence from Mr Grice was that the CD was created by him as building surveyor
on 17 September 2014 and provided
to Mr Holloway, who collected it on the same
day for the purpose of having Preston Lane make an application for a building
(which Preston Lane did on that day).
The plaintiff entered into the lease for a term of 10 years with a further
10-year option.
Construction
of the factory occurred between September 2014 and August 2015 and between 27
August 2015 and 22 September 2015, Mr
Grice inspected the property and certified
it as compliant and sufficient for the issue of occupancy certificates.
All did not go well thereafter.
The plaintiff's claim for damages is maintained on the basis that in the
construction of the factory, the defendants breached the
agreement to lease by
failing to install items that they were contractually bound to install (14 air
conditioning units), and by
failing to complete some of the building works in a
proper and workmanlike manner.
The particulars of loss set out prior to the prayer for relief in the amended
statement of claim reads:
"The Plaintiff has suffered loss in that
it has not received the entire benefit of the Lessor's Work as warranted under
the Agreement
to Lease and has been put to loss and expense as set out in the
Rule 261 Statement filed with this Statement of Claim."
The relief sought is confined to damages, interest pursuant to
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act 1932
and costs. There is no prayer for
further or other relief. The writ commencing the proceeding was endorsed with a
claim for a liquidated
The amount of loss and expense set out in the amended schedule required by r
Supreme Court Rules 2000
is $948,154.23. That amount is made
up as shown in the following table:
Item no. on R261 Schedule
Amount (excluding GST)
Installation of Air-Conditioning units per plans entitled "015140-M01",
"01514-M02" and "01514-M07";
Installation of Roof access Plan and Walkway per plans entitled "01514-M03"
and "A02-05";
Installation of boardroom cabinetry;
Reveling (sic) of concrete slabs outside Main
Chiller and in dispatch area;
(including 40% for preliminaries /
contingencies)
Replacement of corroded transition plate
(including 40% for preliminaries /
contingencies)
Replacement of rotting Plywood;
$948,154.23
After concessions made by the defendants in respect of some items, the four
remaining items for determination, raise two issues,
as follows:
(a) Are the defendants obliged by cl 2(a) and Annexure "C" of the Agreement to
Lease to "install" as "Lessor's work":
the fourteen
"refrigeration and air-conditioning units" alleged in [1](a) of the particulars
subjoined to [7] of the amended statement
(b) Did the defendants' breach cl 2(a) of the Agreement for Lease by allegedly
failing to complete as "Lessor's work" in a good and
workmanlike manner:
the concrete
slab in the main chiller and around the dispatch area as alleged in [2](c) of
the particulars subjoined to [7] of the
amended statement of claim;
the floor plate
of the Gourmet products freezer and the heating element as alleged in [2](d) of
the particulars subjoined to [7] of
the amended statement of claim; and
the internal
wall frame and cladding of the room adjacent to the ice room as alleged in
[2](e) of the particulars subjoined to [7]
of the amended statement of
Paragraph 7(1)(a) of the amended statement of claim pleads as
"7 The Defendants breached the Agreement to Lease
Particulars
The Defendants breached the Agreement to Lease in that:
(1) The Lessor's Work constructed on the property failed to generally accord
with the engineering plans, drawings and specifications
on the Compact Disc, as
(a) Refrigeration and air-conditioning units referred to in drawings entitled
'015140-M01' (sic), '01514-M02' and '01514-M07' within
the plans and
specifications and designated:
(i) MF9 – 1: Main Floor;
(ii) MF9 – 2: Main Floor;
(iii) AC1: Board Room;
(iv) AC2: GM Office;
(v) AC3: BDM Office:
(vi) AC4: Admin Staff:
(vii) AC5: Lunch Room 2;
(viii) AC6: Retail Outlet;
(ix) AC7: Customer Service;
(x) AC8: QAM Office;
(xi) AC9: OM Office;
(xii) AC10: Lunch Room 1;
(xiii) GP10: Gourmet Products: and
(xiv) DS13: Dry Store
have not been installed."
The air conditioning units
The defendants' defence as to the first issue concerning the air conditioning
units relies on an argument involving purely a question
of the construction of
the Agreement to Lease. The defendants did not give evidence. The plaintiff's
sole director, Will Mure, was
not cross-examined on his affidavit.
The defendants argue that the reference in Annexure "C" to "Drawings and
Performance Specifications" can only be a reference to
the set of plans and
specifications on the CD in the file marked "Architectural" as none of the other
plans and specifications on
the CD were prepared by Preston Lane Architects.
Those architectural plans and specifications prepared by Preston Lane are silent
as to air conditioning works.
The file of plans and specifications in the CD folder named Mechanical, which
detail the air conditioning proposed for the works,
were prepared by Andrew
Sutherland Consulting Engineers and commence with the drawing number designation
"O1514 – MOO REV T1"
(the Sutherland plans).
The mechanical drawings are referenced in the Preston Lane plans by notation
and on that basis the air conditioning shown or specified
in the Sutherland
plans might be thought to answer the description "generally in accordance with a
set of plans and specifications
prepared by Preston Lane Architects".
However, the defendants' senior counsel, Mr O'Rafferty, submits that is not so.
In closing submissions, senior counsel said, in
answer to a question I posed to
him about this:
"Well, I mean, I can't avoid the fact that they're
referenced. They are referenced in the plans [the Preston Lane plans], but
because of note 27
and because of the evidence of Mr Sutherland about
the nature of these plans
, and because they're described as
, the parties, in my submission, must have contemplated a tender
process before any of this ventilation and air conditioning could
be carried out
lessor's work
And that means, in my submission, that it isn't lessor's work, it's something
It's part of a tender process that could be completely different to
what's in those plans of Mr Sutherland
. So, that's what I'm submitting to
your Honour – is that the construction has to be that, because to be
otherwise would make
a nonsense out of this business dealing." (My
Note 27 in the Sutherland plans states, "PROVIDE WORKSHOP DRAWINGS FOR APPROVAL
PRIOR TO COMMENCING ANY WORK".
Mr Sutherland gave evidence about the plans being "tender plans" and about the
note requiring workshop plans. Rather than set out
the whole of the relevant
transcript of his evidence, given over two days of the trial, I gratefully adopt
Mr O'Rafferty's summary
of that evidence set out in his written closing
submissions as follows:
"The evidence of Andrew Sutherland is that
the limit of his obligation was to prepare mechanical plans for tendering via
qualified contractors, and that those plans are not construction plans.
That his plans were provided for the sole purpose of the
client using them for
tender negotiations for procurement and ongoing services. That his tender plans
were provided for Pat Holloway.
That the tender process using his plans might
be that the builder would then normally seek expressions of interest from
of goods and services for the procurement and construction of the
facility, following which he might provide additional services
with respect to
finalising plans for construction. That they would then have to go to a
construction issue drawing, and then they
might be refined further and become a
contract issue drawing, which is an arrangement between the builder and his
trade contractors
or service providers. That if he were engaged by the client to
modify the plans and make amendments that it is quite likely that
products and services may be available that are different from what's been
documented, and they may be adopted for commercial
reasons or alterations or
improvements or changes. That workshop drawings would be produced at the
completion of his commission -
the contractor will then seek quotations and
submissions for goods and services materials from trade contractors and for
services. The successful trade contractor, when appointed, will then
prepare the workshop drawings, which may also be called construction
That the bid by the successful trade contractors, includes the preparation of
their drawings and the scope of work could
be changed at the discretion of the
builder - the scope of work may change, from his tender documents to
construction for various
reasons including cost and fitness for purpose "at the
discretion of the builder". (Transcript page references omitted.)
The defendants submit that the fact that the agreements entered into between
the parties do not expressly provide for a tender process
"may or may not be" a
"failing of the solicitors acting for the parties in the preparation of those
contracts" or it may be that,
"objectively the parties were content to leave the
tender process to Pat Holloway and his architects and mechanical engineer,
outside the ambit of the express provisions of the contracts between
." (Empasis added.)
The defendants submit that plaintiff's case is in contract, and it is limited
to alleging a breach of clause 2(a) of the Agreement
to Lease. The defendants
note that no claim in equity, under the Australian Consumer Law, or by way of
implied terms, is made by
the plaintiff.
Thus, the defendants' principal defence can be viewed as comprising the black
letter proposition that by the Agreement to Lease
the defendants were only
contractually obliged to construct what was drawn and specified in the
architectural plans prepared by
Preston Lane, and were not obliged to carry
out, or even to put out to tender, the installation of the air conditioning
equipment specified as to be supplied and installed by "Pat Holloway"
in Annexure "A" to the Lease.
Further, the defendants put forward an alternative defence, "namely that the
proviso in clause 1(a) of the Agreement to Lease should
be invoked" so that the
term "plans and specifications" in clause 4(a)(i) of the Agreement to Lease is
construed as a reference to
"the drawings and performance specifications" in
Item 6 of the Reference Schedule to the Lease.
Item 6 provides as follows:
the drawings and performance
specifications
in accordance with which the improvements on the demised
constructed and including but not limited to those items
specified in the list annexed hereto and marked 'A'" (Emphasis added.)
The defendants point out that Item 6 contemplates that "improvements" in the
form of plant and equipment will be installed pursuant
to "drawings and
performance specifications" (not plans and specifications), and argue that "it
could not be any clearer about what
plant and equipment will be installed until
it is ultimately installed - hence the past tense "were constructed", and hence
"including but not limited to" and hence the open-ended words "all
refrigeration & air conditioning""
In other words, as I comprehend the argument, the Agreement to Lease only
required the defendants to provide the air conditioning
contemplated after the
Lessors Works were constructed and were not necessarily those referred to in the
Sutherland plans and referenced
in the Preston Lane
Conclusion as to air conditioning
The relevant principles of construction are well understood.
Australian Broadcasting Commission v Australasian Performing Right
Association Ltd
[1973] HCA 36
(1973) 129 CLR 99
, Gibbs J said at p110:
trite law that the primary duty of a court in construing a written contract is
to endeavour to discover the intention of the
parties from the words of the
instrument in which the contract is embodied. Of course the whole of the
instrument has to be considered,
since the meaning of any one part of it may be
revealed by other parts, and the words of every clause must if possible be
so as to render them all harmonious one with another. If the words
used are unambiguous the court must give effect to them, notwithstanding
the result may appear capricious or unreasonable, and notwithstanding that it
may be guessed or suspected that the parties intended
something different. The
court has no power to remake or amend a contract for the purpose of avoiding a
result which is considered
to be inconvenient or unjust. On the other hand, if
the language is open to two constructions, that will be preferred which will
avoid consequences which appear to be capricious, unreasonable, inconvenient or
unjust, "even though the construction adopted is
not the most obvious, or the
most grammatically accurate", to use the words from earlier authority cited in
Locke v. Dunlop
[1888] UKLawRpCh 140
(1888) 39 Ch D 387
, at p 393 , which, although spoken in
relation to a will, are applicable to the construction of written instruments
generally; see
Bottomley's Case
[1880] UKLawRpCh 258
(1880) 16 Ch D 681
, at p 686 .
Further, it will be permissible to depart from the ordinary meaning of the words
of one provision so far as is necessary
to avoid an inconsistency between that
provision and the rest of the instrument. Finally, the statement of Lord Wright
Hillas & Co. Ltd. v. Arcos Ltd
[1932] UKHL 2
(1932) 147 LT 503
at p 514 , that the court should construe commercial contracts "fairly and
broadly, without being too astute or subtle in finding
defects", should not, in
my opinion, be understood as limited to documents drawn by businessmen for
themselves and without legal
assistance (cf.
Upper Hunter County District
Council v. Australian Chilling and Freezing Co. Ltd
[1968] HCA 8
118 CLR 429
, at p 437 )."
Toll (FGCT) Pty Ltd v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 52
; 219 CLR 165,
Gleeson CJ and Gummow, Hayne, Callinan and Heydon JJ said at
"It is not the subjective beliefs or understandings of the
parties about their rights and liabilities that govern their contractual
relations. What matters is what each party by words and conduct would have led
a reasonable person in the position of the other
party to believe. References
to the common intention of the parties to a contract are to be understood as
referring to what a reasonable
person would understand by the language in which
the parties have expressed their agreement. The meaning of the terms of a
contractual
document is to be determined by what a reasonable person would have
understood them to mean. That, normally, requires consideration
not only of the
text, but also of the surrounding circumstances known to the parties, and the
purpose and object of the transaction."
Electricity Generation Corporation v Woodside Energy Ltd
251 CLR 640
, French CJ and Hayne, Crennan and Kiefel JJ said at
"35 Both Verve and the Sellers recognised that this Court has
reaffirmed the objective approach to be adopted in determining the rights
liabilities of parties to a contract. The meaning of the terms of a commercial
contract is to be determined by what a reasonable
businessperson would have
understood those terms to mean. That approach is not unfamiliar. As reaffirmed,
it will require consideration
of the language used by the parties, the
surrounding circumstances known to them and the commercial purpose or objects to
by the contract. Appreciation of the commercial purpose or objects is
facilitated by an understanding 'of the genesis of the transaction,
background, the context [and] the market in which the parties are operating'. As
Arden LJ observed in
Re Golden Key Ltd
[[2009] EWCA Civ 636 at [28]],
unless a contrary intention is indicated, a court is entitled to approach the
task of giving a commercial
contract a businesslike interpretation on the
assumption 'that the parties ... intended to produce a commercial result'. A
contract is to be construed so as to avoid it 'making commercial
nonsense or working commercial inconvenience' [
Zhu v Treasurer of New South
[2004] HCA 56
(2004) 218 CLR 530
]. (Endnotes omitted,
citation added.)
my view, applying these established tenets, the defendants' principal argument
in defence of the plaintiff's main claim, comprises
a wholly frustraneous
submission.
conclude that the mechanical drawings,
which were referenced
Preston Lane plans, did not answer the description of being "generally in
accordance with a set of plans and specifications
prepared by Preston Lane
Architects" because the final detail of the item "[a]ll refrigeration & air
conditioning, other than
Ice Maker, Blast Freezer & Waste Chiller..."
referred to in Annexure A to the Lease, might not be established until after the
defendants chose to carry out a tender process and the successful tenderer
provided workshop drawings for approval, would be to make
a commercial nonsense
of the Agreement to Lease and the Lease. It is to be remembered that the two
agreements must be read together
and that the defendants were both the lessors
and the builders.
Counsel for the defendants say in their written
submissions:
"55 The defendants are not saying that they would not
be obliged to engage in some form of tender process, but rather, that:
55.1 the defendants were only ever obliged to engage in a tender process that
produced workshop drawings and performance specifications
for the plant and
equipment contemplated in the Preston Lane plans in the file marked
'Architectural' in the CD;
55.2 those plans of Preston Lane contemplated only very large
air-conditioning and refrigeration units such as the evaporators and
necessary to make the various Chiller and Freezer rooms operational for the
purposes of a fish processing factory under
the Agreement to Lease (and those
were installed); and
55.3 the twelve air-condition ventilation units claimed in this proceeding
were not contemplated by the Preston Lane plans, and were
not necessary to
achieve the occupancy permit required by the Agreement to Lease, and which was
ultimately granted.
the result is merely inconvenient because the plaintiff has run this case only
on the express provisions of cl.2(a) of the
Agreement to Lease. It is not
inconvenient in the sense used in
Electricity Generation Corporation v
Woodside Energy Ltd
[2014] HCA 7
(2014) 251 CLR 640
at 656–657 per French CJ,
Hayne, Crennan and Kiefel JJ at [35]. It is not a business inconvenience, it is
a litigation inconvenience."
It will be apparent that I do not accept the basis of that submission.
I do accept that the Preston Lane plans must remain the touchstone of Annexure
C to the Agreement to Lease. They are the only "plans
and specifications
prepared by Preston Lane Architects" on the CD. And I note that those plans do
not mention air conditioning. However,
they are plans and specifications
prepared by Preston Lane which reference, and thus, to the relevant extent, can
be said, if not
to incorporate, then at least to recognise and connect to, the
mechanical drawings which can be found on the same CD in the form
Sutherland plans. Those plans do encompass, amongst other things, the provision
for, if not the ultimate detail of, the air
conditioning units contemplated by
the Lease. That the Sutherland plans were prepared as "tender plans" does not
erase the fact that
those plans specified the 14 air conditioning units the
subject of the plaintiff's claim and their existence as mechanical drawings
referenced in the Preston Lane plans.
My conclusion does not involve construing the words "generally in accordance
with a set of plans and specifications prepared by
Preston Lane Architects
(version 17/9/2014) contained on a compact disk titled '243 Kennedy Drive
Cambridge 2014-422' in Annexure
C to the Agreement to Lease", as meaning
the plans and specifications prepared by Preston Lane Architects and
contained in the CD file named "Architectural", and the plans
and specifications
prepared by Andrew Sutherland and contained in the CD file named "Mechanical".
Rather, that the latter are embraced
by the former. As indeed are the plans in
the files in the folder named "Civil & Structural" and "Hydraulic &
which are also referenced in the Preston Lane plans.
It is clear to my mind it was understood that the specifics of the mechanical
services to be provided by the Lessor were contained
in the Sutherland plans and
that is the reason for the notations in the Preston Lane plans, "refer
mechanical drawings". In that
regard I accept the submission of counsel for the
plaintiff, Mr McTaggart KC and Mr Deayton, that the Preston Lane plans, which
architectural plans, did not contain all of the details of the Lessors work
but neither were they to be read in isolation.
I reject as business nonsense the submission made by the defendants that,
insofar as the Preston Lane plans A02-05 and A06-01 note
"refer mechanical
drawings", that must be taken to be a reference to the ultimate "WORKSHOP
DRAWINGS FOR APPROVAL PRIOR TO COMMENCING
ANY WORK" in general Note 27 of "Mr
Sutherland's tender plans". That level of detail is not necessary to understand
what the Agreement
to Lease and the Lease required in terms of air
conditioning.
Wright v Lemon
[2024] WASCA 19
, Buss P, with whom Vaughan
and Hall JJA agreed, said:
"Where a word or an expression is defined
in a commercial contract the court will give effect to the definition. The
proper course
is to read the text of the definition into the relevant clause and
then to construe the relevant clause having regard to the contract
as a whole.
Ordinarily, the purpose of a definition in a commercial contract is to attribute
the meaning agreed upon by the parties
to the relevant word or expression and to
avoid unnecessary and lengthy repetition of the text of the definition in the
The approach I have taken does not offend this principle. My approach does not
render the definition subservient to the provision
using it. I have simply taken
a fair reading of the words in annexure C, overlooking the misdescription of
the Preston Lane plans,
and have then taken those plans, literally at face
value. And I have applied the principle stated by Gibbs J in
Broadcasting Commission v Australasian Performing Right Association Ltd
out above at [40].
During the trial it was indicated by senior counsel for the defendants that
evidence was to be led from Mr Benn Turner, an architect
at Preston Lane, as to
the meaning of the notations "refer mechanical drawings" in the Preston Lane
plans. Counsel foreshadowed that
Mr Turner's evidence would establish that such
references were not references to the Sutherland plans. Mr Turner was not
and no such evidence was adduced. Given the conclusion I have reached
however, it is not necessary for me to consider whether any
inference adverse to
the defendants might be drawn from that.
was also evidence that Mr Holloway attended a meeting with Mures' management on
21 July 2016. A contemporaneous note of what
was discussed at that meeting is in
evidence, at least de bene esse, from Ms Abbie Crow, the plaintiff's then Human
Resources and
Relationship Manager, reads:
"Concerns over the air
conditioning not being installed as of yet have been raised. Pat indicated he is
waiting for the last $150k
of finance to come through before this can be
completed."
The defendants argue that Mr Hollway's statement is not admissible as it is not
a statement against interest because it merely reflects
his subjective intention
or state of mind and thus cannot, as a matter of law, be called in aid to
resolve an ambiguity.
I make it clear, if it is not already, that the conclusion I have reached does
not involve finding an ambiguity in the words of
Annexure C, or between the
words of Annexure C and those of Item 6 of the Reference Schedule and/or
Annexure "A" of the Lease. Thus,
it does not involve recourse to any of the
evidence of the plaintiff's witnesses objected to by the defendants and taken in
Finally on this issue, I should say that I do not need to consider the
defendants' alternative argument that recourse is open to
the "proviso" to
construe the extent of the Lessor's works required by the Agreement to
The "proviso" referred to comprises the opening words of clause 1, the
"Interpretation" section of the Agreement to Lease, and states:
this agreement unless there be something in the subject or context
inconsistent therewith
the expressions following shall have the
respective meanings hereinafter mentioned" (Emphasis added.)
As I apprehend it, there is nothing in the subject or context of the Agreement
to Lease (and/or the Lease for that matter), as I
have construed it, which is
inconsistent with the meaning assigned in Clause 1 to the expressions "Lessor's
work" or "Plans and specifications".
The plans and specifications are the
Preston Lane plans, but those plans refer to and embrace other drawings. There
is no relevant
inconsistency, just as there is no relevant ambiguity.
It follows that I find that the defendants are liable to the plaintiff for
damages in respect of this item in the amended r 261
schedule. It is thus
necessary to resolve the dispute between the parties as to the quantum of those
Damages – air conditioning
In their written closing submissions, the defendants submit that the amount of
$338,466, exclusive of GST and including a contingency
of 5% ($16,118), as
estimated by their quantity surveyor, Chad Freeman, should be adopted by me in
assessing damages under this rubric,
and not the amount estimated by the
plaintiff's quantity surveyor, Chris Hawkins, of
, exclusive of
Both assessments are based on the likely cost of retrofitting the contracted
air conditioning into the current facility.
Mr Hawkins' evidence was that as at 10 July 2023, the total likely cost for the
installation of the missing mechanical equipment
in the existing facility was
$700,337. That sum is inclusive of estimated head contractor preliminaries
(30%) and with contingency
costs estimated at 10%.
Mr Hawkins provided a supplementary opinion on 14 January 2025 in which he
estimated a likely escalation of 4.23% between June 2023
and September 2024
(being the date of the most recent Australian Bureau of Statistics construction
industries index). Factoring in
that increase, he estimated a total cost of
$729,961, excluding GST, for the installation of the air conditioning equipment.
is the amount now claimed by the plaintiff.
Mr Hawkins' figures and calculations were not challenged by the defendants,
apart from adducing evidence from Mr Freeman.
Mr Freeman's estimate was formulated as at October 2022, although he swore an
affidavit on 18 February 2025 in which he deposed
that his earlier affidavit and
the annexed report remained true and correct and would do "for the pending
Mr Hawkins' report of 10 July 2023 considered and commented upon Mr Freeman's
Mr Hawkins noted that Mr Freeman's costings were lower than would be expected
when considering that the retrofit would have to take
place in the context of an
operational facility which would necessarily increase time and cost.
In addition, Mr Hawkins explained that Mr Freeman's opinion did not adequately
consider the likely work involved in installing the
required ductwork.
Finally, Mr Hawkins considered that Mr Freeman's allowance of 15% for head
contractor preliminaries was too low in consideration
of a commercially tendered
project in an operational accredited food production facility (compare Mr
Hawkins' allowance of 30% as
The defendants submit that Mr Freeman's evidence should be "preferred", however
no further evidence was adduced from Mr Freeman
in response to Mr Hawkins'
updated opinion or his critique of Mr Freeman's assessment, and counsel for the
defendants did not expand
on their submission.
Given that I see no factual basis for doubting Mr Hawkins' unchallenged and
contemporary assessment of the likely cost of carrying
out the work, and given
that I see no flaw in his reasoning, I perceive no basis for not accepting
Damages – roof access and boardroom cabinetry
The damages claimed in respect of the installation of the roof access walkway
as per the plans entitled "01514-M03" and "A02-05",
and in respect of the
defective installation of the boardroom cabinetry, being items 3 and 7 on the
amended r 261 schedule, are conceded
and agreed in the total claimed of
exclusive of GST.
Damages – concrete slabs
The amount claimed in respect of the re-levelling of the concrete slabs outside
the main chiller and in the dispatch area of the
facility to prevent water from
pooling, namely
$151,102.23
including 40% for preliminaries and
contingencies, but exclusive of GST, is disputed.
The defendants submit that an assessment by Mr Freeman of $7,030 should be
The constant ponding of water on the floors which does not flow toward
designated drainage is a significant, ongoing maintenance
item and is
unsatisfactory from a biosafety and compliance perspective.
It is not contested that, especially given the intended use and occupancy of
the facility as a fish processing facility, the construction
of the floors in
such a manner as to permit ponding is a breach of the defendants' obligation to
complete the Lessor's work in a
good and workmanlike manner.
A report from the plaintiff's building surveyor, Roland Wierenga, is that the
floors ought to be relevelled. Mr Hawkins' evidence
is that such works will
cost $103,550, excluding GST.
However, as with other anticipated works, Mr Hawkins considers a further 30%
($31,065) should be applied for the estimated of head
contractor preliminaries,
and a further 10% ($10,355) should be added for contingencies, leaving a total
claim of $144,970 for the
works. Factoring in an expected escalation of 4.23%
brings the claim to $151,102.23, excluding GST.
The defendants rely upon an alternative rectification method in respect of the
ponding and the costing for it as opined by Mr Freeman.
That involves cutting
the concrete floor and installing an additional drain.
Mr Freeman lacks the expertise to give his opinion as expert evidence. He is a
quantity surveyor, and Mr Wierenga is a building
surveyor. Mr Freeman's
evidence was admitted after objection as context to Mr Wierenga's evidence.
The plaintiff submits that the proposed rectification method suggested by Mr
Freeman is not feasible, for the reasons given by Mr
Wierenga in his affidavit
read on the trial. In particular, that the absence of ponding is a requirement
of Biosecurity Tasmania
as one of the prescriptive health requirements for the
building which is classified as a Special Use Building.
In his oral evidence, Mr Wierenga said that his rectification method was
preferable to Mr Freeman's, as it was "industry standard"
in accordance with the
relevant Australian Standard. He described Mr Freeman's suggestion as a
"patch-up job" and said that significant
problems obtaining approval from
Biosecurity Tasmania may follow.
The passage from the trial transcript dealing with this is as
"Okay. I'll take you on to your paragraph 4, which is at
page 52 of the PDF?......Yeah.
So here's we're talking about the main floor – ?......Yes.
– ponding area. Now, at paragraph 7 of – on this page, you
In issuing certification in relation to any specific floor finish,
Biosecurity Tasmania will take into account matters such as the
ability of the
floor finish to be cleaned and effectively drained. Here, the department's
issued consent on the basis of the as
designed plans which did not include the
cutting and installation of drains into existing concrete, as per Mr Freeman's
Now, my question to you is, isn't it possible, though, that if Mr Freeman's
proposal is utilised – ?......Yes.
– that Biosecurity might get – give its consent?......It might,
And isn't it true that even on – on your proposal that – that the
plans would have to be amended and recertified?......Correct.
So, Biosecurity would have to give certification to your – to your
proposal, anyway?......
They would, although,
I'd say there's a higher chance, because it's
in accordance with an Australian Standard, rather than a patch up job.
But again, my question to you is, isn't Mr Freeman's suggestion then, in
relation to area 4, a viable option?......It could be, yes.
[indistinct
And at paragraph 8 you're saying:
The difficulty with Mr Freeman's proposal to construct another drainage point
is that it will require at the very least, adjustments
to the current concrete
floor via cutting into the slab.
This can in turn create issues with the
concrete, such as creation of joints in the finish
. Depending on the
location of the drains, structural considerations may be required.
And my question to you is, these aren't insurmountable – insurmountable
problems, are they?......
Well, as long as you can get approval from
Biosecurity, they're not insurmountable, no
And my question about that is, isn't there a chance that that could happen
with Mr Freeman's proposal, because it's a viable possibility?......I
speak for Biosecurity, so you're suggesting it's a possibility, I mean, we
– we – we like to pursue all possibilities,
whether they're
HIS HONOUR: You'd have to run it past Biosecurity first, wouldn't you?
WITNESS: Yeah, you would.
HIS HONOUR: You'd be crazy to be cutting – cutting concrete with a
concrete saw for long lines and putting drains in, and
then asking Biosecurity
if they would approve it.
WITNESS: Ah, you'd have to get their approval.
HIS HONOUR: First.
WITNESS: And yeah.
MR O'RAFFERTY: (Resuming) Well, what about for your suggestion, would you
need approval first for your suggestion from Biosecurity?......You
it's in accordance with an Australian standard so therefore it'd be easily
There's no element of –
the element of proof for
compliance is less
HIS HONOUR: Even so, you wouldn't pump (sic) that either, would you? You'd
WITNESS: No, no.
MR O'RAFFERTY: (Resuming) And I'll take you to your paragraph 10, which is
over the page?......Ah, yes.
And page 53 of the PDF?......Yeah, I've got it thanks.
Even if this were not the case, there's a risk that poor installation may
cause further compliance issues
But again the same question. It might not be poor installation?......No,
that's correct.
And poor installation may occur with your proposed rectification?......It can
happen any – on anything, really."
The applicable principles as to the measure of damages in a case such as this
are not in doubt.
In the case of defective building work, the High Court in
Tabcorp Holdings
Ltd v Bowen Investments Pty Ltd
(2009) 236 CLR 272
re-affirmed the rule in
Bellgrove v Eldridge
[1954] HCA 36
(1954) 90 CLR 613
that the proper measure of damage
is the cost of reinstatement; that is, damages representing the cost of the work
necessary to produce
conformity with the contract.
Stone v Chappel
[2017] SASFC 72, at [200], Doyle J observed:
"...it reflects the plaintiff's interest in securing performance of
the contract, even if that reflects some subjective aesthetic
or eccentric
benefit bargained for by the plaintiff rather than some objective financial
benefit. It permits the recovery of damages
assessed by reference to the
performance the plaintiff bargained for, rather than confining the plaintiff to
compensation for the
loss of the objective financial or economic benefits of
performance."
The defendants do not argue that they are not obliged to pay compensation in
the form of rectification damages. The question for
me does not involve whether
exceptional circumstances or questions of reasonableness make diminution in
value the appropriate measure.
It is merely a question of assessing the
reasonable cost of producing conformity with the contract.
It may be accepted that the rectification works proposed by Mr Freeman in his
inexpert opinion, conveyed to me in evidence by Mr
Wierenga's expert opinion,
amounts to a "patch up job". But so too, with respect to Mr Wierenga, is his
solution of relevelling.
And while Mr Wierenga's view was that there was a
higher chance of his solution being accepted by Biosecurity Tasmania, because it
is in accordance with an Australian Standard and "the element of proof for
compliance is less", he accepted that Mr Freman's proposal
could be a viable
option and he accepted that none of the problems he raised with Mr Freeman's
proposal were insurmountable, as
long as approval from Biosecurity Tasmania was
obtained and there was no poor installation.
In my view the state of that evidence does not justify an award of $151,102.23
and I allow a rounded off sum of
which embraces Mr Freeman's
estimate of $7,030 and takes into account with a broad brush, an allowance for
increased costs since the
date of that estimate and a further allowance for
preliminaries and contingencies.
Damages – the floor
The defendants argue that they are not liable for damages under this rubric.
The plaintiff's claim is in the sum of
, including a 40% allowance
for preliminaries and contingencies per the evidence of Mr Hawkins and an
acceleration of 4.23%.
The floor plate is underneath the doorway to the gourmet products freezer and
has become subject to significant rusting. The plaintiff
says that it was
constructed with an inappropriately treated metal which is unsuitable for a wet
environment and should have been
constructed with "a more robust material, such
as stainless steel".
The defendants do not dispute that the plate is subject to rusting but assert
such corrosion is contributed to, at least in part,
from exposure to brine.
The plaintiff points out that there is no evidence before the Court as to the
use of the gourmet products chiller and that I can
not make any such finding as
to the extent of any alternate contribution. I accept that proposition.
Alternatively, the plaintiff submits that the facility was to be constructed
for the use of fish processing, that I can infer that
such processing would
involve the use of products such as brine and that there is "no contractual or
other stipulation restricting
or otherwise concerning the plaintiff's use of
this particular freezer".
In cross-examination Dr Edwards, the plaintiff's energy and water engineer,
explained in his evidence the acceleration of corrosion
in stainless steel is
much slower than the acceleration in mild steel.
In the absence of any specification requiring the use of stainless steel for
the plant I am not satisfied to the required degree
that the use of mild steel
was poor workmanship. I make no allowance under this
Damages – rotting plywood
This last remaining item in the r 261 schedule is conceded by the defendants.
The plaintiff has already taken the step of rectifying the rotting walls,
incurring a cost of
, excluding GST.
amount should be awarded.
Disposition
There will be judgment for the plaintiff against the defendants in respects of
the damages I have allowed.
As I understand it from opening addresses, there were also items of damage
claimed and agreed prior to trial. In view of that and
the fact that the
defendants abandoned their counterclaim just prior to trial and were awarded
costs, I should hear the parties as
to the amount of the total damages and the
costs of the action.
Given that damages have largely been awarded on a restitutionary basis as at
the date of trial, I will also hear the parties as
to whether, and if so what,
interest should be awarded pursuant to
Supreme Court Civil
Procedure Act
(see the decision of Porter AJ in
Public Trustee as
Administrator of the Estate of Matthew Leonard v Atileo
[2023] TASSC 33
I should also hear the parties as to the plaintiff's claim for consequential
relief to permit it to rectify the items in respect
of which it has been awarded
damages for, or in the alternative, to have liberty to apply for such
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (287 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter