URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASADT/2021/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:11:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Saurabh Kamat v Mark Scully [2021] TASADT 1 (22 April 2021)
[2021] TASADT 1
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
Saurabh Kamat v Mark Scully
[2021] TASADT
KAMAT, Saurabh
SCULLY, Mark
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
19 April 2021
DELIVERED ON:
22 April 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Chairperson Clues
Tribunal Member Cuthbertson
CATCHWORDS:
Equal opportunity – application to withdraw
complaint – relevant considerations -
Anti-Discrimination Act
DETERMINATION:
The Tribunal approves the withdrawal of the complaint
from inquiry.
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant:
Respondent:
No appearance
[2021] TASADT 1
INTRODUCTION
1. On 23 July 2018, Equal Opportunity Tasmania (EOT) received a
complaint from Mr Kamat (the complainant) alleging that he had been
of discrimination and prohibited conduct perpetrated by Mr Scully (the
respondent). That complaint was accepted by the
Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner (the Commissioner) and ultimately referred to the Tribunal for
2. A number of directions hearings have been held in respect of
the complaint and the matter had been allocated dates for the inquiry.
April 2021, the Tribunal held a pre-hearing conference to ensure that the
inquiry was ready to proceed on the allocated dates.
The complainant attended
the pre-hearing conference by telephone. The respondent had been notified of
the date and time for the
conference but did not answer the telephone. As a
consequence, the pre-hearing conference proceeded in the respondent’s
3. During the course of the pre-hearing conference, the complainant
indicated that he wished to withdraw his complaint.
4. Section 98A of the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998 (the Act) provides:
Application to Tribunal to withdraw complaint from inquiry or
(1) A complainant may apply to the Tribunal to withdraw a complaint from
inquiry or review.
(2) The Tribunal, after considering an application
, may approve the withdrawal of the complaint from inquiry or
(3) A complainant whose application to withdraw a
complaint from inquiry or review has been approved by the Tribunal is not
to make another complaint or to apply for an application for review in
relation to the same matter without the permission of the
(4) The withdrawal of a complaint does not prevent
the Tribunal from conducting an inquiry in relation to the complaint or the
Commissioner
from investigating the complaint under
if satisfied that–
(a) the complaint was not withdrawn
voluntarily; or
(b) it is in the public interest to do
5. As can be seen from the language of s.98A, the Tribunal has
a discretion to approve the withdrawal of a complaint from inquiry
receives such an application. Approval is not automatic. Further, if a
complaint is withdrawn, the Tribunal may also continue
to conduct an inquiry in
the circumstances set out in sub-s.98A(4).
6. In assessing whether or not to
approve the withdrawal of the complaint, it is necessary to have regard
(a) the nature of the complaint;
complainant’s reasons for withdrawing the complaint.
7. It is against that background that issues of the public
interest can be properly assessed.
The Complaint
8. The complainant was born in India. He alleges that the
respondent engaged in repeated harassment, stalking and racial discrimination
him. The conduct complained of included the alleged production and distribution
of pictures of the complainant which were annotated
with various statements
which appear to refer to the complainant variously as “DickSniffer”,
“DJ DickSniffer”
or “Doctor DickSniffer”. These posters
were attached to various street signs and noticeboards around the city of
Launceston,
including at the University of Tasmania where the complainant has
previously worked and studied.
9. The complainant also alleged that he had
been the subject of constant harassment from the respondent through text and
phone messages.
The complainant also alleged that the respondent posted a
number of YouTube videos in which he racially vilified, threatened and
homophobic slurs against the complainant and his associates. The complainant is
not homosexual.
10. On the basis of this conduct, the complainant had
earlier sought and obtained a restraint order against the respondent.
11. In her referral report, the Commissioner identified that the complaint
raised the following issues:
• whether or not incitement to hatred, serious contempt
and severe ridicule of the complainant occurred on the basis of race
orientation;
• whether or not the complainant was discriminated
against on the basis of actual or imputed race, sexual orientation, lawful
sexual activity and relationship status;
• whether or not the
complainant was subjected to conduct that is offensive, humiliating,
intimidating, insulting or ridiculing
on the basis of actual or imputed race,
sexual orientation, lawful sexual activity and relationship status.
12. The Commissioner prepared an assessment decision and
reasons for decision on accepting the complaint. That decision noted that
of the videos alleged to have been uploaded by the respondent depict him
referring to the complainant as a homosexual, “pathetic
homosexual”,
“filthy homosexual” and “little girl homosexual” and
states that he will cut the complainant,
kick his head in, slice him and put an
arrow in him. Another video involves the respondent singing that the
complainant “came
here with his boyfriend ... and another guy you are arse
shagging”, “you are gay, you’re a faggot and fat and
In another video published under the heading “Brief Masonic
Tour of Launceston” the respondent refers to throwing “a
Indian immigrant into a fountain”. He also makes further references to
“filthy immigrant”, “filthy
Indian pig” and “fat
pig”. Although the complainant is not mentioned by name, he alleges that
he was indeed thrown
into a fountain by the respondent. In another video the
respondent refers to the complainant as a “filthy Indian immigrant
scumbag” as well as a “fat Indian prick”.
Reasons for Withdrawal
13. The complainant said that he had recently obtained legal
advice in respect of his complaint. At the time he pursued his complaint,
restraint order he had earlier obtained against the respondent had lapsed. He
stated that once the restraint order lapsed, the
respondent recommenced engaging
in the sort of conduct that was the subject of his complaint to EOT.
14. Recently, the complainant has been able to obtain a further restraint
order against the respondent that is for a 2 year period.
The complainant
indicated that the outcome he was primarily seeking pursuant to the Act was an
order pursuant to s.89(1)(a) requiring
the respondent to not repeat or continue
the discrimination or prohibited conduct. The complainant is of the view that
the restraint
order provides him with the relief that he needs to prevent the
respondent repeating the type of conduct that was the subject of
his complaint.
As a consequence, he does not feel that it is worth pursuing the complaint any
further in the Tribunal. Any other
orders available pursuant to the Act are not
worth it for him.
15. A further concern for him is that he will need to
take time off work in order to prosecute his complaint. From the
complainant’s
perspective, the cost of doing that is no longer warranted
given the protection that he is now receiving from the restraint order.
16. The Tribunal is satisfied that the complainant has
voluntarily sought to withdraw his complaint. He has done so with the benefit
of legal advice and in the context of obtaining relief in an alternative forum
akin to that which he was ultimately seeking from
this Tribunal. He impressed
as having given careful thought to his options and having made a decision in
light of a considered assessment
of his situation.
17. The only matter that
remains for the Tribunal to consider is the public interest. If the Tribunal
considered that it was in the
public interest, it could proceed to conduct its
own inquiry into the complaint. That would likely require compelling the
complainant
to attend the Tribunal to give evidence in respect of his complaint.
18. The respondent has in preparation for the hearing provided information
to the Tribunal that indicates he admits being the person
who made and uploaded
the YouTube videos referred to in the complaint. On the face of it, those
videos contain a number of references
to the complainant’s race and actual
or imputed sexuality. Those references utilise derogatory language which may
a breach of a number provisions of the Act. As the Tribunal
understands it, the respondent does not deny making those videos, but
have been suffering from PTSD at the time; as a consequence, he argues that he
cannot be held responsible for those videos
and their content. There are no
provisions in the Act that provide any obvious defence to an allegation of
discrimination or prohibited
conduct based on a person’s mental health
condition. It may be, however, that the fact that a person was suffering from a
mental illness or psychological condition at the time of breaching the Act may
be relevant to any orders that may be made by the
Tribunal if the complaint is
substantiated.
19. On balance, the Tribunal has determined to approve the
complainant’s withdrawal of his complaint. It is satisfied that
complainant has withdrawn his complaint voluntarily and with an understanding of
the consequences of doing so. The respondent
has admitted to making and
uploading videos that make derogatory comments about the complainant that appear
to be based on his race
and actual or imputed sexuality. Nevertheless, the
Tribunal does not consider it is in the public interest to conduct an inquiry
itself in relation to the complaint. The respondent’s behaviour is
currently being controlled by the terms of a restraint
order. If the respondent
was to again engage in conduct of this type again, the complainant would be
entitled to make a new complaint
to EOT in respect of any alleged breaches of
the Act, provided the allegations do not concern the same behaviour that was the
of this complaint. The Tribunal does not wish to put the complainant
through giving evidence in respect of his complaint in the
circumstances noting
that it would involve taking him away from his employment for a period of time.
In all the circumstances, it
is not in the public interest for that to
20. The Tribunal having considered an application made by the
complainant Mr Saurabh Kamat on 19 April 2021 to withdraw his complaint
the withdrawal of the complaint from inquiry.
M CLUES K CUTHBERTSON
CHAIRPERSON
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (114 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter