URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASRMPAT/2021/29.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:19:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
JAC Group Holdings Pty Ltd v Launceston City Council and S Cai and WY Cai [2021] TASRMPAT 29 (28 September 2021)
JAC Group Holdings Pty Ltd v Launceston City Council and S
Cai and W Y Cai
[2021] TASRMPAT 29
: JAC Group Holdings Pty Ltd
First Respondent
: Launceston City Council
: Susan Cai & Wei Yuan Cai
Subject Land:
22 (also known as 22-24) Margaret Street, Launceston
Planning Appeal
Hearing Date(s):
Submissions were made and responded to in writing
Decision Date:
28 September 2021
Delivered At:
M Duvnjak, Chairperson
Representation:
: S McElwaine SC, Shaun McElwaine
& Associates
First Respondent:
G Williams Glynn Williams Legal
Second Respondent:
I Duckett, Ireneinc Planning
Catchwords:
Planning Appeal
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. The Second Respondents, Susan Cai & Wei Yuan
Cai, applied to the Launceston City Council (the Council) for approval of
development
application 0174/2021 to “
convert parking area”
required for the operation of an existing food services use (the Golden
Brumby Restaurant) to private open space for a residential
use the subject of a
permit granted by Council with respect to development application 0593/2008.
2. On 17 June 2021, the Council granted a permit which describes the
development as
“residential and food services – change of
existing restaurant carpark to private open space for the existing
(the 2021 Permit) The permit gave approval for the change
of use for the existing restaurant carpark, the provision for which was
conditioned under a permit issued by Council on 18 December 1997, to an area of
private open space for the existing residential use
the subject of a planning
permit granted by Council on 20 November 2009. The 2021 Permit issued by Council
for the change of use
was subject to conditions which included Conditions 2 and
3 which provided as follows:
“2. AMENDED PLANS REQUIRED
Prior to the commencement of any work and/or use, an amended site plan
must be submitted to the satisfaction of the Manager City Development
plans annotated as Amended Plan Required and attached to the Permit. Once
approved, the amended plan will be endorsed
by the Council and will then form
part of the Permit. The amended site plan must be drawn to scale by an
appropriately qualified
person and show:
buildings, fences and other features, existing and proposed;
marking of car parking;
car parking spaces;
defined public, private and common areas; and
landscaping,
including species and height at maturity.
3. PROVISION OF
FIVE CAR PARKING SPACES
Five car parking spaces must be provided on-site at all times whilst the
restaurant is open for diners.”
3. The Appellant, JAC Holdings Pty Ltd, by this appeal, challenges the
decision of Council on the following grounds:
“1. It was not open to the planning authority to grant the planning
permit that it has purported to grant because:
(a) The application lodged with the planning authority sought to change
the use of a part of an existing car park on the site;
(b) The car parking is required to be maintained on the site pursuant to
planning permits granted by the planning authority for the
use of land as a
restaurant being DA01.97.355, DA00.98.014, DA041.2005 and DA0593.2008;
(c) In combination those planning permits require the rear of the building
where the restaurant use is conducted to be reserved for
car parking for patrons
of the restaurant use;
(d) The applicant for the planning permit framed it as one to permanently
convert use of a portion of the rear of the restaurant building
from car parking
to private open space with the effect of displacing the requirement under the
earlier granted permits to maintain
that area for use by restaurant customers;
(e) Despite the way in which the application for the planning permit was
framed, the planning authority purported to grant a planning
temporary use of a portion of the area required for car parking as private open
space and to expunge the requirement of
the earlier planning permits that the
rear of the property be permanently reserved for car parking for use in
conjunction with the
operation of the restaurant.
2. The effect of the grant of the planning permit by the planning
authority is to alter the requirements of the earlier granted planning
in circumstances where it was not open to the planning authority to amend those
planning permits pursuant to the mechanism
of the application for the permit
that was lodged with it.
3. It was not open to the planning authority to grant a planning permit
for temporary use of a portion of the rear of the property
for private open
space when that was not the application that was lodged with the planning
authority for a planning permit.
4. Condition 2 of the planning permit is inconsistent with the conditions
of the earlier planning permits, and for that reason could
not have been imposed
by a planning authority acting reasonably and rationally.
5. The application for a planning permit lodged with the planning
authority was invalid from the outset or it was not open to the
authority to grant a planning permit in the terms that it did
is no use class pursuant to the Launceston Interim Planning Scheme 2015 of
Private Open Space. Accordingly, the application
for the planning permit was
misconceived and it was not open to the planning authority to grant a planning
permit for the use that
it classified as Private Open Space; and
term Private Open Space is defined in the planning scheme as meaning “an
outdoor area of land or dwelling for the exclusive
use of the occupants of the
land or dwelling”. Accordingly, it was not open to the application to
apply for, nor the planning
authority to grant, a planning permit the effect of
which is that the proposed area of Private Open Space will not be for the
use of the occupants of the land or dwelling.”
4. As the grounds of appeal raise predominately legal issues and the history
of the various permits granted with respect to the property
the site of the
proposal was not in dispute, Council and the Appellant sought to have the appeal
determined without a formal hearing.
The Appellant and Council filed written
submissions in support of their respective positions. No submissions were filed
by the Second
Respondent. The Tribunal has had regard to the submissions filed
in reaching this decision.
5. While not the subject of agreed facts, the material before the Tribunal
identifies the following permit history for the site which
was conveniently
summarised by Mr McElwaine in submissions made on behalf of the Appellant:
“4. On 18 December 1997, the planning authority issued a permit to
develop and use the land for the purposes of a restaurant
(the 1997 Permit). The
endorsed plans included a site plan that depicted a car parking area to the
north of the restaurant building
comprising five car parking spaces. Clause 4 of
that planning permit requires that the restaurant use ‘shall not commence
five carparking spaces are provided on-site.’ Clause 5 of that
permit required the carparking spaces to be constructed, marked
‘parking area and access lanes must be kept available’ for the
restaurant use ‘at all times’. Clause
7 of that permit specified
that the use may only operate between 10am and 10pm Monday to Saturday.
5. On 16 February 1998, the planning authority granted a planning permit
for the use and development described as: ‘outdoor
dining area,
construction of wall and realignment of the carpark for the existing
restaurant’ (the 1998 Permit). The plan endorsed
with that permit depicted
five carparking spaces on the northern side of the existing building and at
ground level. Clause 4 of
that permit required that before the use commences,
the area set aside for parking vehicles and access lanes must be property
constructed,
line marked and that each parking area and access lane ‘must
be kept available for these purposes at all times.’ Clause
permit specified that the outdoor dining area may only be used between the hours
of 10am and 10pm Monday to Saturday.
6. On 10 October 2005, the planning authority granted a planning permit
for the development and use described as ‘construct
an extension to the
building’. The endorsed plans depict certain modifications to the
building, but otherwise make no reference
to the carparking maintenance
requirements for the restaurant use.
7. On 20 November 2009, the planning authority granted a planning permit
for the site for the development and use described as: ‘demolish
and extend a restaurant building for the purpose of a single dwelling and to cut
back the awning of the existing restaurant’
(the 2009 Permit). The
endorsed plans with that planning permit depict, inter alia, a ground floor plan
for use of the existing building
as a restaurant and an upper floor plan for use
of the building for the purposes of a private residence. The site plan as
of by that planning permit depicts four carparking spaces described as
‘existing carpark’ to the north of the building
on the site.
8. On 28 April 2017, the planning authority issued a planning permit for
the site for the use described as ‘residential’
(the 2017 Permit).
The plans endorsed by that planning permit depict four carparking spaces to the
rear of the existing building
on the northern side.
9. The restaurant use commenced in accordance with the planning permit of
18 September 1997 and continues to the present time. In
accordance with the
various 3 planning permits that have been issued for that use, it is an
essential requirement that four carparking
spaces be provided for the restaurant
use on the northern side of the building and as depict on each of the endorsed
10. On 22 March 2021, Susan Cai, one of the persons who is described as
the second respondent to this appeal, made an application
for a planning permit
for the site and in accordance with the standard Development Application Form of
the planning authority (the
2021 Permit). Under the heading of ‘the
proposal’ she stated:
‘Convert parking area to Private Open Space for dwelling,
maintaining 2 car spaces. The restaurant is mostly serving take-aways
deliveries. During opening hours 5pm – 8.30pm Monday – Saturday
there is extensive on and off street public parking
options within
6. There appears to be nothing controversial about the chronological history
summarised above. Council, in its submissions, did not
suggest otherwise.
7. The Appellant submitted that the 2021 permit granted by Council, subject
to the conditions referred to, is not what was applied
for by the Second
Respondents in their development application. It was submitted that it is
apparent from the terms of the development
application that the Second
Respondents sought to permanently convert the carparking area to private open
space. The decision of
Council to issue the 2021 Permit with Conditions 2 and 3
in the terms set out, requiring five carparking spaces to be provided onsite
all times while the restaurant is open to diners (Condition 3) and that an
amended site plan be submitted which depicts those
five carparking spaces
(Condition 2) was not what the Second Respondents sought by their development
application.
8. The Tribunal accepts, as submitted by the Appellant, that the development
application did not propose what the permit granted,
that is a temporary use of
the carparking area for private open space when the Food Services Use is not
open for diners.
9. The Tribunal finds that if the development was carried out in accordance
with the approval, it would be significantly different
to what was in fact
applied for. The development application seeks to ‘repurpose
a carpark as private open space for the residence. That this is what was
sought by the Second Respondents is clear upon a consideration
development application itself. In that application the Second Respondent
identified the available onstreet and other carparking
available in the vicinity
of the restaurant. It identifies a number of other Food Services Uses in the
area that operate without
dedicated carparking. The development application
clearly seeks to ‘convert’ the parking area to private open
10. The Tribunal accepts that the permit granted was for a materially
different use from that sought by the development application
and, as such, is
As stated by Porter J in
Sultan Holdings
“The essential principal is that a condition imposed must not
significantly alter the development for which the application
is made, or leave
open the possibility that the development carried out in accordance with the
approval will be significantly different
from the proposed
development”.
11. Council’s submissions in response did not challenge the position of
the Appellant in any meaningful way. It submitted that
what was applied for
could be interpreted differently. Council submitted that “
difference of interpretation is that in practicable affect it is not about
establishing a used [sic] class, but establishing
a permit for a restaurant
which will have a different carparking obligations than that which has occurred
previously.”
That description does not accord with how the Second
Respondent’s application was framed, nor for that matter, does it accord
with what Council, via its permit, purported to approve.
12. For the reasons set out, Ground 1 of the appeal is made out.
13. The position of the Appellant as asserted by Ground 2 is that there is
simply no mechanism under the
Land Use Planning & Approvals Act 1993
(the LUPA Act) to enable amendment to existing
. It was submitted that the
development application in this case, seeks to amend the 1997 and 1998 Permits
by varying the condition
requiring provision of dedicated off-street parking
spaces for the Food Services Use.
Dorsett Council v DP & LJ
, Crawford J identified
the limited legislative mechanisms available to vary a permit which has been
His Honour referred to
authority supporting the proposition that
“notwithstanding the
statutory prohibition on variations to permit conditions which have been
required by the Tribunal, there
is nothing to prevent a developer, who has
obtained a permit with conditions required by the Tribunal, from subsequently
for another permit which is identical to the first, except for
differences in the conditions, subject, of course, to the two year
period in the Land Use Planning & Approvals Act 1993,
Respondent’s development application as framed did not seek approval for a
Food Services Use with no provision for
dedicated off-street carparking.
15. The Appellant also referred the Tribunal to the Judgment of Preston CJ in
AQC Dartbrook Management Pty Ltd v Minister for Planning and Public
in which His Honour
refers with approval to the decision of
Gordon & Valich Pty Ltd v City of
Sydney Council
it was held that
“a development application cannot be made to vary the
terms of a development consent directly; a development application can
made seeking consent for the carrying out of
development.”
Tribunal accepts the Appellant’s submissions that the reasoning set out in
the New South Wales decisions, although based
on different legislative
provisions, was referred analogous to those provisions set out in the LUPA Act.
No provision in the Launceston
Interim Planning Scheme 2015, or in the LUPA Act,
operates so as to enable a person to apply for a permit, the effect of which is
only to vary terms upon which development has been undertaken pursuant to the
grant of an earlier permit. No provision for a review,
amendment or variation of
the conditions of a permit previously granted is provided for. As noted in [10]
above, the development
application seeks to repurpose a carpark as private open
space for the residence. Provision of carparking for the Food Services
a condition of the 1997 and 1998 Permits. The development application, in fact
seeks a removal of the carpark condition
associated with the 1997 and 1998
Permits. There is no power to so amend or vary. Ground 2 of the appeal is made
16. Council did not specifically address the submissions of the Appellant. Mr
Williams for Council submitted that the development
application “
change the nature of the use applied for to reflect the underutilisation
the carparking area]
which is advanced by the Proponent”
it was submitted for the Council that “
in this particular instance, the
Council has imposed a condition to modify the use and to do so which is
effectively an application
of the Parking Code in its application to the
It is not clear what Council has submitted here. If the
modification is to remove the requirement for carparking when the Food Services
Use is not in use, it is this very modification that the Appellant asserts
constitutes a modification of an existing permit and is
therefore invalid.
17. The Appellant’s Ground 3 re-agitates matters raised by Grounds 1
and 2 and need not be separately considered.
18. Ground 4 asserts invalidity of Condition 2 of the 2021 Permit on the
basis that it is inconsistent with the conditions imposed
by the 1997 and 1998
Permits. Given the Tribunal’s determination with respect to Ground 2,
that a development application
cannot be made to vary the 1997 and 1998 Permit
conditions, this ground need not be further considered.
19. Given the Tribunal’s determination as to the absence of power to
amend the 1997 and 1998 Permits, Ground 5 need not be
considered further.
20. Accordingly, having found Grounds 1, and 2 are made out, the Tribunal
makes the following orders:
Council’s decision to grant a permit for DA0174/2020 dated 17 June 2021,
be set aside and be replaced with a refusal; and
Tribunal will entertain any application for an order for costs in this appeal /
application if made to the Tribunal in writing
with supporting submissions
within the next 21 days. If requested, the Tribunal may reconvene to hear any
evidence in respect of
any matter bearing upon an order for costs. In the
absence of any such application for an order for costs, the order of the
is that each party bear its own costs.
Sultan Holdings Pty Ltd v
[2017] TASFC 14 at [97], per Porter AJ.
Accepting a limited respect
provided for in s56 of
Land Use Planning & Approvals Act 1993
s23(6) of the
Resource Management & Planning Appeal Tribunal Act 1993,
neither of which is relevant
[1999] TASSC 69.
S55 and 56 of the
Planning & Approvals Act 1993 and s23(5) and (6) of the Resource Management
& Planning Appeal Tribunal Act 1993 –
see paragraphs [22] –
At paragraph
[2021] NSWCA 112
[2007] NSWLEC 780
Ibid paragraphs
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (558 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter