URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFC/2023/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
TT-Line Company Pty Ltd v Burrows [2023] TASFC 4 (3 July 2023)
[2023] TASFC 4
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (FULL
TT-Line Company Pty Ltd v Burrows
: TT-LINE COMPANY PTY LTD (ACN 061 996
BURROWS, Rae (DPIPWE)
DELIVERED ON:
3 July 2023
HEARING DATE:
17 April 2023
Estcourt J, Martin AJ, Porter AJ
Animals – Prevention of cruelty to animals – Offences –
Offence to use a method of management of animals reasonably
likely to result in
unreasonable and unjustifiable pain or suffering – Charge relating to
transport of horses contained in
a trailer within a ship's hold
–Allegations that the method of management included failures to take
certain measures –
Where legislation imposed general duty on persons with
care and control of animals to take all reasonable measures to ensure their
welfare – To the extent a method of management includes omissions, the
omitted measures must be reasonable ones to have been
taken in the
circumstances.
Animal Welfare Act
[2021] TASFC 3
33 Tas R 163
Mitchell v Marshall
R v Iannelli
[2003] NSWCCA 1
56 NSWLR 247
considered.
DPP (Cth) v Poniatowska
[2011] HCA 43
244 CLR 408
Aust Dig Animals [43]
Magistrates – Jurisdiction and procedure generally – Procedure
– The hearing – General matters – Procedural
fairness and
natural justice – Magistrate found charge made out on a basis not
particularised in the complaint – Magistrate
failed to raise the issue as
potential basis for liability and to hear and determine any application to amend
complaint – Procedural
unfairness made out.
Aust Dig Magistrates [1122]
Criminal Law – Criminal liability and capacity – Defence matters
– Ignorance and mistake of fact – Availability
of defence of honest
and reasonable mistake – Particular cases – Evidential burden on a
corporate defendant to raise
the ground of exculpation – Whether mistaken
belief on the part of a corporation sufficiently raised – Whether finding
that defence negatived reasonably open of the whole of the evidence.
Animal Welfare Act
1993(Tas), s 3A(3)(a).
Brambles Holdings Ltd
(1976) 15 SASR 270
GJ Coles & Co Ltd v Goldsworthy
[1985] WAR 183
, considered.
Aust Dig Criminal Law [2065]
Criminal Law – Criminal liability and capacity – Defence matters
– Ignorance and mistake of fact – Availability
of defence of honest
and reasonable mistake – Generally – Mistaken belief in a state of
affairs which if true would make
an accused's actions "innocent" – Where
applicant faced primary charge and sought to raise mistake of fact – Where
had pleaded guilty to related regulatory offences but irrelevant to
strict consideration of primary charge – Observations on
the meaning of
"innocent".
CTM v The Queen
[2008] HCA 25
236 CLR 440
[2021] HCA 42
, considered.
Aust Dig Criminal Law
REPRESENTATION
Neal SC and K Grinberg
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Director of Public
Prosecutions
Judgment Number:
[2023] TASFC 4
paragraphs:
Serial No 4/2023
File No FCA 3138/2022
TT-LINE COMPANY PTY LTD (ACN 061 996 174) v RAE BURROWS
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
(Dissenting)
3 July 2023
Orders of the Court:
of guilt made on 22 October 2022 set aside.
remitted for re-hearing by a different magistrate.
File No FCA 3138/2022
TT-LINE COMPANY PTY LTD (ACN 061 996 174) v RAE BURROWS
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
3 July 2023
the hours of about 7.30pm on 28 January 2018 and 4.00am on 29 January 2018, 16
out of 18 horses loaded inside a truck in
the hold of the
Spirit of Tasmania
died of respiratory failure caused by high environmental temperatures
during transit which were likely to have increased the respiratory
effort of the horses immediately prior to their death. The horses were alive
when they were loaded onto the ship and
accordingly it is clear that they died
whilst being transported across Bass Strait.
a result of the deaths, the applicant, TT-Line Company Pty Ltd, was charged and
was later convicted by a magistrate of the offence
of using a method of
management that was reasonably likely to result in unreasonable and
unjustifiable pain and suffering to animals
contrary to
Welfare Act
applicant lodged a notice to review that conviction pursuant to
Justices Act
. Under the provisions of r 692 of the
Supreme Court
, the notice to review was referred to this Court for
determination.
applicant was also charged and convicted by the magistrate of 28 other counts
which alleged that the applicant was a person transporting
a horse across Bass
Strait and that it failed to ensure that the horse was individually stalled
contrary to r 34(6) of the
Animal Welfare (Land Transport of
Regulations
(the Regulations).
review of those convictions was sought.
first ground of review before the Court is that the magistrate erred in law in
determining the elements of an offence under
of the Act by finding that it
was not an element, where the alleged method of management included an omission
to take a measure,
that the measure was a reasonable measure.
of the Act provides:
6 Duty of care to animals
A person who has the care or charge of an animal has a duty to take all
reasonable measures to ensure the welfare of the animal."
of the Act provides:
7 Management of animals
A person who has the care or charge of an animal or group of animals must not
use a method of management of the animal or group which
is reasonably likely to
result in unreasonable and unjustifiable pain or suffering to the animal or an
animal in the group."
the Act, the owner of an animal, a person who has control, possession or custody
of the animal, and the operator or manager
of premises where an animal is held
for commercial purposes, each have the "care or charge" of the animal, and
premises include a
interpretation of
of the Act was considered by Blow CJ in
Mitchell v Marshall
[2014] TASSC 43
27 Tas R 1.
The question before his
Honour in that case was whether
required proof of criminal negligence. He
concluded that it did not, saying at [27]:
"It should be noted that
, does not prohibit any sort of omission. It only
prohibits the use of a method of management that is reasonably likely to have
results. There is therefore no reason why cases about criminal
negligence should have any relevance to that section. By contrast,
the offences
can be constituted either by the doing of acts or by
omissions to do duties. It must be remembered that
creates a duty whereby
'A person who has the care or charge of an animal has a duty to take all
reasonable measures to ensure the
welfare of the animal.' That section does not
create an offence. It simply imposes a duty whose breach can be the subject of
prosecution under
, depending on the consequences of the
TT Line Company Pty Ltd v Burrows
[2021] TASFC 3
AJ, with whom Porter AJ agreed, said of
"54 In observing that
does not prohibit any sort
of omission, Blow CJ was simply drawing a comparison between
and the express
prohibitions contained in
which included omissions to do a duty.
His Honour made a general observation in the context of the issues before the
court concerning
the mental element of the offences. His Honour was not asked to
determine whether an omission to act could comprise a method of management
an aspect of such method. Nor was his Honour endeavouring to analyse 'method of
management' in any respect.
The decision of Blow CJ is not an authority for the proposition that an omission
to perform an act cannot be regarded as an aspect
of a method management for the
purposes of
at [93], Marshall AJ, with whom Porter AJ also agreed, said:
The argument in support of the proposed ground of appeal seeks to argue that in
Mitchell v Marshall
[2014] TASSC 43
, Blow CJ considered that
of the Act did not comprehend any omission to act, but only punished overt
acts. In my view such an approach is inconsistent with
the concept of a method
of management which may include positive acts which may be alleged to be harmful
to animals, as well as failure
to take certain actions which result in harmful
consequences to animals, and be part of one method of management. In any case I
agree with the submissions of counsel for the respondent that Blow CJ's judgment
Mitchell v Marshall
does not exclude the possibility of an omission
being part of a method of management. The question in that case concerned
there was a specific mental element attached to overt acts. The case
does not stand for the proposition that omissions cannot form
part of a method
of management and, if it did, with respect, it would have been wrongly
purporting to follow Blow CJ in
Mitchell v Marshall
, the magistrate said
in her reasons for decision at [81]-[83]:
"81 In line with, and
following His Honour's reasoning, I am satisfied the Defendant does not need to
intend, know or foresee the
likely result of the chosen method of management.
The onus is on the Prosecution to prove that the acts were voluntary and
intentional,
and there is no need to prove any other mental element. I am
satisfied that
requires the Prosecution to prove a method of management
existed, and that by act or omission, the Defendant exposed animals or an
in the group to unreasonable and unjustifiable pain and suffering.
Defendant must not use such a method of management, and by implication, this
provision is mandatory.
Consistently with Blow CJ's comments in Mitchell at
[30], it does not import a consideration of whether the measures adopted in the
method of management were reasonable or conversely unreasonable.
83 The unreasonableness in
attaches to:
1) The degree of likelihood the prohibited result will occur stemming from
the method of management employed-it has to be reasonably
likely; and
2) The degree of pain and suffering to the animal and animals in the group."
(Emphasis added.)
respect, I disagree.
I respectfully adopt the observations of Martin and Marshall AJJ in
set out above and having done so I see no reason why the words
"all reasonable measures" set out in
of the Act ought not to be taken, in
the legislative scheme of the Act, as stating the extent of the duty required by
in the case of an omission or omissions forming part of a method of
management.
imposes the duty which the law has long required before
criminal liability will lie in the case of an omission to act. If that is
in relation to
, then an accused individual or company could be criminally
convicted and fined or imprisoned for
failing to take
unreasonable or even absurd measure. (I should add that I am conscious that
reliance by the applicant on the consignor's
declaration as to the adequacy of
the ventilation inside the truck was not an omission but an act. However such
without more
, embraces, by so acting, any consequent omission
to take a particular measure.)
follows that I accept the submission of the applicant that in reaching the
findings she did on this issue, the magistrate erred
reaching the conclusion that the charge against the applicant was proved, her
Honour ought to have considered whether the applicant,
in relying in the manner
in which it did, and without more, on the consignor's written declaration as to
the adequacy of the ventilation
of the truck on which the horses were loaded,
had fulfilled its duty to take "all reasonable measures", or whether that duty
an obligation on the applicant to itself ensure that the truck's
ventilation was suitable for the horses being transported in the
circumstances
they were, and to itself ensure that the truck was fitted or designed in a way
that it had effective and appropriate
airflow for the horses. It was
substantially those failures that her Honour relied upon at [141] of her reasons
to find the charge
against the applicant had been made out. I say substantially,
because those omissions flowed, in effect, from the act of placing
sole reliance
on the consignor's declaration and her Honour found that the act and the
omissions, either individually or in combination,
resulted in unreasonable
suffering. Her Honour said:
"141 I find that TT Line's method of
management so far as it consisted of:
(a) relying on the consignor's declaration as to the adequacy of the
ventilation;
(b) failing to ensure the ventilation of TA27PF [the truck] was suitable for the
horses being transported, and fitted or designed
in a way that had effective and
appropriate airflow for the horses being transported;
(c) failing to inspect the transport and trailer unit prior to the voyage to
ensure they were individually stalled,
either individually or in combination was reasonably likely to result in
unreasonable and unjustifiable pain or suffering to 16 horses,
which travelled
across Bass Strait on the
Spirit of Tasmania 1
on 28 January 2018."
my view, in failing to consider what measures might have been taken by the
applicant in order to prevent the pain and suffering
to the horses and then
considering whether such measures were reasonable measures in all of the
circumstances, her Honour erred in
law in her application of
Act and the applicant's first ground of review succeeds.
applicant's second ground of review is that the magistrate erred in law in
failing to afford procedural fairness when she found
the charge against the
applicant proven on a ground that was not particularised in the complaint,
namely, the applicant's reliance
on the consignor's declaration as to the
adequacy of the ventilation for the horses in the truck.
magistrate observed at [68] of her reasons:
"68 Ultimately, very
little factually is in dispute in these proceedings. The question is whether
the mismanagement charge under
Animal Welfare Act
It was the Defendant's clear position that it accepts that the ventilation of
TA27PF was inadequate, that TT Line is
not guilty of the charge because it was
reasonable of it, as a non-expert, to accept the declaration of the consignor
truck driver
that the ventilation characteristics of the truck were adequate.
It is my view that it would have been more accurate for the Prosecution
alleged that TT Line's reliance on the consignor's declaration that the
consignment complied with all regulatory ventilation
and all other requirements
was part of the method of management of TT Line. However this was not
specifically referred to by either
Prosecution or Defence and I refer if
necessary, to
Justices Act 1959
and will make any appropriate
amendments to the particulars of the charge."
whilst her Honour did not amend the particulars of the charge, she found it
proven, as set out at [15] above, on particulars
that included the applicant's
reliance on the consignor's declaration.
its written submissions, the applicant submits as follows:
been a particular of the charge, the onus would have been on the prosecution to
prove beyond reasonable doubt that reliance
on the consignment note, either
individually or in combination, was reasonably likely to result in unreasonable
and unjustifiable
pain and suffering to the horses in the horse truck. The
prosecution would have presumably led evidence to that effect and the defence
would have had the opportunity to test that evidence, either through
cross-examination or through its own evidence. This would have
increased the
focus on and exploration of this issue as a particular to the charge. The
defence could have called additional expert
evidence in relation to the level of
expertise and resources required to verify the declaration by assessing the
ventilation capability
of horse trucks, noting that the prosecution called an
expert in computational fluid dynamics in order to prove its case and the
evidence of the Regulator that it did not expect the TT-Line to have that
expertise (see below). Further, the Applicant could have
called evidence about
industry standards and practice regarding reliance on consignment and passenger
declarations."
I not reached the view that I have in respect of the first of the applicant's
grounds of review, I would have held that the failure
to hear and determine an
application to amend the complaint amounted to procedural unfairness. As Martin
Smith-Towns v Tasmania
[2019] TASCCA 22
AJ agreeing) :
"86 As a matter of principle and fairness, an accused
is entitled to be informed 'of the particular act, matter or thing alleged as
the foundation of the charge' (per Dixon J in
Johnson v Miller
starting point in this process is the indictment and, specifically, the
necessary information is provided by the allegations
set out in the particulars
section of the indictment.
generally, the Crown is bound by the allegations set out in the indictment. If
the evidence departs from those allegations,
and particularly where the
allegations are as specific as those provided in the indictment under
consideration, if the Crown wishes
to press for a conviction on a basis not
encompassed by those allegations, it is incumbent upon the Crown to seek an
amendment to
those allegations.
Similarly, if a trial judge considers that
the evidence leaves open a conviction on a basis different from the allegations
in the indictment, the trial judge should raise the question of amendment
in order to provide the parties with a reasonable opportunity
submissions as to whether an amendment should be made.
" (Emphasis
given that, in my opinion, her Honour failed to correctly construe and apply
, of the Act, her failure to advise the applicant of her intention to
include its reliance on the consignor's declaration, without
more, as part of
its method of management, was at once a procedural irregularity and an
irrelevance.
my view, there is no need to further consider the second ground of review, as
assuming I am correct about the validity of the
first ground, the appeal must
succeed and there will have been no operative denial of natural justice.
applicant's third ground of review is that magistrate erred in law in finding
that the defence of honest and reasonable mistake
was not made out.
applicant's case was that it relied on the declaration signed by the consignor
which makes a number of representations, including
showing that he was aware of
and understood the animal welfare provisions contained in the
(Cth) and the applicant's conditions of Carriage of Livestock
Policy and believed that the animals to be shipped had been selected
transported according to those requirements. The conditions of carriage for
horses required that vehicles used for the transport
of horses were to provide
adequate airflow through ventilation; that vehicles which have inadequate
airflow through ventilation capability
when stationary are not be used for sea
freight; and that horse trucks are to have an opening in both front and rear or
of not less than 1.5 metres horizontally and 0.3 metres vertically.
The applicant says that these representations proved to be wrong
and that in
relying upon them it made an honest and reasonable mistake.
applicant submitted to the magistrate that the mistake was honest and reasonable
because the consignor, who was the driver of
the truck and the owner of some of
the horses, was highly experienced in caring for and transporting horses and had
used the horse
truck for many years, including nine previous uneventful trips on
Spirit of Tasmania
during the summer months. He was mistaken about
the ventilation capacity of the truck and in this situation, it was submitted it
was unreasonable to expect the applicant, a shipping company, to have known any
applicant asserts a number of errors on the part of the magistrate. They are
that she erred in finding that the applicant had
a non-delegable duty; that she
failed to apply the criminal burden of proof to the requirement that the
prosecution exclude the defence
of honest and reasonable mistake of fact and
that it in concluding that the applicant's mistake was unreasonable she failed
into account the "highly material consideration" of the consignor
– the driver of the truck – being the "primary duty
holder" under
the 15(1)(b) of the Regulations.
these three asserted errors, I am of the view that the second of them subsumes
the other two, or at least renders consideration
of them academic. Had the
magistrate approached the question of the onus of proof in an orthodox fashion,
the question of duty and
in particular its delegability, may not have been to
the forefront of her reasoning. Given that she did not, it is difficult, if
impossible, to unravel her Honour's determinative reasoning on these
This is particularly so given that her overarching error in construing
of the Act as to the fact of the relevant duty, and its content, namely, "all
reasonable measures", was the foundation on which all
of her subsequent
reasoning rested. And, as was submitted on behalf of the applicant, "the extent
of the [properly identified] duty
must at least be balanced against the
statutory scheme which explicitly places responsibility on the driver
the truck for its ventilation." Whilst I fail to see the relevance of the law as
to non-delegable duty, it is clear at least that
the applicant claims reliance
upon the consignor in performing its own legal duty.
J summarised the principle of honest and reasonable mistake in
Director of
Public Prosecutions v J S P
[2020] TASCCA 3
A mistake by an accused as to a matter of fact which,
if true, would excuse criminal responsibility for the act, may operate as a
ground of exculpation by virtue of s 14 of the Criminal Code, or pursuant to the
Proudman v Dayman
[1941] HCA 28
(1941) 67 CLR 536
Kaw Teh v The Queen
[1985] HCA 43
(1985) 157 CLR 523
[2008] HCA 25
236 CLR 440
Bell v Tasmania
In this State the 'defence' of honest and reasonable mistake applies
to the issue of consent to sexual intercourse in a charge of
[1962] TASStRp 26
[1962] Tas SR 271.
By extension, it also applies to a belief
Although mistake is commonly referred to as a defence, it is a ground of
exculpation. Once an accused person satisfies the evidentiary
onus to raise
honest and reasonable mistake, the prosecution bears the legal burden of proving
beyond reasonable doubt that the accused
person did not have an honest and
reasonable but mistaken belief
CTM v The Queen
[2008] HCA 25
Hindrum v Lane
[2014] TASFC 5." (Emphasis
closing submissions before the magistrate, the applicant relied on the principle
of honest and reasonable mistake of fact, citing,
as already noted the
declaration signed by the consignor, and also security camera footage of him
preparing to board the
Spirit of Tasmania
and providing that declaration.
That was clearly enough to raise the issue. Her Honour appears to have accepted
in her reasons at [103]-[104], her Honour said,
relevantly:
"103 There was nothing in the interview
to indicate
TT Line made any specific inquiries
as to Mr Williams' competence on the
question of ventilation, nor that it had any idea who Mr Williams was. ...
this case, nothing was done portside or during the voyage to ensure the
consignments complied with the conditions of carriage.
There is no evidence
Mr Williams was asked any questions about his competence as a carrier, or
experience carrying horses. There
is no evidence that TT Line knew anything
ventilation.
It made no independent enquiries as to whether the horses were
individually stalled in accordance with the requirements of the regulations."
(Emphasis added.)
so saying, her Honour appears to place a legal burden of proof on the applicant
and failed to address the question she ought to
have been considering, namely,
the applicant having raised the issue of honest and reasonable mistake, had it
discharged its evidential
burden and had the prosecution discharged its legal
burden of proving beyond reasonable doubt that any mistake was not honest or
not reasonable.
I do not accept the respondent's submission that it should be inferred that her
Honour approached the issue correctly. In my view
a fair reading of her Honour's
reasons does not demonstrate that she applied her mind to the question. I note
the respondent's submission
that the applicant
have had no relevant
belief at all and that if it did it may not have been a belief that would render
it innocent of the charge,
which included failures which were distinct from
reliance on the consignor's declaration. However those issues should have been
by the magistrate in the context of findings as to what measures
constituted "all reasonable measures" for the purposes of s 6 of
the Act and
then a consideration of the issue of causation and then, assuming it remained
necessary after that analysis, an orthodox
approach to the exculpatory principle
of honest and reasonable mistake.
my view, her Honour's failure to properly address the onus of proof was an error
of law. However, the question arises as to the
ultimate materiality of that
Since preparing these reasons I have had the advantage of reading the reasons
of both Martin AJ and Porter AJ in draft form. As
noted by Porter AJ at [240],
the respondent submits that it is open to find that applicant did not discharge
its evidentiary burden.
However, even if the magistrate wrongly took the view
that the applicant's burden was not discharged, that error is of no consequence
if it was nonetheless open to the magistrate to conclude that the applicant's
mistake was unreasonable. As Porter AJ points out
at [240], it would not be an
error which vitiates the decision itself:
Hindrum v Lane
[2014] TASFC 5
24 Tas R 290
For the reasons expounded by Porter AJ and summarised by his Honour at [271]
and [285], I agree that the absence of an honest and
reasonable mistake was the
only reasonable inference open to the magistrate on the whole of the
circumstances. It follows that, taken
as a whole, ground 3 must fail.
applicant's fourth and fifth grounds of review are that the magistrate erred,
first, in fact and second, in law, in determining
there was a sufficiently
significant causal connection between the double stalling of 16 of the horses
inside the truck and the risk
of the horses overheating.
noted at [15], above, the magistrate found that as well as relying on the
consignor's declaration and failing itself to ensure
the adequacy of the
ventilation and airflow inside the truck, the applicant's failure to inspect the
transport and trailer unit prior
to the voyage to ensure that the horses were
singly stalled, either individually or in combination with the other acts and or
was "reasonably likely to result in unreasonable and unjustifiable
pain or suffering" to 16 of the horses.
am satisfied that in so finding, her Honour erred in fact by not acting on the
evidence before her and not reaching a conclusion
based on her own finding of
fact on the issue.
[118]-[120] of her reasons, her Honour said:
"118 Dr Stacey's
evidence was essentially that the degree of heat stress suffered by the ponies
was a result not only of the ventilation
in the trailer but the number of ponies
in it. He stated: 'it's a combination of the total heat that's being emitted
trailer which is the number of ponies, and the restriction presented
by the window vents.' (Transcript 435.)
he ran a simulation in relation to reduce the number of ponies with a vent
configuration as it existed on 28 January 2018 it
was better. He said 'I still
wouldn't have wanted to be one of those ponies probably, but I may not have
died.' His modelling also
indicated that the larger ventilation in the
unaffected transport driven by Mr Martin, meant that it was unlikely that the
in that transport would have experienced any heat stress. He agreed that
his modelling did not include the stalls that were in place
on board the trailer
and that the barriers made no difference to the outcome.
Grull also gave evidence that the stall dividers were an open mesh design rather
than solid walls and that they allowed air to
flow through the trailer.
satisfied that whether the 18 horses were individually stalled or
double-stalled, would not have made any discernible difference
to the conditions
inside the affected truck with regard to any risk of heat stress or
asphyxiation
." (Emphasis added.)
very clear expert evidence was that, had there been additional partitions in the
truck to allow single stalling, the result would
have been the same. Indeed the
transcript of the evidence of the expert for the prosecution, Dr Stacey shows
that when asked, "[t]hat
means, does it not, that in the event that there were
barriers between each horse, the conclusions that you have reached would remain
the same?", he answered, "[s]o the barriers make no difference to the
is the question of factual causation advanced in my view by the magistrate's
postulation at [122] of her reasons, that:
"122 If TT Line had
opened the tailgate and looked into the truck before Mr Williams boarded
Spirit of Tasmania 1
, it would have seen the horses were double-stalled
and to comply with its legal obligations, presumably refused to allow TA27PF to
board the ship. Mr Williams' options would have been to offload some horses and
take two trips or potentially modify the trailer
so that 18 horses could go on
the ship individually stalled. The horses may have survived the trip or at
least been exposed to less
risk if the temperatures had been lower as they had
survived previously."
evidence was that the floor space of the truck was sufficient to allow for the
single stalling of 18 horses but that single stalling
would have made no
difference to the outcome.
4 of the amended notice to review succeeds, although in my view it is not a
vitiating error, given that the magistrate found
that the failure to ensure
single stalling of the horses was only one of three particulars which, either
individually or in combination,
established factual causation.
consideration of ground 5 becomes wholly academic as there cannot be a causal
connection in law, whatever the test for causation,
between a non-existent fact
and an event.
[130], after considering a number of authorities on the test for causation in a
case such as the one before her, the magistrate
"130 In this
case while the wording of the legislation is not identical to the WH&S
legislation, s 7 is however a risk-based offence,
and in my view the question to
be asked is whether the failure to individually stall on 28 January 2018 was
reasonably likely to
result in unreasonable and unjustifiable pain or suffering
to the horse or horses in TA27PF. Whether the words 'causation', 'nexus'
'connection' are used, I am satisfied that there was sufficient strength in the
relationship between the breach and the risk of
pain and suffering to the horses
required to found criminal liability. This is so because it requires an
assessment by reference
to the particularised measures and the relevant events
that actually occurred on that particular occasion."
or not that is correct, there was no relationship in fact between the
particularised measure of failing to single stall the
horses and their
overheating and asphyxiation. There cannot therefore have been a relevant legal
relationship. Ground 5 of the notice
to review succeeds, although as with
grounds 3 and 4, it was not a vitiating error in my view.
In the final analysis of the hearing of the alleged offence against s 7 of the
Act, the only viable particular of the offence remaining
at the end of the
prosecution case was, in my view, in substance, the assertion that the applicant
failed to carry out its own assessment
of the adequacy of the ventilation and
airflow in the horse compartment of the truck. For my part at least, I fail to
see how that
could, on any view, have been a reasonable measure to have been
required of the applicant. However ground 1 of the notice to review
related only
to a point of law and this Court was not asked, if that ground or any other
ground or combination of grounds succeeded,
to set aside any finding on fact on
the basis that it was not reasonably open to the magistrate. It may well be that
on my analysis
(and that of Porter AJ), a submission that there was no case for
the applicant to answer, if made to the magistrate, ought to have
That however, is not a basis on which this Court should order an acquittal as
opposed to a rehearing, notwithstanding
that might prove to be the outcome of
any rehearing.
Whilst it is strictly speaking unnecessary for me to do so, I should also add
that I do not regard the applicant's convictions for
transporting horses across
Bass Strait and failing to ensure that the horses were individually stalled
contrary to r 34(6) of the
Regulations as having any impact on the success or
failure of ground 3 of the amended notice to review, given my conclusion that
there was no factual or legal causal connection between the facts on which those
convictions were based and the event the subject
offence with which the
applicant was charged under s 7 of the Act.
Bell v Tasmania
[2019] TASSCA 19,
33 Tas R 95
, in considering the
question of what was required for an honest and reasonable mistake of fact to
render conduct "innocent" Brett
J said at [22] :
"22 Subsequent
common law cases have not provided support for the proposition that "innocent"
extends as far as meaning "free from
moral wrong". However, it is also apparent
that the cases have not come to grips directly with the meaning of the word
"innocent".
Does it mean innocent of any legal wrongdoing, innocent of any
wrongdoing of a criminal nature, or innocent of the crime charged?"
At [31] his Honour said:
"31 Taken to the extreme, if 'innocent'
means not guilty of any offence whatsoever, a person would not be excused from
criminal responsibility
for a serious criminal offence committed under a
mistaken belief in a state of affairs that would render him guilty only of a
regulatory breach. The proposition that an accused person can be held
criminally responsible for a serious offence, despite acting
under an honest and
reasonable belief in a state of affairs which would render him or her innocent
of that crime, notwithstanding
that another less serious crime may have been
committed, is difficult to reconcile with fundamental concepts relevant to
justice, such as the presumption of innocence."
On an appeal to the High Court in that case in
Bell v Tasmania
, the majority of the Court held that an accused person's act,
as honestly and reasonably believed by them, must render the person
innocent of
any offence
. However in that case there was no dispute that the
appellant's conduct amounted to offences against two separate sections of the
Misuse of Drugs Act
, only one of which was charged, and the other of
which was not capable of being the subject of any mistaken belief. In the
case the applicant's conduct in failing to ensure that the horses were
individually stalled amounted to an offence against r 34(6)
of the Regulations,
but absent any causal connection, either factual or legal, between that conduct
and the pain, suffering and death
of the horses, the conduct did not amount to
an offence against
of the Act. At best that conduct was asserted by the
respondent as an ill-conceived particular of such an offence.
I would allow the appeal, set aside the finding of guilt and remit the matter
for re-hearing by a different magistrate.
File No FCA 3138/2022
TT-LINE COMPANY PTY LTD (ACN 061 996 174) v RAE BURROWS
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
MARTIN AJ (Dissenting)
3 July 2023
Introduction
During the evening of 28 January 2018, 30 horses, in two transport units, were
transported from Devonport to Melbourne on the Spirit
of Tasmania, a vessel
operated by the applicant. During the journey, 16 horses died.
The applicant was charged with using a method of management with respect to the
transport of the horses that was reasonably likely
to result in unreasonable and
unjustifiable pain and suffering to the horses, contrary to
Welfare Act
(the Act). Other charges were brought alleging failure to
comply with relevant regulations of the
Animal Welfare (Land Transport of
Livestock) Regulations
(the Regulations).
The applicant pleaded not guilty to all charges. After a lengthy trial, her
Honour Magistrate Topfer found the charges proven. The
applicant seeks a review
of the finding of guilt of the offence against
, and submits that the Court
should quash that finding and find the charge not proven.
For the reasons that follow, I would allow the appeal.
The essential facts relating to the transport and deaths of the horses were not
in dispute, and the findings of the learned magistrate
in this regard are not
challenged. The learned magistrate summarised the facts:
material times TT Line operated a vessel, Spirit of Tasmania I, which
transported passengers, cargo and livestock carried
in mobile transport units
across Bass Strait between Devonport and Melbourne.
the 28 January 2018 Andrew Williams (Mr Williams) directed the loading of 30
horses onto two transport units at Barnbougle in Northern
Tasmania following
completion of a polo tournament which had been held in the preceding weeks.
total of 18 horses were loaded onto a semi-trailer/transport unit. The
semi-trailer was registered as CE96CK. The trailer was registered
('TA27PF'). The semitrailer/transport unit was registered to Mr Williams.
of the horses were loaded two per stall. This trailer, which will be referred to
as TA27PF, was driven by Mr Williams.
total of 12 horses was loaded onto another transport unit. The transport unit
was driven by Thomas Martin.
9 The horses in this second unit were
also loaded two per stall.
two units had different configurations. The unit driven by Mr Martin had a
continuous vent along the sides, front and back and
was relatively easy to see
was a converted refrigeration trailer which had been bought by Mr Justin Couper,
modified by him, and subsequently sold to
Mr Williams. On each side were six
permanently barred vents directly opposite each other at similar height. Its
configuration is
further described in paras 35-40.
Williams and Mr Martin left Barnbougle at approximately 4 pm and drove their
respective transports to the port of Devonport to
board Spirit of Tasmania
arrived at Devonport at approximately 7:08 pm. Both Mr Williams and Mr Martin
completed declarations relating to their consignment
of horses, which was
required by the Defendant. The documents were given to the Defendant.
vehicles were loaded onto deck 3 of Spirit of Tasmania I. Both Mr Williams and
Mr Martin left their transport units and proceeded
to the passenger decks.
of carriage by the Defendant did not permit inspection by passengers of animals
on the vehicle decks of the Spirit of Tasmania
I during a voyage, pursuant to
the requirements of Chapter II-I Part B – 4 Regulation 23(3) and 23(6) of
International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea
(SOLAS) which
is given effect to in Australia through the general regulation making power
Navigation Act
(Cth) by Marine Order 12.
of Tasmania I departed Devonport at approximately 7:40 pm and arrived at
Melbourne at 5:40 am the following morning, the 29
January 2018.
arrival at Port Melbourne Mr Williams and Mr Martin returned to their respective
transport units. They left the ship and the port
complex at approximately 5:59
am bound for Yarra Glen, Victoria, where the horses were intended to be rested
at a property belonging
to Mr Simon Wincer. They did not inspect the horses
until they reached Yarra Glen. They arrived at Yarra Glen at approximately 7:15
arriving and opening of TA27PF it was discovered that 16 of the 18 horses had
died. They had been double stalled.
two surviving horses were single stalled and were closest to the access ramp at
the rear of the trailer.
20 The 12 horses in the unit driven by Mr
Martin were unaffected.
carcasses of the 16 horses in TA27PF were taken by Mr Williams to Charles Sturt
University at Wagga Wagga for post mortem examination.
surviving horses were unloaded into the paddock on the Yarra Glen property.
was no issue with respect to ventilation on deck 3 of the Spirit of Tasmania I
and the ventilation fans operated as required
under SOLAS.
rounds of the vehicle deck where the horses were located were undertaken five
times during the voyage between 19:05 pm
and 2:00 am on the 28-29 January
had been used to transport horses across Bass Strait between 2014 and 2018 on
nine previous occasions.
trips always took place in December or January and there were no reported
incidents in relation to any journeys of TA27PF prior
to the 28 January
Death of the horses
of the deceased horses were examined by the veterinary pathologist, Associate
Professor Shane Raidal, together with his colleagues
at Charles Sturt
University.
preliminary investigations showed all 16 horses had very similar gross findings,
so he chose three horses to do a more comprehensive
post-mortem. The three
necropsy reports were tendered by consent.
uncontroversial findings of Associate Professor Raidal were that the gross and
histological findings of the three horses were
consistent with sudden death due
to peracute respiratory failure. He proceeded on the basis of high environmental
temperatures during
transit which were likely to have increased respiratory
demand and effort immediately prior to death. He put the most likely time
death at a minimum of 12 hours and a maximum of 24 hours prior to post-mortem,
which was conducted between 2pm and 4pm on the
29 January 2018.
other cause of death was able to be identified or was consistent with the
circumstances.
horses were alive when they were transported onto the ship and accordingly the
evidence established that the horses died whilst
being transported across Bass
Debra Grull was a veterinary officer with Biosecurity Tasmania, a division of
the Department of Natural Resources and Environment
Tasmania. She was an
experienced vet and I am satisfied also had considerable expertise in relation
to horse transportation. She
was appointed an inspector within the meaning of s
8 of the Animal Health Act 1995 and an officer within the meaning of
Animal Welfare Act 1993
. She was assigned to investigate the case.
gave evidence that she agreed with the conclusion that the cause of the horses'
death was peracute respiratory failure because:
'Based on the
environmental conditions that the horses were in, and ruling out the cause of
infectious disease, ruling out presence
of a toxin, observing the differences
between the affected and unaffected horse transport, it appeared to me that the
horses suffocated
in transport (page 327 of transcript)
The magistrate dealt in detail with the measurements and ventilation of the
transport units, and a simulation undertaken to assess
the ventilation. In a
finding not challenged by the applicant, her Honour found that the ventilation
of the unit in which the horses
died was inadequate.
finding the charge proven, the magistrate expressed her ultimate
conclusions:
I am not satisfied that the aspect of TT Line's method of management so far as
it involved a failure to inspect the horses
either by the passengers or TT Line
during the voyage exposed the horses to any further risk of pain and suffering.
There is insufficient
evidence that it would have made any difference to the
outcome. Dr Grull spoke of the signs a horse may exhibit under heat stress
have no detail of when or indeed if the signs would necessarily have been
exhibited by the horses.
141 I find that TT Line's method of
management so far as it consisted of:
a) relying on the consignor's declaration as to the adequacy of the
ventilation;
b) failing to ensure the ventilation of TA27PF was suitable for the horses
being transported, and fitted or designed in a way that
had effective and
appropriate airflow for the horses being transported;
c) failing to inspect the transport and trailer unit prior to the voyage to
ensure they were individually stalled,
either individually or in combination was reasonably likely to result in
unreasonable and unjustifiable pain or suffering to 16 horses,
which travelled
across Bass Strait on the Spirit of Tasmania 1 on 28 January 2018.
make that finding in the context of a warm evening where there was a clearly
inadequately ventilated transport unit, stationary
for 10 hours on the Spirit of
Tasmania 1, where there were too many horses in the unit and 16 horses were
exposed to the risk of
acute heat stress and asphyxiation and died from peracute
respiratory failure.
Accordingly
I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that TT Line is guilty of the
mismanagement charge, as amended."
In addition to those essential findings, the magistrate found that although the
"defence" of honest and reasonable mistake of fact
was available in respect of
an offence against
, the applicant had failed to make out a basis for the
application of that principle.
Grounds of appeal
The notice of review contained five grounds upon which the applicant
(1) The learned magistrate erred in law in determining the
elements of an offence under section 7 of the Animal Welfare Act 1993 (Act)
finding that it was not an element of the offence that where the alleged method
of management includes an omission to take a measure,
that it was a reasonable
1 against the Applicant alleged that it had committed an offence under section 7
of the Act by using a method of management
that involved the omission to take
certain measures. This included omitting to ensure the horses were double
stalled and omitting
to ensure the vehicle being used to transport the horses
was suitable for the horses being transported and had effective and appropriate
airflow for the horses being transported.
6 of the Act states that a person who has the care or charge of an animal has a
duty to take all reasonable measures to ensure
the welfare of the animal.
learned magistrate found that it was not an element of the offence that, where
the charge alleges the offence was committed by
way of a method of management
that involved an omission to take a measure, that the omitted measure was a
reasonable measure: [81–82].
(2) The learned magistrate erred
in law in failing to afford the Applicant procedural fairness.
learned magistrate found charge 1 proven on a basis that was not particularised
in the charge.
learned magistrate observed that the prosecution did not particularise in charge
1 that the Applicant's reliance on the consignor's
declaration was part of the
method of management of the applicant: [68].
learned magistrate referred to
Justices Act 1959
as permitting
the Court to amend the particulars of the charge: [68].
learned magistrate did not amend the particulars of the charge.
learned magistrate found the charge proven on particulars that included the
Applicant's reliance on the consignor's declaration
and, in doing so, found the
Applicant guilty of the charge in a way that was not particularised in the
charge: [141].
(3) The learned magistrate erred in law in finding
that the defence of honest and reasonable mistake was not made out.
learned magistrate erred in finding that TT-Line had a non-delegable duty:
learned magistrate failed to apply the criminal burden of proof to the
requirement that the prosecution exclude the defence of
honest and reasonable
mistake of fact.
was not open to the learned magistrate to conclude that the applicant's mistake
was unreasonable.
(4) The learned magistrate erred in fact in
determining there was a sufficiently significant causal connection between
double stalling
and the risk of the horses overheating.
evidence before the learned magistrate did not establish, beyond reasonable
doubt, that the double stalling of the animals was
reasonably likely to result
in unreasonable and unjustifiable pain or suffering to the
(5) The learned magistrate erred in law in finding that
there was a sufficiently significant causal connection between double stalling
and the risk of unreasonable and unjustifiable pain or suffering to the
learned magistrate erred in failing to apply the criminal standard of proof -
beyond reasonable doubt- in relation to factual
findings regarding the impact
that double or single stalling would have had on the likelihood of unreasonable
or unjustifiable pain
or suffering.
learned magistrate erred in determining the legal test of causation to be
In summary, the written submissions of the applicant advanced the following
propositions:
Section 7 of the
Act should be interpreted in light of s 6 which creates a duty owed by a person
who has care or charge of an animal
to take "all reasonable measures to ensure
the welfare of the animal". Where the prosecution alleges a failure to take a
the prosecution "is required to establish, as an element of the
offence, that the measure is a reasonable measure".
This approach is
in keeping with the duty found in s 6 and with the "accepted legal principle
that criminal liability for an omission
to act should only apply where there is
a legal duty to act".
The particulars
provided by the prosecution referred to the s 6 duty as relevant to ensuring
that the horses were individually stalled
and that the transport unit provided
effective and appropriate airflow. However, having particularised the s 6 duty
in this way,
the prosecution sought to argue that the s 6 duty did not apply to
a charge under s 7, and was only relevant to ss 8 and 9. "There
is nothing in
the Act that limits the applicability of the duty found in s 6 to only ss 8 and
It follows from
the decision of the Full Court in
TT-Line Company Pty Ltd v Burrows
[2021] TASFC 3
that the proposition of Blow CJ in
Mitchell v Marshall
[2014] TASSC 43
that the s 6 duty did not apply to a s 7 offence should not
be followed.
The magistrate
erred in law in relying upon the decision of Blow CJ and "failed to see that
Blow CJ's decision was premised on a case
'when a defendant was charged on the
basis of a positive fact'".
As a result of
the error, the magistrate did not consider whether the prosecution had proved
that the measures alleged were "reasonable".
There was no consideration of why
the applicant should have assessed the ventilation of the horse truck,
particularly in view of
reg 15(1)(b) of the Regulations which "squarely casts
the obligation to ensure the adequate ventilation of the truck on the driver
the truck."
There was no
consideration of how the applicant "should have assessed the truck's ventilation
and whether such a measure was reasonable",
particularly in the absence of any
Australian standards, guidance in legislation or regulations and research as to
the requirements
for adequate ventilation. In addition, the truck had
previously taken nine uneventful trips during the summer months.
Further, 12
months after the deaths of the horses, the Regulator endorsed the applicant's
existing specifications with respect to
ventilation and accepted that the
applicant did not possess the expertise to assess the ventilation of horse
respondent submitted that s 6 creates a "general duty", not an offence. The
observation was made that ss 8(1) and 9 refer to
breaches of duty, but s 7 does
not contain reference to a breach of duty.
these circumstances, the respondent argued there is no basis for importing a
duty to act in a particular way into the offence
created by s 7. "Proof of the
offence requires an analysis of what the method of management was and whether it
gave rise to the
relevant risk to the animal; it does not give rise to broader
considerations of duties owed." Further, "An omission to act is simply
particular of the method of management and is not dependent upon proof of a
distinct legal duty to act."
respondent also contended that the question of reasonableness "attaches to the
consequences of the method of management." The
words "unreasonable and
unjustifiable" are used only "to describe a degree of pain or suffering" that
the prosecution must prove
in order to establish an offence against s 7. Those
words do not refer to the act or omission comprising the method of
management.
these circumstances, the respondent contended that there was no occasion for the
magistrate to consider whether the applicant
should have assessed the adequacy
of the ventilation, or whether such a measure was reasonable or otherwise. "All
that was required
was an assessment of whether the method of management that was
employed ... was one which was reasonably likely to result in unreasonable
unjustifiable pain and suffering ...".
her reasons the magistrate correctly identified the point that is now the
subject of the applicant's first ground. Her Honour
referred to ss 6 and 7, and
to the applicant's contention that where the alleged method of management is
alleged to have omitted
a measure, such measure must be a reasonable measure.
After discussing the decisions of Blow CJ in
Mitchell v Marshall
and the Full Court in
TT-Line Company Pty Ltd v Burrows
(above), her
Honour found:
"[81] In line with, and following His Honour's
reasoning, I am satisfied the Defendant does not need to intend, know or foresee
likely result of the chosen method of management. The onus is on the
Prosecution to prove that the acts were voluntary and intentional,
and there is
no need to prove any other mental element. I am satisfied that s 7 requires the
Prosecution to prove a method of management
existed, and that by act or
omission, the Defendant exposed animals or an animal in the group to
unreasonable and unjustifiable pain
and suffering.
[82] The Defendant must not use such a method management, and by implication,
this provision is mandatory. Consistently with Blow
CJ's comments in
at [30], [s 7] does not import a consideration of whether the
measures adopted in the method of management were reasonable or conversely
unreasonable".
to the concept of "unreasonable", the magistrate found:
unreasonableness in s 7 attaches to:
degree of likelihood the prohibited result will occur stemming from the method
of management employed – it has to be reasonably
likely; and
degree of pain and suffering to the animal and animals in the group."
arriving at her decision, the magistrate rejected a submission by the applicant
that she should not follow the decision of Blow
. In her Honour's view the question before Blow CJ was whether s 7
required proof of criminal negligence, and his Honour "was not
asked to consider
whether civil negligence, based on the duty of care set out in s 6,
7 operates in the context of the Act, the purpose of which is described in the
long title as "to prevent neglect of, and
cruelty to, animals, to ensure the
welfare of animals, to repeal the
Cruelty To Animals Prevention Act
and for related purposes." At the forefront of the Act is Part 2 headed
"Welfare of Animals", which begins with s 6 creating
a general duty of care to
animals. Section 6 is followed by a number of provisions directed to
prohibiting specific treatment of
animals, including ss 7, 8 and
6 Duty of care to animals
A person who has the care or charge of an animal has a duty to take all
reasonable measures to ensure the welfare of the animal.
7 Management of animals
A person who has the care or charge of an animal or group of animals must not
use a method of management of the animal or group which
is reasonably likely to
result in unreasonable and unjustifiable pain or suffering to the animal or an
animal in the group.
Penalty: In the case of –
(a) a body corporate, a fine not exceeding
1 000 penalty units; or
(b) a natural person, a fine not exceeding 200
penalty units or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months, or both.
8 Cruelty to animals
(1) A person must not do any act,
or omit to do
, which causes or is likely to cause unreasonable and unjustifiable
pain or suffering to an animal.
Penalty: In the case of –
(a) a body corporate, a fine not exceeding
500 penalty units; or
(b) a natural person, a fine not exceeding 100
penalty units or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months, or both.
(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection
(1), a person is guilty of an offence under that subsection if the person
(a) wounds, mutilates, tortures, overrides,
overdrives, overworks, abuses, beats, torments or terrifies an animal; or
(b) overloads or overcrowds an animal; or
(c) drives, conveys, carries or packs an animal in
a manner or position or in circumstances that subjects or may subject it to
unreasonable
and unjustifiable pain or suffering; or
(d) works, rides, drives or uses an animal when it
is unfit for the purpose; or
(e) has possession or custody of an animal that is
confined, constrained or otherwise unable to provide for itself and fails to
the animal with appropriate and sufficient food, drink, shelter or
exercise; or
(f) abandons an animal of a species usually kept in
a state of confinement or for domestic purposes; or
(g) has possession or custody of a sick or injured
animal and fails to provide veterinary or other appropriate treatment for the
(h) administers to or otherwise uses in respect of
an animal an injurious drug or a toxic or noxious substance except for–
(i) medical curative purposes; or
(ii) scientific research purposes; or
(iii) normal management procedures; or
(iv) euthanasia; or
(v) the purposes of controlling a List A
disease as defined in the
Animal Health Act
(vi) the purposes of controlling a pest animal
in accordance with the pest register; or
(i) in the course of any sport or public
performance or in the training for any sport or public performance, applies or
electronic device to an animal; or
(j) uses a spur, or other like appliance, with
sharpened rowels on an animal; or
(ja) uses a pronged collar, or a similar
collar, on an animal; or
(k) does any other prescribed act.
9 Aggravated cruelty
(1) A person must not do any act,
or omit to do
, referred to in section 8, if the person knows that, or is reckless
as to whether, the act or omission will, or is reasonably likely
(a) the death, deformity or serious disablement
of an animal; or
(b) harm to an animal that endangers the life of
the animal; or
(c) an injury to an animal that, either alone or in
combination with the health of the animal at the time of the injury, results in
a significant and longstanding injury to the animal.
Penalty: In the case of –
(a) a body corporate, a fine not exceeding
1000 penalty units; or
(b) a natural person, a fine not exceeding 200
penalty units or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 months, or both.
(2) It is not a defence in proceedings for an
offence under this section if an animal is euthanised before –
(a) the animal dies as a result of an act or
omission referred to in subsection (1); or
(b) the full extent of the deformity, disablement,
harm or injury to the animal as a result of that act or omission is known.
(3) If a person is charged with, but not found
guilty of, an offence under this section, the person may be convicted of an
under section 8 if the evidence in the proceedings on the charge under
section 9 establishes that the person committed an offence
under section 8." (My
10 of the Act is concerned with the baiting and shooting of animals, and s 11 is
directed to the use of animals for the purpose
of training other animals. Rodeos
are dealt with in s 11A, and the trapping of animals by leg hold trap, glue
board trap or snare
is prohibited by s 13 unless the Minister grants an
Mitchell v Marshall,
Blow CJ was concerned with alleged contraventions of
ss 7, 8 and 9 of the Act, and whether the magistrate had been correct in
determining
that the offences were offences of strict liability in respect of
which prosecution was not required to prove a particular state
of mind (unless
the issue of honest and reasonable mistake of fact was raised). In finding that
the magistrate was correct, Blow
CJ made the following
observations:
"27 It should be noted that s 7, unlike ss 8(1) and 9,
does not prohibit any sort of omission. It only prohibits the use of a method
management that is reasonably likely to have certain results. There is therefore
no reason why cases about criminal negligence
should have any relevance to that
section. By contrast, the offences created by ss 8(1) and 9 can be constituted
either by the doing
of acts or by omissions to do duties. It must be remembered
that s 6 creates a duty whereby 'A person who has the care or charge
animal has a duty to take all reasonable measures to ensure the welfare of the
animal.' That section does not create an offence.
It simply imposes a duty
whose breach can be the subject of a prosecution under s 8(1) or 9, depending on
the consequences of the
long title to the
Animal Welfare Act
is, 'An Act to prevent neglect of,
and cruelty to, animals, to ensure the welfare of animals, to repeal the
Cruelty to Animals Prevention Act 1925
and for related purposes'.
the relevant second reading speech (House of Assembly, 19 May 1993) the then
Minister for Primary Industry and Fisheries, Mr Gray,
'The Animal Welfare Bill has been prepared to replace the
Cruelty to Animals Prevention Act
which was introduced nearly seventy
years ago. Community attitudes have changed significantly in that time to the
extent that modern
legislation needs not only to provide the means of preventing
cruelty but also to ensure that animals are treated with consideration
The motivation to give the replacement of the
Cruelty to Animals
Prevention Ac
t the highest priority possible arose in 1989, as a direct
result of the discovery of 107 diseased and starving dogs in cages near
Norfolk. It was one of the worst cases of animal cruelty in recent years and the
old act was totally inadequate to ensure that
proper penalties were applied.
The bill has been developed after extensive community consultation and with
formal representation of community groups via the Animal
Welfare Advisory
The bill preserves the basic provisions of the
Cruelty to Animals
Prevention Act
but adds many new features:
A 'duty of care' for the welfare of animals is imposed on animal keepers and
is an indicator of the philosophy behind the bill.
A managerial method 'reasonably likely' to result in cruelty, can be brought
to court without waiting for the inevitable cruelty to
Cruelty resulting in death or serious disablement of an animal is regarded as
'aggravated cruelty' and attracts heavy penalties.
Powers are provided to authorised persons to take possession of and care for
animals which are at risk of serious, ongoing cruelty
and a court may disqualify
a person convicted of animal cruelty from the right to keep animals.
Throughout this speech I will refer often to community attitudes and
standards. As much as possible, the bill avoids provisions which
difficult to modify in line with future changes in community norms. The emphasis
is on flexible, dynamic legislation which
can move with the times. One example
of this is the definition of cruelty itself.
Many practices clearly constitute cruelty and the bill makes reference to a
wide range of these. However there will always be a degree
of subjectivity in
assessment of particular incidents and under this act courts will often have the
opportunity to rule on the basis
of their view of current community attitudes
and standards.'
provision referred to by the Minister as imposing a duty of care is now
Animal Welfare Act
, to which I have referred.
of the provisions in question imposes a prohibition.
prohibition on the use of any method of management that is reasonably likely to
have certain results.
Sections 8(1)
each prohibit both the doing of acts,
and omitting to do duties. None of the relevant prohibitions are qualified by
adverbs which
refer to an offender's state of mind, such as 'knowingly',
'intentionally' or 'wilfully'. The absence of any such adverbs is not
conclusive, but tends to weigh against the applicability of the common law
presumption that
is an ingredient of every offence.
of the relevant prohibitions is imposed by the use of the words 'must not'.
These provisions were enacted before the introduction
of s 10A of the
Interpretation Act
, which requires the word 'must' in subsequent legislation
to be treated as imposing a mandatory requirement. However the use of the
'must not' in the relevant sections still tends to indicate that each relevant
prohibition applies even in the absence of a
guilty mind.
should also be noted that the words 'unreasonable and unjustifiable' in ss 7 and
8(1) are used only to describe the degree of pain
or suffering that is necessary
for an offence to have been committed. They do not refer to the act or omission
of an offender or
alleged offender. The duty imposed by s6 is a duty 'to take
all reasonable measures'. But there is nothing in the legislation to
that, when a defendant is charged on the basis of a positive act, the
prosecution needs to prove that the act was unreasonable
or unjustifiable.
one gives the words of s 7 their ordinary meaning, it would appear that the
prosecution needs to prove (1) that the defendant had
the care or charge of an
animal or group of animals; (2) that the defendant used a method of management
of the animal or group; (3)
that that method of management was reasonably likely
to result in pain or suffering to the animal or an animal in the group; and
that that likely pain or suffering was unreasonable or unjustifiable. No doubt
the prosecution would need to prove beyond reasonable
doubt that the second of
those elements – the use of a method of management – was voluntary
and intentional. However
there is nothing in the wording of the section to
suggest that the prosecution would need to prove beyond reasonable doubt that
defendant intended, knew or foresaw the likely result of the use of the
chosen method of management.
one similarly analyses s 8(1), it would appear that the prosecution would need
to prove (1) that the defendant either did an act
or omitted to do a duty; (2)
that that act or omission caused or was likely to cause pain or suffering to an
animal; and (3) that
that pain or suffering was unreasonable and unjustifiable.
If the defendant were charged with doing an act, the prosecution would
have to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the act was voluntary and
intentional. If the defendant was charged on the basis
of an omission, there is
nothing in the subsection to suggest that the prosecution would need to prove
beyond reasonable doubt that
the defendant knew he or she had a duty, or that he
or she knew that he or she was omitting to perform that duty. And there is
in the subsection to suggest that the prosecution would need to prove
beyond reasonable doubt that the defendant intended, knew or
foresaw the results
or likely results of his or her act or omission.
the words of s 9 suggest that, to prove a contravention of that section, a
prosecutor would need only to prove (1) that
the defendant did an act or omitted
to do a duty, and (2) that the act or omission resulted in the death or serious
disablement of
an animal. Once again, there is nothing in the section to suggest
that the prosecutor would need to prove awareness of the duty on
the defendant's
part, consciousness of omitting to do the duty, intention, knowledge or
foresight."
to the observation by Blow CJ that, unlike ss 8 and 9, s 7 "does not prohibit
any sort of omission", in
TT-Line Company Pty Ltd v Burrows
Court found that his Honour was drawing a comparison between s 7 and the express
prohibitions in ss 8 and 9 which included
omissions to fulfill a duty. It was a
general observation in the context of the issues before the Court, and his
Honour was not
determining whether an omission to act could comprise a method of
management, or be an aspect of such method, for the purposes of
should also be noted in identifying the elements to be proved on a prosecution
under s 7, Blow CJ had not been asked to consider
the point now being made by
the applicant that if the prosecution was based on an omission in the method of
management, it was necessary
for the prosecution to prove that the omitted
measure was a "reasonable measure". That issue simply did not arise for
consideration.
this issue was not the subject of consideration by the Full Court in
Pty Ltd v Burrows.
The Full Court was concerned with the particulars relied
upon by the prosecution and the issue of duplicity. However, the Court
considered the operation of s 7 in the context of the statutory scheme. In a
judgment with which Porter AJ generally agreed, I said:
"38 Section
7 is to be considered in the context of the statutory scheme. The Act is
concerned with ensuring the welfare of animals,
and s 6 imposes on a person who
has the care or charge of an animal a duty 'to take all reasonable measures to
ensure the welfare
of the animal'.
7 is directed specifically at the manner in which a person, who has the care or
charge of an animal or group of animals, manages
those animals. Section 7 is
concerned with 'a method of management' used by the person in charge of the
8(1) contains a prohibition against doing any act, or omitting to do any duty,
which causes or is likely to cause unreasonable
and unjustifiable pain or
suffering to an animal. Section 8(2) identifies specific acts which will offend
against s 8(1).
7 prohibits the use of 'a method of management' which is reasonably likely to
bring about a particular result, namely, 'unreasonable
and unjustifiable pain or
suffering' to an animal. However, s 7 does not identify any aspect of the method
of management which is
prohibited; nor does s 7 identify any form or manner of
management, or any aspect of management, relevant to the question to be
determined.
The method of management used is a question of fact to be determined
by the magistrate. Once the facts of the method of management
are determined,
the magistrate is in a position to address the question whether the method of
management was reasonably likely to
bring about the prohibited result."
AJ emphasised that the conduct in issue was the "use" of a particular method of
management which might involve a number of
aspects capable of contravening other
provisions of the Act or Regulations:
Animal Welfare Act
is concerned with the
of a method of
management reasonably likely to bring about a particular result. The proscribed
act or conduct is that of
such a method of management. The conduct
alleged is the use of a certain method of management on the particular occasion.
The incident
of use is unambiguously identified by date, voyage, vessel and
truck/trailer unit. The controversial particulars set out in the complaint,
the plethora of further particulars, go to the
method of management
Martin AJ has said, a method of management will almost inevitably have different
features or aspects, and be likely to encompass
a period of time.
appellant submitted that each individual particular would amount to an offence
if it was reasonably likely to result in unreasonable
and unjustifiable pain or
suffering. That submission must be rejected. It may well be that one
particularised aspect of the method
of management
the subject of
a charge of using a method of management under
, but to say that each feature
or aspect must necessarily be the subject of a separate charge is to adopt an
unrealistic and unnecessarily
restrictive construction of the provision. It
would impose a high degree of artificiality. The 'use of a method of management'
to be construed as 'one activity':
Walsh v Tattersall
aspects of the method of management might fall foul of other provisions of the
Act or of regulations but that is of no consequence.
The references in the
further particulars to relevant regulations are merely descriptive of what is
alleged. The exercise could have
been easily done by way of setting out the
thrust of the particular regulation, without express reference to it."
applicant relied upon the general legal principle that "there can be no criminal
liability for an omission unless the alleged
conduct constitutes a failure to
perform a legal obligation".
general principle is not in dispute. The critical question is whether the
applicant is correct in its submission that the
general duty imposed by s 6 is
imported into s 7 such that the duty defined in s 6 applies to the method of
management under consideration
pursuant to s 7. In particular, the applicant
urged that when the method of management involves an omission to act, if s 6 is
imported into the operation of s 7, a person might be convicted on the basis
of an omission to take an unreasonable measure as part
of the method of
management.
Poniatowska
, the Commonwealth legislation under consideration concerned a
charge of engaging in conduct and, as a result of that conduct, obtaining
advantage that the defendant knew or believed she was not eligible to receive.
The definition of "engaging in conduct" included
doing an act or omitting to
perform an act. The issue was whether the omission to perform an act could form
a physical element of
the offence if the person was not under a legal obligation
to perform the act.
the High Court, the majority observed that under the law of the Commonwealth,
"the omission to perform an act cannot be a physical
element of an offence
unless the law creating the offence makes it so, expressly or impliedly, in the
manner provided by s 4.3 [of
Commonwealth Criminal Code
]" [32]. The
reasons continued with the observation that the
Criminal Code
"more restrictive approach to liability for the omission to act than does the
common law".
critical context is the statutory scheme and the wording of the section creating
the offence, namely, s 7. As to the immediate
context of s 7, s 6 does not
create an offence. It establishes a general duty of care on the part of a
person who has the care or
charge of an animal. Such duty of care has a role to
play with respect to offences against ss 8(1) and 9(1). Those sections
specifically
provide that a person must not "omit to do any duty" which causes
or is likely to cause unreasonable and unjustifiable pain or suffering
animal. In the context of the Act, plainly the duty imposed by s 6 is
encompassed by the specific reference to omitting to
do any duty found in ss
8(1) and 9(1).
way of contrast, s 7 is not expressed in terms of breaching a particular duty.
Section 7 does not create an offence of omitting
to do an act or perform a duty.
The point made by Porter AJ is important in this regard; at the heart of s 7 is
a prohibition against
the "use" of a prohibited method of management. The
prohibition is against the use of a method of management which is "reasonably
likely to result in unreasonable and unjustifiable pain or suffering" to an
animal. Liability is created on the basis of a positive
act, namely, the use of
a prohibited method of management. It is not to the point that the prohibited
method of management might
involve an omission to act. The content of the legal
duty is found in s 7, not in s 6.
these principles to the circumstances under consideration, and s 7 necessarily
drawing attention to the method of management,
although the prosecution led
evidence concerning a number of aspects of the management, at the heart of the
case were two features:
applicant allowed the horses to be brought on board, and transported, without
checking the adequacy of the ventilation and without
failing to ensure that the
ventilation was suitable and fitted and designed in a way that provided
effective and appropriate airflow
for the horses.
applicant allowed the horses to be brought on board, and transported, without
inspecting the trailer unit in which the horses
were stored to ensure that they
were individually stalled.
aside the impugned particular discussed later in these reasons, those two
particulars of the method of management were found
proven by the magistrate who
held that either individually, or in combination, they resulted in the method of
management being reasonably
likely to bring about the prohibited result. The
criminal liability does not attach to the individual omissions by way of an
to omit to do an act or perform a duty. The prohibited conduct is the
use of the method of management reasonably likely to bring
result, and the omissions comprised aspects of the method of management which
the prosecution alleged caused
the method of management to breach s 7.
to the contention that unless the general duty of care in s 6 to take
"reasonable" measures is incorporated into the operation
of s 7 an absurd result
is likely to follow, because a person could be convicted on the basis of
omitting to carry out an unreasonable
measure as part of the method of
management, it should not be overlooked that the prohibition is against using a
method of management
which is "reasonably" likely to bring about the prohibited
result. The "omission" of a particular measure from the method of management
will not offend against s 7 unless that omission causes the method of management
to be a method which is "reasonably" likely to cause
the prohibited result. In
any event, if an absurd result can be conjured up, it is not determinative of
the interpretation of the
statute according to the ordinary and natural meaning
of the words used.
these reasons, in my view the ruling of the magistrate was correct and ground 1
of the application is not made out.
2 is a complaint that the magistrate found the first charge proven on a basis
not particularised in the charge.
history of particulars by the prosecution in respect of the charge of a breach
of s 7 is somewhat tortured and it is unnecessary
to canvas it. Ultimately, the
particulars of the charge were as follows:
BURROWS v TT LINE
COMPANY PTY LTD
Complaint 90840/2019
IN RESPECT OF THE PARTICULARS OF CHARGE 1 (AMENDED)
TT Line Company Pty Ltd, on or about 28 January 2018 at Devonport in
Tasmania, was a person who had care or charge of a group of animals
horses, and used a method of management, namely the transport of 18 horses in a
transport and trailer unit registration CE96CK
(with trailer unit TA27PF) from
Devonport to Melbourne in Victoria (via the vessel
Spirit of Tasmania 1
that was reasonably likely to have resulted in unreasonable and unjustifiable
pain or suffering to the animal or animals in the
group, namely that the 18
horses in the transport and trailer unit referred to were exposed to the risk of
acute heat stress and
asphyxiation due to suffocation in the confined space of
the transport and trailer unit, and such exposure was not identified or
considered as a result of failing to inspect the horses during the voyage
CONTRARY TO
section 7(1)
Animal Welfare Act 1993
particulars of the method of management used being set out below:
FURTHER PARTICULARS
(a) The method of management used by the defendant was:
(i) in receiving the horses for transport, not permitting the inspection of the
horses during the voyage by passenger(s) accompanying
the animals; and
(ii) the defendant, either prior to or during the voyage or both, not adequately
inspecting the transport and trailer unit, or the
horses contained therein;
the defendant, either prior to or during the voyage or both, not
ensuring that the horses were transported or packed in a manner that
with the requirements of the
Animal Welfare (Land Transport of
Regulations 2013
and as a result, either individually or in combination thereof, that method
of management was reasonably likely to have resulted in
unreasonable and
unjustifiable pain or suffering to the animal or animals in the group as
particularised above."
and better particulars were also provided by the prosecution which the
magistrate summarised in identifying the method of
management relied upon by the
prosecution:
"64 In considering whether there has been a breach of
Animal Welfare Act
the first issue to consider is what was the
method of management? The method of management alleged by the Prosecution was
the transport
of TA27PF containing the 18 horses across Bass Strait on
of Tasmania
I in the following circumstances:
receiving the horses for transport, not permitting the inspection of the horses
during the voyage by passenger(s) accompanying
the animals; and
to or during the voyage, or both, not adequately inspecting the transport and
trailer unit or the horses contained therein to
assess whether they were
individually stalled; and
or during the voyage, or both, not ensuring that the horses were transported or
packed in a manner that complied with the requirements
Animal Welfare
(Land Transport of
Livestock) Regulations
ensuring that the horses were individually stalled; and
(2) Ensuring that the vehicle being used to transport the horses was:
(1) Suitable for horses being transported; and
(2) Fitted or designed in a way that it had effective and appropriate airflow
for the horses being transported.
was alleged in respect to the third aspect of the method of management that the
horses should have been packed (or re-packed) during
the transportation in the
following manner:
1) Not more than 11 horses ought to have been
packed into the transporting trailer unit for the voyage across Bass Strait for
and trailer unit TA27PF for the voyage across Bass Strait; and
that were transported across Bass Strait in that transport and trailer unit
ought to have been individually stalled."
observing that the prosecution case was based on the "entirety of the method of
management, which included various aspects",
the magistrate referred to the
applicant's case that it was not guilty of the charge "because it was reasonable
of it, as a non-expert,
to accept the declaration of the consignor truck driver
that the ventilation characteristics of the truck were adequate". Her Honour's
reasons continued:
"[68] ... It is my view that it would have been
more accurate for the Prosecution to have alleged that TT Line's reliance on the
consignor's
declaration that the consignment complied with all regulatory
ventilation and all other requirements was part of the method of management
TT Line. However this was not specifically referred to by either Prosecution or
Defence and I refer if necessary, to
Justices Act
will make any appropriate amendments to the particulars of the charge."
is common ground that reliance on the consignor's declaration as to the adequacy
of the ventilation did not explicitly form part
of the particulars provided by
the prosecution. It is also common ground that no submissions were invited with
respect to amending
the particulars, and the magistrate did not make any order
with respect to such an amendment. In addition, her Honour did not discuss
submissions or evidence concerning such reliance.
discussed earlier in these reasons [7], ultimately the magistrate was not
satisfied that the failure to inspect the horses was
part of the method of
management reasonably likely to bring about the prohibited result. In her
Honour's view there was insufficient
evidence that such an inspection would have
made any difference to the outcome.
magistrate found that reliance on the consignor's declaration as to the adequacy
of the ventilation was one of three aspects
of the method of management which
either individually, or in combination, proved that the method of management was
reasonably likely
to have resulted in unreasonable and unjustifiable pain or
suffering to the horses. However, as the respondent explained in written
submissions, evidence concerning reliance on the consignor's declaration was not
led to establish that such reliance was part of
the method of management. Such
evidence was led to prove the second and third particulars of the method of
management, namely, failing
to ensure the ventilation was suitable and
effective, and failing to inspect the transport and trailer unit prior to the
ensure the horses were individually stalled. The prosecution led the
evidence of reliance on the declaration as relevant to explain
how and why the
applicant failed to ensure appropriate ventilation and failed to carry out an
inspection to ensure the horses were
individually stalled.
these circumstances, the respondent conceded that the magistrate's reliance on
this aspect as part of the method of management
was inappropriate. Plainly, a
procedural irregularity has occurred.
respondent contended that notwithstanding the error by the magistrate in
"incorrectly elevating" reliance on the declaration
to being part of the method
of management, the mischaracterisation by the magistrate was "ultimately
immaterial" and did not lead
to a miscarriage of justice. The respondent
submitted that the finding of guilt did not depend upon the finding with respect
reliance on the declaration as the magistrate found that the other two bases
of the method of management, "either individually or
in combination", were
reasonably likely to bring about the prohibited result. The "pith and
substance" of the charge was not affected
by the error.
addition, the respondent submitted that the error did not involve the
introduction of additional evidence as reliance on the consignor's
declaration
concerning ventilation formed part of the conduct alleged by the prosecution.
The respondent contended that the applicant
"plainly anticipated this evidence
to be part of the case against it, relying on it to mount a defence of honest
and reasonable mistake
of fact". In these circumstances, the respondent urged
that the applicant "accepted that its reliance on the declaration formed
its method of management".
the respondent noted that the applicant was "afforded the opportunity" of
testing the evidence by cross-examining witnesses
and tendering business
documents concerning the policy and declaration.
to the question of prejudice flowing to the applicant by reason of the
magistrate's error, the applicant advanced the following
submissions:
"33 Had that particular been pleaded, the prosecution
would have had to prove it beyond reasonable doubt and in the normal course
evidence to show why the unchallenged and uncontradicted evidence of two
employees of the Applicant, Messrs Michael and Davis
should not be accepted. The Applicant would have had the opportunity to call
other evidence and to meet
the arguments relied on by the learned magistrate.
The course adopted by the Learned Magistrate denied the Applicant procedural
it been a particular of the charge, the onus would have been on the prosecution
to prove beyond reasonable doubt that reliance
on the consignment note, either
individually or in combination, was reasonably likely to result in unreasonable
and unjustifiable
pain and suffering to the horses in the horse truck. The
prosecution would have presumably led evidence to that effect and the defence
would have had the opportunity to test that evidence, either through
cross-examination or through its own evidence. This would have
increased the
focus on and exploration of this issue as a particular to the charge. The
defence could have called additional expert
evidence in relation to the level of
expertise and resources required to verify the declaration by assessing the
ventilation capability
of horse trucks, noting that the prosecution called an
expert in computational fluid dynamics in order to prove its case and the
evidence of the Regulator that it did not expect the TT-Line to have that
expertise (see below). Further, the Applicant could have
called evidence about
industry standards and practice regarding reliance on consignment and passenger
declarations."
receipt of the respondent's written submission, the applicant added
supplementary written submissions concerning this issue:
Respondent contends that the failure to particularise reliance on the
declaration did not cause prejudice to the Applicant
(at [27]). The criticism is
made that the Applicant would not have been prejudiced if it sought to adduce
further evidence, like
the kinds of evidence referenced at [34] of its
submissions. Nevertheless, it made the forensic decision not to do so.
evidence in the case on the custom and practice in transport of relying on
consignment declarations was contained in a record
of interview with a Mr
Michael and Mr Davis tendered as Exhibit P5 by the prosecution.2 That evidence
was strong about the industry
practice and the reasons for relying on
declarations given the vast varieties of cargo carried by ships and other modes
of transport,
the expertise of the consignors and that the declaration drew the
attention of the consignor to its statutory obligations.
evidence supported the defence case. The prosecution led no evidence which
contradicted it. That evidence was particularly strong
in light of Regulation 15
of the Animal Welfare (Land Transport of
Livestock) Regulations 2013
placed the obligation for the truck ventilation on the driver of the truck. Her
Honour's finding that TT Line had a non-delegable
duty in regard to the truck's
ventilation (as opposed, for example to the ship's ventilation) was surprising.
As argued in our primary
submissions, had reliance on the declaration been a
particular, there would have been a stronger emphasis on this issue and the
prosecution
would have been required to prove the particular beyond reasonable
issue of the applicant's reliance on the consignor's declaration was thoroughly
canvassed in evidence before the magistrate.
As discussed, however, the
evidence was led for the different purpose of explaining how and why the
applicant failed to ensure appropriate
ventilation, and failed to carry out an
inspection to ensure the horses were individually stalled. Elevating the issue
to a particular
of the method of management unfairly altered the use for which
the evidence was led and deprived the applicant of leading evidence
presenting submissions as to why this feature did not amount to an aspect of the
method of management which contributed to a
circumstances, if the incorrect elevation to a particular had provided the sole
basis for the conviction, a miscarriage
of justice would have occurred.
However, the magistrate found the prosecution had made out its case on any one
of the three particulars.
If the remaining two particulars provide a sound
basis for conviction, no miscarriage of justice has occurred.
an alternative, the respondent submitted that this Court could exercise a power
s 110(2)(f)
Justices Act
to amend the complaint to add the
first "particular" on which the magistrate erroneously relied. Even assuming
such a power exists,
I would reject that suggestion. In the particular
circumstances, it would be unfair to the applicant.
Grounds 4 and
3 concerns the application of the principles governing the "defence" of honest
and reasonable mistake of fact. It is convenient
to deal with grounds 4 and 5
prior to dealing with that issue.
4 complains that the magistrate erred in determining that there was a
"significant causal connection between double stalling
and the risk of the
horses overheating". The particular in ground 4 states as
"The evidence before the learned magistrate did not
establish, beyond reasonable doubt, that the double stalling of the animals was
reasonably likely to result in unreasonable and unjustifiable pain or suffering
to the animals."
5 asserts that the magistrate erred in finding there was a sufficiently
significant causal connection between double stalling
and "the risk of
unreasonable and unjustifiable pain or suffering to the animals." In addition,
ground 5 asserts that her Honour
failed to apply the criminal standard of proof
in relation to factual findings concerning the impact of double or single
on the likelihood of unreasonable or unjustifiable pain or suffering,
and erred in determining the legal test of causation.
magistrate specifically addressed the facts of the stalling, and noted Dr
Stacey's evidence that the "degree of heat stress suffered
by the ponies was as
a result not only of the ventilation in the trailer but the number of horses in
it." After observing the evidence
of Dr Grull that stall dividers were an open
mesh design allowing air to flow through the trailer, her Honour found as
"I am satisfied that whether the 18 horses were
individually stalled or double-stalled, would not have made any discernible
to the conditions inside the affected truck with regard to any risk
of heat stress or asphyxiation".
the extent that ground 4 asserts that the magistrate found there was a
"significant causal connection between double stalling
and the risk of the
horses overheating", the assertion is incorrect. In relation to the risk of
heat stress or asphyxiation, the
finding of the magistrate was to the opposite
effect. This was not, however, a finding as to the ultimate question of the
of management.
referring to the fact that if the applicant had looked into the truck before Mr
Williams' boarded the vessel it would have
seen that the horses were double
stalled and, presumably, the applicant would have refused to allow the transport
to board the ship,
the magistrate referred to the acknowledgment that the
applicant was guilty of a regulation charge, but not of a breach of
Honour referred to the evidence of Dr Grull that the applicant had followed a
process which is followed by every shipping line
in the world and airlines, that
is, the system of relying on declarations. Turning then to the question of
causation, which her
Honour described as a "vexed" issue, her Honour referred to
authorities in the work health area and identified the question she was
to address:
"130 In this case while the wording of the legislation
is not identical to the WH&S legislation,
is however a risk-based
offence, and in my view the question to be asked is whether the failure to
individually stall on 28 January
2018 was reasonably likely to result in
unreasonable and unjustifiable pain or suffering to the horse or horses in
TA27PF. Whether
the words 'causation,' 'nexus' or 'connection' are used, I am
satisfied that there was sufficient strength in the relationship between
breach and the risk of pain and suffering to the horses required to found
criminal liability. This is so because it requires
an assessment by reference to
the particularised measures and the relevant events that actually occurred on
that particular occasion."
magistrate having found that the method of management included a failure to
individually stall the horses, her Honour was correct
in addressing the question
as to whether that aspect of the method of management was "reasonably likely to
result in unreasonable
and unjustifiable pain or suffering" to the horses.
However, having found that the failure to individually stall the horses "would
not have made any discernible difference to the conditions inside the affected
truck with regard to any heat stress or asphyxiation",
her Honour was required
to identify the impact of the failure to individually stall the horses, and how,
in the absence of making
any difference to the risk of heat stress or
asphyxiation, such failure could be "reasonably likely to result in unreasonable
unjustifiable pain or suffering to the horses". With respect, it is at this
point that the reasoning of the magistrate failed to
grapple with this issue.
Her Honour simply stated that there was a "sufficient strength in the
relationship between the breach and
risk of pain and suffering to the horses
required to found criminal liability".
respondent contended that the ultimate finding of the magistrate with respect to
this question "took into account that on that
date the presence of 18 horses in
the transporting trailer provided a causative link to the
unreasonable or unjustifiable pain or suffering".
substance, the respondent's submission involves the following steps:
The magistrate
accepted the evidence of Dr Stacey that the degree of heat stress suffered by
the horses was a result of not only the
ventilation, but the number of horses in
the transport unit.
The magistrate
found that if the horses had been individually stalled, only 11 horses would
have been in the unit.
If the applicant
had inspected the unit prior to boarding, it would have seen that horses were
double stalled and would not have allowed
the unit to board the ship. In that
event, if Mr Williams had wished to transport any of the horses, only 11 would
have been loaded
in the offending unit.
individually stalled horses had been allowed onto the ship, according to Dr
"I still wouldn't have wanted to be one of those
ponies probably, but I may not have died".
In this way, the
failure to inspect, and to prevent the trailer from boarding with more than 11
individually stalled horses, was "reasonably
likely" to cause the prohibited
is not necessary to explore the limits of the causation principles. This line
of reasoning is too remote to satisfy the test
of causation. Further, it breaks
down by reason of the absence of evidence that reducing the number of horses to
11 in individual
stalls would have avoided the risk of unreasonable or
unjustifiable pain or suffering to the horses. The evidence tends to suggest
otherwise, namely, while the horses may not have died if individually stalled,
because of the lack of ventilation a significant risk
of unreasonable or
unjustifiable pain or suffering to the horses remained.
these reasons, in my view, the magistrate erred in finding that the failure to
inspect the unit to ensure that the horses were
individually stalled caused the
method of management to involve the prohibited risk. The causative link between
the breach and the
prohibited risk within the method of management was lacking.
The failure in this regard was a breach of the regulations, but it
contribute to any breach of
Ground 3 – Mistake of
3 is a complaint that the magistrate erred in finding that honest and reasonable
mistake of fact "cannot exculpate" the applicant.
In the process, the applicant
contends her Honour erred in finding that the applicant had a non-delegable
duty, and in failing to
apply the appropriate standard of proof. It is also
alleged it was not open to the magistrate to conclude that the applicant's
was unreasonable.
discussing the principles governing exculpation by reason of honest and
reasonable mistake of fact (mistake of fact), it is appropriate
to bear in mind
the factual situation following the decision of the magistrate and my earlier
magistrate was not satisfied that the applicant's failure to inspect the horses
during the voyage, or the failure to allow
the driver to carry out such an
inspection, exposed the horses to "any further risk of pain and suffering". It
followed from this
ruling, that her Honour found this particular of the impugned
method of management was not made out.
(2) As to the
particular that the method of management was in breach of
because the
applicant to failed to inspect the transport unit, either before or during the
voyage, to ensure that the horses were
individually stalled, the magistrate
found individual stalling would not have made any difference to the heat stress
suffered by
the horses. In these circumstances, for the reasons discussed,
contrary to the ruling of the magistrate, this particular also falls
(3) The sole
remaining particular, therefore, which the magistrate found proved, was the
failure by the applicant to ensure that the
ventilation of the transport unit
was suitable, and fitted or designed in a way that had effective and appropriate
air flow for the
horses being transported. It is this particular that, subject
to mistake of fact, comprises the sole feature of the method of management
rendered that method of management in breach of
the magistrate, and in this Court, at the heart of the applicant's reliance upon
mistake of fact was acceptance of, and reliance
upon, the declaration signed by
the driver of the transport unit, Mr Williams. Although it was the applicant's
case that it relied
upon that declaration in a number of respects, in the
circumstances to which I have referred, the critical question concerns reliance
upon the declaration with respect to the adequacy of the ventilation in the
transport unit.
to factual matters relevant to the issue of mistake of fact, the applicant's
written submissions summarised the case for the applicant:
making closing submissions to the learned magistrate, the application to
determine the elements of charge one had not yet
been resolved by the learned
magistrate. In light of this, TT-Line made closing submissions in the event that
the Learned Magistrate
imposed strict liability. It was submitted that,
TT-Line relied on the so called defence of honest and reasonable mistake of
raising this, TT-Line relied on the declaration signed by Mr Williams,
and security camera footage of Mr Williams preparing to board the Spirit
of Tasmania and providing the declaration.
That declaration makes a
number of representations, including showing that Mr Williams declared he was
aware of and understood the
animal welfare provisions contained in the Marine
(Cth) and TT-Line's conditions of Carriage of Livestock Policy
and believed that the animals to be shipped have been selected and
transported
according to these requirements.
The conditions of carriage for
horses required that vehicles used for transport of horses are to provide
adequate airflow through
ventilation; that vehicles which have inadequate
airflow through ventilation capability when stationary are not be used for sea
and that horse trucks are to have an opening in both front and rear or
both sides of not less than 1.5 metres horizontally and 0.3
metres vertically.
Williams had represented that his truck had adequate flow through ventilation on
this and his nine previous trips. This proved
to be false on the last occasion.
TT-Line permitted him to travel on the Spirit of Tasmania on the basis of that
declaration and,
thereby, made a mistake about the adequacy of the ventilation
in the truck.
submitted that mistake was honest and reasonable. Mr Williams, the driver of the
truck and the owner of some of the horses
was highly experienced in caring for
and transporting horses and had used the horse truck for many years, including
nine previous
uneventful trips on the Spirit of Tasmania during the summer
months. He was mistaken about the ventilation capacity of the truck.
situation, it is unreasonable to expect TT-Line, a shipping company, to have
known any better.
Post-incident
responses by the regulator supported the reasonableness of reliance on
declarations with respect to ventilation. In
June 2019, the Department endorsed
the use of substantially the same declaration form and the same openings for
horse trucks as those
in place prior to the incident. In a letter dated 9 March
2022, the Department acknowledged that it would be unreasonable to expect
TT-Line to have been able to assess ventilation of horse trucks. In this letter
the Acting Secretary of the Department notes that
he is responding to TT-Line's
previous letter suggesting that the position of the Department seems to be that
in order to discharge
its animal welfare obligations, TT-Line was required to
check the ventilation openings of the transport units and assess their
suitability
of the transport units for the carriage of horses. In response, the
Acting Secretary clarified that this was not an accurate representation
Department's position. The Acting Secretary advised that TT-Line may rely on a
signed vehicle suitability declaration provided
by the accompanying passenger to
be satisfied of the vehicle suitability; however, it was also recommended that
TT-Line staff check
that the vehicle has vents that are open." (footnotes
magistrate commenced her consideration of mistake of fact by observing that as
the offence is one of strict liability, mistake
of fact was open to the
applicant. Her Honour correctly noted immediately that the word "defence" is
used "not in the pure technical
sense but in the loose sense in which it is
conveniently used to described a ground of exculpation".
in mind the applicant's complaint that the magistrate erred with respect to the
burden of proof, it should be noted that
at the commencement of her
consideration of mistake of fact, her Honour cited a passage from the judgment
of Brett J in
Sims v Elmer
[2019] TASSC 21
in which his Honour
plainly stated that the prosecution bears the "ultimate responsibility of
proving guilt beyond reasonable doubt,
and this includes excluding any
circumstance which would provide an excuse for the conduct, including honest and
reasonable mistake
of fact." His Honour added that the prosecution would bear
that burden of proof only if the accused "satisfies an evidentiary onus
the ground of exculpation."
magistrate then observed that once the issue had been properly raised by the
defence, the evidentiary onus had been discharged,
and it was then necessary for
the court to consider the factual questions "necessary to determine whether
criminal liability is excused
on the basis of the applicant holding, on honest
and reasonable grounds, a state of facts which if true would render them not
of the offence." Those observations were immediately followed by a
citation from another passage of the judgment of Brett J in
Sims v Elmer
"... has the prosecution proved beyond reasonable doubt
that the applicant did not act pursuant to an honest belief, held on reasonable
grounds, in a state of facts which, if true, would render him not guilty of the
is clear from these passages of the magistrate's reasons that she was well aware
of, and alert to, the relevant burden of proof
resting on the prosecution to
exclude the "defence" of mistake of fact. However, the applicant submitted
that having regard to
the magistrate's approach to the evidence, and to her
ultimate finding that, in the circumstances, "honest and reasonable mistake
fact cannot exculpate the defendant in this case", her Honour erred in failing
to apply the burden of proof resting on the prosecution
to exclude mistake of
it is not entirely clear, it appears the magistrate found the applicant had
discharged the evidentiary onus required to
raise mistake of fact. After
referring to authorities with respect to the application of the principle, her
Honour said:
"94 In this case, TT Line has relied on the declaration
from Mr Williams that his truck had adequate ventilations. As acknowledged
the Defendant and was apparent from the evidence, that declaration was false.
Defence counsel submitted:
'TT Line permitted him to travel in the Spirit of Tasmania on the basis of
that declaration, and has therefore made a mistake about
the adequacy of the
ventilation of the truck. It is clear that there would have been no risk to the
horses had that representation
been true. ... that mistake with respect to the
ventilation is reasonable. If Messrs Williams and Cooper were mistaken about the
ventilation of that truck how could it be expected that TT Line would have known
any better' (pages 22 and 23 closing submissions).
Line's position was that it was sufficient for it as a 'non-expert' to accept
the declaration of the consignor truck driver that
the ventilation
characteristics of that truck were adequate.
96 Dr Neal said in
closing submissions at page 586:
'It is not possible in terms of expertise for shipping lines to be expert
on horse trucks ... or all the other cargo they carry, it's
reasonable to expect that, and that's why the custom and practice is as it is.
That is, you are entitled to rely on the
expertise of people who currently have
that expertise and who are prepared to declare and sign for that proposition. It
unreasonable to do otherwise".
It was further submitted that in terms of industry practice, the
Department's own assessments subsequent to the incident and
regulation 15
Regulations which essentially states that the ventilation of the vehicle is the
responsibility of the driver of the vehicle,
that it was reasonable to rely on
the assertions of the consignor."
those passages, the magistrate considered evidence relevant to the belief of the
applicant at the time of transportation.
Having regard to her Honour's reasons
in their entirety, I am satisfied her Honour found the applicant had discharged
the evidentiary
onus, but that any mistaken belief was not reasonable.
Notwithstanding the absence of any direct evidence that the applicant actively
relied upon the declaration of Mr Williams, there is no basis for interfering
with the magistrate's finding that the evidentiary
onus had been
discharged.
magistrate addressed the evidence relevant to the belief of the applicant at the
time of transportation:
"97 What is the evidence of the belief of TT
Line on the 28 January 2018? There were a number of undisputed facts:
affected trailer TA27PF had been used to transport horses across Bass Strait
between 2014 to 2018 on the Spirit of Tasmania vessels
on nine occasions.
were no reported incidents in relation to any journeys of the trailer TA27PF
prior to the 28 January 2018.
were a number of declarations and consignments notices signed by Mr Williams or
an associate prior to the trailer TA27PF boarding
the vessels on the dates
between 2014 to 2018 as stated in i) above.
was a consignment notice signed by Mr Williams on the 28 January 2018 with the
accompanying declaration:
'I hereby declare that I am aware of
and understand the animal welfare provisions contained in the Marine Orders
and the TT Line Company Pty Ltd carriage of livestock policy and after due
inquiry believe that the animals to be shipped have been
selected and
transported according to these requirements'.
The declaration went on to say that it was a condition of carriage that:
'1 It is a requirement that horses are accompanied by the owner or a
responsible attendant during the sea voyage.
2 Ventilation – vehicles used for the transport of horses are to
provide adequate flow-through ventilation. Road transport
vehicles which have
inadequate flow-through ventilation capability when stationary are not to be
used for sea freight ....
8 Where notice has been given that horses are to be loaded onto a vessel
and for the purpose of ascertaining that the fittings and
equipment comply with
this policy/procedure and Marine Orders
,a TT Line Company Pty Ltd
employee/representative has the right to inspect...
10 Horses/Livestock being transported cannot be inspected during the
voyage by passenger(s) accompanying the horses/livestock. The
Chief Officer will
inspect these horses at approximately midnight. The passengers may attend the
Pursers office at this time to receive
an update from the Chief Officer if they
wish. The Chief Officer will make contact with the accompanying passenger should
any issues with any of the horses being transported.
was CCTV footage played of the affected truck on the 28 January 2018 arriving at
the boom gate to embark on the ship. It was
parked there for 2 or so minutes
where it can reasonably be inferred Mr Williams was filling out paperwork. The
truck was not inspected
prior to being driven on the ship. There was evidence
from Dr Grull that the tailgate was able to be lowered in '
'. There were inspection rounds taken by crew of the vehicle deck
while the ship was sailing but not (as suggested by Defence Counsel)
inspection of the horses.
Couper gave evidence [pp182-208 of the transcript] that he had modified the
refrigeration unit and sold it to Mr Williams in 2014.
He did not enlist the
assistance of a ventilation expert when modifying the truck. He said that there
were no ventilation guidelines.
He could not find anything but made the windows
as large as he could while maintaining the structural integrity of the trailer
the use of the truck to transport horses. He spoke of his passion late in
life for competitive polo and how Mr Williams, the former
captain of the
Australian Polo team, had extensive polo pony experience and had introduced him
to polo. He also said that he had
no previous concerns about the ventilation of
Sattler, the owner of Barnbougle, also gave evidence of Mr Williams' experience
in working with and owning polo horses '
right at the top end
'. He said he
treated his horses like children and observed the horses were [p227 of
transcript] '
individually fed, individually talked to, ...and that he would
not knowingly take a risk in relation to the welfare of his horses.
Russell Hunter and Dr Grull, who investigated the incident interviewed Mr
Michael (the General Manager of Marine Operations for
the Defendant) and Mr
Davis (the General Manager of Port Operations for the Defendant) on the 14
January 2019. They were referred
to the document titled '
Policy Horse
Trailer/Trucks including horse floats'
which included information on TT Line
policy on carriage of horses as well as the declaration by the Consignor ('the
Declaration')
which was current on the 28 January 2018. They were asked [page 5
of the record of interview]:
'are trailers carrying horses or any
other transport unit carrying horses assessed or otherwise inspected by TT Line
officers or contractors
to ensure compliance with the conditions of carriage and
specifications in the declaration?'
To which both Mr Michael and Mr Davis answered '
101 Mr Michael further said:
'on the basis of the generalised carriage of many items aboard a
roadpacked vessel, no different to our vessels, whether it be certain
hazardous casting – hazardous cargo, personal use, pets, livestock
etcetera etcetera etcetera the industry standard
is such that it will do its
best in all respects to expose the applicable requirements to those that are
intended carriage,right,but
the onus of that transport is to put back to them as
they as seen as a greater authority than any individual in TT Line. So for us
assess – and I'm using an example here – for us to then put one of
our people in position where they would go into
a horse transport unit, check
the stalling arrangement, check the amount of water, check the amount of feed,
size up the ventilation,
etcetera etcetera etcetera etcetera which are all part
of the carriage requirements, and all the applicable wording around that,
whether it be the Tasmanian regulations, Marine Orders, it comes down to a
competent authority. Competent authority requires an onus
of proof on that
competence. Now we're not carrying a vet which you would say is a competent
authority to go into that thing. So
from that point of view, whilst TT Line
responsibly portrays all the requirements of carriage the onus of
responsibility, and hence
the competent in this area.
Michael and Mr Davis acknowledged that the Declaration stated TT Line would
inspect the horses. Mr Michael said [page 8 of interview]
which, after all
this matter is concluded, probably needs revisiting
was nothing in the interview to indicate TT Line made any specific inquiries as
to Mr Williams' competence on the question of
ventilation, nor that it had any
idea who Mr Williams was. The only personal aspect of the trip was the comment
by Mr Michael who
said [page 12 of interview]:
'On the basis of
the information I received from our Chief Executive that there had been an
alleged incident, that the death of horses
that had travelled with us the
previous evening had been reported. In my position I did what would be
considered a normal response
from the General Manager Marine, so I questioned
the vessel on the basics. So one, was your ventilation intact and running or
because that's the biggest key, Marine Orders paragraph 43 for us, so can
you confirm that, can you confirm inspections were done,
for which they did, the
Master confirmed these things with me. Were there any abnormal – they did
mention the amount of urine,
but they hadn't had a large consignment like that
for a long period of time and considered that just to be a consequence of the
of horses that were being travelled'.
Then on page 13 of the record of interview, Dr Grull asked '
do you have
any comments to make on visual cues in relation to this specific horse transport
in that incident on that – on that
day, on that sailing?
' Mr Michael
'prior to their travelling no. When we were party to, at their request,
answer and state vets out of Victoria coming on board, they
took quite some time
looking at the footage and respective photographs of those horse transport
units, they made some generalised
comments over what they saw as to, you know,
one unit was quite open and the other one appeared to have very small
ventilation. Now
that was just a generalised comment at the start and we didn't
really comment on the subject. So that unit, they did ask, that unit
travelled previously right, but from our point of view no.'
this case, nothing was done portside or during the voyage to ensure the
consignments complied with the conditions of carriage.
There is no evidence Mr
Williams was asked any questions about his competence as a carrier, or
experience carrying horses. There
is no evidence that TT Line knew anything
ventilation.
It made no independent enquiries as to whether the horses were
individually stalled in accordance with the requirements of the
regulations."
in isolation, it might appear that the magistrate incorrectly placed the burden
of proof on the applicant when she asked:
What is the evidence
of the belief of TT-Line on the 28 January 2018?
addition, the magistrate referred to the absence of enquiry concerning the
competence of Mr Williams, and the lack of evidence
that the applicant "had any
idea who Mr Williams was". Further, her Honour referred to the absence of any
action to ensure compliance
with the conditions of carriage or that the horses
were individually stalled.
magistrate was required to determine whether the prosecution had proved that the
applicant did not act under a mistaken, but
honest and reasonable belief, as to
relevant facts. Put another way, was it reasonably possible that it did so? In
making that
determination, necessarily her Honour was required to assess whether
any evidence supported or contradicted the applicant's claim
that it acted under
a mistake of fact.
this process, the magistrate was not required to repeatedly refer to the burden
of proof resting on the prosecution to negative
mistake of fact. Having regard
to her Honour's remarks in their entirety, including the fact that her review of
the evidence followed
immediately upon specific citations in which the burden of
proof was correctly and plainly stated, I am satisfied that her Honour
err in this regard.
I do not view the magistrate's single sentence conclusion as indicative of a
reversal of the burden of proof. It is quite
common for judicial discussion of
mistake of fact to refer to the principle as a "defence" or a ground of
"exculpation". Two of
the authorities to which her Honour referred spoke of
exculpation. In its context, the concluding sentence that mistake of fact
"cannot exculpate" the applicant was not indicative of error as to the burden of
the course of her reasons, having referred to the evidence in the passages
cited, the magistrate addressed the question as to
whether the applicant's
responsibility in transporting the horses could be discharged by delegating the
responsibility to Mr Williams
or some other person not employed by the
applicant. Her Honour found that the responsibility could not be delegated.
is not clear why the magistrate thought it necessary to consider the question of
delegation. The applicant did not suggest it
had sought to delegate
responsibility for the conditions of transport, and compliance with the Act and
Regulations, to Mr Williams
or any other person. The applicant contended that,
relying on the declaration by Mr Williams, it held a mistaken, but honest and
reasonable belief that the ventilation was adequate.
to the applicant's submission, I am satisfied that the diversion by the
magistrate into the question of non-delegable duties
did not affect her Honour's
view of the evidence and whether mistake of fact had been negatived. It was an
irrelevant side issue.
addressing the evidence upon which the applicant relied as establishing a
reasonable possibility that mistake of fact existed,
the magistrate did not
overlook the consignment notice and declaration by Mr Williams. Nor did her
Honour overlook the regulations
which place responsibility on the driver of the
vehicle, including reg 15 which provides that the driver must ensure that the
being used to transport the horses had "effective and appropriate
airflow". Her Honour also referred to the submission by the applicant
subsequent assessment by the relevant department determined it was reasonable
for the applicant to rely upon the assertions
of the consignor.
to individual stalling, in contrast to other regulations which speak directly of
responsibilities of the "driver" of a vehicle
transporting livestock or a horse,
reg 34(6) provides that a "person" transporting a horse across Bass Strait must
ensure that the
horse is "individually stalled". The applicant was a person
transporting the horses across Bass Strait.
applicant did not call any evidence from employees of the applicant that
reliance was placed on the declaration by Mr Williams,
or that an employee
formed a belief that the ventilation was adequate and the horses were
individually stalled. Reliance was placed
solely on the declaration, and the
drawing of an inference from the declaration, that it was reasonably possible an
employee of the
applicant relied upon it and formed an honest and reasonable
mistaken belief. There is no direct evidence to suggest that an employee
applicant addressed their mind to these questions. However, the absence of
direct evidence as to the belief of the applicant
does not, in itself, resolve
the issue. Properly, in raising mistake of fact, the applicant relied upon the
cumulative effect of
a number of facts:
Leaving aside
the question of individual stalling, the legislative scheme places
responsibility for the welfare of the horses, and
specifically the ventilation,
upon the driver of the transport to be carried by the applicant.
As a matter of
practice, TT-Line requires the driver to submit a declaration containing a
number of representations of direct relevance
to the method of management and
the welfare of the animals. In particular, Mr Williams
"I am aware of and understand the animal welfare
provisions contained in the Marine Orders Part 43 and the TT-Line Company Pty
carriage of livestock policy and after due enquiry believe that the animals
to be shipped have been selected and transported according
requirements."
The declaration
form signed by Mr Williams contained relevant provisions of the applicant's
policy to which the declaration referred,
including specific reference to
ventilation stating "vehicles used for the transport of horses are to provide
adequate flow-through
ventilation."
Mr Williams had
previously been involved with nine transportations of horses and, on each
occasion, had completed the same declaration.
Those transportations occurred
without incident.
Reliance on such
declarations is a common practice throughout the transport industry. Evidence
was given that the system of declarations
is operative across the world with
shipping lines and airlines who all rely on those declarations. This applies to
passengers and
cargo. From a practical point of view, inevitably transporters
are required to rely upon the reliability of declarations provided
like Mr Williams, reliance which is envisaged by the statutory scheme governing
the transport of horses across Bass Strait.
these circumstances, the absence of direct evidence from any employee that
reliance was placed on the statements by Mr Williams
is not surprising. As a
matter of practice at a busy seaport terminal, or airport, it is not expected
that an employee of the transporter
will look at each declaration and
individually address their mind to the qualification or experience of the person
making the declaration.
From the point of view of the transporter, provided the
appropriate declaration is made, as a matter of practicality and industry
practice, it is entitled to rely upon the accuracy of the declaration.
making these observations, I emphasise that I am not concerned with the
applicant's failure to ensure that the horses were individually
stalled. The
legislative scheme placed that obligation on the applicant, and the applicant
failed to fulfil that obligation. The
relevance or otherwise of that failure to
fulfil the obligation with respect to individual stalling is discussed shortly.
I am presently
concerned with a mistake as to the adequacy of the ventilation.
To put it another way, was it reasonably possible that the applicant
believed the ventilation was adequate?
issue of mistaken belief as to the adequacy of the ventilation having been
raised, the burden rested on the prosecution to prove
beyond reasonable doubt
that the applicant did not act under the mistaken belief that the ventilation
was adequate, or that such
belief was not reasonable. I am satisfied that the
magistrate overlooked the significance of the matters to which I have referred.
From my review of the evidence, in my opinion the prosecution failed to negative
the existence of a mistaken belief that the ventilation
was adequate. Put
another way, at the conclusion of the evidence it remained a reasonable
possibility that the applicant held such
a mistaken belief.
factors to which I have referred are also relevant to the question whether it
remained reasonably possible that the mistaken
belief as to the adequacy of the
ventilation was reasonable. Of particular importance in this regard is the
practice followed by
the applicant with respect to the declarations, which
accords with the industry practice.
addition, the legislative scheme imposes significant duties upon the driver of a
vehicle transporting livestock, including horses,
as opposed to the operator of
a vessel conveying a transport unit from one locality to another. In
particular, in addition to regulations
which apply to drivers and other persons,
regs 10, 11, 15, 20, 22, 25 and 27 are among regulations which impose wide
ranging duties
upon drivers of vehicles used to transport livestock. Specific
duties are imposed by reg 34 with respect to the transport of horses,
ensuring sufficient airflow. By way of contrast, with respect to horses, the
only specific obligation imposed upon a person
transporting a horse across Bass
Strait is to ensure that the horse is individually stalled.
is not surprising that the legislature would allocate responsibility in this
way. The unit in which the horses are transported
is supplied by consignor who
is in the best position to assess the adequacy of the ventilation. The
legislative scheme does not
contemplate that the shipping line will possess
expertise in this area.
although the question of reasonableness or otherwise of the relevant belief
remains a question for the Court, the expectations
of the industry regulator are
relevant. On 7 March 2022 the applicant wrote to the Acting Secretary of the
Department of Natural
Resources and Environment. Reference was made to previous
correspondence concerning reliance upon the accuracy of information provided
declarations, and the absence of expertise on the part of the applicant to
assess ventilation of transport units and condition
of livestock, including
horses. The Acting Secretary of the Department responded by letter of 9 March
2022 stating that appropriate
checks performed by staff of the applicant
"without specialist expertise in livestock transport would suffice to comply
with regulatory
animal welfare requirements." The letter stated the
"To restate NRE
Tas previous advice in as simple
and unequivocal terms as possible, it is the minimum expectation of NRE
TT Line may rely
on the signed Horse Welfare Declaration provided by the accompanying passenger
for the health condition of the horses
for the intended journey. TT Line staff
do not need to independently conduct veterinary health assessments of
staff must, prior to the voyage, undertake a visual inspection of horse
transport units to verify the number of horses they contain,
and to ensure that
they are individually stalled, in accordance with the approved TT Line Animal
Welfare Manual, and the prescription
in r34 (6) of the
Animal Welfare (Land
Transport of
Livestock) Regulations 2013
Such checks do not require any
specialist livestock expertise.
may rely on the signed Vehicle Suitability Declaration provided by the
accompanying passenger to be satisfied of the vehicle
suitability; however, it
is recommended that TT
Line staff also check that the vehicle has vents
that are open. Such checks do not require any specialist livestock
voyage, TT line staff will undertake a check of all animal vehicles and cages
(including livestock) located on the vehicle
decks. Such checks can be performed
by staff with no specific expertise in relation to animals and will rely
primarily on common
sense visual and audible clues that an animal is in distress
or deceased."
magistrate dismissed the correspondence as of "minimal weight" in considering
the issue of whether the applicant had complied
with its obligations. Her
Honour was of the view that there was "no context" to the records.
respectfully disagree with her Honour's dismissal of the relevance of this
evidence. It provides for support for the applicant's
case that its mistake of
fact as to the adequacy of the ventilation was reasonable because it was
entitled to rely upon the declaration
by Mr Williams.
these reasons, in my view the prosecution failed to prove that the applicant's
mistaken belief that the ventilation was adequate
was an unreasonable belief.
At the least, it was a reasonable possibility that the applicant held such a
belief, and that such a
belief was reasonable. The prosecution failed to
negative honest and reasonable mistake of fact.
Mistake of fact
– consequences
respondent submitted that even if mistake of fact was not negatived, the
mistaken belief as to the adequacy of the ventilation
could not assist the
applicant in escaping conviction for a breach of
because the belief, if
true, "did not make the act of the accused innocent". The submission
"The method of management pleaded included failures to
adequately inspect the transport and trailer unit, or horses contained therein;
and the failure to ensure that the horses were transported or packed in a manner
that complied with the requirements. Reliance upon
a declaration did not
address the failure to conduct adequate inspections or ensure compliance with
the requirements. For example,
reliance on the declaration did not address the
pleaded method of management to adequately inspect the transport and trailer.
what circumstances could reliance upon the contents of a document overcome
the failure to inspect? Similarly how could reliance
upon the contents of a
document, ensure compliance with the requirement to singularly stall the horses.
Only a visual inspection
could ensure that the requirement was complied with.
In fact, a visual inspection would have revealed not only that the horses were
not all singularly stalled, but would have revealed a further inaccuracy in the
declaration relied upon, which declared that there
were 21 horses on board, when
there were only 18."
respondent's submission relied upon failures to inspect and to ensure the horses
were packed in a manner that complied with the
requirements. However, the
magistrate found that the breach of
was made out because the applicant
relied on the consignor's declaration as to the adequacy of the ventilation;
failed to ensure
the ventilation was suitable; and failed to inspect the unit to
ensure the horses were individually stalled. Those findings were
not based on a
general view that there was a failure to ensure compliance with the transport
requirements.
discussed earlier in these reasons concerning grounds 4 and 5, in my view the
magistrate erred in finding that the failure to
inspect the transport unit to
ensure the horses were individually stalled caused the method of management to
involve the prohibited
risk. The causative link between the breach and the
prohibited risk within the method of management was lacking. In these
circumstances,
the remaining particulars of the method of management were
reliance on the consignor's declaration as to the adequacy of the ventilation
and the failure to inspect the trailer to ensure that the ventilation was
"suitable" and "effective and appropriate".
discussed, while mistake of fact results in the applicant being "innocent" of a
, nevertheless the applicant was in breach of reg 34(6) by failing
to ensure that the horses were "individually stalled". As the
applicant is
guilty of an offence against the regulation, is the applicant "innocent" for the
purposes of the principles governing
mistake of fact? The issue having been
raised during the hearing of the appeal, the Court requested the parties to
provide further
written submissions, particularly with respect to the impact of
the decision of the High Court in
Bell v Tasmania
[2021] HCA 42
decision on appeal from this Court in
Bell v Tasmania
[2019] TASCCA 19.
summary, the applicant's further written submissions advanced the following
propositions:
CTM v The Queen
[2008] HCA 25
236 CLR 440
were cases involving a "common
physical element between the charged offence and the different offence", and in
the majority held "it will not be harsh, unfair or otherwise
contrary to the principles of the criminal justice system to convict
basis of a different offence".
In considering
the limits of the principle, Edelman and Gleeson JJ noted at [104] that the same
evidence in respect of the offence
charged would have "unequivocally
established" that the appellant was guilty of an offence under a different
section of the same
The "ventilation
measure is not an element of an aggravated offence" and does not provide a basis
for "conviction of any other offence".
The two offences, breach of s 7 and
breach of reg 34(6) consist of different elements.
not authority for the proposition that mistake of fact is not available where
the Act, on the facts as honestly and reasonably
believed, would make the person
"guilty of a different offence with different elements and they were convicted
of that offence".
There is no
"affront to justice" in allowing mistake of fact to exculpate the applicant of
the offence against s 7 given that the
applicant has been convicted of a breach
of reg 34(6) for failing to ensure that the horses were individually
following contentions were advanced in the respondent's further written
submissions:
Acts Interpretation Act
"defines the word 'Act' used in
relation to a legislative enactment, to include a reference to any regulation
made under that Act",
therefore proof of any conduct "encompassed in a
regulation ... would bring the conduct of the accused within the operation of
enactment".
circumstances, if true, the facts in which the applicant mistakenly believed did
not render the applicant's conduct "innocent".
The breach of
the regulations in failing to ensure the horses were individually stalled did
not contain elements additional to the
offence charged.
The applicant
relies on the contents of the consignment declaration only in respect of the
assertion that the transport had effective
and appropriate ventilation. The
same declaration asserted compliance by way of individually stalling, but the
applicant does not
rely upon that aspect. "This is illogical".
The applicant
argues that the defence is limited to the issue of ventilation "because that is
the basis upon which the learned magistrate
found causation". However, "the
issue of causation has no part to play" in determining whether the facts in
which the applicant
mistakenly believed would constitute another offence.
The mistaken
belief as to the extent of the ventilation does not extend to the failures found
by the magistrate, namely, the failure
to "ensure" that the ventilation was
adequate and the failure to inspect the trailer prior to the voyage to "ensure"
they were individually
stalled. The mistake is not said to extend to a belief
that the ventilation had been checked to ensure its suitability, or inspection
had taken place to ensure the horses were individually stalled.
circumstances, the mistaken belief of fact would "not provide a complete defence
to the particulars that the learned magistrate
Bell v Tasmania
[2019] TASCCA 19
, the appellant had been charged with
supplying a drug to a child, an indictable offence against the
attracting a maximum penalty of imprisonment for 21
years. The appellant claimed a belief that the child was aged over 18 years.
Blow CJ declined to leave the issue of mistake of fact to the jury because, in
his Honour's view, the appellant's belief did not
make his act "innocent" for
the purposes of the principles governing the application of mistake of fact. On
his own version, the
appellant was guilty of supplying a drug to another person,
a summary offence under the same
Misuse of Drugs Act
, but attracting a
maximum penalty of imprisonment for two years.
decision of Blow CJ was upheld on appeal to this Court, and on further appeal to
the High Court. In this Court, while accepting
that the prevailing state of the
authorities supports the principle that a mistake of fact will only excuse
responsibility if the
belief would result in the conduct being innocent "in the
sense that it is not criminal conduct of any nature", Brett J expressed
that the authorities had not "come to grips directly with the meaning of the
word 'innocent'". His Honour posed the question
mean innocent of any legal wrongdoing, innocent of any wrongdoing of a criminal
nature, or innocent of the crime charged?"
the issue had not been the subject of submissions, it was unnecessary for the
Court to express a view. It appears it is now necessary
, the High Court upheld the decisions of Blow CJ and this Court. In
the course of the judgments, consideration was given to the meaning
"innocent" in the application of the principles governing mistake of fact.
a joint judgment, Kiefel CJ and Keane J expressed general agreement with the
reasons of Edelman and Gleeson JJ, but made observations
concerning the origin
of the principle which are relevant to the issues under consideration. After
referring to the provisions of
the Code preserving the common law principles
governing mistake of fact, their Honours addressed the origins of the principle
the underlying considerations of morale culpability as opposed to criminal
responsibility:
"9 The interpretative principle of the common law
recognised by s 14 of the Tasmanian Code has variously been referred to as a
circumstance
of excuse or exculpation or as a defence to a charge. This
interpretative principle had its origins in the willingness of the judges
Victorian England to gloss the terms of a statute to an extent that reflected
the historical development of the criminal law in
England over centuries as
something of a collaboration between the judges and the Parliament. The
rationale for the judicial gloss
can be found in the view of the judges of
Victorian England that there would be an unacceptable gap between moral
culpability and
criminal responsibility if a statute constituting an offence
were construed as imposing criminal responsibility for an act or omission
the accused honestly and reasonably believed to be lawful. This rationale was
clearly articulated in
this regard, in
CTM v The Queen,
Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Crennan and Kiefel
JJ cited the following passages from the judgment of Cave J in
'At common law an honest and reasonable belief in the
existence of circumstances, which, if true, would make the act for which a
is indicted an innocent act has always been held to be a good defence.
Now it is undoubtedly within the competence of the legislature to enact that
a man shall be branded as a felon and punished for doing
an act which he
honestly and reasonably believes to be lawful and right; just as the legislature
may enact that a child or a lunatic
shall be punished criminally for an act
which he has been led to commit by the immaturity or perversion of his reasoning
But such a result seems so revolting to the moral sense that we ought
to require the clearest and most indisputable evidence that
such is the meaning
of the Act.'
, the plurality went on to say:
'[T]he point made by Cave J at the end of the second passage quoted above
continues to be of fundamental importance to the function
of courts in seeking
to find and give effect to the meaning of criminal legislation. While the
strength of the consideration may
vary according to the subject matter of the
legislation, when an offence created by Parliament carries serious penal
consequences,
the courts look to Parliament to spell out in clear terms any
intention to make a person criminally responsible for conduct which
is based on
an honest and reasonable mistake. ...
Where it is a ground of exculpation, the law in Australia requires that the
honest and reasonable, but mistaken, belief be in a state
of affairs such that,
if the belief were correct, the conduct of the accused would be innocent. In
that context, the word 'innocent'
means not guilty of a criminal offence. In the
case of an offence, or a series of offences, defined by statute, it means that,
the belief were true, the conduct of the accused would be 'outside the
operation of the enactment'.
is apparent that the common law interpretative gloss recognised by s 14 of the
Tasmanian Code was justified by the need to avoid
'the public scandal of
convicting on a serious charge persons who are in no way blameworthy'. But the
unacceptable affront to the
moral sense that provided the rationale for the
common law gloss did not arise in cases where the act of the accused was such
he or she would rightly 'be branded as a felon and punished' even if the
facts of the case were indeed as the accused believed them
to be. That this is
so is apparent from the statements in the authorities that, for the ground of
exculpation to apply, the act in
question must have been believed by the accused
to be 'innocent'. That understanding of the rationale for the common law gloss,
the expression of the common law principle of interpretation to which it
gave rise, was confirmed by a majority of this Court in
Bergin v Stack
and in the reasons of the plurality in
understood, the rationale for the judicial gloss does not support a further and
more nuanced gloss on the meaning of a statute
whereby the act of an accused
would be excused even where, on the mistaken view of the facts asserted by the
accused, the act would
warrant conviction of an offence against that statute. In
such a case, the unacceptable prospect of convicting a person of a serious
charge where that person is 'in no way blameworthy' does not arise." (footnotes
CJ and Keane J emphasised the words in s 14 that the state of facts in which the
belief is held would excuse the act or omission
from criminal responsibility
"entailed" by such act or omission. Applying the ordinary and natural reading
of the words used in
s 14, the belief must excuse the accused from "any or all
criminal responsibility entailed by the act or omission" done under the
mistake. Their Honours observed in the matter before them, that notwithstanding
the mistaken belief as to age, the appellant
was guilty of supplying a drug to
another person and his conduct in that regard could not be regarded as
"innocent" or "in no way
blameworthy". The joint judgment added at
"There is not the gulf between moral culpability and criminal
responsibility that arises when the act of an accused has been committed
honest and reasonable belief that the act was lawful."
CJ and Keane J recognised that s 14 operates in a rather "blunt" way "in that it
does not seek to align the extent of criminal
responsibility precisely with the
degree of moral culpability revealed by the accused's belief as to the state of
affairs in which
he or she acts." Their Honours continued by comparing the
relevant provision in the Queensland Code which their Honours said "expressly
aligns criminal responsibility for an act with the moral culpability associated
with the accused's belief" [18]. However, they found
there was "no escaping the
conclusion" that in enacting s 14 the Tasmanian legislature declined to adopt
the Queensland Code and
"chose instead to adhere to the common law principle of
interpretation".
J found that
Bergin v Stack
[1953] HCA 53
(1953) 88 CLR 248
was "unambiguous authority
for the proposition that an act is only 'innocent' within the meaning of the
common law presumption if
it is not a criminal offence at all" [29]. His Honour
observed, however, that issues of procedural fairness "might well arise in
case, closer to
, in which an element of the separate offence which
the accused would have committed had the state of fact believed by the accused
been true is not an element of the offence of which the accused stands charged"
a joint judgment, Gordon and Steward JJ found that the principles to be applied
to the circumstances in
were sufficiently stated in
CTM v The Queen
(above) at 447 [8]. In their Honours' view s 14
of the Code "embodies the common law principle of mistake of fact as a ground of
exculpation", and the word "innocent" means not guilty of any criminal
to the "outer limits" of the common law principle, Gordon and Steward JJ were of
the view that the appeal was not the appropriate
vehicle to "qualify or clarify
the outer limits".
a joint judgment with which Keifel CJ and Keane J were in "general agreement",
Edelman and Gleeson JJ identified the "sole issue"
"53 ...The sole issue on this appeal concerns the
qualification upon the common law excuse that the facts as honestly and
believed must make the act of an accused person an 'innocent act'.
The authorities have taken four different approaches. Must the
person's act, on
the facts as honestly and reasonably believed by them, make the person: (i)
innocent of any offence, civil wrongdoing
or immoral conduct? (ii) innocent of
any offence or civil wrongdoing? (iii) innocent of any offence? (iv) innocent of
the particular
offence charged?
54 For the reasons below, the correct qualification is (iii). The accused
person's act, on the facts as honestly and reasonably believed
by them, must
render the accused person innocent of any offence. It is in the nature of the
common law excuse that the accused person
is not punished for an offence despite
all elements of the offence being satisfied by their action due to the 'beliefs
strength of which [they] took that action'. An honest and reasonable
belief in facts that would nevertheless have involved a different
offence cannot
entirely excuse offending action at common law." (footnote omitted)
made those observations, and in holding that Blow CJ and the Court of Criminal
Appeal were correct in dismissing the appeal,
their Honours added a
qualification touching upon the issue now under consideration at
"Nevertheless, systemic considerations which preclude the
conduct of a trial within a trial, based on new and disputed facts or
allegations,
may constrain the manner in which the prosecution can exclude the
excuse of honest and reasonable mistake on the basis that the act
of the accused
person would constitute a different offence if the facts believed by the accused
were true. Such considerations do
not apply in this case."
discussing the development of mistake of fact, Edelman and Gleeson JJ addressed
the early judicial development of the common
law "excuse". Their Honours then
turned to the "component" of "innocence" which they observed had been reiterated
in many cases,
including the High Court. The judgment continued at
"[86] ... It is thoroughly entrenched as an element of the
common law excuse of honest and reasonable mistake. But the precise meaning
the requirement of "innocence" has been the subject of different approaches.
[87] There are four approaches that can be discerned from the authorities,
particularly those discussed above. From the narrowest
to the broadest
approaches they are as follows. An act will only be innocent if:
(1) the facts as honestly and reasonably believed would involve no moral or
legal culpability;
(2) the facts as honestly and reasonably believed would not constitute any
offence or legal wrong (including torts);
(3) the facts as honestly and reasonably believed would not constitute any
offence; or
(4) the facts as honestly and reasonably believed would not constitute the
offence charged."
and Gleeson JJ rejected approaches (1) and (2):
"91 Neither of the
first two approaches should be accepted. In
He Kaw Teh v The Queen,
Brennan J correctly rejected any role for civil wrongdoing or immorality, noting
that criminal punishment is 'not imposed to enforce
the civil law, to deter the
commission of torts or to suppress immorality'. Moreover, as Professor Kenny
observed, these approaches
substitute 'the vagueness of an ethical standard for
the precision of a legal one'. An example of the wide scope of application of
that vague standard, even by the social mores of the time, is the reasoning of
Bramwell B in
that to take a female 'of
such tender years', whether or not she was over 16 years, from the care of her
parents was 'wrong in itself'.
Professor Cross described this language as 'gross
judicial hyperbole', citing the example of a male friend who took a consenting
18‑year‑old female 'against her parents' wishes on a short visit to
his mother'". (footnotes omitted)
rejecting the fourth approach, that the act would be innocent if the facts as
honestly and reasonably believed would not constitute
the offence charged,
Edelman and Gleeson JJ discussed limits to the third approach that requires the
facts as honestly and reasonably
believed to not constitute "any
"98 The most recent enunciation of the excuse of honest
and reasonable mistake by this Court was in terms of the third approach,
the belief to be one that, if true, would have meant that the accused
person was guilty of no offence. In
CTM v The Queen
, Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Crennan and Kiefel JJ said:
'Where it is a ground of exculpation, the law in Australia requires that the
honest and reasonable, but mistaken, belief be in a state
of affairs such that,
if the belief were correct, the conduct of the accused would be innocent. In
that context, the word 'innocent'
means not guilty of a criminal offence. In the
case of an offence, or a series of offences, defined by statute, it means that,
the belief were true, the conduct of the accused would be 'outside the
operation of the enactment'.'
reference by their Honours to the offence falling 'outside the operation of the
enactment' is a quotation from Dixon J in
Proudman v Dayman
. The need for
the accused person's belief not to be outside the 'operation of the enactment'
introduces a limit upon the circumstances
in which the excuse can be excluded
from consideration because the person's belief might amount to an offence. For
the reasons below,
that limit is based upon the accusatorial system of criminal
common law requires that an accused person is entitled to be told 'not only of
the legal nature of the offence with which he or
she is charged, but also of the
particular act, matter or thing alleged as the foundation of the charge and the
manner in which the
offence was alleged to have been committed. As Barwick CJ
Ratten v The Queen
, approving reasons given
by the Full Court of the Supreme Court of Victoria:
'Under our law a
criminal trial is not, and does not purport to be, an examination and assessment
of all the information and evidence
that exists, bearing on the question of
guilt or innocence'. It is a trial, not an inquisition'.
would be contrary to these longstanding common law assumptions underlying the
accusatorial criminal justice system for the prosecution,
during the course of a
trial, to be permitted to conduct a trial within a trial as to whether the acts
of the accused person constitute
a different and uncharged offence, beyond the
scope of the enactment as charged, and perhaps based upon new facts that might
be disputed.
In other words, the limit requires that whenever sufficient
evidence is led to enliven a consideration of the excuse of honest and
reasonable mistake, the prosecution must negate that excuse unless the
prosecution can establish, consistently with the right of
the accused person to
be informed of the foundation of the charges against them, that the acts of that
person would constitute another
offence based upon the facts they believed.
point can be illustrated by adapting an example given in a report of the
Criminal Law Officers Committee of the Standing Committee
Attorneys‑General, which followed the Committee's consideration of
Proudman v Dayman
. Suppose that a person accused of importing heroin were
to lead evidence in support of an excuse that they honestly and reasonably
believed that they were importing watches. Separately from any questions
concerning the mental element required for the offence,
the prosecution could
not avoid its onus to negate the excuse of honest and reasonable mistake by
seeking to establish that the belief
of the accused person amounted to a
different offence, involving new evidence and allegations outside the scope of
the enactment,
to show that the watches that were the subject of the belief were
dutiable and that the accused did not have a licence to import
is unnecessary in this case to explore the metes and bounds of this limit. It
was not an issue in
Bergin v Stack
meaning of "innocent" for the purposes of the principles governing mistake of
fact is not capable of precise definition. In
the High Court
declined to undertake that task, but I endeavour to distil a number of points
relevant to determining the limit and
whether the applicant, on the current
facts, was "innocent":
(1) Underlying
the rationale for the development of the common law principle was a concern to
avoid an unacceptable gap between moral
culpability and criminal responsibility
for an act which the accused honestly and reasonably believed to be lawful.
least, the belief must excuse criminal responsibility "entailed by the act or
omission". Put another way, in the context
of a criminal offence, "innocent"
means not guilty of a criminal offence.
(3) Although
Edelman and Gleeson JJ spoke of innocence of "any offence", their Honours cited
the majority judgment in
in which it was plainly stated that the word
"innocent" means "not guilty of a criminal offence".
(4) Issues of
procedural fairness may dictate a limit. For example, the limit may be exceeded
if an element of the alternative offence
is not an element of the primary
offence. Similarly, if the alternative offence was "beyond the scope of the
enactment as charged",
or is based on new facts or evidence not led at trial,
fundamental principles of fairness centred on the accusatorial system might
dictate that the limit would be exceeded if reliance was placed on the
alternative offence to deny "innocence".
Bergin v Stack
(above), the High Court was concerned with an employee of
a club charged with selling alcohol without a licence. The employee took
granted that the club was licenced. He was unaware he had served alcohol
outside permissible hours and was, therefore, guilty
of the offence of selling
alcohol outside lawful trading hours for a club. It was in these circumstances
that Fullagar J, with the
agreement of Williams ACJ and Taylor J, spelt out the
principle at (262):
"The rule as to the effect of an honest and
reasonable mistake of fact means, I think, that such a belief excuses if its
truth would
have meant that no offence was being committed, not if its truth
would have meant that some other and different offence was being
committed."
J referred with approval to the judgment of the majority in
[1875] LR2 CCR 154 which his Honour held "that a mistake could not excuse
unless the fact believed was such that, if it had been true,
there would not
merely have been no crime at all but no wrongful act at all."
essential principle enunciated by Fullagar J has not been overruled. It was
confirmed by the majority in
CTM v The Queen
in the context of a charge
of sexual intercourse with a person aged between 14 and 16 years who the
offender believed was aged 16
years. In ruling that such a belief could not
excuse the offender, the joint judgment of Gleeson CJ, Gummow J, Crennan and
JJ identified the principle at [8]:
"Where it is a ground of
exculpation, the law in Australia requires that the honest and reasonable, but
mistaken, belief be in a state
of affairs such that, if the belief were correct,
the conduct of the accused would be innocent. In that context, the word
means not guilty of a criminal offence.
In the case of an
offence, or a series of offences, defined by statute, it means that if the
belief were true, the conduct of the
accused would be 'outside the operation of
the enactment' Proudman v Dayman
[1941] HCA 28
67 CLR 536."
in their judgment, the majority spoke of the belief as to the age of the child
as not assisting the offender because "it would
merely take the case out of one
prohibition into another". The judgment continued:
"The act of
consensual sexual intercourse is not of itself an offence. The offence consists
in a particular accompanying state of
affairs or circumstance (relevantly, age).
An honest mistake about the extent to which a child is under-age would merely be
irrelevant to guilt, although it could possibly have some consequence
sentencing purposes."
to a mistaken belief taking the conduct "outside the operation of the
enactment", in issue in
Proudman v Dayman
was the application of the
mistake of fact principles to summary road traffic offences created by statute.
Although the High Court
agreed with the view of the Full Court that the
appellant could not succeed with the claim of mistake of fact in the particular
circumstances
of the case, Dixon J discussed the application of the principles
to statutory offences and provisions under the
Road Traffic Act
Honour concluded there was an absence of sufficient reason for treating the
presumption in favour of applying the principles
of mistake of fact as rebutted
with respect to the particular provision of the
Road Traffic Act
which the charge was laid. It was in this context that his Honour spoke of the
requirement that a defendant "must make it appear
that he had reasonable grounds
for believing in the existence of a state of facts, which, if true, would take
his act outside the
operation of the enactment and that on those grounds he did
so believe."
context in which Dixon J was speaking in
Proudman v Dayman
significant. His Honour was discussing the presumption that mistake of fact
would apply to newly created statutory offences.
It was in this context that
his Honour spoke of an act being taken by the facts in which a defendant
believed "outside the operation
of the enactment". It appears likely that his
Honour had in mind the statutory "enactment" in which the provision containing
primary offence was found. In
Proudman v Dayman
Traffic Act.
Application of the principle
regardless of the particulars as to the method of management upon which the
Crown relied, it is necessary to return the findings
of the magistrate. Her
Honour was not satisfied that the failure to inspect the horses during the
voyage exposed the horses to any
further risk of pain and suffering. In other
words, as to that particular of the method of management, her Honour found that
failure did not play any role in the method of management being reasonably
likely to bring about the prohibited result.
magistrate found three failures, individually or in combination, rendered the
method of management in breach of s 7. The first
failure was reliance on the
consignor's declaration as to the adequacy of the ventilation. However, for the
reasons earlier discussed,
it was not unreasonable for the applicant to rely on
that declaration. If the ventilation had been adequate, the method of
would not have been "reasonably likely to result in unreasonable and
unjustifiable pain or suffering" to the horses. Reliance on
the consignor's
declaration, therefore, would not have been a feature of the method of
management "reasonably likely" to bring about
the prohibited result.
second particular upon which the magistrate found the charge proved was the
failure "to ensure the ventilation ... was suitable
for the horses being
transported, and fitted or designed in a way that had effective and appropriate
air flow" for the horses. Again,
if the mistaken belief had been true, namely,
the ventilation was adequate, a failure to ensure adequacy of the ventilation
not have caused the method of management to be reasonably likely to bring
the third aspect upon which the magistrate relied was the failure to inspect the
transport unit to "ensure" that the horses
were individually stalled. For the
reasons discussed, in my view the magistrate erred in this regard. As the
failure to individually
stall the horses did not possess any causative effect, a
failure to inspect to ensure individual stalling could not contribute to
method of management being reasonably likely to bring about the prohibited
these circumstances, although the prosecution sought to rely on a number of
particulars, the only particular left standing before
the application of the
principles governing the mistake of fact was the failure to ensure adequate
ventilation. The failure to ensure
the horses were individually stalled, while
advanced as a particular, was not an "element" of the method of management. The
to individually stall is an entirely separate offence of no relevance to
the method of management.
Notwithstanding
the lack of relevance, the facts underlying the alternative offence, being the
failure to ensure the horses were
individually stalled, were fully explored and
debated during the trial because the failure was advanced, unsuccessfully, as a
of the method of management. In these circumstances, there is no
question of unfairness to the applicant of the type contemplated
judgments in
based on the accusatorial system and comparing the
elements of the offences.
a consequence of the findings of the magistrate and the reasons earlier
discussed, the current position is as follows:
Although the
facts underpinning the breach of reg 34(6) were, in the prosecution case,
relevant to the charge of a breach of s 7,
following the finding of the
magistrate those facts were irrelevant to the charge of a breach of s 7.
The applicant
reasonably believed that the ventilation in the transport unit was adequate. If
those facts had been true, the applicant
was not guilty of a breach of s 7. The
mistake was not "legally irrelevant" to guilt of an offence under the provisions
Animal Welfare Act
breach of reg 34(6) by reason of a failure to ensure the horses were
individually stalled was irrelevant to the primary
offence of a breach of
Although the
regulations form part of the legislative scheme, and are made for the purposes
of the Act, nevertheless the alternative
offence of breaching reg 34(6) is not
an offence against any provision of the Act under which the primary offence was
The primary
offence charged concerned a "method of management" reasonably likely to cause
the prohibited result of unreasonable and
unjustifiable pain or suffering to the
horses. Regulation 34(6) is not dependent upon proof that the failure to
individually stall
the horses is reasonably likely to cause a particular result.
Specifically, it is not dependent upon proof that the failure to individually
stall is reasonably likely to result in unreasonable and unjustifiable pain or
suffering to a horse. It is a strict requirement,
regardless of the particular
circumstances or possible consequences of a failure to comply.
At the time of
transportation, the maximum penalty for a breach of s 7 was $159,000. The
maximum for a breach of reg 34(6) was $15,900.
culpability between an offence under s 7 and a breach of reg 34(6) is
significant. The applicant believed the ventilation
was adequate and that it
was complying with the Act. It believed that the consignor had ensured
compliance with the applicant's
conditions of carriage.
This is not a
in which it would be affront to common sense and justice to
permit an offender to escape conviction notwithstanding that the mistaken
was irrelevant to guilt of an alternative criminal offence against the same
statute. The applicant's mistaken belief as to
the adequacy of the ventilation
"excused" the applicant from the commission of any offence under the Act.
underpinning the breach of reg 34(6) were irrelevant to the offence against s
It would be
affront to accept notions of fairness and common sense to insist that although
the applicant held an honest and reasonable
belief that the ventilation was
adequate, and was therefore not guilty of the primary charge under s 7,
nevertheless a conviction
for that charge should stand because the applicant was
guilty of an omission irrelevant to the primary charge which amount to a breach
of reg 34(6).
these circumstances, in my view, to find the accused guilty of a breach of s 7
would be to extend the concept of "innocent" beyond
its proper limits. However,
the respondent contended that as a reference to an act in the
Animal Welfare
is, by reason of
Acts Interpretation Act
, a reference
to the regulations, the alternative offence of the breach of reg 34(6) is not
"outside the operation of the enactment".
Therefore, the applicant is not
"innocent".
Acts Interpretation Act
"In any Act,
including this Act, a reference to an Act (including a reference to the Act in
which the reference occurs) or to an Imperial
Act, or a Commonwealth Act,
includes a reference to any regulation made under that Act, Imperial Act, or
Commonwealth Act."
respondent contended that commission of a breach of the regulations brings the
relevant conduct "within the operation of the
enactment". In other words, the
Act and regulations are part of a single legislative scheme and comprise a
single "enactment" of
the type contemplated by Dixon J in
Proudman v Dayman
when his Honour spoke of the requirement that a defendant "must make it
appear that he had reasonable grounds for believing in the
existence of a state
of facts, which, if true, would take his act outside the operation of the
enactment and that on those grounds
he did so believe."
Acts Interpretation Act
does not dictate that a breach of
regulations made under an Act amounts to a breach of that Act. Similarly, it
does not dictate that
a breach of an Act is a breach of the regulations made
under the Act. Plainly, the Act and regulations comprise a legislative scheme,
and s 5(2) provides that where reference is made in an Act to that Act, it is
taken to be a reference to regulations made under that
Act. However, in the
creation of offences, separate regimes exist within the Act and regulations made
under that Act.
these circumstances, for the reasons discussed, notwithstanding a breach of reg
34(6), by reason of the mistake of fact as to
the adequacy of the ventilation
the applicant was "innocent" for the purposes of the principles governing
mistake of fact.
would allow the appeal and, in respect of the conviction for a breach of s 7 of
the Act, I would set aside the conviction and enter
a finding of not
File No FCA 3138/2022
TT-LINE COMPANY PTY LTD (ACN 061 996 174) v RAE BURROWS
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
3 July 2023
Introduction
In late January 2018, 18 horses were being transported in a truck/trailer on an
overnight crossing of Bass Strait by a vessel operated
by TT-Line Company Pty
Spirit of Tasmania I
. The transport unit was owned and driven
onto the vessel by Andrew Williams. Sixteen of 18 of those horses died during
the crossing.
The immediate cause of death was respiratory failure due to high
environmental temperatures.
(the applicant) was charged with a breach of
Animal Welfare
(the Act) in that being in care or charge of a group of animals it
used a method of management of the group reasonably likely to
unreasonable and unjustifiable pain or suffering. On 27 October 2022 the
applicant was found guilty by Magistrate Topfer,
and has moved to review that
finding of guilt. A single judge reserved the motion for this Court to hear and
I have had the advantage of reading the reasons for judgment of both Estcourt J
and Martin AJ. The background facts, the relevant
concluding remarks of the
magistrate in finding the applicant guilty and the amended grounds of the notice
to review are set out
in the judgment of Martin AJ. I respectfully adopt his
Honour's summary.
For the reasons that follow, I agree that the motion should be allowed and the
order by which the charge was found proved should
be set aside. However, I agree
with Estcourt J that there should be an order that the complaint be re-heard.
The grounds of the motion to review
There are five grounds set out in the notice to review. In short summary,
ground 1 relates to the construction of s 7 of the Act,
ground 2 concerns a
procedural fairness issue, ground 3 relates to the issue of honest and
reasonable mistake of fact, while grounds
4 and 5 concern a factual issue of
"double-stalling" the horses in the trailer.
As to ground 1, I agree with Estcourt J but I will make some additional
remarks. As to ground 2– the procedural fairness issue
with Estcourt J and Martin AJ that it should be upheld but here too will add
some comments. As to grounds 4 and
5 – the "double-stalling" grounds"
– I agree with Martin AJ. I note that for differing reasons, each of
their Honours
has said the success of grounds 2, 4 and 5 is of no consequence in
the overall context of the motion to review and because of success
grounds. As to the mistake of fact ground, I am afraid I take a different view
to both of their Honours, although as will
become clear, I agree in part with
Ground 1 – s 7 of the Act
By ground 1 the applicant complains that the magistrate erred in law in
determining the elements of an offence under s 7 by holding
that it was not an
element of the offence that where the alleged method of management included an
omission to take a measure, it
was a reasonable measure to take. The ground
involves consideration of when criminal liability will attach to omissions and
7 operates in that context.
arises in the context of her Honour's finding that the complaint was made out by
proof of a method of management consisting
of a failure to ensure the
ventilation of the trailer was suitable for the horses being transported and had
effective and appropriate
airflow, and failing to inspect the trailer unit
before the voyage, to ensure that the horses were individually stalled. (The
particulars
of the charge and the further and better particulars supplied are
set out in the judgment of Martin AJ). Her Honour also held the
complaint was
also made out the basis of reliance on a "Declaration by Consigner of
Livestock/Animal Welfare Statement" (consignor
declaration) signed by Mr
the sake of convenience, I will again set out the two directly relevant sections
of the Act.
Section 6 provides:
6 Duty of care to animals
A person who has the care or charge of an animal has a duty to take all
reasonable measures to ensure the welfare of the animal."
Section 7 provides:
7 Management of animals
A person who has the care or charge of an animal or group of animals must not
use a method of management of the animal or group which
is reasonably likely to
result in unreasonable and unjustifiable pain or suffering to the animal or an
animal in the group".
the present case the method of management was, in summary, ultimately
particularised by reference to failures to inspect the horses
during the voyage
and, in transporting the horses, to do certain things to ensure there was
effective and appropriate airflow and
that the horses were individually stalled.
Of course, implicit in the last two allegations is that the airflow is said not
been effective and appropriate and that the horses ought to have been
individually stalled. As Martin AJ has shown, in the context
of s 7 allegations
of transporting the horses in adverse conditions can be framed as positive acts,
rather than omissions. Issues
of conceptualisation
TT-Line v Burrows
[2021] TASFC 3
33 Tas R 163
that s 7 of the Act is concerned with an activity; the
of a method of
management.
Liability attaches to
the use of a method – ostensibly a positive act – that is reasonably
likely to result in unreasonable
and unjustifiable pain or suffering. But the
phrase "use a method of management" is a compendious one, with the method of
alleged to have been "used" requiring particularisation and scrutiny
in any given case. And, as was decided in
TT-Line Company Pty Ltd v
, omissions to act or to do things can form part of a "method of
management" the subject of a charge under s 7.
noted, the case against the applicant was pleaded, and the magistrate decided
it, on the basis of a method of management that
included what might be called
"true" failures to act on the part of the applicant. An issue in the trial was
the assertion by the
applicant that the method of management used was to rely,
in relevant respects, on the consignor declaration and that, as such reliance
was a reasonable measure, it had not "failed" to act as alleged. (I note that as
Estcourt J has observed, that reliance without more
implies consequent omissions
to take particular measures.) That is the case with which this Court is dealing.
is axiomatic that an omission to act will only give rise to criminal liability
in situations where a duty arises at common law
or is imposed by statute. The
duty must be a circumscribed one and be positively laid down by the law. See for
Kenny's Outlines of Criminal Law
Glanville Williams,
Textbook of Criminal Law
148-149; PM Gillies,
Criminal Law
ed at 37. A statutory
duty can be a general duty, or a statute may make an offence one committed by an
omission or failure.
R v Iannelli
[2003] NSWCCA 1
56 NSWLR 247
, Handley JA
"21 Criminal liability for mere omissions in Anglo-Australian
law is exceptional unless it has been expressly imposed by statute.
Criminal Law
The General Part
(1961) at 3-5 states:
'In some instances an omission will create criminal responsibility without
any positive act ... In law, as in morals, the concept
of culpable omission
presupposes a duty to act; and a rule penalising an omission must state to whom
this duty belongs ... the criminal
law does not impose a duty upon someone to
act to prevent a consequence whenever it imposes a duty not to bring about the
consequence.
The law relating to omissions is not co-extensive with the law
relating to acts. It is partly coincident in manslaughter and murder,
the event of death leads the law to look upon the omission with special
severity. Most crimes, particularly those at common
law, are defined to need a
positive act ...'.
Halsbury's Laws of England
, 4th ed, Vol 11 (1976) ... at 15 is to
the same effect:
9 Omissions.
As a rule the criminal law imposes no obligation on
persons to act so as to prevent the occurrence of harm or wrongdoing. There is
no general duty to prevent the commission of crime; nor does a person commit a
crime or become a party to it solely because he might
reasonably have prevented
its commission. Omission to act in a particular way will give rise to criminal
liability only when a duty
so to act arises at common law or is imposed by
statute. Such a duty is exceptional and the criminal law does not ordinarily
a man to be his brother's keeper'.
responsibility for omissions can occur where the accused has, or has accepted,
the duty of looking after another, such as
an infant, or an invalid, who is not
able to look after himself or herself and that person dies or suffers injury
through neglect
of that duty. ..."
are other examples of where a common law duty to act arises, not presently
relevant. As is noted in that passage, a duty to
act may arise where a person
has, or has accepted the duty of looking after another. At common law there was
no general duty of care
with respect to animals as such, as distinct, perhaps,
from being possessions of humans. That was remedied in this State by the
introduction
of s 6 of the Act, the rationale for which is explained in the
Minister's second reading speech. That speech is reproduced in the
judgment of
Martin AJ by way of a quotation from the judgment of Blow CJ in
[2014] TASSC 43
was referred to by the majority (Doyle CJ and Duggan J) in
Poniatowska v
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth)
[2010] SASCFC 19
107 SASR 578
. That case found its way to the High Court:
DPP (Cth) v Poniatowska
[2011] HCA 43
244 CLR 408.
The case concerned the construction of s 135.2(1) of
Criminal Code Act
1995 (Cth) (the Code) the relevant elements of
which are engaging in conduct as a result of which a financial advantage is
s 4.1.2 of the Code, "engaged in conduct" is defined as a meaning to do an act,
or to omit to perform an act, but by s 4.3 an
omission to perform an act can
only be a physical element of a crime if (a) the law creating the offence makes
it so, or (b), the
law creating the offence impliedly provides that the offence
is committed by an omission to perform an act that by law there was
In the South Australian Full Court, at [30], Doyle CJ and Duggan J after
expressing their opinion that the law creating the offence
(s 135.2(1)) did not
make an omission to perform a physical element of the offence, continued as
"The concept of an 'omission' must be read as referring to
a law which identifies the omission in question in such a way as to create
duty to perform the omitted act. An example of such a law is a law which makes
it an offence for a person to refuse or fail to
produce a driver's licence on
request by a police officer. The refusal or failure to produce the driver's
licence is an identified
or specific omission, and it is an omission to perform
an act which the person in question is obliged to perform, having regard to
terms of the offence creating provision. An omission to file a tax return
provides another example."
In the High Court, at [29], the plurality (French CJ, Gummow, Kiefel and Bell
JJ) approved the notion that the Code incorporated
the general law principle
that the criminal law does not attach to an omission, save the omission of an
act that a person is under
a legal obligation to perform. That obligation is to
be found within the law defining the offence, or where the duty to perform the
act is otherwise imposed by law. The Court affirmed the decision of the majority
in the Full Court, and held that the law creating
the offence in s 135.2(1) of
the Code did not make the omission of an act a physical one of the offence
within the meaning of s 4.3(a).
the High Court, the plurality said at [35]:
"If the law creating the
offence does not criminalise the failure to do a thing...and if that failure is
not the breach of a duty
imposed by the law....it is difficult to characterise
the fact that a person does not do the thing as the omission of an act. The
appellant's answer to this difficulty is to say that the elements of the offence
are not to be analysed in isolation: the gravamen
of the offence created by s
135.2(1) is the intentional failure to do something, which causes the person to
receive the financial
advantage, in circumstances in which he or she has the
requisite additional mental state.
This analysis conflates the elements of
conduct and the result of conduct. In the result, the need to identify a
specific omission
to act is overlooked
." [My emphasis].
Poniatowska
concerned provisions of the Code. However, at
[32] the plurality noted that the Code adopted a more restrictive approach to
for the omission to act than if the common law, but this was because
"the law" to which s 4.3(b) referred, was a law of the Commonwealth,
4.3(b) did not include obligations imposed under the general law. At [33], their
Honours went on to note that s 4.3(a) of the
Code allows the omission to perform
an act to be a physical element on an offence if the law creating the offence
"makes it so".
The text of s 7 of the Act has to be construed in its context. Its immediate
context includes ss 6, 8 and 9. On the one hand, s
8 – Cruelty to animals
– provides that a person must not do any act or "omit to do any duty"
which causes or is likely
to cause unreasonable pain and unjustifiable pain or
suffering, wording which is repeated in s 9 – Aggravated cruelty. On the
other hand, there is a textual connection between ss 6 and 7, that being the
repeated concept of "a person who has the care or charge...".
In the case of s
6, that care or charge is of "an animal", while s 7 simply extends that to the
plural. The use of a method of management
is linked to the concept of having
care and control.
The prohibition in s 7 on using a method of management (which can include
omissions) that is likely to produce a particular consequence,
is analogous to a
prohibition in s 135.2(1) of the Code on engaging in conduct (which can include
omissions) resulting in a particular
consequence. Recalling what the High Court
Poniatowska
at [37] (above), s 7 is a "result" or "consequences"
provision. Although that case deals with a different statutory scheme, the legal
situations are sufficiently analogous so that it can and should be applied to
the present case.
What is proscribed is the use of a method of management that is reasonably
likely to cause the result provided for in the section;
unreasonable
unjustifiable
pain and suffering. The respondent submits that the
question of reasonable attaches to the consequences of the method of management.
I am not able to accept that submission. The words which condition the type of
pain and suffering cannot be used to define the nature
of an omission said to be
part of a method of management.
follows that if it is alleged that a method of management being "used" consists
of an omission to do something, there must be
an obligation to do that thing.
Primarily at least, that is to be found in s 6. I do not think it can be found
within s 7 itself.
After giving the matter careful consideration, I am satisfied
that to the extent that the method of management alleged in this case
of omissions, the omitted measures must be reasonable ones to have been taken in
the circumstances. Ground 1 succeeds.
Ground 2 – procedural
Ground 2 asserts an error in law in failing to afford the applicant procedural
fairness. There are five overlapping and repetitive
aspects of this assertion.
In essence, the complaint is that the magistrate found the charge was made out
on a basis that was not
particularised – the consignor declaration was not
alleged to have been part of the method of management – and did not
the complaint before the decision. The power to amend a complaint to
accommodate a variance between it and the evidence in
support is to be found in
Justices Act
to the facts, the magistrate, after discussing reliance on the consignor
declaration as being part of the method of management,
noted that this had not
been specifically referred to by either party, and said she referred "... if
necessary, to
... and will make any appropriate amendments to the
particulars of the charge." Her Honour did not raise the matter before the
The prosecution had not applied to amend the complaint and no order of
amendment was made.
J has observed that the failure to hear and determine an application amounted to
procedural unfairness. I agree. With respect,
if that is what her Honour had in
mind, it ought to have raised, and dealt with. The respondent properly accepted
that the power
to amend under
may only be exercised upon application and
at any time before judgment. See
Robinson v Murweh Shire Council
parte Robinson
[1984] Qd R 349;
Jennings v Brown
[1982] Tas R 306 (NC
17). I also agree with the conclusions of Martin AJ and, generally speaking,
with his reasons. The only thing I want to add to what
their Honours have said
relates to the power available under the
Justice Act
1959, s 31(3) to
amend the complaint "to accord with the evidence".
Martin AJ has noted, the respondent concedes that the magistrate's reliance on
the consignor declaration as part of the method
of management was inappropriate
but contends the mischaracterisation was ultimately immaterial because of the
findings of guilt based
on the other two aspects of the method of management
which, either individually or in combination, were reasonably likely to bring
elevation of the reliance issue to a particular was
not immaterial. The
magistrate included the reliance on the consignor declaration in the three
aspects of the method of management
that "either individually or in combination
was reasonably likely to result in unreasonable and unjustifiable pain or
suffering."
In the alternative, the respondent submits that should this Court find that
there was "a defect in the particulars" then it could
exercise the power under
Justices Act
to now amend the complaint to add the
particular. That provision enables a court on a motion to review to "amend or
cause to be amended,
on such terms as are just, any defect or error in any
proceedings before the justices". (There is also
s 110(2)(i)
which enables the
court to exercise any power that might have been exercised by the
magistrate).The submission leads to a consideration
provisions of
operate as follows. A variance between the complaint and the
evidence in support is treated as a defect. In
McKay Investments Pty Ltd v
[2011] TASSC 11
, Blow J (as he then was) said that by
implication, if there is some inconsistency between the allegations
particularised in a complaint
and the evidence adduced by the complainant, but
that inconsistency does not cause the defendant prejudice in the sense the
of the trial is affected, then the inconsistency must be regarded as
immaterial.
is also authority for the proposition that a magistrate has no discretion to
refuse to amend a complaint to accommodate a variance
between it and the
evidence unless the defendant appears to have been prejudiced:
[1976] TASR 42
at 55. It follows from all of this, of course, that
the central question is that of prejudice.
In this case, the respondent conceded in argument that there may well have been
further evidence not led on the point of reliance
on the consignor declaration
had it been made a particular of the charge, as outlined by the applicant. That
concession is one properly
made. The existence of prejudice is the end of the
matter and I agree with Martin AJ's comments in this respect. In the absence of
established prejudice though, there is authority for the proposition that a
court on a motion to review has the power to make an
amendment in the
circumstances set out in
, pursuant to
s 110(2)(f)
S v Johnson
[2015] TASSC 20
– mistake of fact
The ground alleges an error of law in finding that the defence of honest and
reasonable mistake was not made out. There are three
parts to this ground:
(a) An error of law in finding the TT-Line had a non-delegable duty.
(b) A failure "to apply the criminal burden of proof to the requirement that the
prosecution exclude the defence of honest and reasonable
mistake of fact."
(c) It was not open to the magistrate to conclude that the applicant's mistake
was unreasonable.
Martin AJ has set out the applicant's submissions on the factual matters
relevant to this issue. His Honour has also set out the
relevant parts of the
magistrate's reasons. I am grateful for his Honour's summary.
As to the ground 3(a), I agree that the magistrate's comments about delegation
amounted to a minor diversion of no consequence.
As to ground 3(b), it should be
noted that the magistrate did not expressly say whether the evidential burden
had been discharged
respondent submits that it was open for the magistrate to hold that the
applicant had not discharged the evidentiary onus to
raise the ground of
exculpation. On a fair reading of the entirety of the relevant passages, her
Honour may well have taken that
view. Such a view would explain her Honour's
observations about the lack of evidence about a number of things, some of which
observations
were relied on by the applicant to suggest the reversal of the onus
of proof. They included any check "portside or during the voyage"
compliance with the applicant's conditions of carriage, and enquiries as to Mr
Williams' competence as a carrier, experience
in carrying horses or his
competence on the question of ventilation.
any event, I agree with Martin AJ. I am satisfied that the magistrate did not
reverse the onus of proof and ignore the requirement
that the prosecution
exclude the defence of honest and reasonable mistake of fact once the
evidentiary onus of raising the issue
had been satisfied. In my view it is quite
unlikely that having set out two relevant passages from
Sims v Elmer
[2019] TASSC 21
, which correctly identify the proper approach, her Honour would
then completely ignore them. That is borne out by the following.
introducing the topic of honest and reasonable mistake of fact, her Honour
"Given that that
is an offence of strict viability, the
'of honest and reasonable mistake
' is open to the Defendant. The
' is used not in the pure technical sense but in the loose
sense in which it is conveniently used to describe a ground of exculpation."
[Original emphasis]
That puts into proper context her Honour's concluding remarks which were the
subject of criticism by the applicant, viz "In the
circumstances honest and
reasonable mistake of fact cannot exculpate the defendant."
Ground 3(c) is worded in a peculiar way. It will be recalled it complains that
it was not open to the magistrate to conclude that
the applicant's mistake was
unreasonable. That assumes two things; first that the applicant had discharged
the evidentiary onus of
raising the ground of exculpation and second, that the
magistrate was satisfied that the applicant had a belief in a fact or state
facts which, if true, would make the conduct of the applicant "innocent". Given
the magistrate's reasons there is no real basis
for those assumptions, and the
issues are in fact raised by the respondent in this motion.
Leaving that to one side for the moment, as I noted earlier this ground was
argued on the basis of '
House v King
' errors. Quite why the case was put
on that particular basis escapes me. In any event, the applicant primarily says
the magistrate
failed to take into account a number of factual matters, some of
which involve unchallenged evidence. Those matters are more fully
set out in the
judgment of Martin AJ and I need not provide any detail point. Suffice it to
say, the applicant asserts failures to
take into account some aspects of the
evidence and to give "sufficient weight" to particular evidence.
In written submissions, the consequence of a finding that the magistrate made
-type errors" in the reasoning process was not identified. However,
during oral argument and on specific questioning from the Bench
outcome if the ground were upheld on this basis, senior counsel for the
applicant "invited" the Court not to remit the
matter, it being clear form the
exchange that the Court was being asked to resolve the factual question for
itself, set aside the
finding of guilt and dismiss the
Acquittal by this Court
long line of authority establishes that a motion to review is not in the nature
of an appeal by way of rehearing, and the principles
[1979] HCA 9
(1979) 142 CLR 531
do not apply. On a review of the conclusion of a
magistrate on the facts, the question is whether on the evidence the magistrate
might, as a reasonable person, have come to the conclusion to which he or she
did: see for instance:
Richardson v Ship
[1970] Tas R 105
Phillips v Arnold
[2009] TASSC 43
19 Tas R 21
per Crawford CJ (with whom
Blow J and I agreed) at [46],
Nilsson v McDonald
[2009] TASSC 66
per Blow J at [59] (Crawford CJ and Evans J agreeing) and
[2018] TASFC 1
28 Tas R 11.
a motion to review challenges a finding of guilt, it should only be allowed if
the court is satisfied that on no reasonable
view of the evidence could the
magistrate have failed entertain a reasonable doubt as to guilt; that is, the
finding was not reasonably
Leonard v Newell
[1983] TASRp 11
[1983] Tas R 78
I will take the applicant's arguments accordingly. That means all of the
evidence that relates to all aspects of the issue of honest
and reasonable
mistake of fact needs to examined, not just whether "the applicant's mistake was
unreasonable." Because of the outcome
of grounds 4 and 5, the matter needs to be
approached, as Martin AJ has done, on the basis that the only issue as to the
management is that relating to airflow/ventilation.
should make it clear that this Court was not, in respect of any other ground of
review, asked to consider an acquittal on the basis
the finding of guilt was not
reasonably open. There was no suggestion by the applicant that in the event any
other ground or combination
of grounds succeeded, the Court should determine the
fate of the complaint on the whole of the evidence.
I have alluded to, the respondent submits it is open to find that applicant has
not discharged its evidential burden. Whether
or not the issue was sufficiently
raised on the evidence is a matter of law. The question can be determined by
this Court:
CTM v The Queen
[2008] HCA 25
236 CLR 440
it was not raised, in strict terms there is no need to go further. If it was,
the ultimate issue is one of fact. If the magistrate
wrongly took the view that
the evidential burden was not discharged, then any such error is of no
consequence. It is not an error
which vitiates the decision itself:
[2014] TASFC 5
24 Tas R 290
this case, there was no direct evidence in relation to the issue of mistake in
any respect. The issue can be sufficiently raised
and ultimately determined by a
process of inference:
Jiminez v The Queen
[1992] HCA 14
(1992) 173 CLR 572
at 583-584.
Determining the ultimate issue in the present context involves an assessment of
whether the evidence is reasonably capable
of excluding all rational hypotheses
consistent with innocence. Ultimately, the applicant needs to show that it was
not reasonably
open for the magistrate to have found that an absence of an
honest and reasonable mistake was the only rational inference to be drawn
all of the circumstances.
An underlying issue –
corporate attribution
In the context of the evidential burden, the respondent argues that the
evidence failed to support any conclusion that the applicant
held an actual
positive mistake and belief. The applicant points out there was no evidence from
the employee or employees who received
the consignor declaration as to their
belief or reliance, and in particular submits "the evidence fails to establish
whose belief
was that to be
upon the Applicant as a company." [My
charge under
seeks to make the applicant directly liable, and the question
of imputation of a belief to the applicant as a body corporate is one
to be addressed. Corporations can only act through human agency. In determining
a corporate state of mind it is necessary
to look at the question of attribution
to it of a human state of mind. This was not a matter that seems to have been
mentioned at
all during the lower court hearing.
the course of the argument in the Court, senior counsel for the applicant was
questioned about the extent of the evidence said
to discharge the evidential
burden or create a reasonable doubt, in the course of which he was asked how the
consignor declaration
induced in the corporation a mistaken belief. The answer
was to the effect that by providing the document to the employees, their
knowledge is the company's knowledge; "... the general rule in relation to
corporate criminal liability of these things is always
in that way, the
knowledge of the corporation is imputed through the knowledge of its employees."
In fact, s 3A(3)(a) of the Act provides that for the purposes of proceedings
for an offence under the Act, the conduct and state
of mind of an officer,
employer or agent of a body corporate acting within the scope of his or her
actual, usual or ostensible authority
will be imputed to the body corporate (the
"attribution provision"). There is no reason to think that "state of mind" does
not include
common law, in order to fix liability on a company it was determined that the
"directing will and mind" of the company is to be
ascertained, and that person
or person's state of mind is attributed to the company. This approach was later
said not to be universal;
the rules of attribution could relate to other persons
depending on the circumstances of the case and the construction of the statute
involved. See
Tesco Supermarkets Ltd v Nattrass
[1971] UKHL 1
[1972] AC 153
Hamilton v Whitehead
[1988] HCA 65
(1988) 166 CLR 121
Meridian Global Funds
Management Asia Ltd v Securities Commission
[1995] UKPC 5
[1995] 2 AC 500
Developmental Learning Centres v Wallace
[2006] VSC 171
161 A Crim R 250
and in particular, the discussion in
Commonwealth Bank of Australia v
[2016] FCAFC 186
249 FCR 421
per Edelman J at [94]-[100].
Section 3A(3)(a) is shorter form of
Competition and Consumer
at [109], Edeleman J described that provision as being
"supplemental" to the general rules of attribution and not replacing them;
extends rather than limits the liability of corporations for the actions of
must be accepted that because s 7 of the Act is a strict
offence with the mens rea
being the absence of an honest and reasonable mistake of fact, a mistaken belief
in relation to that element
would be a "state of mind" within the meaning of the
attribution provision.
A question of whether a person has the requisite state of mind said to be
attributed to the company is one of fact. Ordinarily it
would be expected that
when mistake of fact is sought to be raised, the particular person said to have
the requisite state of mind
to be imputed to the corporation would at least be
identified so as to establish the relationship with the company in order to
the application of the attribution provision. In this case it might
be reasonably inferred that that it was an employee or contractor.
(It appears
from what was said in the interview of the TT-Line's Mr Michael and Mr Davis on
14 January 2019 that "officers or contractors"
could have been relevantly
issue of corporate mistaken belief arose in
GJ Coles & Co Ltd v
Goldsworthy
[1985] WAR 183.
The Court recognised the different evidential
and ultimate burdens. At 188, Burt CJ noted that for the purposes of the case
necessary to identify the "person who" did the relevant act, "and that
person having been identified it is
belief which must be considered."
[Original emphasis.]
Honour went on to note that the only relevant person called did not say that he
had any belief one way or the other, and that
it was his belief with which the
Court was concerned so that he could be identified with the company. At 193-194,
Smith J said that
where a corporation wished to set up the defence, the belief
of the company may be the belief of a single officer or it may be a
compounded of the knowledge of various of its officers.
is no great difficulty in the application of the attribution provision where it
is asserted the one "officer, employee or agent"
acting within the relevant
scope of authority had the requisite state of mind. On the hearing of this
motion, the applicant includes
in the consideration of whether the mistake was
honest and reasonable, the fact that before this particular voyage, Mr Williams
used the same trailer to transport horses by TT-Line ship on nine occasions,
with no reported incidents. This was the subject of
agreed facts, the date
range being from approximately January 2014 to 10 December 2017.
might raise the issue of knowledge of those known trips by the one person, or by
several persons. That in turn raises the legal
question of the aggregation of
knowledge or states of mind of individuals for the purposes of corporate
attribution. Broadly speaking,
the circumstances in which it is appropriate to
use aggregation are limited: see generally
(above) at [66],
[78]-[80], [106] and following;
Cargill Australia Ltd v Viterra Malt Pty Ltd
[2022] VSC 13
at [2622] and following.
issue of aggregation of beliefs of several persons relevant to mistake of fact
on the part of a corporation arose in
Brambles Holdings Ltd v Carey
(1976) 15 SASR 270
. At 275, Bray CJ observed that it was a fallacy
to say that any state of mind to be attributed to a corporation must always be
state of mind of one particular officer alone, but "hastened" to add this
did not mean that a corporation "can know or believe two
contradictory things at
once." (That issue did arise on the facts of the case.)
282, Mitchell J acknowledged there were cases in which it was necessary to
consider the information of individual officers as
a composite, but found in the
case at hand, that because of the contrary knowledge by one employee, the
mistaken belief of another
could not be attributed to the company. See the
analysis of this case by Edelman J in
[127]-[133].
The evidential burden
evidential burden might be discharged where there is evidence of a reasonably
possibility of the existence of the defence; that
is, where the evidence taken
at its highest in favour of an accsued could lead a tribunal of fact to have a
reasonable doubt:
R v Youssef
(1990) 50 Crim R 1 at 3;
Braysich v The
[2011] HCA 14
, 243 CLR at [36]. In the context of the 'defence' of
self-defence it has been said that the issue should be raised in "a meaningful
way", with the evidence capable of supporting a reasonable doubt as to whether
the defence has been excluded. The evidence must be
capable of doing this as a
matter of legitimate reasoning, and not mere speculation. See
Director of Public Prosecutions
[2006] NSWCA 293
Douglas v The
[2005] NSWCCA 419
per Simpson J (Adams and Hoeben JJ agreeing) at
[99]-[101].
of the burden may require that an accused person lead evidence in a defence
case; the burden may be discharged by way of
cross-examination of prosecution
witnesses, and "in rare cases it may be discharged by reference to evidence
adduced by the by the
prosecution in chief":
Momcilovic v The Queen
[2011] HCA 34
per Bell J.
What the law
requires for a "belief"
must be an affirmative belief about a fact or factual situation in question.
Inadvertence, a mere absence of knowledge, not
turning one's mind to the issue
or having an absence of concern about the matter are not sufficient:
Teh v The Queen
[1985] HCA 43
(1985) 157 CLR 523
per Brennan J at 575;
[2008] HCA, 236
CLR 440 at [7];
Von Lieven v Stewart
State Rail Authority (NSW) v Hunter Water Board
28 NSWLR 721
Su v Australian Fisheries Management Authority (No
[2008] FCA 1485
189 A Crim R 23
Hindrum v Lane
GJ Coles v Goldsworthy
(above) at 194, Smith J said it was incumbent on
those who seek to rely on the issue to put "cogent evidence" of a relevant
before the tribunal of fact, and "state clearly and unequivocally what
they believed the true facts to be and the grounds of that
belief", citing
Brambles Holdings Ltd v Carey
(above) per Bray CJ at 274. However, as
Bray CJ had there observed, evidence of belief can be "gathered by
inference."
the law requires for a "reasonable" belief
word '"reasonable" in the context of an honest and reasonable mistake does not
involve a hypothetical ordinary or reasonable
person test. It is the
respondent's belief that must be looked at but it must also be objectively
reasonable, that is to say it must
be, "based on his appreciation of primary
objective fact which is in reason capable of sustaining belief":
& Co Limited v Goldsworthy
(above) per Burt CJ at 187;
Hindrum v Lane
(above) per Tennent J (with whom Pearce J agreed) at [26]. Put another way,
consideration of the reasonableness of a belief must be
based on the
circumstances as the accused perceived then to be:
[2004] QCA 420
[2005] Qd R
Gibbon v Fitzmaurice
[1986] Tas R 137 per
Nettlefold J at 154.
Hindrum v Lane
at [27], Tennent J went on to set out a lengthy analysis
conducted by Reeves J in
Su v Australian Fisheries Management Authority (No
(above) at [104]-[106]. The analysis of Reeves J concluded at [106] with
the statement that it is apparent the word "reasonable":
not involve the hypothetical, ordinary or reasonable person test;
(b) requires that the belief be that of the accused;
(c) requires that the accused belief be objectively reasonable, i.e.
rational, based on reason, or capable of sustaining belief;
(d) requires the objective reasonableness of the accused's belief to be
assessed by reference to the subjective circumstances in which
the accused was
placed, including the accused's personal attributes and the information
available to him or her at the time."
the words of Bray CJ in
Brambles Holdings
(above) at 274, the belief must
be a product of reason rather than of faith. A mistake carelessly made is not a
reasonable one:
GJ Coles v Goldsworthy
(above) per Burt CJ at 188.
think of further significance in the present case is a comment made by Rowland J
Pearce v Stanton
[1984] WAR 359
at 363, to the effect that in
assessing whether an accused's belief was reasonable, regard should be had "to
the policy thrown up
by the statute". This was adopted in
Hindrum v Lane
at [28]. The need for consideration of "highly protective" legislation in this
context was also noted in
Bailey v Doncon
[2007] WASC 252
178 A Crim R
Whelan v Kallane
[2021] WASC 75
288 A Crim R 368
. In this case, the policy is clearly a protective one essentially as
expressed in s 6 of the Act, and as explained by the Minister
in the Second
Reading speech referred to earlier.
The state of the evidence
In relation to the issue of an affirmative mistaken belief, the applicant
relies on the particular consignor declaration. That
hereby declare that I am aware of and understand the Animal Welfare provisions
contained in the Marine Orders Part 43 and the TT-Line
Pty Ltd Carriage of
Livestock Policy and
after due enquiry believe
that the animals to be
shipped have been selected and transported according to these requirements."
[My emphasis.]
the conditions of carriage are set out in the declaration, there is nothing from
Part 43 of the Marine Orders. The particularly
relevant part of the conditions
"Vehicles used for the transport of horses are to provide
adequate flow through ventilation".
applicant also relies on the nine previous uneventful trips undertaken by Mr
Williams, and the similar consignor declarations
signed on each of those
relation to the consignor declaration, there was an agreed fact that "prior to
carriage", Mr Williams completed a consignor declaration
"which was required by
the defendant and was returned to the defendant." At the top of the document
there is a direction that the
completed declaration is to be returned to
"Terminal Services" at a specified email or fax number and it was to be returned
before departure. Senior counsel for the applicant conceded in argument
that this was not the practice; the practice was that it
was "submitted at the
barrier in the office and signed on the day of travel."
only other evidence concerning the use of the particular declaration came about
in the cross-examination of Dr Grull who was
asked in cross-examination (without
objection) to interpret some CCTV footage of what happened with Mr Williams when
he reached the
barrier to the loading dock. Dr Grull agreed with the suggestion
that the footage showed that both Williams and Martin were not allowed
onto the boat until they had gone in the office and completed the declarations.
That Mr Williams would not have been allowed
through in order to board if he had
not signed the declaration, is a reasonable inference to draw. With respect, I
think anything
beyond that inference is speculation and guesswork.
examination of the detail reveals the following:
(a) There is no evidence of who it was who physically received the consignor
declaration signed by Mr Williams, or what relationship
that person or persons
had with the applicant as a corporation.
(b) There is no evidence whether it was that person or someone else to whom the
declaration was immediately given who was responsible
for making the decision to
raise the barrier and allow Mr Williams onto the loading dock.
(c) There is no evidence as to whether whoever received the declaration, read it
and formed any view about the ventilation based
on it and if so what that view
was, or whether they simply received it as a mere procedural pre-condition for
allowing the truck/trailer
through the
(d) There is no evidence of who in the applicant corporation or as its agent, on
the night of 28 January 2018, had knowledge of the
previous nine trips; it may
have been one person with knowledge of all nine, or nine separate people who
knew of one each.
(e) There is no evidence that any such knowledge had any role to play in forming
a belief about the adequacy of the ventilation and
allowing Mr Williams onto the
vessel that night.
(f) There is no evidence that any person within the applicant corporation or
acting as its agent, having anything to do with allowing
Mr Williams to board
the vessel, knew anything of his relevant experience or expertise, or that any
such knowledge had any effect
in inducing a positive belief about the
effectiveness of the trailer ventilation.
In terms of reliance placed on the consignor declaration it might be noted, at
the risk of engaging in semantics, that – as
noted above – in fact
the consignor is declaring a
(after due enquiry) that the animals
are being shipped according to the requirements. Accordingly, any asserted
material belief arising
from the declaration is one based on someone else's
assertions that the applicant had a mistaken belief are simply insufficient. In
my respectful opinion, I have grave doubts the
applicant discharged the
evidentiary burden. There was an absence of evidence from which it could be
inferred that
in a relevant relationship with the applicant
– giving rise to the application of s 3A(3)(a) – had formed an
actual belief
make innocent the applicant's conduct. In any event, I take the view that
evidence is not capable of creating a reasonable doubt about the issue. On my
assessment, the absence of an honest and reasonable
mistake was the only
reasonable inference open. That is, it was reasonably open on the whole of the
evidence to the magistrate to
find the 'defence' negated.
follows that there is, in strict terms, no need to consider the question of the
reasonableness of the asserted mistake. However,
it is appropriate to make some
remarks about it. The question is whether, assuming the reasonable possibility
of a relevant mistaken
belief, the mistake was a reasonable one to make in all
of the circumstances.
primary difficulty I see with this issue is one that flows on from the
deficiencies in the evidence. That problem flows on to
the question of the
grounds of any belief. It will be recalled that an aspect of the assessment of
the reasonableness of a mistake
includes consideration of the accused's personal
attributes and the information available to that person at that particular time.
The belief must be based on that person's appreciation of primary objective
facts. In this case, there is not only no evidence about
who the relevant person
was, or persons were, but no evidence about what particular information was
relied on. I do not believe
it reasonable to draw inferences from generalised
assertions about collective knowledge.
any event, I will set out the matters relied on by the applicant and make some
comments. They are, in effect, what is also put
in relation to whether the
alleged omissions involve measures that ought reasonably to have been taken.
First, there is reg 15 of
Animal Welfare (Land Transport of
Regulations
which imposes an obligation on the driver of the vehicle
being used to transport livestock, to ensure the vehicle has the effective
appropriate airflow for the type of livestock being transported. The applicant
claims that Mr Williams was highly experienced
in caring for and transporting
horses, and have used the trailer for many years without incident and "he was
mistaken about the ventilation
capacity..."
is also the issue of "standard industry practice" in relation to the acceptance
of consignor declarations in these types of
circumstances. The only evidence
Michael said that
it is relied on. In this Court, the passage was referred to as
unchallenged and uncontradicted evidence about the industry practice.
was responding to a question whether there was a reason the applicant's officers
or contractors did not (as had been admitted)
assess horse carrying units for
compliance with the conditions of carriage and specifications in the
declaration.
passage is set out in the judgment of Martin AJ but it is convenient if I repeat
it, and to be fair, add part of a subsequent
answer that was identified to the
magistrate as part of the relevant response:
"On the basis of the
generalised carriage of many items aboard a roadpacked vessel, no different to
our vessels, whether it be certain
grades of hazardous casting – hazardous
cargo, personal use, pets, livestock etcetera etcetera etcetera the industry
is such that it will do its best in all respects to expose the
applicable requirements to those that are intended carriage, right
but the onus
of that transport is to put back to them as they as seen as a greater authority
than any individual in TT Line. So for
us to assess – and I'm using an
example here – for us to then put one of our people in position where they
would go into
a horse transport unit, check the stalling arrangement, check the
amount of water, check the amount of feed, size up the ventilation,
etcetera etcetera etcetera which are all part of the carriage requirements, and
all the applicable wording around that,
whether it be the Tasmanian regulations,
Marine Orders, it comes down to a competent authority. Competent authority
requires an onus
of proof on that competence. Now we're not carrying a vet which
you would say is a competent authority to go into that thing. So
from that point
of view, whilst TT Line responsibly portrays all the requirements of carriage
the onus of responsibility, and hence
the competent in this area. ... So when
we're receiving dangerous goods, just as you asked (indistinct word) right, what
we are taking
is the information off the consignment that has also gone to
Australian Maritime Authority. So no road packs owner or container ship
whatever else can be in a position where it can individually require that we
check the contents of every container to verify
what they're being told is
correct. So the principle remains the same throughout. "
can be drawn from this passage seems to have been significantly elevated in its
effect. In submissions to the magistrate, senior
counsel for the applicant put
that the TT-Line did "what every shipping line in the world and airlines do all
the time with all of
their passengers and all of their cargo and not only you
can imagine if there had to be detailed searches of everybody getting on
ship or all of the cargo, it's simply inconceivable that that would be the case.
Hence, the system on declarations is operative
across the board."(sic).
(Reference to standard industry practice of airlines seems to have been first
introduced into the hearing
in these submissions.)
In oral argument, the evidence of reliance was said to that described by Mr
Michael but that description was put to the Court, "chapter
and verse", as
"This is the industry practice. It is the practice to rely
on declarations because of the volume of cargo and the practicalities of
operating that is the only real way we can do it. Moreover, the expertise of
those who are packing these goods exceeds the expertise
that we have got at
dockside or even generally to be able to make those assessments."
there are the post-incident responses from the Department of Primary Industries
Parks Water and Environment in 2019 and Department
of Natural Resources and
Environment Tasmania in 2022. The relevance of these later matters is doubtful.
the applicant says that in February 2019 DPIPWE "endorsed the use of
substantially the same declaration form in the same openings
for horse trucks as
those in place prior to the incident." That has to be looked at in light of the
facts. There was a change that
consisted of the insertion at the start of the
document of four "boxes" to be ticked. They related to the reading and
understanding
of, and compliance, with Marine Orders par 43, the TT-Line Company
Pty Ltd conditions of carriage for horses, and the requirements
of the relevant
Animal Welfare Regulations
. There is also a box to be ticked
acknowledging that horses and livestock cannot be inspected by accompanying
passengers.
On 7 March 2022, the Acting Secretary of the DNRET wrote to the applicant not,
as claimed by the applicant in argument, acknowledging
that it would be
unreasonable to expect TT-Line to have been able to assess ventilation of horse
trucks, but advising that the minimum
expectation (among other things) was that
TT-Line may rely on the signed "Horse Welfare Declaration" without the need to
independent veterinary assessments. A further "minimum expectation" was
that TT-Line may rely on the signed "Vehicle Suitability
Declaration" provided
by the accompanying passenger to be satisfied of the vehicle suitability, but it
was recommended that staff
check that the vehicle has vents that are open. (The
relevant passage from the letter is set out in full in Martin AJ's
Further minimum expectations were that TT-Line staff undertake a visual
inspection of horse transport units to verify the number
of horses they contain
and to ensure they are individually stalled. If the reference to a "Vehicle
Suitability Declaration" was
intended to mean a different document than the
consignor declaration, then that particular document does not seem to have been
evidence. The same applies to a "Horse Welfare Declaration".
the fact of a mistaken belief by a relevant person, and assuming that person can
be said to have based that belief on the
factors outlined that existed at the
time, I do not see the cumulative effect of those things would assist the
applicant. Going back
to the discussion about "belief", the factors that were
operative at the relevant time merely suggest a general understanding or
assumption that a system or set of procedures in place would produce a certain
result in the form of compliance with requirements.
mistaken belief based on mere understandings and assumptions that systems and
processes are sufficient in that respect cannot be
said to be reasonable:
Coles & Co Pty Ltd v Goldsworthy
(above) per Smith J at 194;
v G J Coles & Co Pty Ltd
[1986] WAR 224 per Smith J at 234. In this
case, I think that is particularly so given the legislative purpose underpinning
Act and the consequences that might flow from a breach of s 7.
all of the above reasons, it was reasonably open to the magistrate to find that
the only reasonable inference to be drawn from
the whole of the circumstances
was the absence of an honest and reasonable mistake of fact to be attributed to
the applicant. It
is not necessary for me to go any further, but I should add
that if I am a wrong about that, I would respectfully agree with what
has written about the possible consequences of mistake of fact not being
negatived – that is, where the belief may
not make an accused's actions
"innocent" – and his Honour's discussion of
Bell v Tasmania
96 ALJR 22.
It follows that ground 3(c) fails, and so the entire ground
Grounds 4 and 5 – double stalling
I agree with Martin AJ as to this issue. Put in very brief terms, the state of
the evidence left the respondent in the position
of arguing that the method of
management of 18 horses was to ensure that there was only 11. That has the
difficulties attached to
it explained by Martin
I would allow the motion, set aside the finding of guilt and remit the matter
for re-hearing. In all of the circumstances, it is
appropriate to also order
that it be re-heard by a different
magistrate.
Poniatowska v DPP (Cth)
[2010] SASCFC 19
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions v
Poniatowska
[2011] HCA 43
See Gauden and Steward JJ
at [48]. See too Edelman and Gleeson JJ in relation to the accusatorial system
at [99]-[104].
See the discussion of
omissions and the practical distinction between action and inaction by Windeyer
R v Phillips
[1971] TASStRp 9
(1971) 45 ALJR 467
The emphasis I put on "use" in
the phrase was in the context of an argument about particulars, with the TT-Line
Co Pty Ltd then
arguing that each particularised aspect of the alleged method of
management amounted to a separate breach of the
Irregularities and amendments
(1) An objection shall not be taken or
allowed to a complaint in respect of –
(a) an alleged defect therein,
in substance or in form; or
(b) a variance between it and the evidence in
support thereof.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) ,
(a) a complaint fails to disclose an offence or matter of
complaint; or
(b) the defendant appears to have been prejudiced by any defect
or variance referred to in that subsection –
the justices shall, unless
the complaint is amended as provided in subsection (3) , dismiss the
(3) If it appears to the justices that the complaint
(a) fails to disclose an offence or matter of complaint, or is
otherwise defective; and
(b) ought to be amended so as to disclose an offence
or matter of complaint, or otherwise to cure the defect –
the justices
may amend the complaint upon such terms as may be just.
The Court was told that in
fact, some six weeks after the magistrate's reasons had been handed down, the
prosecution made an application
to amend the complaint in accordance with that
section. The application was opposed. There appears to have been argument that
with, among other things, the issue of
functus officio
magistrate reserved her decision. The application remains unresolved.
The prosecution submissions at
trial had also treated the issue of honest and reasonable mistake of fact as a
single step, simply
contending that "honest and reasonable mistake of fact
cannot exculpate the defendant in this case ... if it was an honest mistake,
then it could not be said to be reasonable"
For another, more relevant,
example of an attribution provision see
Environment Protection Authority v
Aussie Earthmovers Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2020] NSWLEC 98
There was no argument for the
proposition that s 7 of the Act creates an offence of absolute liability.
His Honour went on to say
it could be argued in the case before the Court that no individual had any
belief sufficient to invoke
the defence, "quite apart from what beliefs of
individuals might be imputed to the company."
In this respect, it should
be noted that there was an error on Mr Williams' consignor declaration, in that
the number of livestock
is shown as 21, whereas in fact it was 18.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (957 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter