URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASHPT/2019/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:16:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lyndon Walker v Psychology Board of Australia [2019] TASHPT 2 (15 April 2019)
[2019] TASHPT 2
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL
Lyndon Walker v Psychology Board of Australia
WALKER, Lyndon
PSYCHOLOGY BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
25 March 2019 and by written submissions
DELIVERED ON:
15 April 2019
DECISION OF:
Chairperson Webster
CATCHWORDS:
Psychologist – Performance and Professional
Standards Panel – finding of unsatisfactory professional performance
imposition of conditions on the registration of the practitioner –
appeal by practitioner – variation or amendment of
Performance and
Professional Standards Panel’s decision
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law Act
Health Practitioners Tribunal Act
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (Tasmania) Act
Craig v The Medical Board of South
[2001] SASC 169
Psychology Board of
Australia & AHPRA
[2013] FCA 91
DETERMINATION:
The Performance and Professional Standards
Panel’s decision of 15 June 2018 is amended by removing the conditions
to its written reasons for its decision of 13 July 2018 and by adding
the schedule of conditions set out in Annexure “A”
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
S. Taglieri SC
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency
[2019] TASHPT 2
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. On 15 June 2018 the Performance and Professional Standards
Panel (“the Panel”) of the Psychology Board of Australia
Board”) conducted a hearing in relation to a notification received by the
Board on 15 November 2016 pursuant to
the National Law (“the
notification”).
2. The applicant participated in the hearing and an
oral decision was given to him by the Panel on 15 June 2018, which determined
the conduct referred to in the notification constituted unsatisfactory
professional performance. The Panel further determined to
impose conditions
upon the applicant’s registration and the review period for those
conditions was set at 2
On 13 July 2018 written reasons for its decision were produced by the Panel and
those reasons were provided to the applicant.
3. Pursuant to s199(1)(i) of
the National Law the applicant is entitled to appeal the decision of the Panel
to impose conditions on
his registration to the appropriate responsible
Tribunal. The applicant appealed the Panel’s decision on 23 August 2018.
appropriate responsible Tribunal for the purposes of s199(2) of the National
Law is the Health Practitioners Tribunal established
pursuant to
Health Practitioners Tribunal Act 2010
(Tas) (“HPT Act”). The
appeal under s199(1) of the National Law is, by virtue of s21 of the HPT Act, an
application
to this Tribunal for a review of the Panel’s
4. The parties to this application participated in conciliation on
23 January 2019 in an attempt to reach an agreement as to the outcome
proceedings. The parties reached an in principle agreement and have sought the
Tribunal’s approval of that agreement.
The matter was therefore listed
before me on 25 March 2019 at which time I heard submissions from the parties
with respect to the
agreement they had reached.
The Performance and Professional Standards Panel
5. The Panel consisted of Dr Peter Cook who is a practitioner
member from Victoria, Dr Louise McCutcheon who is also a practitioner
from Victoria and Ms Christine Schokman a community member from Tasmania. The
written reasons of the Panel indicate the Panel
was established under s182 of
the National Law and pursuant to s184 of the National Law the applicant was, on
30 May 2018, given
notice of the following matters:
(a) the date, time and place at which the Panel’s
hearing was to be held;
(b) the nature of the hearing and the matters to be
considered at the hearing;
(c) that the applicant was required to attend the
(d) that the applicant may be accompanied at the hearing by an
Australia legal practitioner or other person;
(e) that if the applicant
failed to attend the hearing it may continue, and the Panel may make a decision,
in his absence; and
(f) the types of decision the Panel may make at the end
of the hearing.
6. The issues set out in the Panel’s written reasons were
identified by the Board after it conducted an investigation following
the notification. The Panel’s written reasons indicate the five issues it
was to consider, as identified by the
Board, were:
the practitioner provided adequate treatment to the notifier, given the
allegations that he:
(a) talked over her during consultations;
(b) repeated himself;
(c) told the notifier that she was to blame for her own self-esteem;
(d) said he did not know why she was bothering to seek psychological
the practitioner discussed a diagnosis with the notifier during the therapeutic
relationship or only did so (via email) after
the therapeutic relationship had
the practitioner’s diagnosis of the notifier having Borderline Personality
Disorder or Narcissistic Personality Disorder
was appropriate.
it was appropriate for the practitioner to communicate with the notifier via
email in the manner he did (or at all) after
the notifier expressly terminated
the therapeutic relationship.
at the conclusion of the therapeutic relationship, the practitioner should have
referred her to a psychologist or psychiatrist
for further treatment –
given his concern that the notifier had Borderline Personality Disorder or
Narcissistic Personality
7. With respect to the first issue identified in paragraph 6,
the Panel determined those allegations could not be substantiated and
no further action was to be taken with respect to them.
8. In relation to
issues 2 through to 5 identified in paragraph 6, the Panel:
(a) was satisfied the applicant did not discuss his
diagnosis with the notifier during the therapeutic relationship and only did so
(via email) after that relationship had ended;
(b) was satisfied the
applicant did not adequately address the criteria to properly make a diagnosis
of Borderline Personality Disorder
or Narcissistic Personality
(c) found it was not appropriate for the applicant to communicate
with the notifier via email in the manner he did after the notifier
terminated the therapeutic relationship; and
(d) found the practitioner did
not give any or any adequate consideration to an appropriate referral of the
notifier for further treatment
at the time of treatment or after the notifer
terminated the therapeutic relationship and that he should have referred her to
a psychologist
or psychiatrist or back to her general practitioner for further
9. As a result the Panel found the applicant’s conduct in
relation to the matters raised by issues 2 through to 5 constituted
unsatisfactory professional performance in that he:
• failed to adequately recognise the limits of his
ability to manage the therapeutic relationship with the notifier and make
appropriate referral for further treatment;
• provided a diagnosis of
Borderline Personality Disorder after the termination of the therapeutic
relationship thereby failing
to maintain proper boundaries with the notifier and
failing to ensure she had support to deal with the diagnosis;
diagnosis of Borderline Personality Disorder when he was unable to demonstrate
an adequate knowledge of the criteria
and tools for making that
• sent email correspondence to the notifier after she had
terminated the therapeutic relationship, the contents of which were
inappropriate and punitive.
10. The Panel determined the applicant should undergo
supervision and further education in relation to the matters raised by issues
through to 5 in the terms of the conditions which were attached to its written
reasons. In accordance with s191(4) of the National
Law the Panel also
determined the review period for the conditions was to be 2 years. Finally the
Panel determined that because
the applicant demonstrated limited insight about
each of these issues and because the contents of his emails to the notifier were
punitive of her, the applicant should be given the following reprimand:
practitioner is reprimanded for engaging in an inappropriate and punitive email
exchange with the notifier after the termination
of the therapeutic relationship
with her, including providing the notifier with an inappropriate diagnosis and
otherwise failing
to refer the notifier for further
treatment.”
The History of the Matter Before the Tribunal
11. This matter was first listed for directions before me on 10
September 2018. On that day I raised with the applicant his appeal
raised issue 3 but not issues 2, 4 and 5. I asked him whether he wanted to
pursue those matters in this appeal. After
discussing the matter with the
applicant it became clear he was not sure how to proceed. I therefore gave him
time to consider his
position and he was given 30 days to advise both the
respondent and the Tribunal whether his appeal was limited to issue 3 set out
the Panel’s determination of 15 June 2018 or whether it extended to issues
2, 4 and 5 and, if so, he was to provide details
of those matters and the basis
upon which he wished to challenge the Panel’s findings.
12. When this
matter was next listed before me on 11 October 2018 the applicant had provided
further documentation which challenged
the findings of the Panel with respect to
issues 2 and 5. Therefore issues 2, 3 and 5 were in issue. Both parties were
to proceed to conciliation before the Tribunal embarked on a contested
13. When this matter was next before me on 3 December 2018 I was
advised that an informal conciliation was held at the end of October
and further
discussions had been held between the parties thereafter. I was advised no
resolution had, at that stage, been reached
but the parties were happy to
proceed to a formal conciliation within the confines of the Tribunal. That
conciliation conference
proceeded on 23 January 2019 and it was as a result of
that conference the parties reached an in principle agreement.
JOINT SUBMISSION
Additional Information and Facts
14. The following further matters were agreed between the
• The applicant is a self-employed psychologist and aged
• He has practised psychology for a period of about 19
• Since practising in Launceston over the last 5 years, he has
solely undertaken private consulting of patients and has only
charged the
recoverable Medicare rebate sum as remuneration for his services. That sum is
approximately $84.00 per one hour consultation.
• He sees 20 to 25
patients per week and largely they are from a public cohort who are unable to
pay private fees or out-of-pocket
expenses for the treatment the applicant
• He has encountered in the relevant past few patients who
require diagnosis and treatment of Borderline Personality Disorders
and the vast
proportion of his practice relates to treating patients with Anxiety or
Depressive Disorders.
• He makes a very modest livelihood from his
practice as a psychologist.
• He considers he is morally and
professionally restrained from charging his patients over the Medicare rebate
and reasonably
believes if he charged more, the patients would not seek
treatment due to not being able to afford paying an out-of-pocket
• The agreed information and facts referred to above were
not submitted by the applicant to the Panel at the hearing and therefore
not known at the time it made its decision on 15 June 2018.
of supervision sessions for the duration of 2 years based on the conditions
imposed by the Panel will be approximately
$6,720.00 and in addition, the
applicant is likely to incur additional costs for complying with the education
conditions. The total
cost of compliance with the conditions imposed by the
Panel will cause financial hardship to the applicant.
• The applicant
will not be altering his fee charging practice in the foreseeable
The Position of the Respondent on the Appeal
15. The respondent’s position is as follows:
• The findings of the Panel were open and were not in
• When taking disciplinary action as a consequence of a finding
of unsatisfactory professional performance, a balance is required
between the
primary object and purpose of the National Law, which is protection of the
public, and the reasonable interests of the
practitioner. It was submitted the
following statement by the Court in Craig v Medical Board of South Australia
[2011] SASC 169
applied to this case:
purpose of disciplinary proceedings is to protect the public, not to punish a
practitioner in the sense of which punishment
is administered pursuant to the
criminal law. A disciplinary tribunal protects the public by making orders
which will prevent persons
who are unfit to practice from practising, or by
making orders which will secure the maintenance of proper professional
A disciplinary tribunal will also consider the protection of the
public, and of the relevant profession, by making orders which
will assure the
public that appropriate standards are being maintained within the relevant
profession.”
• Given the principles referred to in the passage set out
above and the additional information referred to in paragraph 14,
submitted the conditions imposed by the Panel should be varied.
frequency of supervision required by the conditions and the length of them,
given the applicant’s personal circumstances
and the nature of his
practice are such that if not varied, it is likely to impose considerable
financial hardship on the applicant
and so given the nature of the findings may
be regarded as punitive.
The Position of the Applicant on the Appeal
16. The applicant confirmed he did not wish to pursue his
appeal in relation to findings 2, 3 and 5 set out in paragraph 6. He wanted
to take into account the agreed matters set out in paragraph 14 and he agreed
with the submissions of the respondent which are
set out in paragraph
THE OUTCOME SOUGHT
17. Given the purpose of disciplinary proceedings as set out in
the passage referred to above in Craig v Medical Board of South Australia
(supra) and the personal circumstances of the applicant set out in paragraph 14
I agree with the parties that the reduction in time
from 2 years to 1 year with
respect to supervision of the applicant’s practice strikes a reasonable
balance between the protection
of the public and the interests of the
practitioner. It is agreed that the cost of supervision will cost the
practitioner almost
$7,000.00. In addition the conditions which are proposed
require the applicant to undertake a program of education approved by the
which includes a reflective practice report, in relation to the diagnosis,
management and treatment of personality disorders.
The applicant will have to
research what courses are available and will have to nominate a course to the
Board for approval. I note
the course is to consist of a minimum total period of
5 days and it is to include a formal assessment component in relation to the
diagnosis, management and treatment of personality disorders. That is likely to
cost a not insignificant sum and added to that is
the time the applicant will
need to take out of his practice in order to successfully complete the course.
The total cost in actual
fees for the course and time taken out of his practice
could reasonably be expected to amount to somewhere in the vicinity of
The total costs will therefore, over the 2 year period, amount to
somewhere in the vicinity of $10,000.00. Assuming the applicant
patients a week for 48 weeks a year at $84.00 per session, his net income for
the year is $80,640.00 less tax or $60,576.00
net. Over a 2 year period the
cost to him of the imposition of the conditions will amount to in excess of 8%
of the applicant’s
net income. It is clear the costs over a 1 year period
will still be significant but at least the costs of the applicant’s
supervision will be incurred over 1, not 2, years. I therefore think the
proposed period strikes the appropriate balance.
18. The Tribunal was invited
by the parties to vary the Panel’s decision under review pursuant to
s31(4)(b) of the HPT Act by
imposing varied conditions. That provision
the referring Act to which an application under
in respect of a decision relates does not set out how the Tribunal may
decide the application, the Tribunal may determine the matter
(a) affirming the decision; or
(b) varying the decision; or
(c) setting aside the decision and making
another decision in substitution for it; or
(d) setting aside the decision and remitting
the matter for reconsideration, by the person who made the decision, in
accordance with
any directions or recommendations of the
19. Section 21(4) of the HPT Act provides:
“A person who is the
subject of a decision against which an application for a review of a decision
may be made to the Tribunal
under a referring Act may apply to the Tribunal for
a review of the decision.”
20. The term “referring Act” in ss21(4) and 31(4)
is defined in s3 as “a law of Tasmania, other than the National
under which jurisdiction is conferred on the Tribunal”. The National Law
is the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law Act 2009 (Qld) and the
National Law set out in the schedule to that Act has been adopted by the
Tasmanian Parliament
and applies as a law of this State by virtue of the Health
Practitioner Regulation National Law (Tasmania) Act 2010; see
21. “National Law” is defined in the HPT Act as meaning
“the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (Tasmania)”.
view that means the National Law as set out in the schedule to the Queensland
Act, but adopted by the Tasmanian Parliament,
by virtue of s4 of the Health
Practitioner Regulation National Law (Tasmania) Act 2010. The National Law is
therefore a law of Tasmania.
Accordingly as the referring Act is not a law of
Tasmania other than the National Law this is not a case whereby a review of a
may be undertaken by the Tribunal pursuant to s21(4) because the
application for the review of the Panel’s decision was made
National Law. It follows s31(4) of the HPT Act is not applicable and the
Tribunal does not have the power to vary the conditions
22. This is clearly a matter which the applicant has appealed to this
Tribunal by virtue of s199 of the National Law and it represents
an application
for a review of the Panel’s decision pursuant to s21(2) of the HPT Act.
Accordingly s31(2) applies and that
provisions says:
Tribunal is to determine an application made to the Tribunal under s21(2) by
making a decision in accordance with s202
of the National
23. Section 202 of the National Law provides as
“(1) After hearing the
matter, the responsible tribunal may –
(a) confirm the appellable decision; or
(b) amend the appellable decision; or
(c) substitute another decision for the appellable decision.
(2) In substituting another decision for the appellable decision, the
responsible tribunal has the same powers as the entity that
made the appellable
24. I can therefore amend the Panel’s decision by
removing the conditions which were attached to the Panel’s decision
appending to that decision the conditions which are attached in Schedule A to
this decision. This is what I propose to do.
25. During submissions I was
referred to the Federal Court decision in Pardo v AHPRA
[2013] FCA 91 (Pardo)
authority for the proposition that the Health Practitioner Regulation National
Law (Tasmania) Act 2010 was the referring Act which
gives the Tribunal
application under the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
The respondent submitted no Commonwealth law was involved and there was no
decision by a Commonwealth officer in that case
that could be reviewed under
that Commonwealth Act. The respondent also submitted the relevant law was a
national law that had been
enacted in each State in substantially mirror terms
and that, as a matter of law, the questions that were being agitated in the
Court were governed by State law. Although AHPRA is a national body it
was acting exclusively under laws enacted by State Parliaments
and therefore the
Federal Court lacked jurisdiction. That submission was upheld and the
applicant’s application that she was
aggrieved by the failure of AHPRA to
grant her general registration as a psychologist was dismissed. That decision
is not inconsistent
with my decision because the Federal Court recognised that
AHPRA was exercising a power under a State law and the definition of National
Law in the HPT Act also refers to the Health Practitioner Regulation National
Law (Tasmania) i.e. the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (Tasmania)
Act 2010. The definition of “referring Act” as that phrase appears
in s31(4) means a law of
Tasmania other than the National Law i.e. other than
the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (Tasmania) Act 2010 by or under
which jurisdiction is conferred on the Tribunal. Accordingly, as I have said in
paragraph 21, s31(4) is not applicable in the circumstances
26. Pursuant to s202 of the National Law I order the
Panel’s decision of 15 June 2018 be amended by removing the schedule of
conditions which are annexed to its written reasons for its decision dated 13
July 2018. To that decision are to be added the schedule
of conditions set out
in Annexure “A” to this decision.
27. I order, as agreed between
the parties, that the conditions set out in the schedule, annexed to this
decision and marked “A”,
are to operate for a period of 12 months
from 15 January 2019.
28. I also formally note the parties agree the Board,
of its own motion, will conduct a review of the conditions imposed pursuant
the Tribunal’s orders set out in paragraphs 26 and 27 upon the expiry of
12 months from 15 January 2019 and may take further
action pursuant to the
National Law.
R. B. WEBSTER
CHAIRPERSON
Annexure “A”
Schedule of Conditions
Supervision
1. The practitioner is to be supervised by another registered
psychologist experienced and competent in psychotherapeutic methods
assessment, diagnosis and treatment of personality disorders.
supervision must occur on a monthly basis for a minimum of 12 months with each
session being of at least one hour duration.
Supervision must continue until
these conditions are removed by the Psychology Board of Australia (the
3. Within 21 days of the notice of imposition of these conditions or
such further timeframe agreed by the Board, the practitioner
(a) Provide to the Board acknowledgment, on the approved
form (HP13), that reports will be sought from the supervisor approved by
Board and what those reports must contain;
(b) nominate to the Board, on the
approved form (HPN13), the names of three suitably skilled registered
psychologists to be considered
for approval as supervisors;
(c) ensure the
nominated supervisors meet all the requirements of the approved
(d) ensure the nomination is accompanied by an acknowledgement, on the
approved form (HPNA13) from the nominated supervisor and by
the information and
documentation required on the form.
4. Within 14 days of being advised of the supervisor approved
by the Board or such further timeframe agreed by the Board, the practitioner
(a) Commence supervision with the Board approved supervisor;
(b) provide to the Board, on the approved form (HPSP13) a supervision
plan signed by the approved supervisor;
(c) the supervisor’s
supervision plan must include the schedule, format and details of how
supervision will address psychotherapeutic
methods and assessment, diagnosis and
treatment of personality disorders and any other matters specified by the
5. The practitioner is to ensure reports are provided to the
Board/AHPRA as follows:
(a) Every 6 months from the date of the approval of the
supervisor by the Board;
(b) at the conclusion of the minimum period of
supervision prescribed in the conditions on the practitioner’s
registration;
(c) at any later time that the practitioner requests the Board
to consider reviewing the supervision condition;
(d) whenever the supervisor
has a concern or becomes aware of a concern regarding the practitioners conduct
or professional performance;
(e) when requested, either verbally or in
writing by AHPRA or the Board.
6. The practitioner is to ensure reports provided in accordance
with this condition include:
(a) The format, date, time and length of each supervision
session that has occurred since the previous report;
supervisor’s opinion as to whether the practitioner has satisfactorily
participated in and understood the focus of the
supervision and was confident
that the practitioner could (or did) apply this knowledge;
practitioner’s own reflections on the supervision (unless the report is
for the purpose of the approved supervisor raising
concerns about the
practitioner).
7. The practitioner is to continue with supervision until such
time as the Board advises in writing that it is satisfied the reports
demonstrate the practitioner has reflected on and addressed the issues that gave
rise to the supervision condition and how the practitioner
has incorporated
lessons learnt in the supervision.
8. In the event that the supervisor is no
longer willing or able to provide the supervision required the practitioner is
a new nomination form to the Board in the same terms as the previous
nominations. Such nomination must be made by the practitioner
within 7 days of
becoming aware of the termination of the supervision relationship.
practitioner is not entitled to claim the hours spent with the supervisor or the
time spent in preparing reports for the supervision
in compliance with this
condition as part of the continuing professional development requirements for
registration.
10. The practitioner must undertake and successfully complete a
program of education, approved by the Board and including a reflective
report, in relation to the diagnosis, management and treatment of personality
11. Within 21 days of the notice of the imposition of these
conditions or such further timeframe agreed by the Board the practitioner
on the approved form (HPN24), nominate for approval by the Board an education
course, assessment or program (“the education
program”) addressing
the diagnosis, management and treatment of personality disorders.
practitioner must ensure:
(a) The nomination includes a copy of the curriculum of the
(b) the education consists of components comprising a minimum
total period of 5 days;
(c) the education contains a formal assessment
component in relation to the diagnosis, management and treatment of personality
13. The practitioner must complete the education within 12
months of the notice of the Board’s approval of the
14. Within 28 days of the completion of the education, the
practitioner must provide to AHPRA:
(a) Evidence of successful completion of the
(b) a reflective practice report demonstrating, to the
satisfaction of the Board, that the practitioner has reflected on the issues
that gave rise to this condition and how the practitioner has incorporated
lessons learnt in the education into the practitioner’s
(c) evidence of having undertaken a successfully completed formal
assessment component of the education.
See s191(4) of the National
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (216 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter