URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCCA/2025/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Aliano v Tasmania [2025] TASCCA 4 (10 June 2025)
[2025] TASCCA 4
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (COURT OF CRIMINAL
Aliano v Tasmania
[2025] TASCCA
: ALIANO, Thomas James
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Pearce J, Jago J, Porter AJ
Criminal law – Appeal and new trial – Verdict
unreasonable or insupportable having regard to evidence – Appeal
– Appellant charged with committing an unlawful act intended to
cause bodily harm Victim the initial aggressor – Appellant
struck victim
multiple blows with a hammer – Claim of acting in self-defence –
Contradictory evidence of eye witnesses
– Open for jury to rely on one
witness – Evidence of one blow which felled the victim before blows
continued –
Verdict of not guilty but guilty of wounding not unreasonable
or insupportable.
Aust Dig Criminal Law [3476]
Criminal law – Appeal and new trial – Appeal against
sentence –Grounds for interference – Sentence manifestly
excessive or inadequate – Wounding – Multiple blows to victim
with a hammer. – Claim of self-defence – Evidence
only permitted
finding of one blow in excessive use of force which caused a wound – Head
wound but uncertainty in evidence
of two years and three months with eligibility for parole after one year and
months manifestly excessive.
Aust Dig Criminal Law
Legislation:
Criminal Code
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Director of Public
Prosecutions
Judgment Number:
[2025] TASCCA 4
paragraphs:
Serial No 4/2025
File No CCA 2096/2024
THOMAS JAMES ALIANO v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
to appeal against conviction granted but appeal dismissed;
against sentence allowed;
of imprisonment for two years and three months from 26 June 2023 imposed by
Martin AJ on 21 June 2024 quashed;
re-sentenced to imprisonment for 18 months from 26 June 2023. Appellant not
eligible for parole until having served 15 months
of that term.
Serial No 4/2025
File No CCA 2096/2024
THOMAS JAMES ALIANO v STATE
OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
10 June 2025
appellant was found guilty by a jury of wounding contrary to the
, s 172. He was acquitted of the more serious charge of committing an
unlawful act intending to cause bodily harm under s 170, and
guilty of wounding
was returned as an alternative verdict. He was sentenced by Martin AJ on 21 June
2024 to imprisonment for two
years and three months from 26 June 2023 with
eligibility for parole after having served one year and three months of that
This appeal concerns both the conviction and sentence. The appeal
against conviction is on the ground that the verdict was "unsafe
satisfactory". Because an appeal on that ground involves questions of fact
alone, or mixed questions of fact and law, the appeal
may be brought only with
the leave of the Court:
Criminal Code
, s 401(1)(b). The appeal against
sentence is on the ground that the sentence was manifestly excessive. An appeal
on that ground does
not require leave.
28 May 2025, after hearing argument in the appeal, the Court immediately
announced its decision that the ground of appeal challenging
the conviction was
not made out. However, the Court concluded that the appeal, as it concerned the
sentence, should succeed. It made
orders allowing the appeal on that ground,
quashing the sentence and substituting a sentence of imprisonment for 18 months
June 2023 with a non-parole period of 15 months. These are the reasons I
joined in the making of those orders.
The prosecution
was the prosecution case that just after 6.00 pm on Friday, 21 April 2023, in
the car park of the Coles Supermarket in Mowbray,
the appellant violently
assaulted Dale Coleman by striking him with a hammer and kicking him. At trial
there was no dispute that
the appellant applied force to Mr Coleman, including
by striking him with a hammer. However, the appellant claimed that his acts
justified by self defence. As will be explained, the overwhelming inference to
be drawn from all the evidence was that Mr Coleman
was the initial aggressor.
The thrust of the prosecution case was that even if the appellant was justified
in using some force to
defend himself, the force he used was in excess of what
was reasonable and continued after the need for self defence had passed.
prosecution called five witnesses who were present or nearby at the relevant
time: Mr Coleman, Mr Coleman's then partner Nicole
Clark, Mr Coleman's friend
Alex Knight, Nicole Bakes who was an employee of the supermarket and Kerryn
Burton, who happened to be
in the car park at the time. The appellant did not
give or adduce evidence, and did not participate in a police interview.
Road is the main road through Mowbray, and runs roughly north/south. On the
western side was a business called Shiploads,
located in a large rectangular
building, the longer side of which fronted directly on to the road. Immediately
behind Shiploads,
between the building and a fence, was a long driveway running
between Joffre Street to the south and Haig Street to the north. This
referred to as the Shiploads car park because, along the driveway, there was car
parking against the back of the building.
The Coles supermarket was also on
Invermay Road, just south of Shiploads. The supermarket car park at the rear
bounded Joffre Street
near where the Shiploads car park also met Joffre
Coleman gave evidence that during that afternoon he and Ms Clark had been at the
Mowbray Hotel. They left together on foot to
go to the Coles supermarket to buy
food for dinner. They had with them a young dog, a "staffy", which was on a
lead. After leaving
the supermarket they walked, carrying their bags, through
the Coles car park, across Joffre Street and into the driveway and car
behind Shiploads. They intended to walk through the driveway, which Mr Coleman
described as being about fifty metres long, to
Haig Street at the other end. As
Mr Coleman entered the Shiploads car park he ran into his friend Alex Knight. Mr
Knight was driving
but he stopped his car and they chatted through the passenger
window. When Mr Knight drove off Mr Coleman and Ms Clark continued
walking. Mr
Coleman saw a man, which the evidence established was the appellant, walking
towards them from the opposite direction.
Mr Coleman claimed to not know this
man but said that he could hear the man talking to himself. Mr Coleman's account
was that, as
they came close, his dog approached the appellant. Mr Coleman said
that the dog was just "sniffing" but the appellant produced a
hammer from his
pocket. When Mr Coleman asked "what's going on mate", the accused "just started
yelling and carrying on" and there
followed an argument between them.
to Mr Coleman, he did not walk past the appellant, because "he had a hammer in
his hand". He said that he could not remember
what happened after that except
that "we ended up in the Coles car park". When asked how and why he ended up in
the Coles car park
Mr Coleman answered that he had chased after the appellant to
"find out what was his problem". He claimed to then have no memory
happened, except that he was "between two cars", "standing there yelling at this
guy" and the man was "just jumping up and
down". He said that his mate, Alex,
had grabbed the dog from his partner. He did not explain how Alex had come to be
present again.
Mr Coleman also gave evidence that "at a later time" he had a
small baseball bat, he thought a bit over a foot long, which Alex had
him, and he took a swing at the appellant with it. When asked if he made contact
he answered "not that I know of, no".
The next thing he remembered was waking up
on the ground with people standing around. He saw blood on the ground and waited
the ambulance arrived.
cross-examined, Mr Coleman denied that his dog had jumped up at the appellant.
When it was suggested to him that the appellant
was not holding a hammer at that
stage he disagreed. However he accepted that after he and the appellant
exchanged unpleasant words
the appellant walked away towards Coles and he, that
is Mr Coleman, grabbed the dog and chased after the appellant. When asked
the only reason he followed the appellant was to confront him he
repeated "I just wanted to know what his problem was, that's all".
He maintained
that it was him, not the appellant, who was standing between two cars in the
Coles car park, but accepted that his
friend Alex arrived back and gave him the
baseball bat which he swung at the appellant. He denied striking the appellant
in the back
and ribs with the bat. He said he swung the bat because the
appellant was holding a hammer, but agreed with the proposition that
chasing him and now you've got a baseball bat." He maintained that after
swinging the bat at the appellant he gave the
bat back to Mr Knight even though
the appellant was still holding a hammer.
Clark's evidence was that after she and Mr Coleman left the hotel and the
supermarket they began to walk through the Shiploads
car park towards Haig
Street. They ran into Mr Knight who was driving in the same direction. Mr
Coleman and Mr Knight chatted for
a few minutes before Mr Knight drove off and
she and Mr Coleman continued walking. Mr Coleman was, she said, leading their
saw a man, who she said she did not know, walking towards them and, as
they got close, the dog went close to him "sort of sniffing".
She said that the
man "got a little bit angry" and Mr Coleman said "Oh, what's your problem mate".
She said that she could see that
the man was carrying a hammer and was "waving
it about". After this exchange, she said, "that's when they, the guy and Dale,
of ran towards Coles way again". The substance of her evidence was that the
two men moved together towards Coles. She said that she
was "trying to run to
try and keep up, saying that we've done nothing wrong", but when she got to the
car park "I seen (sic) Dale
on the ground unconscious with blood". By then, she
said, there was a "fair lot of people there". She claimed to not have seen Mr
Coleman with a baseball bat.
Knight agreed that he met and spoke to Mr Coleman in the Shiploads car park. It
was getting dark and he had his headlights on.
He saw the appellant walking
towards them but drove off when he was about 15 metres away. He said that the
appellant was a person
he "had seen ... around" and "knew of as Big Jim". He
claimed to have, as he drove away from the end of the car park, heard yelling
and seen the appellant through his rear view mirror pull something out of his
pocket and wave it around, although he could not identify
what it was. He drove
to his unit in Haig Street, about thirty metres from the end of the car park.
After going inside to speak to
his partner, he returned to the boot of his car
from where he removed his baseball bat, which he described as "like a children's
baseball bat", about fifty or sixty centimetres long. That must have happened
fairly quickly because when he then drove back through
the Shiploads car park he
saw Mr Coleman and the appellant, "over in Coles", moving between the cars. He
left his car, heard the
appellant and Mr Coleman yelling and moving backwards
and forwards, all over the place, in the car park, and he "passed Dale the
By that time, he said, Ms Clark was standing "right next to" Mr Coleman, about a
metre or so back. The only reasonable inference
arising from that series of
events is that Mr Coleman retrieved the bat from his car intending to return and
give it to Mr Coleman.
He claimed that when he returned to the car park, the
appellant "had a weapon in his hand" and after he passed the bat to Mr Coleman
he "was sort of swinging it to protect himself". Mr Knight said he then drove
car park where he saw the
appellant yank the baseball bat out of Mr Coleman's hand and hit him over the
head with the hammer. He
"Um, after he's grabbed it, he sort
of – tried to swing it at Dale, a couple of times, and he's dropped it,
and that's when
he was hitting him in the head with the hammer."
to Mr Knight, he saw the appellant hit Mr Coleman "about two or three times in
the head" before "taking off". Mr Knight
described the hammer as being a normal
size ball point hammer. He noticed that Mr Coleman was bleeding a lot from the
side of his
head. He stayed for a minute or two before taking Mr Coleman's dog
and groceries back to his unit. He did not see the baseball bat
again until he
found it later in the garden next to the cars in the car park, and he "got rid
Knight accepted, during an exchange with defence counsel and the trial judge,
that when he returned to the Coles car park with
the bat he saw the appellant
between two cars which were facing out onto Joffre Street, and that the
appellant was "moving backwards"
with Mr Coleman coming toward him. It was then
that he handed Mr Coleman the baseball bat. At that time he saw nothing in the
appellant's
hand. He agreed that he only saw the appellant with the hammer after
Mr Coleman was given the bat and "taken a swing" with it. He
then qualified his
earlier answer by saying that "even before the bat", they "kept moving backwards
and forwards towards each other."
According to Mr Knight, Mr Coleman swung the
bat at the appellant but did not strike him.
jury was shown CCTV footage taken of the events in the Shiploads car park which
cast considerable doubt on the evidence of Mr
Coleman and Ms Clark. It
contradicted their evidence in several important ways. The CCTV showed the
initial exchange between the
appellant and Mr Coleman, Ms Clark and their dog.
This Court is in just as good a position as the jury to draw inferences from the
CCTV. It seems to me to be abundantly clear that the confrontation was, for
reasons not established by the evidence, initiated by
Mr Coleman. Mr Coleman can
be seen gesticulating towards the appellant. The appellant attempted to edge his
way past with his back
to the fence, but Mr Coleman made it difficult for him to
do so. The appellant, as he approached, did not produce a hammer or wave
anything around. He seemed to respond only when Mr Coleman persistently
confronted him in what appears to be a very agitated way.
Be that as it may,
what the CCTV established beyond doubt was that the appellant withdrew from the
confrontation and walked away
from Mr Coleman through the Shiploads car park
towards Coles. The appellant was already some distance away when Mr Coleman took
lead of the dog from Ms Clark and, with the dog, walked quickly after the
appellant. As the appellant approached Joffre Street he
paused again as Mr
Coleman approached, but then kept walking away. Still Mr Coleman followed after
him with the dog.
Burton arrived in the supermarket car park just after 6.00 pm intending to pick
her daughter up from work. She parked near
Joffre Street across from the
Shiploads entrance and saw three people, two men and a woman with a dog, coming
across the road in
her direction. One was bigger and more heavily set. The
evidence establishes that man to have been the appellant. The other man she
described as older and "a bit weathered looking". That was Mr Coleman. The two
men were arguing. There was a lot of swearing, she
said, and the two men came
very close to her car. The larger man had a hammer in his hand. She said he was
threatening the other
man with it who was "goading him". She heard the men
saying things like "I'll do this", "no you won't", "go on then" and "why don't
you", back and forth to each other. Each man was moving forwards and then going
back. As they continued arguing she left her car
and went around the corner to
call the police. She did not see either man strike any blow. As she was on the
phone she saw the larger
man run past her towards Invermay Road. When she
returned she saw the other man lying injured in a pool of blood.
final witness to give direct evidence of these events was Nicole Bakes. Her
evidence was of crucial importance to the prosecution
case, but before
explaining it, reference should be made to the evidence of the injuries suffered
by Mr Coleman. The evidence was
relatively limited. Rodney Walker was a senior
constable in forensic services, and took photographs of Mr Coleman at about 7.40
on 21 April 2023 at the hospital. It was before Mr Coleman had been seen by a
doctor or cleaned up, and there was still a lot of
blood on him. Nine
photographs taken by Senior Constable Walker were in evidence. Mr Coleman
complained of pain in his left arm.
Senior Constable Walker took one photograph
of the outside of that arm and one of the inside. The first showed blood on the
but did not depict an injury. The second depicted a reddened mark on the
inside of the upper arm but no other injury and no breaking
of the skin. There
were photographs of circular red marks, consistent with the shape of the head of
a hammer, on Mr Coleman's back.
There were three such marks, one under the right
shoulder blade, one in the mid back immediately to the left of the spine, and
on the upper right buttock. Although two of the marks were very red, it was
not alleged by the prosecution that any amounted to wounds.
Senior Constable
Walker also photographed Mr Coleman's head. When describing the photographs he
referred to an "injury" near the
crown of Mr Coleman's head. There were three
photographs of what appeared to be a laceration at the left rear of the crown of
Coleman's head. According to Senior Constable Walker's evidence, he checked
all over Mr Coleman's head and there were "no other significant
although his hair was quite stained with blood.
Constable Walker's evidence, to the extent that it suggested that the injury
near the crown of Mr Coleman's head was the only
wound, was mistaken. The
photographs he took depict one other laceration at the back of Mr Coleman's head
and medical evidence established
that there were at least three wounds on Mr
Coleman's head. A report was prepared by a medical practitioner from the
emergency department
of the hospital dated 16 May 2023, accompanied by some
agreed facts about the meaning of certain terms. The report, in part,
"Clinical examination showed open wounds to the right and left
sides and back of the scalp. There were bruises with associated swelling
tenderness to the left shoulder, right hip and left lower back. Computerized
tomography (CT) scans showed: minimally displaced
fractures to 9
ribs, depressed fractures of the right and left parietal
bones with corresponding open wounds, the right sided of which was also
associated with minor subdural hemorrhage (sic) The report also acknowledges
soft tissue swelling at the left shoulder and adjacent
to the lower spine.
The clinical diagnosis was soft tissue contusion to the left upper arm and
back, along with fractures of the 9
well as two open depressed skull fractures with minor subdural hemorrhage (sic).
Proposed treatment included urgent transfer
to Hobart for neurosurgical
intervention, along with medical prevention of infection and seizures using
antibiotics and anticonvulsant
medication. In accordance with patient wishes, he
was instead treated as an outpatient with oral antibiotics and anticonvulsants,
following a wound washout and closure in ED with sutures. Two of the wounds were
left open in accordance with patient's wishes..."
report disclosed that the only wounds suffered by Mr Coleman were on his head.
To "wound" a person means to cause an injury whereby
the skin is broken or cut
and blood is caused to flow:
[1982] TASRp 16
(1982) 8 A Crim R 45
; Tas R 155.
The bruises and broken ribs described by Senior Constable Walker and in the
medical report, did not amount to wounds.
To me, it was not entirely clear from
this report how many wounds were suffered by Mr Coleman. However, the reference
to "open wounds
to the right and left sides and back of the scalp" suggested
that there were at least three, even though Senior Constable Walker
saw only one
such wound. The CT scan revealed that the two fractures of the parietal bones
both had corresponding open wounds and,
as has already been noted by reference
to the report and the photographs, there was another wound to the back of the
head. The presence
of at least three wounds is also confirmed by the reference
in the report to two wounds having been left open and another wound or
having been closed with sutures.
finished her shift and, after purchasing a few items
for herself, she made her
way out to her car in the car park. As she approached she heard and saw two men
near her car yelling at
each other. She said that there was also a female there
who was screaming or yelling at the same time. One of the men, who was a
bald man, was close to the car park, waving a hammer around. The other man, who
she described as having grey hair, a "weathered
appearance" and shorter than the
appellant, was nearby not waving anything but screaming at the bald man. Again,
the evidence established
that the taller bald man was the appellant and the
weathered looking man was Mr Coleman. According to Mrs Bakes, after they stopped
screaming at each other, the appellant walked away, turning into the car park as
if he were going to Coles. Later in her cross-examination,
Mrs Bakes repeated
that after she first saw the appellant waving the hammer around, he turned and
walked the other way, away from
Mr Coleman. She then saw Mr Coleman run across
the road towards the Shiploads car park and grab what she described as an
pole" from another man. She said that Mr Coleman ran back across the
road, chased after the appellant, ran up behind him when his
back was turned
and, as Mrs Bakes described it:
"The grey haired man lifted the
orange pole and went to hit him across the back I think and the he went to hit
him again but the bald
man turned around and blocked it with his arm".
asked whether the first swing with the pole connected with anything she answered
"I think it connected with his back. Yeah,
either his back or arm but it did hit
him, Yeah." In cross-examination she said that it appeared that the grey haired
the bald man with the pole "as hard as he could", and then, when the
bald man turned to face him, he tried to hit the man again and
"it looked like
he was going towards his – like his face this time...". The second blow
was blocked by the appellant with
his arm. In summary, what she described as
then happening was seeing the appellant strike Mr Coleman's head with the
hammer. Mr Coleman
fell to the ground after which the appellant continued to
strike him with the hammer around his head six or seven times while Mr
tried to cover his face and head with his arms. The appellant then began to kick
Mr Coleman.
her evidence in chief Mrs Bakes explained that she was about 20 metres away as
she observed these events. The relevant parts of
her evidence should be set out
in full. It continued as follows:
"Having blocked it with his arm
what did you see after that?. ... .I saw the bald man retaliate by lifting the
hammer that was still
in his hand and hit him – hit him around the head
and the grey-haired man then fell to the ground.
Okay?.....The bald man just kept swinging the hammer over and over I guess
When – when the first blow hit the grey-haired fellow– ?.. ...Mm
–did the grey-haired fellow – I assume he was standing at that
stage was he?.. ...Yes.
Did he remain standing?.. ...No he fell to the ground, um, um, I think he
– he fell onto his side."
"Um, from there, what, what did you notice?. ... .Um, I
– he wasn't really fighting back, so, um, I think he had his –
Well, ... just tell us what you saw?.....Okay, um, he had his arms up, um,
protecting himself.
Yeah, can you describe that for me?.....Ah, I think he was, like, trying to
cover his face."
"Okay, what – what else, if anything, did you
see?.....Um, I then saw ... the woman came across the road to the carpark and
started screaming, ... telling the bald man to leave the grey haired man
What was the bald man doing, prior to that?.....Um, so, um, after he had
knocked the grey-haired man down to the ground –
Yep?..... he um, kept swinging the hammer onto the guy's head, the ...grey
haired man's head.
Yep?.....Several times.
Okay, can we be more accurate than several, are you able to remember how
many?.... Um, it would have been between six and seven times.
Okay, all right, thank you. Um, did you see anything else?.....Ah after that,
he started kicking the grey-haired man."
Bakes was asked to describe the kicks she saw:
"...did you see the
appeared that he was kicking him
ah – anywhere from the stomach to his
face. He just was everywhere.
And again, I'm just trying to be careful. Did you actually see the contact
between the feet and the body?.....Ah, yes, when he kicked
the torso area, I saw
that one. Um, yeah.
Okay. Did you hear anything said by anybody at this stage?.....Um, I remember
the bald man saying things like , 'How do you like that?'
That's probably the
main one that's stuck out."
cross-examined Mrs Bakes maintained that she had an unobstructed view. She
agreed that it appeared to her that before Mr Coleman
was struck he had struck
the appellant in the back as hard as he could with the object he was holding.
She agreed that, after the
first blow was struck by Mr Coleman, the appellant
turned around and was facing Mr Coleman when Mr Coleman attempted to strike him
again. After the second strike, she said, "it took [the appellant] maybe not
even two seconds to react." When it was suggested to
her that Mr Coleman was not
knocked to the ground but was "still on his feet, but ... crouched down a bit"
she answered "I would
have to disagree". Finally, it was put to her that the
appellant did not strike the man while he was on the ground. She answered
would respectfully disagree with you."
The appeal against
assertion that a verdict is unsafe and unsatisfactory finds statutory expression
in this State in the
Criminal Code
, s 402(1), which provides that
the Court "shall allow the appeal if it is of opinion that the verdict of the
jury should be set aside
on the ground that it is unreasonable, or cannot be
supported having regard to the evidence." The approach that an appellate
must take when addressing "the unreasonableness ground" was
authoritatively stated in the joint reasons of Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson
Toohey JJ in
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
at 493. The court must ask itself:
"whether it thinks that
upon the whole of the evidence it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that the accused
was guilty".
explained in
and restated in
[2002] HCA 53
213 CLR 606
[2020] HCA 12
268 CLR 123
, the question does
not depend on whether, as a matter of law, there is evidence to support the
verdict, but rather whether the evidence
required the jury, acting rationally,
to have entertained a doubt as to the appellant's guilt. An appellate court must
independent review of the evidence, but making full allowance for
advantages enjoyed by the jury, including from having seen and
witnesses. Because of the central role of the jury in the administration of
criminal justice, this Court is not to substitute
trial by an appeal court for
trial by jury:
R v Baden-Clay
[2016] HCA 35
. The court must proceed on the basis that issues of
credibility and reliability of oral testimony are matters primarily for the
The function of this Court is then to examine the record to see whether,
notwithstanding that assessment, either by reason of other
inconsistencies, discrepancies, or other inadequacy, the court is satisfied that
the jury, acting rationally, ought nonetheless
to have entertained a reasonable
doubt as to proof of guilt:
at 145 [39].
have no hesitation in concluding that no jury, acting rationally, could have
been satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant
was not justified in
using force against Mr Coleman in defence of himself. The
Criminal Code
s 46, relevantly provides that a person is justified in using, in the defence of
himself, such force as, in the circumstances as
he believes them to be, it is
reasonable to use. In
[1993] TASSC 91
, Crawford J (as he then
was), with whom Cox J and Zeeman J agreed, explained at [16]:
defence under s46 involves a subjective and an objective test. The subjective
test can be said to involve two questions, whether
the accused was acting in
defence of himself when he used the force in question, and what were the
circumstances as he believed them
to be which might be taken into account for
the purposes of the objective test. The objective test is whether the force used
in the circumstances as the accused believed them to be, reasonable to use.
Once the evidence raises self defence as an issue the
jury should be directed
that they must acquit unless satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused
was not acting with justification
under s46."
court must first consider whether an accused person, in the circumstances he or
she believed them to be, believed that some force
was necessary. If so, the
further question, to be determined objectively, is whether the force used was,
in the circumstances as
the defendant believed them to be, reasonable to use. As
to the second question, in the oft cited passage from
Palmer v The
[1970] UKPC 2
[1971] AC 814
, Lord Morris speaking for the Judicial
Committee said at 832:
"If there has been attack so that defence is
reasonably necessary it will be recognised that a person defending himself
cannot weigh
to a nicety the exact measure of his necessary defensive action. If
a jury thought that in a moment of unexpected anguish a person
attacked had only
done what he honestly and instinctively thought was necessary that would be most
potent evidence that only reasonable
defensive action had been taken."
[1988] TASSC 42
, Green CJ and Neasey J both referred to
that passage with apparent approval. Green CJ added:
determination of [the second] question involves the making of a judgment which
takes into account all the circumstances of the
situation in which the appellant
found himself. In making that judgment it must be recognised that the
circumstances which entitle
a person to act in self defence are not conducive to
the making of a cool considered assessment of the amount of force which is
appropriate
particularly when there has been provocation and that therefore it
is unrealistic to weigh such conduct on 'golden scales' per Richards
Salor v Klingbiel
[1945] SAStRp 43
[1945] SASR 171
The evidence overwhelmingly established that Mr Coleman was the initial
aggressor. There were many reasons to question the credibility
and reliability
of the evidence of Mr Coleman and Ms Clarke, and for that matter Mr Knight. The
account given by those witnesses
was not only contradicted by the CCTV but was
also contrary to the evidence of Kerryn Burton and Nicole Bakes, the only two
independent
eye witnesses. The jury, acting reasonably, could not have failed to
find that Mr Coleman initiated the confrontation with the appellant
Shiploads car park, and then persistently followed the appellant who, until the
moment he was struck by Mr Coleman in the
back with the bat, had repeatedly
walked away from him. The appellant was already some distance away when Mr
Coleman first went after
him. Mr Coleman deliberately took the dog. The only
reasonable inference to be drawn from that circumstance is that he intended to
induce fear or apprehension in the appellant, or to intimidate him. The
appellant paused and turned at the end of the Shiploads car
park. The only
rational explanation for that movement was that it was an attempt to dissuade Mr
Coleman from following him because
then, again, the appellant kept walking away.
Still Mr Coleman followed, despite knowing that the appellant was in possession
a hammer. If Mrs Bakes' evidence was to be accepted, the appellant was again
trying to walk away immediately before Mr Coleman struck
him from behind having
armed himself with a baseball bat. Mr Coleman's evidence that he only followed
the appellant to "find out
what his problem was" was highly implausible. Mr
Coleman baited and taunted the appellant and then put himself in possession of a
weapon, the baseball bat given to him by Mr Knight, before deliberately and
aggressively approaching the appellant and swinging the
bat at him when the
appellant's back was turned. Although the evidence of Mr Coleman and Mr Knight
was that Mr Coleman did not strike
the appellant with the bat, the unchallenged
evidence of Mrs Bakes was that Mr Coleman hit the appellant with the bat from
as hard as he could and then, when the appellant turned around, tried to
strike him again, this time towards his face. In those circumstances,
reasonable jury could have rejected the proposition that the appellant had a
genuine belief that some force was necessary to defend
himself. Moreover, I do
not think that a jury, acting rationally, could have been satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that the force
which the appellant immediately applied to Mr
Coleman was excessive or unreasonable, even though it involved use of a hammer.
appellant was faced with the imminent prospect of being struck by an
aggressive man with a weapon. A hard blow with the baseball
bat to his head,
could have caused very serious injury or even death. He had little time to react
and no time to calmly weigh the
amount of force which was appropriate.
the evidence revealed a significant change in circumstances. Whether the jury
should have found the appellant guilty depended
very much on its assessment of
the evidence of Mrs Bakes, considered with the evidence of the injuries suffered
by Mr Coleman, about
what happened after the appellant struck the first blow
with the hammer. The jury was entitled to accept Mrs Bakes' evidence that,
Mr Coleman was first struck, he fell to the ground. According to Mrs Bakes, Mr
Coleman was then no longer fighting back and
was covering his head with his
arms, but the appellant "kept swinging the hammer onto the ...grey haired man's
head", several times,
which she explained meant "between six and seven times".
He then began to kick Mr Coleman. It was for the jury to assess the credibility
of Mrs Bakes' evidence. There was nothing which arose either by reason of other
evidence, or inconsistencies, discrepancies, or other
inadequacy which should
have raised a reasonable doubt in the minds of the jury about the truthfulness
and accuracy of her account.
It is to be recalled that the appellant was found guilty of the alternative
crime of wounding. There was no evidence from which
the jury could have been
satisfied that any of the kicks caused Mr Coleman to suffer a wound. CCTV
captured of the appellant walking
away from the scene showed that he was wearing
socks and thongs. With that footwear the appellant may have broken Mr Coleman's
but not wounded him. The blows with the hammer were a different matter. Mr
Coleman suffered no wounds on his torso, but it was open
to the jury to conclude
that he suffered at least three wounds on his head. It was for the prosecution
to exclude, as a reasonable
possibility, that all of the wounds caused by the
appellant were justified. However, the jury need only have been satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that one of the wounds was caused by a blow which was not
justified by self defence, to find the accused guilty
of the crime of which he
was convicted. The evidence did not require the jury to have a reasonable doubt
the appellant suggested that the wound to the back of Mr
Coleman's head could have been caused when he fell to the ground following
infliction of the lawful blows, but, on all the evidence, the jury was correct
to exclude that scenario as a reasonable possibility.
The evidence strongly
suggested that at least one of the wounds on Mr Coleman's head was inflicted
while he lay on the ground. The
jury was entitled to be satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that, by that time, he presented no continuing threat and that
the appellant
either no longer believed that force was necessary to defend
himself, or alternatively that the force he used was more than was reasonable
the circumstances as he believed them to be. For those reasons appeal against
conviction failed. I would grant leave but dismiss
The trial judge's directions as to the crime of
the course of the preparation for this appeal, it became apparent to this Court
that the directions given by the trial judge to
the jury as to the elements of
the crime of wounding were, with respect to his Honour, incorrect. The
directions were given in the
form of both a written memorandum and oral
directions.
the charge on the indictment of committing an unlawful act intended to cause
bodily harm contrary to the Code, s 170, the jury
was correctly directed that
before it could find the appellant guilty it must have been satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that the
appellant, by a voluntary and intentional act,
unlawfully caused actual bodily injury, and, at the time he struck or kicked Mr
he intended to maim, disfigure, disable or cause grievous bodily harm.
The jury was also correctly directed that to disable meant
to "deprive a person
of physical or mental ability by causing a serious or permanent disabling
injury" and grievous bodily harm meant
"any bodily injury of such a nature as to
endanger or be likely to endanger life, or to cause or be likely to cause
serious injury
to health".
in the course of the trial, the issue of a possible alternative verdict was
raised by the trial judge. The Code, by s 332
and s 334A, relevantly provided
that upon an indictment for committing an unlawful act intended to cause bodily
harm, the accused
person may, if found not guilty of that crime, be convicted
of wounding or causing grievous bodily harm, or assault. The following
exchange occurred between the trial judge and
HONOUR: Mr Sherriff , s334A provides an alternative of wounding or causing
grievous bodily harm or assault and s172 is the offence
of wounding of causing
grievous bodily harm. So that's the obvious alternative.
MR SHERRIFF: Yes, I agree with that.
HIS HONOUR: Which alternative are you inviting me to leave – wounding
or causing grievous bodily harm?
MR SHERRIFF: Certainly wounding and I don't we believe we can go to an
assault unless the jury infer that the only evidence of an
assault was the
kicking for example, but I – it would be unlikely they'd get to that
HIS HONOUR: Certainly the wounding is the obvious alternative.
MR SHERRIFF: Yes.
HIS HONOUR: Mr Tucker do you want to –
MR TUCKER: No, I couldn't argue with that as an alternative your Honour."
aside the issue of whether both wounding and grievous bodily harm could have
been left as alternatives, the submission made
by counsel for the prosecution in
the passage just quoted, dismissed the possibility that the jury could find the
appellant not guilty
of wounding but guilty of the further alternative of
assault in respect to the wounds to Mr Coleman's head. No mention was made of
mental element for the crime of wounding and the possibility of an alternative
verdict if the mental element was not established.
it arose from the manner in which the trial was conducted, and the predominance
which the parties attributed to the issue
of self defence, but the directions
given by the trial judge in the summing up when addressing the jury, both orally
and in the form
of the memorandum, similarly omitted mention of a mental element
for the alternative crime of wounding. His Honour directed the jury
that to find
the appellant guilty of wounding the prosecution need only prove that the
appellant, by a voluntary and intentional
act, unlawfully struck Mr Coleman with
a hammer, and that the application of force caused a wound. The direction, or
absence of direction,
was amplified when his Honour directed the
"So, they are the elements that the Crown must prove to prove
the crime of wounding which will arise if you find the accused not guilty
first charge. And you will appreciate that in those elements, there's no
question of intention to cause harm. There's a significant
difference between
the first charge, the major charge and the alternative. The alternative does not
involve an intention to cause
harm. They are objective questions."
complaint was made by either counsel to the trial judge about the terms of his
Honour's direction. No submission was made by counsel
in their respective
closing addresses about the need to prove a mental element for wounding.
However, with great respect to the learned
primary judge, the direction the jury
was given was incorrect. As was explained by this Court in
[2016] TASCCA 8
, guilt of the charge of wounding requires
proof of "actual intent to wound or subjective recklessness":
[1961] HCA 42
(1961) 108 CLR 56
R v Bennett
[1990] TASRp 6
[1990] Tas R
, per Neasey J at 81, with whom Underwood and Crawford JJ (as they then were)
agreed at 85;
Hurst v Tasmania
[2011] TASCCA
. Subjective recklessness is based on what the
accused in fact foresaw, not objective recklessness, which is based on what the
ought to have foreseen. As explained by Zeeman J in
Standish v R
[1991] TASSC 83
61 A Crim R 364
"The expression
'subjective recklessness' is merely a shorthand way of expressing the
requirement that in order to convict the appellant,
the jury needed to be
satisfied that at the time the appellant performed the relevant act he foresaw
the likelihood that a wounding
might be caused."
the course of the hearing of this appeal these matters were expressly raised
with counsel for the appellant. The issue does not
arise from the sole ground of
appeal against the appellant's conviction. Notwithstanding an invitation to
consider doing so, no application
was made to amend the grounds of appeal to
assert error by the misdirection which was identified. It cannot be known why no
application
was made, and no criticism is made of counsel for not making it. The
result is, however that there is no ground of appeal which asserts
the error of
law identified or any miscarriage of justice arising from it. Counsel for the
respondent made some submissions about
the issue, but at short notice and
without the opportunity for reflection. The matter was not fully argued and the
Court did not
have the assistance of considered submissions.
to the extent that this Court has a duty to, for itself, prevent a miscarriage
of justice, I would make the following observations.
As was stated by the
majority in
Kalbasi v Western Australia
[2018] HCA 7
; (264) CLR 62 at
[57], a misdirection upon a matter of law is always contrary to law and is
always a departure from the requirements
of a fair trial according to law. In
the context of this case, however, it might be argued that the error was not
fundamental and
could not realistically have affected the reasoning of the jury
to a verdict of guilty on the wounding charge. In my view it necessarily
followed from the verdict of acquittal on the principal charge that the jury was
not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant
struck Mr Coleman with
an intention to cause the type of serious harm contemplated by s 170. There
could have been no doubt that
the appellant's acts were voluntary and
intentional and that Mr Coleman suffered actual bodily harm. Had the acquittal
on self defence then the appellant would also have been acquitted of
the alternative charge of wounding. I think it also follows
that the jury
experienced a reasonable doubt that the appellant intended to wound Mr Coleman.
Were it to have been otherwise, such
was the nature of the wound which was
unlawfully caused, the jury would likely have found him guilty of the principal
it is difficult to accept that any jury could not have been satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that the accused realised
that, having struck Mr Coleman to the
ground with a hammer blow to the head, struck him again with the hammer to the
head without
a realisation that by doing so he may well have caused a wound.
Alternatively, the nature of the direction may have left open the
application of
the proviso, in this State contained in the Code, s 402(2). The question in that
case is whether there has been a
substantial miscarriage of justice and the
resolution of that question will depend on the particular misdirection and the
in which it occurred:
416 ALR 359
[2021] HCA 36
274 CLR 351
[2025] HCA 20
. I am satisfied that the evidence
properly admitted at trial proved beyond reasonable doubt the accused's guilt of
other matter relevant to whether a miscarriage occurred concerns a possible
further alternative verdict. Had the jury not been
satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt of subjective recklessness, it was, for reasons already stated, inevitable
that it would have found
the appellant guilty of assault. Contrary to the
submission made by counsel for the prosecution to the trial judge, had the
been found guilty of assault he would have been criminally responsible
for all of the force he unlawfully applied to Mr Coleman after
the infliction of
the first justified blow. That included not only the unlawful blow which caused
the wound to his head but the blows
with the hammer and kicks to Mr Coleman's
torso which caused the other injuries. The level of criminal culpability for an
of that nature was high. The same situation would apply if a verdict of
guilty of assault were substituted in accordance with this
Court's power to do
so in the Code, s 403(2).
should also be noted that the appellant was convicted and sentenced on 21 June
2024. He had already been in custody since 26 June
2023, almost a year earlier.
He did not appeal within time. On 10 July 2024 he applied for an extension of
time to appeal which was
granted on 22 August 2024. The appellant became
eligible for parole on 26 September 2024 but did not apply for parole. The
was not then ready for hearing until listed by the Court on 28 May 2025,
by which time the appellant had served almost two years
of the term. Amendment
of the grounds of appeal would very likely have resulted in further
The appeal against sentence
sole ground of the challenge to the sentence was that it was manifestly
excessive. When sentenced the appellant was aged 45.
He was a single man in
receipt of a disability pension. His criminal record was a significant matter in
sentencing. He had a long
record of offending for a wide range of criminal
conduct, including convictions for wounding, two for assault police and nine for
assaults of various levels of seriousness. He had served many terms of
imprisonment over the years. There was a history of non-compliance
community based orders. On 8 June 2022 the appellant was sentenced to a total
term of imprisonment of two years and six months
from 8 June 2020 (exactly two
years earlier) with eligibility to apply for parole after having served one year
and eight months of
that term. That sentence was imposed for two serious
assaults. The first was committed on 4 September 2019 when the appellant was
prison. He became angry and repeatedly punched, kicked and stomped on a fellow
prisoner who was confined to a wheelchair. The
second assault was committed
against a female family friend on 24 February 2021. During an argument the
appellant grabbed her around
the throat, restricting her breathing, and bit her
on the nose. The primary judge was informed that the appellant did not apply for
parole and served all of the sentence. The crime which is the subject of this
appeal must then have been committed only months after
his release.
primary judge was given a pre-sentence report prepared by a Community
Corrections officer. It reported that the appellant had
a history of problematic
illicit substance abuse and significant "anger management concerns". It was
reported also that the appellant
"took minimal responsibility for his actions"
and, although he had expressed awareness of his difficulty with anger
management, he
did not wish to address this through counselling. The primary
judge was also informed by the report, and by the appellant's counsel,
appellant had, about two years earlier, undergone surgery and radiotherapy for
removal of a recurrent brain tumour, and
had a history of low grade glioma and
frequent seizures. It was submitted that the treatment which would be available
these conditions in prison was "less than optimal". There was no
submission that the appellant suffered from any mental impairment
relevant to sentence.
the first blow struck by the appellant was found by the primary judge to have
been justified, his Honour also found that
the subsequent blows were affected by
anger and a wish to harm the victim. Consistently with the verdict of acquittal
for the crime
of committing an unlawful act intending to cause bodily harm, the
appellant was not to be sentenced for intending to cause serious
or disabling
injury, but the unlawful blows were struck to the head with a weapon which may
well have caused such injury. The sentencing
judge doubted the explanation
offered by the appellant for his possession of the hammer, that he needed it to
door at his residence. However, whatever the reason for
carrying the hammer, he demonstrated a preparedness to produce it in response
situations of potential violence and ultimately used it.
appellant had demonstrated little insight into his violent conduct and the
primary judge justifiably found that the appellant's
prospects of successful
rehabilitation in the foreseeable future were "dismal". The appellant was not
entitled to the mitigation
which would have arisen from a plea of guilty,
although he was acquitted of the principal charge. His Honour's sentencing
"Personal deterrence, that is endeavouring to
deter you from offending again, is a significant factor in sentencing. Previous
have not deterred you, but it is to be hoped that a further period of
imprisonment will assist in achieving a degree of personal
deterrence.
The primary function of this Court is to protect the public. In your case,
protection of the public looms large, as does denunciation
of your conduct and
general deterrence.
Noting the importance of those matters, I also have regard to mitigating
factors attending the commission of your crime. You were
not looking for
trouble. It was the victim who commenced the confrontation and who chased after
you. He was looking for trouble and
when he was unsuccessful in goading you, the
victim attacked you with a baseball bat. You are to be sentenced for excessive
in self defence, that is, the additional blows you struck after the danger
had passed.
It is apparent to me that you are a risk to the public, but you also need
Substance abuse
is also an issue. As best I can assess the situation, however, it appears you
are likely to resist attempts to assist
am in general agreement with Honour's remarks. The submission of counsel for the
respondent that the appellant's record pointed
to continuing problems with
anger, self-control and disproportionate reactions should be accepted, as should
the submission, referring
Read v Tasmania
[2016] TASCCA 8
that the principal sentencing considerations for the crime of wounding are
"deterrence of the individual offender, deterrence of
others who might be minded
to commit similar crimes, retribution or denunciation of criminal conduct, and
the safety and security
of the public....". See also
Director of Public
Prosecutions v Cooper
[2017] TASCCA 8
. In the vast majority of cases
the crime results in the imposition of a custodial sentence:
Director of
Public Prosecutions v Chatters
[2011] TASCCA 8
21 Tas R 26
counsel for the respondent also correctly submitted, past sentences can stand as
a yardstick by which a sentencing court can achieve
consistency in sentencing
and application of relevant sentencing principles:
91 ALJR 131
Hili v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
242 CLR 520
. My examination of past sentences, combined with the data extracted by
counsel for the respondent from the Tasmanian Sentencing Advisory
website, suggests that, for a single count of wounding, this was a heavy
sentence when compared with the median. The fact
that this was a heavy sentence
does not necessarily disclose error. It is not to the point that an appeal court
may have exercised
the sentencing discretion differently. It must be
demonstrated that the sentence is so manifestly wrong that it could only be the
result of undefinable error in the exercise of judicial discretion:
(1992) Tas R 234
Nevertheless,
I concluded that a head sentence of imprisonment for two years and three months
was, in all the circumstances, unjust
and unreasonable and that the sentence was
so harsh as to reveal error. The crime of wounding covers a wide range of
criminal conduct.
The view that I took about the appellant's challenge to the
sentence was heavily influenced by the particular circumstances of this
and the findings of fact made by the learned primary judge. Subject to
consistency with the verdict, it was for the learned
primary judge to determine
the factual basis for sentence. His Honour found that the first blow struck by
the appellant with the
hammer was justified by self defence, but the remaining
blows were not. His Honour's comments when sentencing the appellant included
following passages:
"You were faced with a dangerous and aggressive
man who had struck you with an offensive weapon and, with the second blow, had
at your head. From your perspective and from the perspective of common
sense, you were entitled to defend yourself. Notwithstanding
the dangerous
nature of the hammer, I am satisfied the Crown failed to prove that your first
blow with the hammer amounted to excessive
self defence. The Crown failed to
prove that the first blow with the hammer was unlawful.
After the first blow, the victim fell to the ground and was lying on the
ground on his side. He was not attempting to retaliate when
you struck a further
number of blows with the hammer. The jury was satisfied that at least some of
those blows were unlawful because
they amounted to excessive self defence. As
you struck the further blows, the victim put his hands up to his face in an
to protect himself. You may well have had in mind that you needed to
put the victim out of action and prevent him from coming at
you again. However,
you also had anger in your mind. At that point I am satisfied you were not
thinking of defending yourself, rather
you were angry and you wanted to hurt the
victim. By an objective standard, your conduct in striking the further blows was
not reasonable
and amounted to excessive self defence. Hence your conduct in
striking the further blows was unlawful and one or more of those blows
the victim. This is the way in which the jury found you guilty of the
alternative offence of wounding."
Honour made reference to all of the injuries suffered by Mr Coleman but found
that the two open depressed skull fractures described
in the medical report of
16 May 2023 were caused by the first blow with the hammer which was struck in
self defence. His Honour said:
"The victim suffered wounds to the
right and left sides and back of his scalp, together with a number of areas of
bruising. There
were minimal displaced fractures to the ninth and tenth ribs,
depressed fractures of the right and left parietal bones, corresponding
open wounds, and on the right side there was a minor subdural haemorrhage.
A medical report of 16 May 2023 describes two open depressed skull fractures.
I am satisfied that those skull fractures were caused
by your first blow with
the hammer which was a blow struck in self-defence."
confess to experiencing some hesitation about a finding that two skull
fractures, each with corresponding wounds, could have been
caused by a single
blow, but there was no challenge by either party to his Honour's finding. The
injuries which his Honour found
were caused by that first blow did not,
therefore, result from criminal conduct and were not relevant to sentence other
than to provide
context for the subsequent unlawful application of force.
followed also, his Honour having found three wounds, two of which were not
caused unlawfully, that the sentence for wounding imposed
by the primary judge
could only have been for the single wound which Mr Coleman suffered to the back
of his scalp. That wound was
not associated with either of the skull fractures.
Nor, on the basis of a conviction for a single count of wounding, was the
to be punished for other injuries suffered by Mr Coleman, the bruising
and broken ribs. For reasons already explained, the sentence
imposed for
wounding was to be considered on the basis that the appellant was subjectively
reckless, not that he intended to wound.
with those factors, Mr Coleman's conduct during the lead up to the violence was
highly provocative. He initiated the original
confrontation and then repeatedly
followed the appellant despite the appellant's attempt to move away from him. He
then armed himself
and struck the appellant with a weapon from behind. Although
the blows struck after the initial lawful application of force were
justified, the appellant was still likely in a heightened emotional state. The
primary judge found that the blows were struck
with anger, but the appellant's
anger was readily explained. That did not, of course, excuse his criminal
conduct, but was relevant
to the level of his moral culpability.
impact of the crime on the victim was also relevant to sentence. It is important
to remember that the appellant was not to be
sentenced for the most serious of
Mr Coleman's injuries, the skull fractures and the corresponding head wounds, or
for the injuries
to his torso which did not amount to wounds. The injuries to
the torso were also relevant to context, but the sentence was not to
increased on account of them on a conviction for wounding. In any event, there
was little in the material before the primary judge
which indicated that the
unlawfully inflicted injuries had anything other than a transient impact. That
single wound was likely stitched.
The medical report about Mr Coleman indicated
that urgent transfer to Hobart for neurosurgical intervention was recommended,
the injuries which gave rise to that recommendation were caused by a blow
the primary judge found to have been justified. In any
event, Mr Coleman asked
to be treated as an outpatient. The sentencing judge's rejection of Mr Coleman's
evidence, unless corroborated
by other accepted evidence, extended to his victim
impact statement. In that statement Mr Coleman complained of some ongoing leg
and back pain, and some ongoing psychological effects, but there was no
suggestion of any ongoing neurological impact despite the
apparent seriousness
of the initial head injury.
all of those circumstances I concluded that a head sentence of imprisonment for
two years and three months was manifestly excessive,
that the sentence should be
quashed and the appellant re-sentenced by this Court.
of the matters relevant to sentence which have been canvassed in these reasons,
inform the sentence this Court should pass in
substitution for the sentence
imposed by the primary judge. In my view, the appropriate sentence was a term of
imprisonment of 18
months. A term of that length was a proper reflection of the
level of the appellant's criminal responsibility and moral culpability,
also serving the need for punishment, general and specific deterrence,
denunciation and protection of the public. The appellant's
propensity for
disproportionate violence, his ongoing lack of insight and failure to take
responsibility for his actions pointed
to a particular need for personal
deterrence and protection of the public, and so a longer than usual non-parole
period of 15 months
was also appropriate.
to appeal against conviction should be granted but the appeal dismissed. For the
reasons given I joined in an order allowing
the appeal against sentence,
quashing the sentence imposed by the learned trial judge on 24 June 2024 and
substituting a term of
imprisonment for 18 months from 26 June 2023 with the
appellant not being eligible for parole until having served 15 months of that
Serial No 4/2025
File No CCA 2096/2024
THOMAS JAMES ALIANO v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
10 June 2025
I have read the Reasons for Judgment of Pearce J with which I agree. They
represent the reasons why I joined in the orders dismissing
the appeal against
conviction and an order quashing the sentence imposed by the learned trial judge
and substituting a sentence of
18 months' imprisonment from 26 June 2023 with a
non-parole period of 15 months.
Serial No 4/2025
File No CCA 2096/2024
THOMAS JAMES ALIANO v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
10 June 2025
I agree with the reasons for judgment of Pearce J. They represent the reasons
why I joined in making the orders of the Court on
28 May 2025.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (200 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter