URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASSC/2025/50.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:21:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Moltoni v Tasmania [2025] TASSC 50 (8 October 2025)
[2025] TASSC 50
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA
[2025] TASSC 50
: MOLTONI, Jake
STATE OF TASMANIA
DELIVERED ON:
8 October 2025
HEARING DATE:
24 September 2025
Cuthbertson J
Magistrates – Appeal and review – Tasmania – Motion to
review – Other matters – Review of sentence –
offences including firearms offences – Totality principle –
Non-parole period imposed exceeded minimum –
Sentence of 30 months'
imprisonment with a non-parole period of 20 months not manifestly
Aust Dig Magistrates
Legislation:
Criminal Code 1924
Criminal Code Amendment (Aggravated Burglary) Bill 1997
Firearms Act 1996
Sentencing Act 1999
Brennan v Tasmania
[2022] TASCCA
Bugmy v The Queen
[1990] HCA 18
169 CLR 525
Butt v State of
[2018] TASSC 3
Carr v The Queen
[2002] TASSC 60
Deakin v The Queen
[1984] HCA 31
Dickson v State
of Tasmania
[2024] TASSC 24
Director of Public Prosecutions v Harris
[2013] TASCCA 5
22 Tas R 448
Gill v The Queen
Pickrell v Tasmania
[2011] TASCCA 13
Power v The
[1974] HCA 26
131 CLR 623
R v Ponfield
[1999] NSWCCA
48 NSWLR 327
Richman v Tasmania
[2011] TASCCA 18
[2017] TASSC 65
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
[1988] HCA 14
Watson v Woodgate
[2025] TASSC 26
Williams v Parker
[2016] TASSC
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Office of Director of
Public Prosecutions
Judgment Number:
[2025] TASSC 50
of paragraphs:
Serial No 50/2025
File No 1541/2025
JAKE PAUL MOLTONI v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT CUTHBERTSON J
8 October 2025
This is a motion to review a sentence imposed upon the applicant by Magistrate
Hartnett on 9 April 2025. The applicant pleaded guilty
on that date to a number
of offences across four complaints. A single sentence of 30 months' imprisonment
was imposed in relation
to the charges punishable by imprisonment. That sentence
was ordered to commence on 20 September 2024 to take into account the period
time the applicant had already spent in custody in relation to the matters. A 20
month non-parole period was also made. The applicant
is eligible for release on
parole from 20 May 2026.
The sole ground of the motion to review is that the sentence was manifestly
excessive. A 12 month period of licence disqualification,
commencing upon the
applicant's release from custody, was also imposed in relation to two motor
vehicle stealing charges. No complaint
is made about the order for
disqualification.
The principles which apply to a motion to review a sentence on the ground of
manifest excess are well-settled. They were recently
summarised by Pearce J in
Watson v Woodgate
[2025] TASSC 26
as follows:
succeed on a ground that a sentence is manifestly excessive it is not enough to
establish that the sentence may be regarded by
some as too harsh. An appeal
court may not substitute its own opinion for that of the magistrate merely
because it may have exercised
the sentencing discretion
differently:
Lowndes v The Queen
[1999] HCA 29
. This Court must be persuaded of error of the second type
referred to in
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
that is, that the sentence imposed by the sentencing court is, on the facts,
unreasonable or plainly unjust, such that the
appellate court may infer that in
some way there has been a failure to properly exercise the sentencing
discretion. Manifest excess
or inadequacy must be plainly apparent. An applicant
must show that the sentence is so obviously excessive that it is outside the
proper limits of the broad sentencing discretion of a magistrate:
[2009] TASSC 10
19 Tas R 132
[2017] TASCCA 10
26 Tas R 106
For the reasons that follow, the sentence is not manifestly
The facts of the offending
The offences to which the applicant pleaded guilty were committed in the period
between 20 August 2024 and 23 January 2025. There
were 21 charges across the
four complaints.
Complaint 8681/2024
The first in time was a charge of resist a police officer. On the afternoon of
20 August 2024, police attended an address in the
Glebe looking for the
applicant. They saw him inside the property through a bedroom window and
identified themselves as police before
entering the premises. Two of the
officers placed their hands on the applicant in an attempt to arrest him. He
grabbed one of the
officers by the collar of his shirt and thrusted back and
forth in an attempt to have police release their grip on him. In the course
doing this, some contact was made to the mouth area of one of the officers. The
applicant continued to resist by tensing his arms
and trying to spread them
apart, making restraining him in handcuffs difficult. He was taken to the
ground, placed under arrest and
handcuffed before being placed in the divisional
van to be taken to the Hobart Police Station.
9834/2024 and 9836/2024
The next offences in time were committed on 6 and 12 September 2024. The
applicant was charged over these two complaints with motor
vehicle stealing,
aggravated burglary, two counts of stealing, drive while disqualified, trespass,
breach of bail and unlawful possession
of property.
After his arrest on 20 August 2024, the applicant was granted bail by the
Supreme Court with a surety on 30 August 2024. The conditions
of bail included
that he live at an address at Tranmere and not leave that address unless he was
accompanied by his surety. On 6
September 2024, police received a statutory
declaration from the applicant's surety indicating that he wanted to withdraw.
attended the applicant's bail address that same day and he was not
present in breach of his curfew condition.
During the evening of 11 and 12 September 2024, a white Holden Commodore was
stolen from a driveway in Risdon Vale. The car was
unlocked and the keys were
inside the car at the time. In the early hours of 12 September 2024, the stolen
car pulled into a service
station in Lutana. The driver, identified from CCTV
footage as the applicant, got out of the driver's seat and put $42 worth of
in the vehicle before driving off without making an attempt to pay. The
drive while disqualified, motor vehicle stealing and one
of the stealing charges
relate to this conduct.
At about 9.40pm on 12 September 2024, the applicant attended an address in
Brighton in the stolen Commodore. He was with two other
people at the time. They
parked in the driveway. A 20 year old woman who lived at the address was at home
by herself at the time.
She heard male voices. She contacted her partner and
mother for assistance. The applicant and the other males knocked on the door
before entering the house by opening the unlocked front door. The occupant was
extremely fearful and locked herself in her bedroom
and hid in a wardrobe. She
was able to make a 000 phone call to police while she was hiding. Once inside,
the males moved around
the house. One of them, on realising the door to the
bedroom where the occupant was hiding was locked, kicked the door off its hinges
to gain entry. The occupant managed to run out and escape via her bedroom
window. She ran past the stolen car and one of the males
who was standing next
to it. She ran to a nearby street where she met her mother.
The applicant and the other males stole two motorbike helmets, assorted
jewellery, the woman's purse containing personal identification
and bank cards,
various bottles of vitamins and medications and a replica of an antique firearm
from the house. The total value of
the stolen property was about $1,000. Police
arrived shortly after the occupant fled. They found the stolen Commodore in the
with the engine running and keys in the ignition. The stolen property
had been dropped on the lawn outside the address. Police saw
one of the males
leave the scene. He was wearing a red jumper. They located the applicant's
co-defendant nearby. He had a number
of items of property on him that had been
taken from the house.
When the applicant fled, he ran to a nearby property in another street where he
jumped the fence and entered the backyard. He was
captured on CCTV footage in
the backyard removing the red jumper he was wearing. The occupants of this house
alerted police to the
to the applicant's conduct. He was located in the vicinity
of the address. He was arrested. When he was searched, police located
card which they believed to have been stolen or unlawfully obtained. The charges
of aggravated burglary, one of the stealing
charges, trespass and unlawful
possession of property relate to the events of the evening of 12 September
Complaint 950/2025
The last complaint relates to offences committed on 23 January 2025. The
applicant pleaded guilty on this complaint to charges of
lurk within the
curtilage of a dwelling house, possession of a stolen firearm, possess a firearm
when not the holder of a firearm
licence of the appropriate category, possess
ammunition when not the holder of the appropriate firearm licence, conveying a
contrary to the prescribed safety requirements, conveying ammunition
contrary to prescribed safety requirements, possess a loaded
firearm in public
when not the holder of a firearm licence, motor vehicle stealing and four counts
of breach of bail.
The breach of bail charges relate to two different bail orders, one made in the
Supreme Court on 6 January 2025 and the other in
the Hobart Magistrates Court on
16 January 2025. Both orders included conditions that the applicant reside at an
address in Claremont
and not be absent from those premises between 9pm and 7am.
Police attended the address on 23 January 2025 at 1.43am to conduct a
check and were advised by the applicant's surety that the applicant was not
him. Two of the breach of bail
charges relate to this curfew check.
The remaining two breach of bail charges relate to police locating the
applicant at 10:09pm on 23 January 2025 at Old Beach in breach
of his curfew
condition. At some time between 5:00am and 9:50pm that day, a Nissan Pathfinder
was stolen from a property at Old Beach.
It was parked outside the owner's home
and locked prior to being stolen. The ignition keys had been left hidden on top
the tyres by the owner's brother. Around the same time that the owner
realised that her car had been taken, police were alerted to
a crash at the
intersection of the East Derwent Highway and Baskerville Road at Old Beach. A
witness saw two males fleeing the scene
of the crash. The witness approached the
crashed car and saw a firearm lying on the ground next to the front passenger
door. Police
attended and identified that the car involved in the crash was the
stolen Nissan Pathfinder. The firearm was examined by police.
It was on the
ground and unsecured. It was identified as a stolen .22 calibre centrefire
rifle. It had a single live ammunition round
in the chamber and a magazine
attached which contained live .22 ammunition.
Police searched the area for the occupants of the crashed car. Information from
members of the public lead them to an address in
Old Beach where they located a
15 year old male hiding in the backyard. Police continued to search the yard of
the property and just
after 10:00pm they located the applicant hiding in thick
vegetation under a bush. The applicant had a cut above his left eye and
covered with blood. The applicant and the youth were both arrested and cautioned
before being taken to the hospital to receive
medical treatment. While the
applicant was waiting to receive medical treatment, he told police he had
recently "dug up" the stolen
firearm and the ammunition that was found in the
stolen car. He also said he believed the firearm may have been discharged during
the crash as he was holding it. The applicant explained to the magistrate during
the sentencing hearing that he told police he thought
he had shot himself in the
Police later obtained a statement from a witness who said that two agitated
males had attended his residence, said they had been
in a crash, told him not to
tell police and offered to pay $10,000 to get a lift. Police ascertained that
the firearm had been stolen
from Ridgeley in 2019. Police also located a bag in
the stolen car which contained 50 rounds of .22 calibre live ammunition and a
spent casing.
After the applicant had received medical attention, he participated in a video
record of interview. He made no comment in relation
to the stolen firearm and
ammunition. He said he was aware of his bail conditions, including the curfew.
He told police he had a
dispute with his mother, had slept in the shed and was
unaware that police had attended his curfew address. He admitted he was involved
in the car crash and ran away. He told police he did not know the car was
stolen. He said he did not recall what he said to police
the hospital as he would have been "off his head". He agreed he did not hold a
firearms licence. He recalled
attending the address at Old Beach and asking the
residents for assistance. He admitted he was hiding at the time he was found and
arrested by police.
The applicant's circumstances
The applicant had a number of relevant prior convictions at the time of
sentence. In her sentencing comments, the magistrate summarised
his record as
"You have a lengthy list of prior convictions which include
matters commencing, it appears, in youth court in your late teens but
unfortunately continue into adulthood. They include matters of dishonesty,
driving matters, resist, threaten police, assault police,
secrete within the
curtilage, assaults, motor vehicle stealing.
In 2022, you were dealt with in the Supreme Court by a judge in Burnie for
the offences of aggravated assault, possess firearm unlicensed
appropriate category, possess shortened firearm, possess firearm with
identification marks altered or defaced and, together
with an activation of a
dangerous driving partly-suspended sentence, you served a lengthy term, which
you were released early in
2024, having had parole revoked."
The total effective sentence imposed in 2022 in the Burnie Supreme Court across
all matters was one of 20 months' imprisonment.
Sixteen months of that sentence
related to the aggravated assault and related firearms offences. An eight month
non-parole order
was made in respect of that sentence. The partly suspended
sentence that was activated on that occasion was one imposed in the Supreme
Court in 2020. The sentences imposed by the Supreme Court in 2022 were ordered
to operate cumulatively to the sentence he was then
serving. In October 2021,
the applicant was sentenced in respect of breaches of suspended sentences
imposed in January 2019 and March
2021 on a range of summary offences together
with new matters which included assault of a public officer, breaches of bail
and driving
offences. In total, the applicant was sentenced to 10 months'
imprisonment from 14 August 2021. The applicant was also sentenced
cumulative period of three months' imprisonment in August 2022 for charges of
assault a public officer, threaten a public officer
and common assault.
As at the time of sentencing, the applicant had 29 prior convictions for breach
of bail and 10 prior convictions for offences of
assault, resist, threaten and
abuse police officers or public officers. The combined effect of the cumulative
sentences imposed upon
the applicant on 4 October 2021, 16 June 2022 and 8
August 2022 resulted in the imposition, by my calculation, of 33 months
imprisonment
backdated to 14 August
The applicant was briefly
released on parole but returned to prison and served the entirety of his
sentence. The magistrate was told
he was released from custody in early 2024.
The magistrate accurately summarised the applicant's personal circumstances as
they had been put to her in the plea in mitigation
"You're 24 years of age, you're nearly 25 in a month.
You're single with no children. Your childhood was described as a reasonably
stable one, with your mother and stepfather providing the parental role for you.
I do note that your father was not present, and
the impact that'd have on you. I
also take into account that, more recently, that relationship cannot be
reconciled as a consequence
of his tragic passing.
Unfortunately, as I often hear, methylamphetamine has been a devastating
effect on your life. You started using it at a relative early
stage and, apart
when you were in custody, you've been unable to remain abstinent.
Methylamphetamine causes much harm to the individual, to their families and
to the community, and you're no exception to that, unfortunately.
In relation to
this, you, when you're not using, you've been described as industrious with a
long work history in many areas; furniture
removal, firewood, assisting –
I'll call him your step – he's your stepfather, but your father, general
labouring and
maintaining social housing.
You've been described as an excellent footballer and cricketer. So, you're
still young and there is the prospect that you can make
the decisions to turn
them around. Only you can do that. And only you can determine what's important
in your life, the protection
of those that might be co-accused or the protection
of your life and your family. You've been in custody for 201 days. I'll backdate
the sentence that I'll impose to the 20th of September '24, as suggested by your
I take into account, as your counsel submits, that time in custody was
difficult back in – when you served it following the
sentence from the
Burnie Supreme Court, but also more recently. Of the 201 days, there's been many
lockdowns that I take into account
adds to the punitive effect over and above
what prison already is intended to be punitive. In relation to this, you have
the support
of your family. You can remain abstinent, and you chose to do so in
The reason, your counsel explains, that your relapse into greater use of
methylamphetamine on the most recent spate of offending that
I'm dealing with
relates to processing trauma within the family, and you retreated to heavy use
of drug use. Part of the sentence
I'll impose will be to support the
rehabilitation and hopefully obtain further skills to allow you to deal with it
in an alternative
In addition, the magistrate noted the applicant's pleas of guilty as a matter
counting in his favour as they saved considerable
court time and resources. She
also took into account that the property stolen during the course of the
aggravated burglary was recovered
as a consequence of the offenders being
interrupted when police attended.
During the plea in mitigation, the applicant's counsel had explained that the
applicant offended when under the influence of methylamphetamine
or in order to
obtain funds to obtain the drug. He suggested it would be appropriate for any
sentence imposed to include a "corrections
aspect. As to the ultimate disposition of the matter, the applicant's counsel
submitted that the magistrate
could consider a sentence that did not require the
applicant to serve any further actual imprisonment, perhaps by suspending any
further period to be imposed. During a discussion about the applicant's previous
custodial sentences, the applicant told the magistrate
he had been paroled but
was returned to prison after only 21 days because of a breach of parole
conditions. The magistrate sought
submissions from the applicant's counsel as to
parole eligibility. He submitted that an order allowing for parole would be
given the oversight that could be provided on the applicant's release
which would be of assistance to both the applicant and the
The magistrate's comments on passing sentence
The magistrate made the following observations concerning the nature of the
offences when sentencing the applicant:
As to the charge
of resist a police officer, police have a job to do, and when they are acting in
the execution of their duty, those
being arrested have an obligation to comply.
She noted that a person, when resisting, risks injury to themselves and others
and encourages
people to undermine the authority of police;
As to the breach
of bail charges, bail conditions are expected to be complied with. They are put
in place so that the community can
be protected from further offences. Breaches
are viewed seriously as they undermine the integrity of the bail system;
She considered
the aggravated burglary was a very serious example of the offence. It involved a
group of men breaking into a residence,
at the time of day you expect someone to
be home, for the purpose of stealing. It involved a gross invasion of privacy
and the occupant's
sense of safety. There was an inherent risk that someone
would be inside in the circumstances and that would be traumatic for the
She viewed the
firearms offences very seriously. She noted possession of a stolen firearm is a
serious offence which, when dealt with
summarily, attracts a maximum penalty of
100 penalty units and imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years. This is
of the seriousness with which the offence is viewed by the
legislature and the community. These penalties reflect community concerns
associated with stolen firearms and their use in crimes of dishonesty and
In this case,
the firearm involved was not only stolen but was loaded. General deterrence was,
therefore, important. It was possessed
by the applicant in a loaded state in a
vehicle, and not stored safely, which contributed to the potential of it being
dangerously
The magistrate referred to the applicant's prior convictions. She noted he was
not to be resentenced on his prior convictions, but
that they were relevant "in
regards to the impact previous sentences had" on the applicant, his response to
them and whether they
had the desired effect of breaking the cycle of his
offending. She noted, that to date, previous sentences had not achieved
In sentencing the applicant, the magistrate stated:
"Having taken
into account all the circumstances, a term of imprisonment is the only
appropriate sentence to meet each of the expectations
and sentencing
considerations, including your rehabilitation. I'll make an allowance for parole
as a minimum period of time to reflect
the various considerations, including
your rehabilitation.
Taking into account each of the – all circumstances, including the
principle of totality, that is, that I impose a sentence
that's appropriate,
reflects the criminality but is not crushing, I proceed to sentence you as
follows: You are convicted of each
matter on each count.
On complaint 950/25 (sic), count 4, I don't proceed to any further penalty
than simply recording a conviction. It's the fine-only
possess ammunition
charge. On the motor vehicle stealings, 9834/24 count 1 and count 8 on 950/24,
you're disqualified from driving
for a period of 12 months upon your release
from custody.
On the balance of the matters, I impose a single sentence of 30 months'
imprisonment, backdated to the 20th of September 2024. I order
that you be
eligible to apply for parole after you have served 20 months of that
The applicant's arguments
The applicant was not represented at the hearing of this application. He told
the Court he had chosen to represent himself. He was
at somewhat of a
disadvantage as a consequence. The applicant had received and read the
contentions filed by the respondent which
set out the principles which apply to
motions to review sentence alleging manifest excess. The applicant's attention
was drawn to
those principles before he addressed the Court to explain why the
sentence was manifestly excessive. He had notes of the matters
he wished to
raise in support of his application which he read to the Court.
The applicant argued that he was sentenced harshly in light of his pleas of
guilty, his age and the prospects of him being rehabilitated
community. He acknowledged his offending was bad, but argued that he had seen
more lenient sentences imposed on other
people. He considered he had been
sentenced harshly because of his background and because he did not last long on
parole last time.
He considered he did not have a very big criminal prior
record, especially not for firearms, noting he only had one prior for firearms
in the past. He emphasised he had no priors for aggravated burglary. He also
asserted no one was hurt in the course of his offending.
He believed that
matters that he had been charged with but not convicted of had been taken into
account in some way by the magistrate
who had also dealt with the applicant
during a bail application prior to the sentencing hearing. The applicant said
that most of
his offending was drug related. He felt like he had not been given
any chance at proper rehabilitation.
When sentencing the applicant, the magistrate noted the relevance of the
totality principle to the exercise. Its operation was recently
explained by Jago
Dickson v State of Tasmania
[2024] TASSC
as follows:
"The principle of totality is well
recognised. It requires a judicial officer imposing sentences for multiple
offences to review the
aggregate of the sentences and consider whether the total
effect of the sentences is just and appropriate. The totality principle
to ensure both that the overall sentence is not excessive relative to the
totality of the criminality of the offending, and
also that an offender is not
subjected to a 'crushing sentence' not in keeping with his record and
Postiglione v The
[1997] HCA 26
(1997) 189 CLR 295
Resolution of this application to review requires consideration of both the
length of the head sentence and the length of the non-parole
period imposed. It
is well recognised that a long parole eligibility period may make a sentence
manifestly excessive:
Butt v State of Tasmania
[2018] TASSC 3
, Pearce J at [68].
As to the length of the head sentence, the applicant was to be sentenced for 21
offences committed over a five-month period. The
first of those offences was
committed about six months after his release from prison. He was initially
remanded in custody from 20
August 2024 before being released on bail on 30
August 2024 on strict conditions. The second group of offences were committed on
6 and 12 September 2024, less than a fortnight after the applicant's release on
bail. The offences with which he was charged included
a breach of bail by
breaching curfew within a week of being granted bail. The applicant was then
remanded in custody following his
arrest on the matters before he was granted
bail on 16 January 2025. The final set of offences were committed on 23 January
a week after he was granted bail. Again, the offences included a number of
charges of breach of bail. Consequently, in the five month
period of the
offending, the applicant was on bail in the community for a total of 20 days
during which time he committed the most
serious of the offences for which he
fell to be sentenced.
It was not alleged that the applicant's conduct in resisting police in fact
caused injury to any of the officers involved. In my
view, it was a moderate
example of such an offence. The applicant also had an extremely concerning
record for offending of that type.
The breach of bail charges, each of which
related to breach of curfew conditions, were also reasonably serious examples of
kind in light of the speed with which the applicant chose to ignore
conditions which were plainly directed at controlling his behaviour
and reducing
his risk of offending while in the community. Again, he had an extensive record
of committing similar breaches of bail
in the past. General and specific
deterrence both loomed large as sentencing considerations in respect of the
resist police and breach
of bail charges as a result.
The more serious offences for which the applicant fell to be sentenced were
those arising from the events of 12 September 2024 and
23 January 2025. The
overall behaviour engaged in by the applicant demonstrated a concerning level of
criminality.
The aggravated burglary committed by the applicant in the company of other
offenders was a serious example of such an offence. The
magistrate rightly
observed there was a real risk that someone would be home at the time the
aggravated burglary was committed. That
risk was realised in this case. The
facts do not suggest that the applicant was aware that someone was in the house
at the time,
however the occupant was forced to hide and was understandably
terrified. Ever since the 1997 amendments to s 245 of the
Criminal Code
1924, it is a circumstance of
aggravation that a burglary is committed at a place which is being used, or is
ordinarily used, for
the purposes of human habitation. The purpose of those
amendments was to send a "clear message to those persons who invade the privacy
of a person's home, causing stress and shock to the occupants, that this sort of
behaviour is serious criminal conduct and will be
treated accordingly": see
Second Reading Speech,
Criminal Code Amendment
(Aggravated Burglary) Bill
1997, Tasmania, House of Assembly,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 19 March 1997. A burglary committed at
a time when it was likely that premises would be occupied, particularly at
has also been recognised by the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal
as a circumstance enhancing the seriousness of the offence:
R v Ponfield
[1999] NSWCCA 435
(1999) 48 NSWLR 327
; NSWCCA 435
at [48]. The magistrate's characterisation of the nature of the offending is
well-supported by that authority and the
legislative purpose of the relevant
amendments.
The magistrate was also right to observe that the firearms offences were
objectively serious examples of such offending. Not only
did the applicant have
possession of a stolen firearm, it was also loaded. There was evidence that the
firearm had been accidently
discharged during the course of the crash, only
serving to emphasise the inherent danger of transporting a loaded firearm. The
was unlicensed. His record was such that he would not be able to
obtain a licence for any form of firearm: see
Firearms Act
. A considerable amount of
additional ammunition was also located in the crashed car. The firearm and
ammunition were not stored or
conveyed correctly. The applicant was in
possession of the firearm and ammunition while travelling in a stolen car. The
had relevant and serious prior convictions, having been convicted and
sentenced in June 2022 to 16 months imprisonment on charges
of aggravated
assault, possess a firearm when unlicenced, possess a shortened firearm and
possess a firearm with identification marks
altered or defaced.
Williams v Parker
[2016] TASSC 39
J considered whether a sentence of 14 months' imprisonment with no order for
parole, imposed by a magistrate for drugs and
firearm offences, was manifestly
excessive. In that case, the firearm offences related to the offender's
possession of a shortened
firearm without a licence which was stolen and in
breach of a firearm prohibition order. It is not alleged in this case that the
firearm was shortened or that the applicant has ever been the subject of a
prohibition notice. In reasoning to the conclusion the
sentence in that case was
not manifestly excessive, Pearce J noted at [11] the following in relation to
the introduction of the offence
of possessing a stolen firearm:
reference to the Minister's second reading speech made in the House of Assembly
on 24 and 25 March 2015, the creation of the offence
and the heavy potential
penalties which accompany it, disclose a legislative intention that those found
in possession of a stolen
firearm should face a harsh punishment."
General deterrence and denunciation are important considerations when
sentencing for such offences. In the applicant's case, the
exercise of
discretion required that particular consideration also be given to specific
deterrence given the applicant's record of
prior convictions, recent release
from custody and persistent offending while on bail. While the applicant did not
have a prior conviction
for aggravated burglary, this was of little moment. The
applicant's record demonstrated he had been involved in a good deal of criminal
conduct of various kinds which included offences of dishonesty. The applicant
was not to be sentenced on his record in a way that
was disproportionate to the
offending involved, however, his antecedents served to demonstrate this
offending was not out of character
and reflected his continuing disregard of the
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
[1988] HCA 14
; 164 CLR 465, Mason DJ,
Brennan, Dawson and Toohey JJ at 477.
The applicant complained that no consideration was given to suspending part or
all of the sentence of imprisonment imposed. He also
argued consideration should
have been given to having him assessed for a drug treatment order in light of
the connection between
his drug use and offending. On the issue of suspension,
counsel for the applicant submitted to the magistrate that consideration
be given to suspending any further period of imprisonment imposed in addition to
the time already served in custody. In her
sentencing comments, the magistrate
noted that previous suspended sentences had been activated by courts. She had
regard generally
to the impact of previous sentences upon the applicant and his
response to them. She noted that past sentencing orders, which included
suspended sentences, had not had the desired effect of breaking the applicant's
cycle of offending. This was an observation that
was plainly open in the
circumstances. This alone would be sufficient reason to conclude that a sentence
of imprisonment suspended
in whole or in part would not be an adequate response
to the offending.
No direct request was made of the magistrate to have the applicant assessed for
suitability for a drug treatment order or any other
community-based order.
Counsel did, however, request that consideration be given including a
"corrections-type" order as part of
any sentence imposed so as to include a
therapeutic aspect to encourage the applicant to make the right decisions in the
This was in the context of submissions concerning the applicant's
significant drug use and prospects of rehabilitation. What was
meant by this
submission was not further elaborated upon by counsel. Relevantly, s
27S(2)(a)(i) of the
Sentencing Act
provides that a motion to review does not lie against a refusal of a court
constituted by a magistrate to make a drug treatment order.
No specific error
has been alleged by the applicant in his motion to review, either by failing to
suspend any of the sentence of
imprisonment or in failing to make a drug
treatment order. No such error has been demonstrated.
The circumstances of the applicant's offending, the maximum statutory penalties
available, the objects of those penalties and the
relevant sentencing principles
were such that, in my view, it could not be said that the head sentence of 30
months' imprisonment
was outside of the range of sentences reasonably available
to the magistrate. This is not to say that it would not have been open
magistrate to impose a shorter head sentence; the discretion available to a
sentencing court is a broad one. But that is not
the test. As was made clear by
Pearce J in
TAB v Moore
[2017] TASSC 65
, "It is not to the point
that it was open to the magistrate to sentence the applicant in a different
way". The applicant has not
demonstrated that the head sentence was so obviously
excessive that the sentencing discretion must have
miscarried.
The non-parole period
The purpose of legislation providing for parole eligibility is to "provide for
mitigation of the punishment of the prisoner in favour
of his rehabilitation
through conditional freedom, when appropriate":
Power v The Queen
[1974] HCA 26
at 629. The prospect of parole "provides a prisoner with the hope of release
and an incentive for rehabilitation":
[2022] TASCCA 9
, Wood J at [83] citing
Bugmy v The Queen
[1990] HCA 18
(1990) 169 CLR 525
Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ at 536. In setting a parole eligibility period, a
sentencer has a broad discretion. Some guidance
is provided by the terms of s
17(4) of the
Sentencing Act
which provides that regard may be had to all
or any of the following: the nature and circumstances of the offence; the
antecedents or character; and any other sentence to which the
offender is subject. Section 17(4) makes clear, however, that these
not limit the generality of the court's ability to "have regard to such matters
as it considers necessary or appropriate"
when exercising the discretion. The
length of the non-parole period set by a sentencing court is to reflect the
minimum period of
time that the court determines that justice requires to be
served by the offender, having regard to all the circumstances of the
Power v The Queen
Deakin v The
[1984] HCA 31
[2002] TASSC 60
11 Tas R 362
Richman v Tasmania
[2011] TASCCA 18
Director of Public Prosecutions v Harris
[2013] TASCCA 5
. There is no presumption that the non-parole period
should be the minimum:
Pickrell v Tasmania
[2011] TASSCA 13 at [13].
Gill v The Queen
A34/1990, Crawford J (with whom Neasey J agreed), stated at
"The making of an order by a sentencing judge that a prisoner
shall not be eligible for parole, or extending the non-parole period,
effect of increasing the severity of the punishment by delaying the possible
time for release from prison. It may act as
a deterrent to the prisoner and
others contemplating crime. It may also have the effect of protecting the public
from further criminal
conduct by the prisoner by keeping him locked away.
Conversely it may discourage reformation and good behaviour in prison, and
or lessen the chances of rehabilitation under supervision through
conditional freedom. These effect, or the possibility of them or
the object of
achieving them, or some of them, should be considered by sentencing judges
before making an order removing eligibility
for parole or extending the
non-parole period."
In this case, the magistrate gave consideration to the overall criminality and
the applicant's prospects of rehabilitation when
setting the minimum period of
time he was required to serve before being eligible for release on parole. The
parole eligibility period
imposed exceeded the minimum available by five months
and amounted to two-thirds of the total period of imprisonment imposed upon
applicant. It does, however, provide the applicant the opportunity of early
release ten months prior to the expiration of the
sentence of imprisonment
imposed upon him.
There was good reason for the magistrate to decline to impose the minimum
non-parole period upon the applicant. Not only had the
applicant, by his own
admission, performed poorly on parole when he previously had that opportunity,
his record of prior convictions
reflected a failure to comply with other
rehabilitative orders in the form of suspended sentences and community
corrections orders.
In light of those matters, combined with the circumstances
of the offending, it could not be said that the imposition of a parole
eligibility period in excess of the minimum provided for by the
was demonstrative of error in the exercise of the magistrate's
sentencing discretion.
A sentence of 30 months' imprisonment with a minimum non-parole period of 20
months is a significant sentence. While it would have
been open to the
magistrate to impose a shorter head sentence and non-parole period, that does
not mean the sentence imposed was
unreasonable or plainly unjust. In my view,
the sentence imposed in this case, taking into account both the length of the
of imprisonment imposed and of the non-parole period, was not so
obviously excessive that some error in the exercise of the sentencing
must have occurred.
The motion is dismissed.
The applicant's record of prior
convictions is somewhat ambiguous. It is not clear whether a four month period
of suspended imprisonment
was activated or not. If it was not activated, the
periods of imprisonment imposed on those dates total 30 months and 2 weeks.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (210 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter