URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASLPDT/2023/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:16:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BKJ v Mitchell Ryan Sheehy [2023] TASLPDT 3; (7 August 2023)
LEGAL PROFESSION DISCIPLINARY TRIBUNAL
CITATION: BKJ
v Mitchell Ryan Sheehy
[2023] TASLPDT 3
PARTIES: BKJ (Applicant)
MITCHELL RYAN SHEEHY (Respondent)
FILE NO: 04 – 2023DT
DELIVERED ON: 7 August 2023
DELIVERED AT: Hobart
HEARING DATE: 27 July 2023
THE TRIBUNAL: M. E. O’Farrell SC (Chairman)
M. Kitchell
Application is dismissed;
name of applicant is not to be published or communicated to a person in any
other manner.
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: ln person
Respondent: In person
Decision Number: [2023] TASLPDT 3
Number of paragraphs: 69
DETERMINATION
Introduction
an order made by Judge Turnbull in the Federal Circuit Court of Australia
(‘the Court’) on 28 October 2021, the
was awarded, in
aggregate, an amount representing 16.75% of the value of the combined property
pool held by her and her former husband.
present application is about the respondent’s conduct of the
applicant’s case in those proceedings, both before and
after Judge
Turnbull’s decision.
applicant made a complaint to the Legal Profession Board of Tasmania (‘the
encapsulated, with the applicant’s agreement, in five allegations against
the respondent for his conduct of the applicant’s
case. The Board’s
task was to determine whether any one or more of those allegations amounted to
unsatisfactory professional
conduct, or professional misconduct.
16 March 2023 the Board dismissed the complaint, following an investigation, on
the basis that there was no reasonable likelihood
of the practitioner being
found to have engaged in either unsatisfactory professional conduct, or
professional misconduct.
5 April 2023 the complainant made this application to the Tribunal under s
458(1)(a) of the
Legal Profession Act 2007
(‘the Act’), to
have the matters to which the Board’s determination related determined by
the Tribunal.
the reasons which follow, we have decided that the Board’s determination
was correct. There is no reasonable likelihood
that the respondent would be
found guilty of either unsatisfactory professional conduct, or professional
misconduct. We dismiss
the application.
find as facts the following background extracted from the Board’s
investigator’s report, dated 30 January 2023, and
its annexures.
applicant is originally from China. She speaks very limited English. In the
present proceedings, she required the assistance
of an interpreter to make her
submissions to the Tribunal.
April 2012, the applicant visited Australia. During the visit she met a man,
who she was eventually to marry in January 2013,
in Devonport, Tasmania. Their
relationship continued for six years before they separated in about January
applicant’s former husband owned seven properties, including the house
that the applicant and he lived in during their marriage.
The balance of the
properties were for investment. All the properties were subject to mortgages.
The husband’s contributions
to the marriage were financial, derived from
his work. The applicant’s contributions were predominantly non-financial,
contributions and she did not personally have any assets other than a
car worth a nominal amount.
the separation the applicant instructed the firm of Friend & Jones,
solicitors, in Ulverstone to lodge a caveat on her
former husband’s
properties to prevent their sale. A caveat was lodged on 15 May 2019.
respondent was admitted to practice on 23 August 2019. Soon after that he was
employed as a practitioner at Friend & Jones.
On 25 November 2019, the
applicant retained Friend & Jones to act on her behalf in a property
settlement against her former
husband. The respondent was given carriage of
those proceedings.
early on in the case, the applicant had instructed the respondent to the effect
that she would not settle the matter for less
than 30 per cent of the net
property pool, plus a 50 per cent share of her former husband’s
superannuation. It is, however,
apparent that the respondent continually
advised her that she was unlikely to achieve that result. His assessment of the
outcome of the proceedings was that she would receive between 15 and 20
per cent of the total net pool. An example of the respondent’s
in the following paragraphs of his letter dated 24 May 2021:
I note from our previous discussions that you want at least 30% of the nett
property pool, however, as I have advised on multiple
occasions, I do not
believe you are entitled to 30% of the nett property pool.
Realistically, you should expect to receive between 15% to 20% of the nett
property pool as I believe that is what you are entitled
to after giving
consideration to yours and [your former husband’s] property pool, the
contributions both of you made to the
property pool, and both yours and [your
former husband’s] personal circumstances.
written advice to that effect was given to the applicant by the respondent in a
letter 15 June 2021. On the same day, in
accordance with the applicant’s
instructions, the respondent sent a letter to the former husband’s
solicitors with an
offer to the effect that the applicant would accept (amongst
other things) a sum equal to 30 percent of the value of the net property
were two, unsuccessful, mediations conducted in the lead up to the hearing
before Judge Turnbull. Following the second mediation,
offers were made on both
sides to settle the matter, but they were rejected. In June 2021, the parties
were still a considerable
distance apart, and would remain so. On 15 June 2021,
the applicant instructed the respondent to make the final offer she was to
before trial, namely that she would accept 30 per cent of the pool.
21 July 2021 the respondent prudently instructed an experienced family law
barrister, Ms Mooney SC, to appear for the applicant
at trial. Ms Mooney’s
advice was that the applicant was not likely to receive more than about 15 per
cent of the total asset
pool and that the applicant should attempt to settle the
matter on that figure. It appears at this point that the applicant altered
position, and instructed the respondent that she would accept 25 per cent of the
property pool, plus half of her former husband’s
superannuation balance.
30 July 2021, about 4 days before trial, the respondent sent an email to the
applicant in the following terms:
I have received a [sic] email from Kate Mooney and has [sic] also spoken to her
yesterday afternoon. Ms Mooney has advised that [your
former husband’s]
barrister has spoken to her and [your former husband] is keen to settle this
Ms Mooney has now has [sic] a chance to read over yours and [your former
husband’s] affidavit material. She has advised that
based on what she has
read so far, contributions made by both you and [you former husband] and the
relevant case law you are entitled
to15% of the nett property pool.
Ms Mooney and I spoke yesterday and I agreed that I would contact you to see if
you are willing to make an offer to try and resolve
this without going to a
hearing. This would avoid the stress of having to go through a hearing. Ms
Mooney advises that you will be
unable to prove that your family loaned [your
former husband] the $10,000.00. I had advised you previously that I need the
statement and an affidavit from your family in support.
Ms Mooney would like your permission to make an offer to [your former
husband’s] barrister seeking a property settlement where
you received 15%
of the nett property pool (approximately $92,500.00 and the repayment of the
[former husband] half of the valuation
I strongly encourage you to accept Ms Mooney advise [sic]. As you will recall I
have been advising you to counter with a similar
offer now for some time. If you
proceed to hearing you are unlikely to receive an amount of money as large as
$92,500.00.
If you proceed to hearing, you will have the costs associated with the hearing
and you may be have to pay [your former husband’s]
costs. Whilst [your
former husband’s] offer is too low. I believe that he wants to try and
settle this matter as well.
I would ask to you remember how much stress the last mediation caused you.
If this matter went to hearing on Tuesday it will be a
very stressful event. You
will have to give evidences and [your former husband’s] barrister will
also cross examine you which
will not be pleasant. In addition due to the
language barrier, the use of an interpret will more than double the time that it
to give evidence.
Please carefully think about this proposal and provide me with instructions
matter was heard before Judge Turnbull on 3 August 2023 at the Federal Circuit
Court of Australia in Launceston. It is clear
from Judge Turnbull’s
that Ms Mooney argued that
the applicant should receive 25 per cent of the net property pool, together with
50 per cent of her former
husband’s superannuation. Her former
husband’s barrister argued that the applicant should receive only 10
the total asset pool, inclusive of the superannuation pool.
28 October 2021, Judge Turnbull made the orders previously referred to and
published his reasons. Amongst other orders, there
was an order requiring the
applicant to withdraw the caveats which had been lodged on her behalf over her
former husband’s
properties within 30 days of the Court orders being
handed down, namely, 27 November 2021.
respondent wrote to the applicant on 29 October 2021 setting out in full the
orders made by Judge Turnbull, and the effect of
those orders. His letter
included the following:
Therefore, you will receive 16.75% of the total pool including superannuation.
This was within the range of 15 to 20% that I had
advised you that you would
likely receive prior to trial and also similar arrange [sic] to what Mrs Kate
Mooney SC advised you prior
to the trial.
I will prepare, the instrument to remove the caveats over [your former
husband’s] properties. As the required [sic] to sign
all necessary
documents to remove them within 30 days of these orders.
The respondent did not provide the applicant with a copy of Judge
Turnbull’s reasons at this stage.
appears that, on 2 November 2021, the applicant went to the respondent’s
office and spoke with him. On the same day, subsequent
to that meeting, the
respondent wrote an email to the applicant, which included the following.
Without having Billy to translate it was difficult for us to communicate with
each other, when you dropped by into the office.
From, what I can tell, from our interaction, you were requesting a copy of the
I will need to check, if I can release the judgement to you, as its marked 'not
for publication'. Family law judgments are not to
be posted or shared online or
with people who are not part of the proceedings. The version I have would best
be described as the
unredacted judgment as it has yours and [your former
husband’s] details in it. The Court will later publish the full judgement
online, with different names and redacting the location of the properties or
family details.
We infer that the reference to the ‘judgement’ is to
the reasons of Judge Turnbull.
16 December 2021 the respondent sent an email to the applicant to advise that
her former husband had entered a contract of sale
for one of his properties, in
order to liquidate the funds necessary to pay her the amount ordered to be paid
by Judge Turnbull.
The practitioner advised the applicant that she would need
to attend the office, to sign a document to remove the caveat from her
husband’s properties. He told her to bring Billy with her to translate
the document to the applicant before she signed
it. We interpolate that by now
it should be apparent that Billy was a person known to the applicant who was
able to assist her to
translate English into her native language.
respondent did not hear from the applicant, and on 22 December 2021, sent an
email asking the applicant to attend his office with
Billy in order to sign the
document. The Christmas break then intervened.
9 January 2022 the applicant sent an email to the respondent, in the following
You have mentioned in your previous email about those items. I will go to
collect them. For other items like art wares which I purchased
in Thailand, my
English books, photo frames and my shoes, I will collect as well. If [my former
husband] did not return those items
to me, he needs to pay me for those items,
half costs of those items $2500 in total. Also, please send me the documents
which I need
to sign. I need to read and ask someone to translate for me before
I also have some questions and I hope you can help me make them clear.
First, about the super, can I take it out from the account now?
Second, I have mentioned in previous email that I need the original copy of
court judgment. When could you send it to me? Also please
send me all the
details about your fees. I need the invoice of your fees as well.
Third, you already have the court judgment. So why can you remove the caveats
directly? Why do I need to sign the documents?
I have also ask the legal aid about some details. I also seek help from the
Tasmania Bar Association. I hope you can give me better
understanding of my
12 January 2022 the respondent emailed the applicant to ask her to attend his
office to sign the ‘caveat documentation’.
The applicant responded:
I have sent you email on Monday to ask you to send me the documents which I need
to sign. I need to read and ask someone to translate
for me before I sign it.
Please send it. After I am clear about the details of the documents, I will go
to your office.
19 January 2022 the respondent sent a copy of Judge Turnbull’s reasons to
the applicant.
sometime in January 2022 the applicant instructed a lawyer in New South Wales to
act on her behalf. In emails dated 28 January
2022, relating to a number of
issues, that lawyer wrote:
There is a problem, it seemed [the applicant] wanted to appeal. She did not
receive an order from you when you were presenting [sic]
[the applicant]?
We infer that the reference to ‘an order’ was to Judge
Turnbull’s reasons, although it could have also been to the
sealed orders
of the Court with which, the applicant said at the hearing, she had not been
Later that day the respondent replied:
After Turnbull J handed down his decision. I wrote to [the applicant] and
provide [sic] her an extract of the full orders in a letter
sent via email on
the 29th of October 2021. At no time did [the applicant] raise with me, that she
wanted to appeal the decision.
applicant did not sign the documentation to remove the caveats, and on 2
February 2022 the former husband filed an application
with the Court to have the
caveats removed by a Registrar, to allow him to sell one of his properties to be
able to pay the Complainant.
The application was listed before a Registrar on
10 February 2022 and, on 14 February 2022, the Registrar ordered that the
be removed from the properties.
14 June 2022 the former husband’s firm wrote to the applicant indicating
that $80,287.60 was being held on trust for her
at its firm and that the money
was readily transferrable to her. The material does not reveal whether the
applicant has obtained
those funds.
respondent was an Australian legal practitioner, within the meaning of the Act,
s 5, at all times he acted for the applicant,
although at the time the complaint
was made he had left the profession. In its determination, the Board found that
he was an Australian
lawyer, within the meaning of the Act, s 6. That provision
relates to Australian legal practitioners. However, whatever was intended
not presently relevant, having regard to our primary finding, above.
Ruling as to documents
the hearing before us the applicant handed up 3 tranches of documents, as
(a) a copy of a letter 10 August 2021, together with an affidavit in the Court
proceedings;
(b) copies of SMS communications between her and the respondent;
(c) Several emails between her and the respondent.
Tribunal inspected the documents. Some, but not all, of them formed part of the
materials that were before the Board as annexures
to the investigator’s
report. It was clear that none of the materials were ‘fresh
evidence’ that could not have
been produced to the Board or discovered
with reasonable diligence when the matter was before the Board. Moreover, in
the Tribunal’s
view, none of the documents would make a material
difference to the outcome of the application. Accordingly, the Tribunal
to admit them into evidence.
application is made under the the Act, s 458, which relevantly
(1) The complainant, or the Australian legal practitioner who is the subject of
the complaint, who is served with a notice of the
determination of the Board in
relation to a complaint may, within 21 days after the date of that determination
(a) apply to the Tribunal ...to have the matter to which the determination
relates determined by the Tribunal...
(3) The determination of a matter pursuant to an application made under
subsection (1)(a) is to be by way of a re-hearing.
Boland v Boxall
pointed out ‘the element of ambiguity in the use of the word
‘re-hearing’’, Blow CJ said:
8. Having regard to the second reading speech and the history of the
legislation, it is clear that the word "re-hearing" is used
to refer to the sort
of re-hearing that the Full Court undertakes in an appeal from a decision of a
single judge in a civil matter.
The nature of such a re-hearing was well
described by Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Kirby JJ in
Fox v Percy
214 CLR 118
, as follows:
The 'rehearing' does not involve a completely fresh hearing by the appellate
court of all the evidence. That court proceeds on the
basis of the record and
any fresh evidence that, exceptionally, it admits.
9. On such an appeal by way of rehearing, the issues for determination are
defined by the grounds of appeal. Since this proceeding
is not an appeal, but
one involving a re-determination, the issues are not so confined. Unless
otherwise ordered, the parties may
not rely upon any evidence other than the
record of the proceedings before the Board and the documents or other exhibits
before the Board.
‘matter to which the determination relates’ is the dismissal of the
applicant’s complaint to the Board under
the Act, s 451. That section
451. Dismissal of complaint
After an investigation of a complaint against an Australian legal practitioner
has been completed, the Board may dismiss the complaint
if satisfied that
(a) there is no reasonable likelihood that the practitioner will be found guilty
of either unsatisfactory professional conduct or
professional misconduct; or
(b) it is in the public interest to do so.
Board’s ground for the dismissal was that there was no reasonable
likelihood that the respondent would be found guilty of
either unsatisfactory
professional conduct or professional misconduct.
expression ‘reasonable likelihood’:
...speaks of a chance of an event occurring or not occurring which is real
– not fanciful or remote. It does not refer to
a chance which is more
likely than not to occur, that is, one which is 'odds on' or where between nil
and certainty it should be
placed. A chance which in common parlance is
described as 'reasonable' is one that is 'fair', 'sufficient' or 'worth
terms ‘unsatisfactory professional conduct’ and ‘professional
misconduct’ are found in Chapter 4, Part
4.1, Division 1 of the Act.
Those expressions are defined as follows:
420 Unsatisfactory professional conduct
For the purposes of this Act –
unsatisfactory professional conduct
includes conduct of an
Australian legal practitioner occurring in connection with the practice of law
that falls short of the standard
of competence and diligence that a member of
the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably competent Australian legal
practitioner.
421 Professional misconduct
(1) For the purposes of this Act –
professional misconduct
(a) unsatisfactory professional
conduct of an Australian legal practitioner, where the conduct involves a
substantial or consistent
failure to reach or maintain a reasonable standard of
competence and diligence; and
(b) conduct of an Australian legal
practitioner whether occurring in connection with the practice of law or
occurring otherwise than
in connection with the practice of law that would, if
established, justify a finding that the practitioner is not a fit and proper
person to engage in legal practice.
(2) For finding that an Australian legal practitioner
is not a fit and proper person to engage in legal practice as mentioned in
(1), regard may be had to the suitability matters that would be
considered if the practitioner were an applicant for admission to
profession under this Act or for the grant or renewal of a local practising
certificate."
422 provides for non-exclusive categories of conduct, none of which are
presently relevant. The categories of conduct are
not, however, closed. In
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v
Brett J said that the
task of determining conduct under ss 420 and 421:
...involves an evaluative assessment of the conduct, measured against the
standard of competence and diligence that a member of the
public is entitled to
expect of a reasonably competent Australian legal practitioner. The second step
is to determine whether the
unsatisfactory professional conduct amounts to
professional misconduct. In making this determination, an assessment must be
as to whether the conduct involved a substantial or consistent failure to
reach or maintain a reasonable standard of competence and
diligence. It is the
finding that the relevant failure has been substantial or consistent which is
critical to this determination.
A further observation which can be made about
the legislative scheme incorporated into this legislation is that the standard
of competence
and diligence required of a legal practitioner is to be evaluated
on the basis of what a reasonable member of the public would be
entitled to
expect of the practitioner. I think that this results in an important shift of
emphasis away from the formulation which
preceded this legislation, which
depended upon what practitioners of good repute and competency would reasonably
consider to be conduct
which could be described as disgraceful or dishonourable.
standard of proof for the finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct or
professional misconduct is the balance of probabilities.
But it is well
recognised that the standard requires the Tribunal to be reasonably satisfied,
and that threshold is not reached
‘by inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect
inferences’.
follows from these principles that our task is to determine whether there was no
reasonable likelihood that, in respect of the
conduct identified in the
applicant’s complaint, having regard to the requisite standard of proof,
the respondent would be
found guilty of either unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct.
Conclusions
has been noted there were five allegations made in the complaint, which were
formulated by the Board’s investigator with
the agreement of the
to the applicant’s difficulties with English, the Tribunal took the course
of putting each allegation to her, summarising
the Board’s findings and
then asking her why she thought that the Board was wrong about that allegation.
The applicant agreed
to the Tribunal taking that course.
all of the applicant’s submissions traversed the particular allegation put
to her, or the Board’s findings. Accordingly,
we set out, in summary,
what the applicant told us, and then deal with the substance of each allegation.
respondent made submissions which were, in the main, consistent with the
background we have outlined above.
Allegation 1
The respondent failed to advocate for the
applicant to ensure that her rights were protected and that she receive a fair
the property pool, where the Complainant was advised by Ms Mooney
prior to the trial that she would receive a 25 per cent share,
however she only
received a 16.5 per cent share.
applicant’s submission to the Tribunal revealed that she thought the
Board’s decision was incorrect, because she did
not receive 25% of the
combined property pool. She appeared to attribute that failure to the
respondent on two grounds. First,
that he did not pursue full disclosure in
respect of her former husband’s bank accounts and the full extent of his
Secondly, that the practitioner did not produce her latest medical
certificate to the Court when her matter was heard.
to the first ground, she alleged that her former husband had ‘taken
over’ a joint bank account, which she told the
practitioner about, but he
failed to investigate.
applicant also complained about the lack of an interpreter at the Court on the
day of the trial.
will be apparent from the background, set out above, that the decision of Judge
Turnbull confirmed the consistent advice of the
respondent and, once she was
briefed, Ms Mooney that the applicant could only expect to receive an amount
equivalent to the value
of 15 to 20 percent of the net property pool. There is
no question the advice was given, and there is likewise no question that
applicant was not prepared to follow it.
if it is assumed in favour of the applicant that Ms Mooney gave advice that she
would receive 25 per cent of the pool, that does
not reflect the advice given by
the applicant. It may be, as the Board suggested at paragraph [35] of its
determination, that the
applicant misunderstood what Ms Mooney said, but we do
not need to decide that point.
allegations raised before the Tribunal to the effect that the respondent did not
pursue disclosure were not raised before the
Board, and there is no material
before the Tribunal that support them. There is a file note, dated 26 July
2021, in which the applicant
requested the respondent to request disclosure of
further bank statements. The respondent agreed that he would write to the
applicant’s
former husband’s solicitors requesting those. That
request is not attached to the investigator’s report. No further
or complaint about the lack of disclosure of the bank statements appears to have
been made by the applicant. We infer that
the matter was not the subject of the
applicant’s complaint to the Board.
without deciding that there was a medical certificate that the respondent failed
to produce to the Court, we do not find
it a compelling reason to consider that
it amounted to relevant conduct.
allegation concerning the interpreter is not well founded. It was the
Court’s responsibility to provide an interpreter.
However, the
interpreter was unable to attend, necessitating another interpreter to be made
available by video link. The hearing
proceeded on that basis. It does not
reflect on the respondent’s conduct.
is no reasonable likelihood that the respondent would be found guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct, or professional
misconduct on this
allegation.
Allegation 2
The respondent delayed sending the applicant a
copy of the Court orders.
applicant’s complaint to the Tribunal was, in effect, that she did not
receive the ‘court order’ in a timely
manner following its receipt
by the practitioner from the Court. We understand the applicant’s
reference to the ‘court
order’ as the reasons for Judge
Turnbull’s decision. The applicant also complained that she did not
receive a sealed
copy of the court orders.
is the most difficult aspect of this case. We find that the respondent did not,
but ought to have sent the applicant a copy
of the reasons forthwith upon
receiving them, together with advice about the possibility of appeal. The
question is whether that
failure amounted to unsatisfactory professional
conduct, or professional misconduct. In our view, it did not, and there was no
likelihood that the practitioner would be found guilty of either of
applicant had sent the respondent the full text of the orders made by Turnbull
J, but not his reasons. The applicant therefore
had notice of the orders. She
also had the respondent’s letter explaining their effect and what needed
to be done to give
effect to them. The respondent’s concern, although
misplaced, was that he may not have been entitled to send the reasons because
they were marked ‘not for publication’. In our view, that was a
mistake. However, adopting the evaluative approach
suggested by Brett J and
accepting, without deciding, that negligence may amount at least to
unsatisfactory professional conduct,
we do not consider that the
respondent’s conduct reaches that level in this case. It was the mistake
of a young practitioner,
acting over cautiously, as best he could, in what he
considered to be in the interests of his client. We do not think a member of
the public would consider that mistake to fall short of the relevant standard of
competence and diligence.
Allegation 3
The respondent failed to respond to the
applicant’s questions with respect to the court orders
applicant said she had sent all the material relating to this allegation to the
Board. It consisted of emails, and text messages.
She told us, in effect, that
a person at the Board had formulated the complaint for her, as she was not able
to do so, because of
her English language difficulties.
agree with the Board’s determination to the effect that there is nothing
in the materials that reveal any outstanding questions
that the practitioner
failed to deal with. His concern, following the hearing, was to secure the
applicant’s compliance with
Turnbull J’s orders. The applicant,
however, did not accept the respondent’s advice, resulting in the eventual
for a hearing before a Registrar to execute the necessary documents for the
withdrawal of the caveat.
Allegation 4
Having received a copy of the court orders the
applicant has identified that the orders were made by consent, however her
instructions
were not sought nor did she agree to the orders as submitted to the
applicant told us that in her opinion the orders were ‘exactly a
reconciliation’. She also referred to text messages
and emails that she
had sent to the Board and suggested that the Board’s decision was
‘quite irresponsible’. She
thought the Board was in favour of the
respondent.
relation to this allegation, we observe that the orders of Turnbull J were not
consent orders. Indeed, a full hearing and judicial
determination was required
to resolve the dispute between the applicant and her former husband. The orders
were imposed on the parties
for that purpose. There is no substance in this
allegation.
Allegation 5
The respondent inappropriately urged the
Complainant to sign a legal document that is in English, which she was unable to
to her limited understanding of English, and further failed to assist
or enable the Complainant to have the document translated so
that she understood
the legal document she was being asked to sign.
to this allegation, the applicant said she did not understand the Court orders,
or the application to withdraw the caveat. She
did not agree with the
Board’s determination.
any view of the material before the Board and the Tribunal, the respondent went
to considerable lengths to ensure that the applicant
understood both the
Court’s process and the documents necessary to give effect to the
Court’s orders. We also observe
that, on many occasions, the applicant
was able to respond to the respondent’s requests. In her email to the
respondent 9
January 2022 the applicant expressly said ‘I need to read
[the document] and ask someone to translate for me before I sign
the Tribunal’s view, had the applicant cooperated more closely with the
respondent in his endeavours to secure her compliance
with the Court’s
orders there is little doubt that she would have received an adequate
explanation of what had happened and
what she was being asked to do.
asked whether there was anything further she wanted to submit to the Tribunal,
the applicant said that the respondent had lied
to her and tried to mislead her.
She repeated her allegations about the failure to investigate the joint bank
account. She made
a submission to the effect that insufficient notice had been
taken of the contribution she made to the marriage. She referred to
the loan of
$10,000.00 that she borrowed from her sister. She said that the Board’s
decision was not what she wanted. She
also said that a partner in the law firm
that represented her former husband was a member of the Board. She said she had
been treated
have already dealt with the failure to pursue disclosure of the bank account.
The applicant’s contribution to her marriage
and the $10,000.00 loan from
her sister were both agitated by Ms Mooney, as instructed by the respondent, as
issues before Turnbull
J, and dealt with at length in his reasons. There is no
evidence that the respondent lied to the applicant, or misled her. To the
contrary, the documents before us show he went to considerable lengths to ensure
that her interests were safeguarded to the best
extent possible. We regard that
allegation as being without substance.
infer that the member of the Board who is also a partner of the firm who
represented the applicant’s former husband is Mr
Mihal. There is nothing
in the materials before us to suggest that he took any part in the Board’s
determination.
the applicant has found herself unable to accept the Court’s decision or
the Board’s determination, or that considers
that she has been treated
unfairly does not reflect in any way on the practitioner’s conduct.
_________________________________________________________________________
The applicant’s name has
been anonymised in this determination to ensure that the parties to Judge
Turnbull’s decision
cannot be identified: see
Profession Act 2007
Board received the complaint on 18 January 2022.
[2021] FedCFamC2F 255
. The names of the parties have been
anonomised by the
[2017] TASSC 57
, [35] (Tennent
[2016] TASSC 30 (Blow
of Agriculture and Rural Affairs v Binnie
[1989] VicRp 73
[1989] VR 836
Young CJ and Teague J agreeing), discussed in
Betts v Legal Profession
Complaints Committee
[2019] WASAT 25
, followed by the Tribunal in
[2022] TASLPDT 1, [9].
, [11]; applied in
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v W
[2023] TASFC 1
, [14] (Estcourt J, with whom Jago J and
Porter AJ agreed).
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, 362 (Dixon J)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (205 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter