URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASWRCT/2021/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:23:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
P. v Xenco Pty Ltd [2021] TASWRCT 22 (2 July 2021)
[2021] TASWRCT 22
WORKERS REHABILITATION AND COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
P. v Xenco Pty Ltd
[2021] TASWRCT
XENCO PTY LTD
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
1 July 2021
DELIVERED ON:
2 July 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Commissioner Wilkins
CATCHWORDS:
Whether worker injured ‘in the course of
employment’ – place where injury occurred not owned by or under
of employer – refusal of property owner to permit worker and
worker’s solicitors access to inspect – application
for order that
property owner permit access and inspection
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Regulations
Xenco Pty Ltd v P
[2021] TASWRCT 11
Gordon v Cadbury Schweppes
[1989] TASSC 105
Hatzimanolis v ANI Corporation
[1992] HCA 21
Comcare v PVYW
[2013] HCA 41
DETERMINATION:
The worker’s application for an order for access
to, and inspection of, the property of a third party is dismissed.
REPRESENTATION:
C McKenzie & A
P Jackson SC
Solicitors:
McLean McKenzie &
Abetz Curtis
[2021] TASWRCT 22
Commissioner Wilkins
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. The worker was employed by the employer working at the
Renison mine (“the mine”) on the West Coast of Tasmania, working
a project civil superintendent. The employer does not operate the
2. There was an arrangement between the employer and Bluestone Mines
Tasmania Joint Venture Pty Ltd (“Bluestone”), the
operator of the
mine, that the worker, and other employees who were working at the mine, could
stay at accommodation owned by Bluestone.
That accommodation is known as the
Zeehan Village.
3. In the early hours of the morning, whilst staying at the
Zeehan Village, the worker accessed the laundry facilities at the village,
then walked back to the cabin in which he was staying. In the course of walking
from the laundry to his cabin accommodation
the worker fell and injured his
4. He made a claim for workers compensation in relation to the
shoulder injury on 7 January 2021, which was a few days after the injury
occurred. The claim for compensation was disputed by the employer, and the
Chief Commissioner determined that there was a reasonably
arguable case to
dispute the claim. See Xenco Pty Ltd v P
[2021] TASWRCT 11.
5. The worker
referred his claim for compensation to the Tribunal under
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
(“the Act”) on 29 March
2021. He seeks orders that he be paid weekly compensation and benefits payable
under Division
of the Act. The worker’
referral has
been listed for hearing on 27 July 2021.
6. The dispute between the parties
is essentially whether the worker was injured in the course of his employment,
within the meaning
of the Act.
7. The employer has made, or has
offered to make, a number of concessions in relation to the factual matrix
surrounding the claim.
8. The facts that the employer does not contest
include the following:
• On 3 January 2021, just before 4:50 am, the worker
walked from his cabin to the laundry, put personal laundry into a clothes
and left the laundry to walk back to his cabin.
• On the way back to
his cabin from the laundry the worker tripped and fell to the ground while
crossing a grassed area, causing
injury to his right
• Nothing that the worker did in connection with the
occurrence of the injury involved any misconduct on his part. He was not
prohibited in any way from using the laundry as and when he did or from taking
the route that he did between the laundry and his
• At the time
when the injury occurred the worker was at a place where the employer had
induced or encouraged him to be, being
the Zeehan Village.
9. In addition, the employer agrees that the laundry and the
vicinity where the fall occurred on the grassed area is depicted in three
photographs which were taken by the worker.
10. The worker has also prepared
a list of facts that the worker does not contest. A number of those overlap
with the facts that
the employer does not contest, but the parties are still in
discussion in relation to their respective conceded facts.
11. The worker has
permission for himself and his solicitors
to access the village. That
permission has been denied.
12. The worker now applies, for an order of the
Tribunal to Bluestone, as the owner of Zeehan Village, that the worker and his
be permitted to access and inspect the Zeehan Village. That
application is the subject of this determination.
13. Counsel for the
employer advised the Tribunal that the employer takes a neutral position in
relation to the application, noting
that the employer is not the owner of the
property, and it is the owner of the property that has denied access to the
his solicitors.
The application for an order under
Regulation 11
14. Ms Williams, on behalf of the worker, seeks an order under
Regulation 11 of the Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Regulations
(“the Regulations”).
15. Regulation 11(1)(b) provides as
against non-parties
(1) The Tribunal may make any or all of the
following orders against a person who is not a party to an application or
(b) an order authorising the observation or
recording of, or the taking of a sample of or from, any property;”
16. In the interpretation section of the Regulations,
“property” is expressed to include “real and personal
17. Ms Williams referred to s196C of the Evidence Act (Tas)
and also Rule 437 of the Supreme Court Rules both of which deal with orders
inspection of property. She submitted that it would be appropriate for me to
have regard to authorities relation to those respective
provisions as a guide to
exercising powers relating to inspection of property. Ms Williams submitted that
the authorities disclose
that the power to order inspection of property is wide,
and ought to be widely construed (although I observe that the discussion
Nettlefold J in Gordon v Cadbury Schweppes Pty Ltd
[1989] TASSC 105
referred to concerned an application for a plaintiff’s expert to view the
defendant’s manufacturing process
to enable the preparation of expert
evidence. This application involves a very different scenario)
Williams indicated that the worker’s argument will be that this is an
“interval case”, that is, that the
worker’s injury was
sustained in an interval or interlude occurring within an overall period of work
where the worker was required
to work a remote place, being the mine, and was
encouraged to stay at the Zeehan Village in between episodes of work at the mine
– under which circumstances he sustained his injury.
19. She referred
to Hatzimanolis v ANI Corporation
[1992] HCA 21
[1992] 173 CLR 473
at page 483
“Where...an
employee is required to go to a remote place and live in accommodation provided
by his or her employer for the limited
time until a particular undertaking is
completed the correct conclusion is likely to be that the time spent in a new
locality constitutes
one overall period or episode of work rather than a series
of discreet periods or episodes of work. An injury occurring during the
interval between periods of actual worker in such a case is more readily
perceived as being within the current conception of the
course of employment
than an injury occurring after ordinary working hours to an employee who
performs his or her work at a permanent
location or in a permanent
20. Ms Williams also referred to the case of Comcare v PVYW
[2013] HCA 41
, [55] and [144]where she submitted the court determined
that where a case is an interval case it is relevant whether the employer
induced or encouraged the employee to spend that interval at a particular place
or in a particular way, and that the majority decision
in PVYW included
observations that whether an injury occurs by reference to a place where an
employee is present may involve something
occurring to the premises or some
defect in the premises.
21. She further submitted that from PVYW can be drawn
the principles that an employer would be responsible for injury in an interval
case where the employer has put the person in a position where injury occurred
because of something to do with the place, and living
in a camp provided by the
employer was an incident of the employment and therefore connected to it.
22. It was Ms Williams’ submission that being able to view the place
where the injury occurred is material to determining the
question in dispute,
and is further necessary and reasonable for the administration of
23. In relation particularly to the photographs that the employer
has agreed depict the area where the injury occurred, Ms Williams
• The worker’s solicitors are currently unable to
determine whether the photographs adequately reflect the scene.
worker’s solicitors cannot properly prepare their case without
consideration of the place as a whole.
• The photographs were taken by
their client who took them before litigation had commenced.
worker took them as a lay person without any legal insight as to what might be
• The photographs cannot replace the benefit of actually
going to the site and seeing the conditions of the lighting at the
time, and it is commonly known that photographs do not necessarily show what can
be seen with the eye.
• The photographs have been taken from a
particular angle.
• The photographs cannot depict why any person may
make a choice to take one path over another.
• There is no detrimental
effect on the owner of the property of which they are aware.
24. When asked what further evidence of information it was
thought might come from the inspection sought, Ms Williams submitted that
photographs do not show the entirety of the village, there may be other tracks
around the general area, there may be barriers
preventing people from taking
particular routes around the village, there may be signage in relation to moving
around the village,
none of which can be viewed from the current
photographs.
25. Ms Williams submitted that because the photographs do not
depict the entirety of the village, and the conditions of the village
time of the injury, they are too narrow and the worker and his solicitors need
to attend the village to be able to make a
judgement as to whether any further
photographs are required.
26. Counsel for the employer, although the employer
has assumed a neutral position in relation to the application, ventured to
the Tribunal by confirming, in regard to the worker’s submissions,
the employer considers to be non-contentious the propositions
that the worker
was not prohibited from taking the route that he did, and that it is not part of
the employer’s case that the
worker should not have taken that route.
Counsel submitted that the employer’s position in that regard answers the
proposition
that inspection of the property would be required to enable the
worker’s solicitors to look for other tracks, barriers or signage.
27. Following the directions hearing, the worker’s solicitors
forwarded to the Tribunal copies of email exchanges between their
themselves and the owners of Zeehan Village. Included in those exchanges of
email were advice from the worker’s solicitors
to Bluestone that there was
intended to be an order sought from the Tribunal for access to Zeehan Village.
It was requested that
if Bluestone were legally represented the email
correspondence from the worker’s solicitors be on-forwarded. Ms Williams,
whilst making her application, advised that they had received no response, and
no contact from any solicitors. From the email exchange,
however, it appears
that whilst the application was being heard the Chief Financial Officer and
Company Secretary of Bluestone responded
to Ms Williams and said “As we
are a third party to this claim I see no reason why we should have to supervise
and escort another
party onto our private property”.
Determination
28. I accept that Regulation 11(1)(b) of the Regulations gives
the power to to Tribunal to make orders that would enable access on
property of a third party, that was not a party to proceedings in the
29. However the exercise of that power ought , in my view, not be
taken lightly. An order, in the nature of that sought, effectively
with the proprietary rights of the titleholder of the Zeehan Village.
do not think the circumstances are such to justify an order to compel Bluestone
to permit the worker and his solicitors access
to its property. In declining to
exercise my discretion to make the order sought, I have had regard to the
several concessions made
by the employer that are relevant to questions
concerning the area where the worker fell and the Zeehan Village generally; the
of photographs of the area in question that have been taken by the
worker and he can give his solicitors instructions about whether
photographs accurately reflect the scene; questions about whether lighting
depicted in the existing, or any other, photographs
would appear to be moot
because the injury occurred at 4:50am; and the owner of the property has
declined access, and raised concerns
that are, on their face, not unreasonable.
31. The worker’s application for an order under Regulation 11(1)(b) is
COMMISSIONER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (107 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter