URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMACT/2020/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rush v Motor Accidents Insurance Board [2020] TASMACT 1 (27 July 2020)
[2020] TASMACT 1
MOTOR ACCIDENTS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
Rush v Motor Accidents Insurance Board
[2020] TASMACT
RUSH, Selina
MOTOR ACCIDENTS INSURANCE BOARD
REFERENCE NO(S):
Z/2019/3 & Z/2020/1
HEARING DATE(S):
16 July 2020
DELIVERED ON:
27 July 2020
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Chairperson Clues
CATCHWORDS:
Claim for prospective entitlement - expense not incurred
as at date of referral – determination -Jurisdiction of Tribunal -
application to dismiss – failure to prosecute – bias
Hall v MAIB
[2009] TASMACT 1;
Webb v The Queen
[1994] HCA 30
Weavell v MAIB
[2019] TASMACT 1
Motor Accidents (Liabilities and Compensation) Act 1973
, (2)(b), (8);
Motor Accidents Compensation Tribunal Regulations 2009
Motor Accidents (Liabilities and Compensation) Regulations 2010
DETERMINATION:
1. With respect to referral
Z/2019/3 the Tribunal is without jurisdiction and therefore the referral is
2. With respect to referral Z/2020/1 the application for dismissal is
upheld and therefore the referral is dismissed.
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
J. Pedder (Pedder Schuh Lawyers)
[2020] TASMACT 1
Chairperson Clues
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
1. The applicant was injured in a motor vehicle
accident that occurred on 26 January 2017. She has received scheduled benefits
the respondent.
2. The applicant has made two referrals to the Tribunal.
She claims she was a person aggrieved by two purported determinations of
respondent.
3. Referral, Z/2019/3 (the first referral), was filed on 25
February 2019. It states that the applicant was aggrieved by a determination
made by the respondent on 21 December 2018 when it “declined request for
C5-6 Decompression and Fusion surgery, stating it
does not have sufficient
information to determine the surgery is warranted, disregarding Medical evidence
it has been provided by
Neurosurgeon Professor Richard G
4. With respect to the first referral, a teleconference was
scheduled for 8 March 2019. The applicant did not attend. The
respondent’s
solicitor advised that the applicant had withdrawn her
medical authority and she had refused to attend an independent medical
examination
so the respondent could not confirm that the request for surgery
resulted from the motor vehicle accident of 26 January 2017. The
later advised the Tribunal that she would attend an independent medical
examination. She further advised that her correspondence
was confidential and
could not be released to a third party without her written consent.
respondent made an appointment for the applicant to attend an independent
medical examination with an occupational physician
in Hobart on 12 June 2019.
The appointment did not proceed. A fresh appointment was made for the applicant
to see another occupational
physician in Devonport (where she resides) on 19
July 2019. The applicant advised she would not attend because she was not
to record the consultation and she did not think an occupational
physician was the appropriate specialist to examine her.
6. The respondent
made another appointment for an independent medical examination for the
applicant to attend with Mr Hanusiewicz,
orthopaedic surgeon, on 16 September
7. Upon receiving the report from Mr Hanusiewicz, the
respondent’s solicitor advised the Tribunal by letter dated 24 October
2019 as follows:
advise that my client, the MAIB, (upon provision of the report of Mr
Hanusiewicz) will agree to fund the C5/6 anterior cervical
decompression and
fusion recommended by Professor Bittar, upon Ms Rush signing and returning the
attached medical authorities to
Professor Bittar and Dr Emmett, in order that it
may obtain reports from those practitioners following the surgery.
In relation to the current proceedings, in the event that Ms Rush agrees to
the above, we would seek orders that the Reference be
dismissed with no order as
to costs, and Ms Rush could then contact the MAIB to advise when surgery is
scheduled to take place.”
8. The applicant refused to sign the medical authorities.
Despite the applicant’s refusal to sign the medical authorities,
respondent agreed to fund the surgery and it proceeded on 19 December
9. Despite the surgery being paid for, on 21 January 2020 the applicant
wrote to the Tribunal objecting to the respondent’s
request that the first
referral be dismissed and alleged the Tribunal was biased. On 24 January 2020,
the Registrar of the Tribunal
wrote to the applicant advising:
will have the matter listed before a Commissioner for a directions hearing as
you have requested.
However, given it appears that the Motor Accidents Insurance Board has agreed
to fund the decompression and fusion surgery, it is
my intention to email Pedder
Schuh directly to see whether they would consent to an order being made. If
consent is given, and the
Commissioner makes the order, the referral may not
need to proceed any further.
I will copy you in to my email to the MAIB’s
representative.”
10. By letter dated 30 January 2020 the respondent’s
solicitor advised that the Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to make orders
respect of prospective entitlements as noted in Hall v MAIB [2009] TASMACT
11. Referral Z/2020/1 (second referral) was filed on 23 January 2020. It
states that the applicant was aggrieved by a determination
made by the
respondent on 10 January 2020 not to reimburse her for the cost of a log
splitter ($549.00) that she purchased from Bunnings
on 17 July 2019. According
to the second referral, the receipt for the log splitter was initially sent to
the respondent on 1 November
2019. The second referral lists a number of email
exchanges between the applicant and the respondent with respect to the
reimbursement
of the log splitter. On 10 January 2020 the respondent wrote to
the applicant advising:
we have received the advice from Dr Emmett we need an occupational therapy
assessment of your home environment to be
able to assess the reasonableness of
the log splitter.
If you are agreeable, the occupational therapist could also assess for any
other equipment you may need as
the same time.
Without this information we cannot proceed with the reimbursement at this
Please let me know if we could arrange an occupational therapist to visit you
12. Both referrals were listed for a directions hearing before
me on 16 March 2020. At that hearing I advised the parties that I
determine the issue raised by the respondent as to jurisdiction. I suggested to
the applicant that she may wish to consider
consulting the lawyer who is
apparently acting for her in her common law damages claim arising from the same
motor vehicle accident.
The applicant rejected this suggestion. It was agreed
that the respondent would write to the applicant and the Tribunal setting
the respondent’s position with respect to jurisdiction.
13. On 15 April
2020 the respondent sent a letter to the applicant and the Tribunal which in
summary stated the following:
• The respondent had already funded the surgery and
travel that was the subject of the first referral.
• The respondent had
not made a determination pursuant to
Motor Accidents
(Liabilities and Compensation) Act 1973
(MALC Act). It had simply advised the
applicant that it required further evidence before it could consider funding the
• Pursuant to the decision in Hall v MAIB (supra) the Tribunal
had no jurisdiction to determine a claim for a prospective entitlement
expense had not been incurred as required by the MALC Act.
relation to the second referral, the respondent had not made a determination not
to reimburse the applicant for the cost
of the log splitter. The respondent had
simply sought further information as to the reasonableness of the
• The applicant purchased the log splitter without prior
consultation in breach of the Motor Accidents (Liabilities and Compensation)
Regulations 2010 (MALC Regulations), Part 6, r1(2).
14. A further directions hearing took place on 27 April 2020.
The applicant submitted that her referrals were not at an end. She
there were outstanding payments relating to the first referral and she did not
need to obtain the respondent’s approval
prior to purchasing the log
splitter. She confirmed that she would not be consulting her lawyer about these
matters and requested
the opportunity to make submissions as the respondent had
done. I directed that she file and serve her written submissions within
days. At the request of the applicant, the solicitor for the respondent agreed
to send her:
(a) His letter dated 30 January 2020 to the
(b) Copies of the cases referred to in his letter to the Tribunal
dated 14 April 2020.
(c) Any letter sent by the respondent to the
applicant’s general practitioner and any response the respondent received
her general practitioner.
15. At a further directions hearing on 13 May 2020, the
applicant requested further time to provide her written submissions because
solicitor for the respondent had not sent her copies of the documents she
16. I advised the parties that I intended to list the matter for
hearing and that I would travel to Launceston which would be the
most convenient
forum for both parties. The applicant submitted that as she resided in
Devonport, the hearing should take place
at the Supreme Court in Burnie. I
advised that the Tribunal only had hearing rooms in Launceston and Hobart. The
applicant stated
that she wished to attend by telephone. The solicitor for the
respondent said that he would attend in person. Due to COVID-19 and
applicant’s apparent reluctance to travel, I agreed to allow her to attend
the hearing by telephone. I advised that she
should ensure that any documents
she intended to rely upon at the hearing were sent to both the
respondent’s solicitor and
the Tribunal.
17. After that directions
hearing the applicant sent the Tribunal a number of emails advising that the
respondent’s solicitor
had not provided her with copies of the documents
she required.
18. On 3 June 2020 the applicant wrote to the Tribunal alleging
that it had:
(a) Been communicating with the respondent’s solicitor
and not her.
(b) Shared her confidential emails with the respondent’s
solicitor without her consent.
(c) Only recognised the respondent’s
submissions and not hers.
(d) Viewed and discussed documents without her
sighting them.
(e) Reprimanded her as to costs.
(f) Delayed the resolution
of her matters.
(g) Not afforded her procedural fairness or natural
19. A further directions hearing was scheduled for 15 June
2020. The applicant did not appear. I determined that in light of the
allegations raised by the applicant in her correspondence to the Tribunal and in
order to provide natural justice to both parties
and to ensure that procedural
fairness was followed, both referrals would be listed for hearing in Launceston
and both parties would
be required to attend in person. I noted that the
solicitor for the respondent would provide to the applicant and the Tribunal the
• A list of scheduled benefits paid to or on behalf of
the applicant.
• A chronology of events.
• Copies of any
outstanding invoices relating to the applicant’s surgery that is the
subject to the first referral.
20. I further noted that the applicant was to provide to the
solicitor for the respondent and the Tribunal copies of all documents
intended to rely upon at the hearing. A summary of the directions hearing was
sent to both parties.
21. Both referrals were listed for hearing in
Launceston on 16 July 2020. On 3 July 2020 the Tribunal received the documents
it requested
from the respondent. In response to queries from the applicant,
the Tribunal advised her on three occasions that she could not attend
hearing by telephone.
Allegations raised by the applicant
22. On 10 July
2020, the applicant provided some submissions and documents to the Tribunal. In
those submissions, the applicant raised
the following matters:
• The first referral had been filed in February 2019 and
it had still not been finalised.
• Misconduct had occurred throughout
• Natural justice had not been followed.
not have confidence in the dispute resolution process.
• The Tribunal
had phoned the respondent and struck “a deal”.
• The Chair
only takes the word of the respondent’s solicitor.
• The Chair
accepted documents without her sighting them.
• The Chair had
“over 8 times” intimidated her into having a lawyer represent her,
disregarding her financial reason
and discussed arrangements with the
respondent’s solicitor to write to her lawyer.
• The Chair
advised her that she had failed to state her case.
• The Chair refused
to require the respondent to produce the letter she had
• The Tribunal had not followed its own
regulations.
• The Chair had agreed to conduct the hearing by phone but
allowed the respondent’s solicitor the advantage to appear
• The Tribunal had failed to list the matter for hearing close
to where she lives in Devonport.
• She had no expectation that the
matter would be resolved fairly or that she would receive procedural
23. As a result of the submissions the solicitor for the
respondent made an application for an adjournment of the hearing. That
application
was listed for hearing by phone on 14 July 2020. The applicant did
not attend. At the hearing of the application the solicitor
for the respondent
did not advance the application for an adjournment. The hearing was not
24. Prior to making my decision not to adjourn the hearing or
disqualify myself from hearing the matter I considered all of the
applicant’s
allegations.
25. I do not consider that any actions
taken by the Tribunal could reasonably be seen as objectionable on the issue of
bias or apprehended
bias. In fact, as the applicant was unrepresented the
Tribunal took extra steps to ensure that she was afforded procedural fairness
with respect to all of the issues that she raised.
26. The test for
apprehended bias is whether, in all the circumstances, a fair minded observer
might entertain a reasonable apprehension
that the judicial officer might not
bring an unprejudiced mind to the resolution of the matter (Webb v The Queen
[1994] HCA 30
(1994) 181 CLR 41
at 67, Dean J). The conduct of the process was complicated by
a number of factors including:
• The applicant’s request that all correspondence
sent to the Tribunal could not be sent to a third party, including the
for the respondent, without her prior approval.
• The applicant refused
to allow the respondent’s solicitor to contact her by email and insisted
that all correspondence
be sent to her by post.
• The applicant is
pursuing a common law damages claim with respect to the injury she suffered as a
result of her motor vehicle
accident of 26 January 2017; however she insisted
that the solicitor representing her in that matter could not be involved or
with respect to the referrals before this Tribunal.
The Hearing
27. The applicant failed to attend the hearing
on 16 July 2020. An application was made by the respondent to have both
dismissed for want of prosecution.
28. Prior to determining whether
the referrals should be dismissed I need to determine whether the Tribunal has
29. In relation to the first
referral the applicant states that on 21 December 2018 the respondent made a
determination not to fund
the C5/6 decompression and fusion surgery recommended
by Professor Bittar (neurosurgeon) on the basis that it did not have sufficient
information to determine whether the surgery was warranted.
letter from the respondent (dated 21 December 2018, advising the applicant that
a request for proposed surgery is declined)
is a determination pursuant to
s28(1)(b) of the MALC Act, then no referral was made to the Tribunal within 14
days of the notification
of the determination as required by the Motor Accidents
Compensation Tribunal Regulations 2009 (MACT Regulations), r4.
decision of Hall v MAIB (supra) Member Carey commented at [10]:
consider that at any time the Board determines that any or all scheduled
benefits are not to be paid to an applicant that
this could amount to a
determination pursuant to s28(1)(b).”
32. The letter to the applicant, dated 21 December 2018,
advising her that it declined her request for surgery because it did not
sufficient information to determine whether the surgery was warranted, may have
been a determination of the respondent concerning
her right to be paid a
scheduled benefit. Accordingly, she had 14 days from receipt of that
notification to refer the matter to
the Tribunal. She did not do so. However,
this does not matter because as in the case of Hall v MAIB (supra) at [10]
“practically
there would have been nothing at the time for the Tribunal to
determine until the condition precedent of the statutory entitlement
that is expenses were incurred which the applicant asserted were reasonable and
necessary.”
33. At the time that the applicant filed the first referral
the expenses referred to in it had not been incurred. It relates to prospective
expenses. As stated in Hall v MAIB (supra) at [24]:
is clear from the relevant statutory scheme that no legal obligation is imposed
upon the Motor Accidents Insurance Board
to pay any medical expenses unless they
have been incurred and the expense is reasonable and necessary. The Tribunal
therefore has
no jurisdiction to determine a claim for a prospective entitlement
as the condition precedent of the expense having been incurred
has not been
fulfilled.”
34. Further, the applicant’s surgery and associated
expenses have been paid for by the respondent after the referral was filed
the applicant has not provided any receipts for expenses she has incurred in
relation to that surgery that have not been paid.
35. I determine that I
have no jurisdiction with respect to the first referral.
36. With respect to
the second referral, on 10 January 2020, the respondent advised the applicant by
email that it could not proceed
with the reimbursement of the log splitter at
that time because it needed an occupational therapy assessment of her home
environment
in order to be able to assess the reasonableness of the log
37. I find that pursuant to s28(1)(b) of the MALC Act that this
amounts to a determination made by the respondent with respect to
her right to
be paid a scheduled benefit. I further find that pursuant to s28(2)(b) of the
MALC Act that the applicant is a person
aggrieved by the failure of the
respondent to make that payment by way of a scheduled benefit. Therefore, the
applicant made a valid
referral to the Tribunal and she did so on 23 January
2020 which was within the 14 day period prescribed by the MACT Regulations,
38. I determine that I do have jurisdiction with respect to the second
Application to Dismiss
39. Having found that I have jurisdiction
to deal with the second referral I will deal with the respondent’s
application to
dismiss it for want of prosecution.
40. Prior to the hearing,
on 10 July 2020 the applicant did file and serve some written submissions and
documents, they were very
difficult to understand and follow and as she did not
attend the hearing they could not be advanced or clarified.
41. With respect
to the Tribunal’s powers to dismiss the second referral I refer to and
repeat the following from the decision
of Member Wilkins in the case of Weavell
v MAIB [2019] TASMACT 1:
Pursuant to s28(2) of the Motor Accidents (Liabilities & Compensation) Act
1973 (‘the MALCA’) a person
aggrieved by a refusal or failure of the
Board to make a payment by way of a scheduled benefit may refer the matter to
the Tribunal.
Pursuant to sub-section (4) of the same section, the Tribunal
shall make such determination on a matter referred to it as it considers
in the circumstances.
[4] S28(8) of the MALCA provides that regulations made for the purposes of
this section may prescribe the manner in which any determination
by the Tribunal
is to be made.
[5] Regulation 15 of the Regulations provides ‘a reference may be
discontinued or dismissed for want of prosecution in accordance
practice applicable in the Supreme Court for the discontinuance or dismissal for
want of prosecution of an action’.
Supreme Court Rules 2000
(Tas) do not specifically provide for
dismissal of an action where there is want of prosecution, however it is
recognised that the
Supreme Court has an inherent jurisdiction to do so where
appropriate. An application to dismiss for want of prosecution was considered
by Cox CJ in Argo Pty Ltd & Ors v Attorney-General for Tasmania
[2000] TASSC
, and which was upheld on appeal in Attorney-General & Anor v Argo Pty
[2001] TASSC 70
where Blow J (as he then was) noted at paragraph
‘The guiding principle for the exercise of a discretion to dismiss an
action for want of prosecution is that such an order will
be made if the justice
of the occasion demands it......the power to dismiss an action for want of
prosecution exists as part of the
general or inherent jurisdiction of the Court,
and has not been conferred by any statute or rule of court. The discretion is
not fettered by any legislative restriction, but it must be exercised in
accordance with principles that have been developed by the
common law.......the
principles governing the exercise of the discretion that have been developed are
guidelines, rather than binding
rules of law......the discretion must be
exercised judicially after taking into account all the circumstances of the
case. Particular
factors that should be taken into account are the length of
the delay, the nature of any explanation given for the delay, and any
to the defendants that has arisen or might arise as a result of the
42. I make the following observations that a relevant to the
exercise of my discretion to dismiss the second referral:
(a) The applicant provided the Tribunal with no explanation
as to why she could not attend the hearing in Launceston on 16 July
(b) The applicant was advised on three occasions by the Tribunal that
she would need to attend the hearing in person and she was also
advised that if
she failed to attend it would proceed on that date.
(c) The applicant failed
to attend the directions hearings on 15 June 2020 and 14 July 2020 that took
place by telephone.
(d) The applicant underwent the surgery that was the
subject of the first referral in December 2019, the respondent paid for the
and associated expenses including travel to and from
(e) The applicant has not provided evidence of any outstanding
medical expenses associated with that surgery.
(f) The respondent first
raised the issue of jurisdiction with respect to the first referral in January
2020. It set out its defence
with respect to both referrals in April 2020.
(g) The applicant has had sufficient time and opportunity to prepare her
referrals ready for hearing.
(h) The applicant can pursue her claim for the
log splitter which is the subject of the second referral in her common law
(i) The respondent has been in a position to proceed to
hearing on both referrals for some time.
(j) There will be an unnecessary
loss of time and resource for the Tribunal and also prejudice in costs to the
respondent should the
matter be allowed to proceed.
43. I find there are no compelling discretionary reasons for me
not to dismiss the second referral. Accordingly the balance of circumstances
favours an order that the second referral be dismissed. I uphold the
respondent’s application for dismissal for want of prosecution
and I order
that the applicant’s second referral to the Tribunal be
44. I order that both referrals be dismissed. The first
referral is dismissed for want of jurisdiction and the second referral is
dismissed for want of prosecution.
CHAIRPERSON
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (145 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter