URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASADT/2020/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Trounson v Tasmanian Health Services [2020] TASADT 7 (6 November 2020)
[2020] TASADT 7
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
Trounson v Tasmanian Health Services
[2020] TASADT
TROUNSON, Ashley
TASMANIAN HEALTH SERVICE
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
15 October 2020
DELIVERED ON:
6 November 2020
REFERRING SECTION(S):
s71(3), s72
DECISION OF:
Chairperson Clues
CATCHWORDS:
Review of dismissal – whether discrimination or
prohibited conduct – indirect discrimination – Tribunal’s
power to deal with new complaint
Anti-Discrimination Act
State of Tasmania v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal & Ors
Cain v The Australian Red Cross Society
[2009] TASADT 3
McIntosh, Ahmad v TAFETas
[2003] TASADT 14
DETERMINATION:
The decision of the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner to
dismiss the complaint was the correct decision.
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant:
Respondent:
D. Elankovan (Office of the
Solicitor-General)
[2020] TASADT 7
Chairperson Clues
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. The complainant has applied to the Anti-Discrimination
Tribunal (the Tribunal) to review a determination made by the
Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner (the Commissioner) dismissing his complaint.
The application is made pursuant to s71(3) of the Anti-Discrimination
(the Act) which provides:
complainant whose complaint is dismissed may apply to the Tribunal for the
dismissal to be reviewed.”
2. Section 71(4) of the Act provides that an application for
review is to be made within 28 days after receipt of the Commissioner’s
written statement of the reasons for the dismissal of the complaint.
Commissioner’s reasons for dismissal are dated 19 February 2020. The
Tribunal received a written application from the
complainant on 26 February 2020
requesting a review of the dismissal. The application for review was made
within the time prescribed
by the Act.
4. The complainant lodged a complaint with the Commissioner on
15 July 2019 against the Tasmanian Health Service – Launceston
Hospital (the respondent).
5. In brief the complaint concerns the alleged
denial by the respondent to provide a “quiet space” to the
complainant
who was suffering difficulties with his Meniere’s disease and
tinnitus whilst attending the emergency department of the Launceston
Hospital (LGH) as a result of suffering chest pains on 20 June 2019.
complaint was accepted by the Commissioner and proceeded to investigation.
Following the investigation of the complaint, the
Commissioner dismissed it on
the basis that it did not relate to discrimination or prohibited
The Review Process
7. In State of Tasmania v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal &
[2009] TASSC 48
Porter J discussed the nature of a review under s72 of the
Act. At [39] he held:
conclude that the review carried out by the Tribunal under s72 is a
‘comprehensive’ merits review, and is not
confined to the material
which was before the Commissioner. I think that the proper meaning of the
scheme is that in carrying out
a review, the Tribunal may take into account such
material as it thinks fit.”
8. Porter J went on to say at [42]:
“Under the terms of
s72, the Tribunal is only concerned with whether or not it is satisfied that the
Commissioner made a correct
decision. On those bases, the question for the
Tribunal is what decision ought to have been made, and the Tribunal has to
the same issues as did the
Commissioner.”
9. This review involves a re-examination of the relevant
material, that is, the material considered by the Commissioner, together
any other relevant material provided to the Tribunal. If the Tribunal is
satisfied the Commissioner’s decision was correct,
the complaint lapses.
If it is not so satisfied, the Tribunal is to deal with the complaint as if it
were an inquiry.
10. The material before the Commissioner was:
(a) the complaint form signed by the complainant on 15 July
(b) a letter dated 18 September 2019 from the Secretary of the
Department of Health to the Commissioner responding to the complaint
September 2019.
11. The only additional material before the Tribunal was a copy
of an email exchange between the Office of the Health Complaints Commissioner
and the respondent between 28 February 2019 and 5 March 2019.
12. Prior to
the review hearing both the complainant and the respondent provided written
submissions.
13. The review hearing took place in Launceston on 15 October
2020. The complainant, the legal representative for the respondent and
Renshaw from the LGH attended the review hearing.
Preliminary Issue
14. The subject of the complaint was respondent’s denial
of a “quiet space” within the emergency department. That
complaint that was the subject of the Commissioner’s investigation and
that was dismissed.
15. As indicated in the respondent’s written
submissions at paragraph 18, in the complainant’s written submissions
1 April 2020, he raises new allegations regarding the conduct of some of
the respondent’s staff at the LGH that were not part
of his original
complaint and relate to conduct occurring more than 12 months ago.
respondent submits that the Tribunal has no power to receive a new complaint.
That power is vested in the Commissioner.
Pursuant to s62 of the Act, a fresh
complaint is required to be lodged with the
Commissioner
agree with this submission and disregard the fresh allegations made by the
complainant in his written submissions. I explained
this to the complainant at
the review hearing. The complainant said he understood the hearing was limited
to reviewing the dismissal
of the complaint that was dealt with by the
Commissioner in her reasons for decision dated 19 February 2020.
The Factual Background
18. By the end of the review hearing, there was little dispute
between the parties with respect to the factual circumstances giving
this complaint. Based on the material before the Tribunal I make the following
findings of fact:
• On 20 June 2019 the complainant presented to the
emergency department of the LGH via ambulance from Deloraine.
complainant was suffering from acute chest pain which the paramedic treated as
heart related. He was connected to an
ECG machine.
• Upon arrival at
the LGH the complainant was transferred and reconnected to an ECG machine in the
emergency department.
• The complainant was later taken by wheelchair
for a chest x-ray. Sometime later he was moved into the waiting room and was
told a doctor would see him when available.
• After a further period of
time the complainant was called back into the emergency department where he was
told to take a seat
and wait for a doctor.
• The emergency department
was very busy and “extremely noisy”.
• At this time, the
complainant’s Meniere’s disease “started to take hold”.
He became dizzy. He put
his fingers in both ears to block out the
• A man, who the complainant assumed was a doctor, approached
him and began talking to him. The complainant took his fingers
out of his ears
to try and understand what the man was saying. He asked for a “quiet
space”. The man said “No”
and walked away.
noise continued, including a child screaming in the bed next to where the
complainant was standing and a high pitched
alarm went off.
complainant collapsed to the floor.
• Another man (whom was assumed to
be a doctor) asked if the complainant was alright. The complainant said
but the man walked off.
• Sometime later a Dr Vicah
approached the complainant and took him to the relative’s
• The relative’s room is not nursed and is not visible from
anywhere else in the emergency department. A patient cannot
be left in that
room without a designated staff member. It is also utilised for interviewing
mental health patients, delivering
bad news to families and supporting grieving
relatives when required. These resources must be used according to clinical
to maintain patient and staff safety.
• Once Dr Vicah took the
complainant into the relative’s room, the complainant recovered from his
Meniere’s attack
and Dr Vicah was able to consult with the complainant
with respect to the symptoms of chest pain that he presented with.
Vicah advised the complainant that he needed to see a neurologist. Dr Vicah
offered the complainant a 3 night stay at
the LGH to monitor his condition. In
the alternative he advised the complainant that he could come back to the LGH on
Monday. The
complainant accepted the latter offer.
discharged the complainant and he eventually received a taxi card and a taxi
took him back to Deloraine.
• The complainant asserted that his
Meniere’s disease, his tinnitus and his hearing impairment are clearly
noted on his
medical history at the LGH and that he should not have to request a
“quiet space” as “it is in black and white
that I clinically
• The claimant alleges that there was a quiet room
available (the relative’s room) when he made his request and that he
discriminated against because he was required to remain in the emergency
department and was not permitted to use it.
• In support of his
allegations that his Meniere’s disease, tinnitus and hearing impairment as
well as his clinical need
for a quiet space are all noted on his medical
history, the complainant relied upon an email exchange between Philippa Whyte,
Principal Officer of the Office of the Health Complaints Commissioner and
the respondent dated 28 February 2020 and 5 March 2020.
• Those emails
are evidence that Ms Whyte did request the respondent “to place an alert
on [the complainant’s] file
to the effect that he has a severe hearing
deficit and requesting THS staff to be aware of this when communicating with him
i.e. to speak slowly, loudly and clearly.” The main purpose of
the email exchange was to ensure that the complainant did not
miss a neurology
appointment that had been made for him.
• The email exchange makes no
reference to the complainant’s clinical need for a quiet
• The respondent confirmed that the complainant’s clinical
history at the LGH does contain an alert about his hearing
disability but not
• The respondent’s
evidence is that it was unable to provide a quiet space to the complainant on 20
• On 20 June 2019, the complainant presented to the
emergency department at 11:37hrs. He was triaged according to the Australian
Triage Scale as a category 3 (to be seen within 30 minutes). His presenting
complaint was chest pain on the background of a complex
medical history
including multiple sclerosis. He was seen by a doctor at 13:07hrs and the
appropriate assessment was commenced.
He was seen outside of his triage time
due to the demands on the department and a lack of available spaces in which to
see patients.
• The complainant was seen by the neurology team
registrar, who after discussion with his consultant determined that the
complainant
could be seen in their clinic the following week and was safe for
discharge. The complainant was discharged with a script for strong
• On 20 June 2019, the emergency department was running at
escalation level red (the highest escalation level) due to access
block, meaning
inadequate patient beds and hence a back log of patients waiting in the
emergency department for a bed. Over the
24 hour period there were 31 patients
who waited for significant lengths of time (>8 hours) for an inpatient bed
and 7 of these
patients waited over 24 hours. This meant there was very little
space in the emergency department in which to see and assess
response to a question from myself the complainant thought that his
Meniere’s attack lasted for approximately 20
minutes before he was taken
by Dr Vicha into the relative’s room for his consultation.
The Complainant’s Argument
19. The complainant argues that one of the staff members who
witnessed him suffering his Meniere’s attack should have taken
the relative’s room and stayed with him. He could not understand why two
staff members, whom he presumed were doctors,
asked if he was okay and then
failed to assist him when he told them he was not.
The Respondent’s Argument
20. The respondent argued that the complainant could not have
gone into the relative’s room at an earlier time because although
not have been in use when the complainant had his Meniere’s attack, it is
not nursed and it is not visible from anywhere
else in the emergency department.
Further, a patient, particularly one complaining of chest pain, with suspected
heart problems and
triaged at a category 3, cannot be left in that room without
a designated staff member.
21. Although two medical staff may have asked the
complainant if he was okay, there was no evidence that there were any staff
to take the complainant into the relative’s room and supervise
him at an earlier time. In fact, the evidence was to the contrary;
that is that
the emergency department was running at the highest escalation level (level red)
and there was significant demands on
the emergency department and its staff at
22. As soon as a doctor was available he did take the complainant
into the relative’s room. At this time the complainant’s
Meniere’s attack ceased, the consultation took place and the complainant
was discharged.
The Commissioner’s Decision
23. The Commissioner accepted the complaint for investigation
on 19 February 2020 on the basis that it disclosed the following possible
breaches of the Act:
• Indirect discrimination (as defined in s15) against the
complainant on the basis of disability (s16(k)) in connection with
the provision
of facilities, goods and services (s22(1)(c)).
24. The Commissioner determined, following her investigation of
the complaint, that the complaint be dismissed on the ground that
allegations do not relate to discrimination or prohibited conduct
(s64(1)(b)).
25. The Commissioner found that quiet spaces are available at
the emergency department in the form of single rooms with nursing allocation
those rooms are allocated to patients based on clinical need. The condition and
requirement that a person attending the emergency
department must remain in a
loud area of the emergency department in situations where a quiet space is not
available due to clinical
need, is not unreasonable in all the
circumstances.
Consideration
26. As stated by the Commissioner in her reasons for decision
the elements of indirect discrimination (s15) are as follows:
(a) Imposition of “condition, requirement or
(b) The condition, requirement or practice is unreasonable
in all the circumstances.
(c) It has the effect of disadvantaging a
complainant.
(d) The complainant is disadvantaged as a member of a group of
people who share or are believed to share a prescribed attribute more
person who is not a member of that
27. To establish indirect discrimination within s15 on the
basis of disability, in connection with the provision of facilities, goods
services, there would need to be evidence establishing that there was a
condition, requirement or practice of the respondent
which impacts
differentially upon the complainant as a member of a group sharing a hearing
disability and that condition, requirement
or practice is unreasonable in all
circumstances
was no evidence that because the respondent required the complainant to remain
in the emergency department and did not provide
him with a quiet space after he
requested one was due to his hearing disability. There was no evidence that he
was treated less
favourably than a person who did not have a hearing disability.
The evidence indicated on balance that if anyone had requested a
quiet space at
the same time that the complainant did, the response or position of the
respondent would likely to have been the same.
29. The only quiet space
available was the relative’s room. That room is not nursed. The
complainant had presented at the
emergency department with severe chest pains
and until Dr Vicah became available to go into the relative’s room with
the complainant
he could not have been placed in that room
unsupervised.
30. There is no evidence that anyone from the respondent was
available to supervise the complainant or anyone else in the relative’s
room at the time the complainant requested a quiet space.
31. There was no
differential treatment within the meaning of s15 between the complainant and
anyone else in the same clinical condition
as the complainant seeking a quiet
space at that time.
32. With regard to the issue of
“reasonableness” it was not unreasonable for the respondent not to
provide a quiet space
to the complainant. There was no evidence that the
requirement for the complainant to remain in the emergency department and have
not have access to the relative’s room would have been any different if
the request had been made by any other person presenting
with the same symptoms
as the complainant.
33. The evidence was that the two single rooms with
nursing allocation in the emergency department were occupied at the time of the
complainant’s request. The relative’s room, which does not have
nursing allocation, was free but there was no evidence
of preferential
treatment, that is the respondent did not allow a person without a hearing
disability to use the relative’s
room in preference to the complainant.
No-one was using that room because it does not have nursing allocation and there
was no staff
member available to supervise the complainant or anyone else in
that room at the time that the complainant requested a quiet space.
respondent’s case is that it was simply not possible to provide the
complainant with a quiet space within the emergency
department on 20 June 2019
at the time the complainant requested one.
Determination
considered all the material that was before the Commissioner as well as the
further material supplied by the complainant
together with the written
submissions of the complainant and the respondent, I determine that the
Commissioner’s decision to
dismiss the complaint was the correct decision
and accordingly, pursuant to s72(1) of the Act, the complaint lapses.
CHAIRPERSON
See paragraph 19 of the
respondent’s written submissions dated 5 August
See letter from the
respondent to the Commissioner dated 18 September
Australian Red Cross Society
[2009] TASADT 3
McIntosh, Ahmad v
[2003] TASADT 14
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (122 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter