URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASWRCT/2021/35.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:23:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bluestone Mines Tasmania Joint Venture Pty Ltd v M. [2021] TASWRCT 35 (6 October 2021)
[2021] TASWRCT 35
WORKERS REHABILITATION AND COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
Bluestone Mines Tasmania Joint Venture Pty Ltd v M.
[2021] TASWRCT 35
BLUESTONE MINES TASMANIA JOINT VENTURE PTY LTD
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
19 August 2021
DELIVERED ON:
6 October 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Chief Commissioner Clues
CATCHWORDS:
Worker’s failure to perform actions required under
approved injury management and return to work plans – worker’s
refusal to consent to injury management plan – conduct of worker -
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
Allianz Australia Ltd v L.
[2016] TASWRCT 10
Viney v Roney
Management Pty Ltd
[1996] TASSC 27
(1996) 6 Tas R 240
DETERMINATION:
(1) The worker’s weekly payments
remain suspended until the last of the following occurs:
(a) If a medical certificate is issued under the Act and
specifies that the injury has resulted in the worker being totally or partially
incapacitated for work, the worker must, as soon as reasonably
practicable:
(i) notify the employer of the incapacity and the period for
which the incapacity is likely to continue;
(ii) provide a copy of the
medical certificate to the employer.
(b) If the worker choses a primary
treating practitioner to replace Dr Haq, the worker must:
(i) notify the
employer of the name of the new treating medical practitioner;
(ii) authorise Dr Haq, the previous primary treating medical
practitioner, to release to the newly chosen medical practitioner, records,
relation to the injury, that are held by the previous practitioner.
worker is required to submit to an appropriate independent medical review as set
of the Act.
(d) The worker must undergo any diagnostic tests,
including but not limited to, CT scans, MRI scans and x-rays of the injury as
recommended
by the medical practitioner who conducts the independent medical
review pursuant to
(e) The worker is to provide the employer, the
insurer, his treating medical practitioners and the rehabilitation provider
to his claim with updated contact and residential details.
worker is to:
(a) Perform any actions that he is required to perform under
an approved injury management plan or approved return to work plan unless
is a reasonable cause for his failure to perform those actions.
(b) Provide
workers compensation medical certificates to the employer in a timely
(c) Keep all communications with the employer, the insurer, the
rehabilitation provider, the injury management co-ordinator, his treating
practitioners and any person involved in his treatment, rehabilitation and
(3) The worker is to pay the
insurer’s costs of and incidental to the
notice and this
REPRESENTATION:
T. Pilkington (Page Seager Lawyers)
[2021] TASWRCT 35
Chief Commissioner Clues
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. The worker made a claim for compensation with respect to an
injury he suffered to his right ankle during the course of his employment
January 2020 (the injury). At the time of the injury the worker was employed by
the employer as a “charge up operator”.
2. Shortly after the
claim was accepted difficulties arose in relation to the administration of the
worker’s claim. This subsequently
led to the insurer giving notice to the
Tribunal on 16 April 2021 as provided for by
Workers Rehabilitation
and Compensation Act 1988
(the Act), that the worker had failed to engage in the
numerous return to work plans and injury management plans that were implemented
for him by a senior rehabilitation consultant at Procare Group (Angela McLean)
and further that his rehabilitation and return to
work was frustrated as a
result of the worker being uncontactable, unresponsive, abusive and failing or
refusing to attend scheduled
appointments with medical practitioners, treatment
providers and rehabilitation providers.
3. The matter was referred to the
Registrar to attempt to assist the parties to resolve the
Registrar notified the Tribunal on 7 July 2021 that he was of the opinion that
the matter could not be resolved between the
parties. Therefore, pursuant to
the matter is taken to have been referred to the Tribunal under
5. The Tribunal listed the matter for a directions hearing by
phone on 15 July 2021. The worker could not be contacted. The following
directions were made and sent to the parties:
the referral be set down for hearing in Launceston on 19 August 2021 on notice
to the parties.
2. That within 14 days from today (29 July 2021) both parties are to file
with the Tribunal and serve on each other any documents
or witness statements
that they intend to rely upon at the hearing of this referral.
3. That by 11 August 2021 the employer’s
[insurer’s]
representative is to file with the Tribunal and serve upon the worker a court
book which is to contain all of the documents that either
party intends to rely
upon at the hearing. Two hard copies are to be filed with the Tribunal and
one copy is to be served upon the
4. If the worker wishes to have a conciliation conference with a view to
attempting to resolve the issues in dispute with respect
to this referral, he is
to contact the Tribunal and the matter will be set down for a conciliation
conference in Launceston on 28
July 2021 on notice to the
6. On that date, the directions were sent by email and express
post to the worker. The worker was advised that if he failed to attend
hearing on 19 August 2021 it may proceed in his absence and orders may be made
against him including an order suspending weekly
7. After the
directions hearing concluded the worker contacted the Tribunal. He provided a
new contact number. He advised he was
having difficulty accessing his emails.
He confirmed his postal address. The directions made were read to him. He
advised he had
no interest in attending a conciliation conference. He advised
that he was going to seek legal advice.
8. The matter was listed for hearing
on 19 August 2021. Attempts were made to contact the worker to ascertain if he
had obtained
legal advice. He could not be contacted.
9. At the hearing of
the referral, there was no appearance by or on behalf of the worker. I
determined that it was appropriate for
the referral to proceed ex parte.
The Evidence
10. At the hearing, counsel for the insurer tendered and relied
upon the following documents contained in the court book:
(a) workers compensation claim form
(b) initial workers compensation medical certificate dated 10
January 2020 by Dr Hussein;
(c) initial workers compensation medical
certificate dated 10 January 2020 by Dr Bolt;
referral notice dated
16 April 2021;
(e) bundle of continuing workers compensation medical
certificates covering the period 10 January 2020 to 10 August 2020 and 13 April
2021 to 5 July 2021;
(f) bundle of return to work and injury management plans
numbered 1 to 20 dated 5 February 2020 to 19 January 2021;
(g) bundle of
email exchanges between the rehabilitation providers, the insurer, the employer,
the worker and the physiotherapist
dated 11 June 2020 to 22 July
(h) email from eReports dated 27 July 2021 advising of the
worker’s failure to attend an independent medical examination on
11. The following is a summary of the evidence tendered in
support of the insurer’
• On 14 January 2020, the employer’s
representative, Nola Baxter, attempted to contact the worker to discuss his
As he did not answer his mobile phone she left a message. She
eventually contacted him later that
28 January 2020, Ms Baxter attempted to contact the worker again but was
unsuccessful. She left a message for him to return
her call, but he did
January 2020, the worker turned up late for his medical review with his GP, Dr
Haq. It had to be rescheduled to 6 February
2020. The worker advised Mandy
Hillman of the insurer that his car had broken
June 2020, the worker telephoned his rehabilitation provider from Procare,
Angela McLean, to advise that he was driving
to work and his foot was hurting.
He became angry and started
11 June 2020, Ms McLean spoke to Mr Penn (orthopaedic surgeon) who advised the
worker had attended his office yesterday
without an appointment wanting to be
seen. Mr Penn tried to explain to the worker why he was suffering pain but
advised it looked
like the worker was not really
1 July 2020, the worker did not attend his scheduled physiotherapy appointment
with Mr Hanson. He was uncontactable via
telephone and did not explain the
reason for his
non-attendance
9 July 2020, Ms Baxter tried to call the worker but was unsuccessful. He was
unresponsive to calls to reschedule his missed
physiotherapy
appointment
10 July 2020, the worker failed to attend his pain specialist appointment. The
worker advised Ms Baxter that he was unwell
and provided a new contact
15 July 2020, Ms Baxter tried to call the worker on the new contact number that
he provided, but was
unsuccessful
27 July 2020, the worker attended a review with Mr Penn and Ms McLean.
According to Ms McLean, Mr Penn stated he felt
it was important for the worker
to return to work and the worker agreed. Mr Penn advised the worker that he
felt he was capable
of undertaking his pre-injury duties as tolerated and could
return on alternating days, working half days. Mr Penn noted that if
not viable the worker could contact him and make alterations to the current
workers compensation medical
certificate
29 July 2020, Ms Baxter sent an email to the worker advising she had received a
workers compensation medical certificate
certifying him as fit for suitable
duties from 27 July 2020 to 10 August 2020. She said “This is really good
progress and
we look forward to welcoming you back to work and assisting you to
progress back into your normal duties.” Ms Baxter noted
she had been
trying to contact the worker to discuss his return to work and requested him to
. The worker
did not contact Ms Baxter and did not attend work between 27 and 30 July
• On 31 July 2020, the
worker failed to attend a scheduled appointment with occupational therapist, Ms
Cox. The worker advised
the rehabilitation provider after missing the
appointment that he did not attend because he did not think she could do
anything for
17 August 2020, the worker did not attend a scheduled MRI appointment. On 13
August 2020 he informed the rehabilitation
provider that his pain specialist had
advised him that he did not need to attend the MRI. He was advised to cancel
the appointment
if he was not attending. He failed to do
19 August 2020, the worker did not attend a scheduled teleconference to discuss
his return to work. The worker contacted
Ms Baxter on his previous contact
number and requested a week off due to personal family
2 October 2020, the worker sent an abusive text message to Ms McLean. She made
several failed attempts to contact the
worker. He eventually took her call only
to advise her that she had “fucked his
3 October 2020, after a few attempts, Ms McLean managed to contact the worker
via telephone. They agreed to meet and talk
at 10:00am at Ms McLean’s
office. The worker failed to attend. Ms McLean contacted him. He advised he
did not want to attend
the meeting. It was agreed they could communicate on
Monday, 5 October
14 October 2020, the worker was 40 minutes late for a scheduled medical review
with his general practitioner, Dr Haq.
He said he had mixed up the times of his
appointments
21 October 2020, the worker advised Ms Baxter that he was not taking new
medication prescribed by Dr Haq as he was concerned
side-effects
23 October 2020, the worker did not attend a scheduled appointment with clinical
psychologist, Mr Flemming. Mr Flemming’s
rooms attempted to contact the
worker without success. Ms McLean attempted to contact the worker and received
a message that the
number called was invalid. Ms McLean attempted to contact
the worker’s partner. Later the worker called to advise Ms McLean
forgotten the appointment and was having trouble remembering his
appointments
27 October 2020, Ms McLean had scheduled a meeting with the worker at 10:00am.
The worker called at 11:00am to confirm
the appointment time. It was
rescheduled for 2:00pm that day. The worker was late for that appointment. At
that meeting the worker
advised he did want treatment from the psychologist, Mr
Flemming, however, he did not want to attend the Honorary Clinic at the
General Hospital as recommended by Mr Penn. He did not wish to
receive treatment of Lil Cox, occupational therapist, nor did he
want to see a
pain specialist or a neurologist. He advised he wanted to go alternative and
natural and did not want to put anything
into his body. He did not want to take
the medication prescribed by Mr Penn or Dr Haq. He advised he was crying a
11 November 2020, the worker attended a review with Dr Haq. Ms McLean was
present. Dr Haq was advised the worker had
declined all treatment options and
his family had told him to stop taking all the medication he had been prescribed
including the
antidepressants
8 December 2020, the worker did not attend a scheduled MRI appointment. He
advised that he was not given a password to
get into the facility. The
appointment was rescheduled for 18 December
14 December 2020, Ms McLean attended a medical review with Dr Haq via telephone.
Several attempts were made to contact
the worker by telephone. When he answered
he advised he did not attend the appointment because he had a cold and had been
18 December 2020, the worker failed to attend the rescheduled MRI appointment.
He accidentally phoned Ms Baxter that evening
and when she asked him about the
MRI scan he advised that he did not attend the appointment as he was depressed
and had been in bed
23 December 2020, Ms McLean attended the scheduled medical review with Dr Haq.
The worker did not attend. When contacted
by telephone, the worker said he had
not been advised of the
appointment
4 and 8 January 2021, Ms McLean attempted to contact the worker via telephone
without success. She sent him an email on
8 January 2021 requesting him to call
11 January 2021, Ms Baxter made unsuccessful attempts to contact the worker.
She then sent him an email requesting a valid
11 January 2021, Ms McLean rescheduled the worker’s MRI appointment to 27
January 2021. The receptionist advised
that as the worker had not attended the
past two appointments without explanation, if he did not attend this
appointment, they would
not reschedule again. The insurer approved taxi use for
the worker in the event he was unable to
14 January 2021, the worker did not attend his scheduled general practitioner
medical review. No telephone contact from
the general practice clinic or Ms
McLean was successful. Ms McLean sent an email to the worker advising he would
need to arrange
a new appointment with Dr Haq, reminding him of the MRI scan
scheduled for 27 January 2021 and confirming that the insurer had approved
taxi to take him to and from that appointment. He was advised that Mr
Flemming’s rooms had been trying to contact him regarding
his appointment
and further that she had been experiencing a lot of difficulty contacting him.
She requested he provide a suitable
and reliable telephone contact for himself
which would also need to be sent to the insurer and the
19 January 2021, Ms McLean made several unsuccessful attempts to contact the
worker by telephone. She then sent him an
email advising that he needed to
provide his medical certificates to the employer. Later that day the worker
attended Ms McLean’s
office without an appointment and requested a meeting
with her. The worker was advised that Ms McLean was not in the office and
he would need to call Ms McLean to arrange a
27 January 2021, the worker failed to attend his scheduled MRI appointment
(despite three reminders being sent). The worker
told Ms McLean that he did not
attend the MRI appointment as he had serious depression and that the MRI was
rescheduled to the evening.
Ms Baxter contacted I-Med who confirmed that the
MRI appointment had not been
rescheduled
3 February 2021, the worker changed his general practitioner medical review to a
phone consultation 30 minutes prior to
the appointment time without advising Ms
McLean. During the appointment, the worker was abusive towards to Ms McLean and
he wanted a new case
4 February 2021, the worker informed Ms Baxter that he was firing Ms McLean as
his rehabilitation provider. The insurer
attempted to contact the worker to
discuss his rehabilitation but was
unsuccessful
10 February 2021, Ms McLean attempted to contact the worker via telephone but
was unsuccessful. She sent him an email
requesting him to call
12 March 2021, Ms McLean attempted to call the worker without success. The
worker did not return any of her
15 March 2021, the worker called Ms McLean advising that she had to attend a
medical review with him and his general practitioner,
face to face. Ms McLean
advised the worker she was not able to attend the review as she had not received
prior notice
• On 22 March 2021, the worker did not attend a scheduled review with
Mr Penn. The receptionist advised Ms McLean that the
worker had confirmed by
text the previous day that he would attend but he did not do so. Ms McLean
tried to call him at the time
of the appointment but was
unsuccessful
23 March 2021, the worker did not attend the Honorary Clinic at the Launceston
General Hospital where a round table discussion
had been scheduled with other
orthopaedic surgeons to discuss the worker’s case. A letter had been sent
to the worker advising
him of this. The worker did not attend the appointment.
On 25 March 2021, the worker advised Ms Baxter that he did not want to
the Honorary Clinic due to
16 April 2021, the insurer caused to be filed with the Tribunal a notification
of dispute in relation to injury management
pursuant to
19 April 2021, the worker was abusive and aggressive towards Ms McLean during a
meeting. He occasionally paced the room.
He spoke in a confronting manner. He
swore. He accused Ms McLean of lying. He slammed the door. He
11 May 2021, Ms McLean attended a medical review with the worker and Dr Haq.
The worker attended the review 20 minutes
late without any explanation. On the
same date, Ms McLean’s manager had a discussion with the insurer and it
was determined
that Ms McLean would cease contact with the worker until a review
of the file could be
or about 31 May 2021, Ms McLean was removed as rehabilitation provider for the
worker as the insurer was concerned for
Ms McLean’s safety and
7 June 2021, Ms Sheree Jones of Solutions & Outcomes, took over management
of the worker’s rehabilitation. On
17 June 2021, she had a meeting with
the worker. The worker arrived late and left before she had completed the
initial assessment.
During the meeting, the worker blamed others about his lack
of participation in rehabilitation, avoided questions, was sometimes
refused to sign a medical consent form and provided information that was
inconsistent with reports from Ms McLean and
21 June 2021, the worker failed to attend a 3:30pm appointment made for him to
see Dr Peter Moore (orthopaedic surgeon)
for a second opinion. The appointment
was rescheduled for 4:30pm with an approval to attend the appointment by taxi
but the worker
did not attend. An appointment letter was sent to the worker on
12 May 2021. A reminder text message was sent to him on 17 June
worker failed to attend the rescheduled
appointment
22 June 2021, the insurer sent an email to the worker advising him that an
appointment that had been made for him to see
Dr Gary Davison (independent
medical assessor) on 27 June 2021 had been cancelled and that a new appointment
had been made for 27
July 2021. The appointment letter was sent via express
post to him on 24 June
23 June 2021, the worker contacted Ms Baxter. She reports he was erratic and
anxious. They spoke about his failure to
attend the appointment with Dr Moore.
He said that no-one was helping him. She reassured him that people were trying
to help him
but he continued to fail to attend
appointments
24 June 2021, Ms Baxter sent an email to the worker confirming that the insurer
would provide him with taxi transportation
assistance to and from medical
appointments
or about 28 June 2021, the insurer was advised by its legal representatives that
the Registrar of the Workers Rehabilitation
and Compensation Tribunal had been
unsuccessful in contacting the worker with respect to the
notification
29 June 2021, the worker’s physiotherapist, Mr Hanson, advised that he
last reviewed the worker on 27 April 2021.
He advised the worker did not do any
exercises and did not take on board his advice. The worker did a lower
extremity function
scale (LEFS), but he filled it out in 30 seconds and answered
2/4 for every question so Mr Hanson formed the view that the worker
did not take
30 June 2021, the worker attended the offices of Procare Group (his previous
rehabilitation providers). He was advised
they were no longer involved in his
rehabilitation. He was agitated. He said he had not heard from anyone and was
unsure of what
was happening. He produced a letter regarding an independent
medical examination he said he was meant to attend. On 1 July 2021,
the insurer
wrote to the worker reminding him that he had been sent an email on 22 June 2021
and a letter on 24 June 2021 advising
that the independent medical assessment
with Dr Davison was rescheduled to take place on 27 July 2021. He was also
reminded that
he had been advised by email on 7 June 2021 and orally on 15 June
2021 that Procare were no longer involved in his rehabilitation.
requested not to contact Procare and that if he had any queries he needed to
speak to his new rehabilitation provider (Ms
Jones) or the insurer (Ms
on 1 July 2021, the worker did not attend his scheduled medical review with his
general practitioner. He did not explain
non-attendance
2 July 2021, the worker attended a medical review with Dr Haq and Ms Jones.
During the review the worker was abusive towards
Dr Haq and Ms Jones. Dr Haq
told Ms Jones that he was very scared of the worker. He also told Ms Jones that
the worker had raised
his voice and sworn at previous medical reviews, but his
behaviour had intensified on that
2 July 2021, insurer was advised by its legal representatives that the Registrar
of the Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
Tribunal was unable to contact
the worker with respect to the
notification
6 July 2021, the worker attended the office of Procare Group (his previous
rehabilitation providers). He said he was looking
for Ms McLean. He was
advised she was not in the office. He subsequently called her on the phone and
was verbally abusive towards
7 July 2021, the Registrar of the Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
Tribunal informed the solicitors for the insurer
that he had experienced
difficulties contacting the worker and that it was his intention to refer the
matter to a Commissioner of
the Tribunal to be dealt with pursuant to
22 July 2021, the worker contacted Ms Hillman of the insurer by telephone and
was abusive towards
27 July 2021, the worker failed to attend the independent medical examination
with occupational physician, Dr Davison,
in Launceston. The worker failed to
advise why he missed the
appointment.
Consideration
12. The evidence includes 21 return to work plans (RTW plans)
and injury management plans (IM plans). They are similar in their terms.
except numbers 10 through to 14 (dated 25 September 2020) refer to the worker
being totally incapacitated for work and in summary
require him to perform the
following actions:
(a) Attend all relevant treatment sessions.
all recommended investigations as directed.
(c) Attend all relevant medical
reviews as directed.
(d) Attend scheduled meetings with the employer, the
insurer and the rehabilitation provider.
(e) Report any issues impacting his
immediately.
13. First, in relation to RTW plans 10 to 14 (dated 25
September 2020) I note that Ms Baxter and Ms Hillman state in their affidavits
that Mr Penn provided a medical certifying the worker as fit for suitable duties
between 27 July 2020 and 10 August 2020. That certificate
was not tendered in
evidence. The only certificate tendered is from Mr Penn certifying the worker
as totally incapacitated for any
work from 20 July 2020 to 10 August 2020. RTW
plan 9 extends from 20 July 2020 to 11 August 2020. It states that the worker
incapacitated for work. It does not require him to attend work. RTW plan 10
extends from 6 August 2020 to 11 August 2020. It states
the worker is fit for
suitable duties and that the worker is to work 6 hours per day, 3 days per week.
The evidence of Ms Baxter
is that the worker did not attend work from 27 July
2020 to 30 July
According to RTW plans 9 and 10 the worker was not required to work on those
dates. RTW plans 11 to 14 (dated 25 September 2020)
extend over the period 10
August 2020 to 25 September 2020. They refer to the worker being certified as
fit for suitable duties
from 10 August 2020 to 25 September 2020. The
certificate/s referred to in those plans were not tendered in evidence. There
no evidence that the worker failed to attend work during those periods. I
can make no finding that the worker failed to comply with
RTW plans 10 to 14
(dated 25 September 2020) in so far as they relate to the worker attending the
workplace for the purpose of performing
suitable duties.
14. However, in
relation to the IM plans it is clear that the worker failed to perform the
following actions on a regular basis:
(a) Attend all relevant treatment sessions with Mr Hanson
(physiotherapist), Ms Cox (occupational therapist), Mr Flemming (psychologist)
and a pain specialist.
(b) Attend all recommended investigations. He failed
to attend MRI scan appointments on 17 August 2020, 8 December 2020 and 27
(c) Attend all relevant medical reviews with Mr Penn and Mr
Moore (orthopaedic surgeons), Dr Haq Mohammed (general practitioner) and
Davison (independent medical assessor).
(d) Attend scheduled meetings to
discuss his return to work on 19 August 2020, 3 October 2020 and 27 October
15. The certificates tendered in evidence extend from 10
January 2020 until 10 August 2020. There is a gap and there are further
certificates for the period 13 April 2021 until 5 July 2021.
16. Counsel for
the insurer submits that the worker has stated on occasion that he would see
another medical practitioner to provide
him with a certificate that he is unfit
for work but to date, no notification of the new medical practitioner has been
and no medical certificate has been
to (3) is applicable to this claim. It states:
“(1) An injured worker
is to perform any actions that the worker is required to perform under the
worker's approved injury management
plan or approved return-to-work
does not apply in relation to an action that the worker is not able to
perform because of the worker's workplace injuries or for
any other reasonable
(3) A worker who is unable to perform an action
that the worker is required to perform under the worker's approved injury
plan or approved return-to-work plan, is to, as soon as practicable
(a) seek medical advice and, if appropriate,
undergo treatment that may enable the worker to perform that action; and
(b) advise the employer and the worker's
injury management co-ordinator of the worker's inability and of any medical
advice or treatment
that has been sought or
undergone.”
Section 143N(1)
requires a worker to perform actions under
an “approved injury management plan”.
Section 141(1)
“approved injury management plan” to mean “the injury
management plan to which the worker and the worker’s
employer have
consented under
20. I refer to the IM plans tendered in
evidence. I note the worker has only signed 5 of the 21 plans that were
tendered. However,
as set out above, all of the IM plans are similar in their
terms and all of them require the worker to attend all relevant treatment
sessions, all recommended investigations, all relevant medical reviews and all
scheduled meetings. The worker consented to these
actions by signing at least 5
IM plans. However, on a number of occasions the worker refused to take the
actions set out in the IM
plans. In a meeting with Ms McLean on 28 October
2020, the worker set out what he would and would not consent to. He said he did
not consent to the following:
(a) Continue to see Mr Penn.
(b) Attend the Honorary
Clinic at the Launceston General Hospital as recommended by Mr Penn.
(c) Continue to see Ms Cox, occupational therapist.
(d) Take the
medication prescribed for him by Mr Penn and Dr Haq.
(e) See a pain
specialist.
(f) See a neurologist.
(g) Undergo surgery or
21. At the same meeting the worker indicated that he would like
a second opinion from another orthopaedic surgeon. He would continue
Haq and he wanted to continue to see the psychologist, Mr
a minimum, the worker has consented to attending Mr Flemming (psychologist), Dr
Haq (general practitioner), Ms McLean (rehabilitation
provider), another
orthopaedic surgeon for a second opinion, and obtain a scan of his foot from
23. The evidence is clear that he failed on a number of occasions to
attend appointments with the above providers that he had consented
Therefore, in breach of
he has not performed actions under approved IM
plans, without reasonable cause.
24. The worker has not advised anyone
involved in his injury management or return to work of any reasonable cause as
to why he is
unable to perform these actions. He has not sought medical advice
or undergone treatment that may enable him to perform the actions
stated in the
plans and he has not advised the employer and his injury management co-ordinator
of his inability to perform the required
actions nor has he advised them of any
medical advice or treatment that he has sought or undergone to enable him to
perform these
25. In addition to not performing the actions he was
required to perform under his plans, he has been uncontactable, unresponsive
abusive towards those who that have tried to assist him perform those
26. With respect to the worker’s refusal to attend
appointments with health practitioners and other providers associated with
treatment and rehabilitation I note that pursuant to
where a worker
refuses to give consent to an injury management plan, the injury management
co-ordinator may notify the Tribunal under
that where there has been refusal to consent, an appropriate notification to the
Tribunal under
has occurred.
27. The worker may be frustrated with the
lack of progress in relation to his recovery from the injury. He may also have
issues that are impacting on his ability to deal with the injury but
this does not amount to a reasonable cause for his ongoing and
non-compliance in progressing his rehabilitation and return to work nor does it
amount to a reasonable cause for being
difficult to contact, unresponsive,
uncooperative, abusive, failing to attend scheduled appointments and refusing to
comply with
recommended treatment.
28. I find that the employer, the insurer,
the treating general practitioner, the injury management consultant and return
providers have all genuinely attempted to assist the worker with his
injury management and return to work.
29. In contrast to this, I find the
worker has failed to take many actions set out in his injury management plans
that may have assisted
with his rehabilitation and return to work.
Determination
30. I formally determine that where the worker has refused to
give consent to an IM plan, that refusal was not reasonable in the
circumstances.
Further, I formally determine that where the worker has consented
to an approved IM plan, the worker has, without reasonable cause,
perform all of the actions he was required to perform under the approved IM
31. The worker’s refusal to consent and refusal to perform
actions required of him under the approved IM plans has been aggravated
aggressive, abusive and unresponsive behaviours towards those involved in his
rehabilitation and return to work.
What are appropriate orders?
32. Having made the determinations referred to above, what are
the appropriate orders to be made? As stated by Chief Commissioner
Carey in the
decision of Allianz Australia Ltd v L.
[2016] TASWRCT 10
Act sets out in Part 11 extensive details concerning injury management which
incorporates return to work. It is established
that one of the guiding
principles is to ensure the recovery of the worker from injury and the return of
the worker to work. To
achieve this purpose, obligations are placed upon the
worker, the employer and the insurer with complimentary roles required from
treating general practitioner, injury management consultants and return to work
providers. Given the clear expression of Parliament’s
intent in this
regard, the Tribunal must ensure that insofar as it is able, it gives effect to
that intent and also if required to
make specific orders, those orders are
directed to ensure compliance by the relevant parties of the statutory
33. The power of the Tribunal to make orders in this matter is
set out in s143Q(7) of the Act.
34. Prior to considering the appropriate
orders I note the following:
• There is no current approved RTW plan or approved IM
• The worker has not provided current medical certificates
according to the evidence tendered, the last medical certificate
expired on 5 July 2021.
• The representatives for the insurer state in
their written submissions that the worker “is still employed by the
but has neither returned to work, nor provided a workers compensation
certificate
representatives for the insurers also submit that despite no medical
certificates being provided, the worker’s “weekly
payments were
suspended in accordance with s90C(3) of the Act as he has refused without
reasonable excuse to submit to an independent
medical review or examination when
required under s90A to do
worker’s entitlement to weekly payments have therefore been suspended on
the basis that no workers compensation
medical certificates have been provided
and on the basis that he refused to submit to an independent medical review with
on 27 July 2021.
• The representatives for the insurer
the employer were to receive a workers compensation medical certificate, it is
obliged to renew payment of weekly payments.
This is because Evans J. held in
Barber v Ryan that the employer was obliged to renew the payment of weekly
payments. He said its
refusal to do so was ‘an unlawful contravention of
its obligation under the Act’.
As such, the employer, in light of Barber v Ryan, has to commence making
weekly payments when a further certificate is served and
if the Tribunal is
satisfied that
[the worker’s]
non-compliance warrants a suspension
of weekly payments, the Tribunal should order those weekly payments remain
suspended. The third
reason flows from this point.
The third reason is that one object of the Act is to provide an
mechanism for resolving disputes relating
to the treatment and management of, and compensation in relation to workplace
If there is no order that weekly payments remain suspended, the employer will
have to make a further application for suspension of
weekly payments upon
receipt of a further certificate.
The employer submits that will incur further legal costs and expend the
Tribunal’s time and resources. In effect, that would
not be an economical
method of resolving this
35. At this time it would seem the worker has abandoned his
workers compensation claim. However, I accept that it could be resumed
continued by him at any time if he was to receive and provide the employer with
a further workers compensation medical certificate.
36. As observed by Zeeman
J in Viney v Roney Management Pty Ltd
[1996] TASSC 27
(1996) 6 Tas R 240
the withholding of a payment pending the presentation of an appropriate medical
certificate, “does not amount to a termination
of the weekly payments. All
that occurs is that the obligation to make the actual payment is left in
abeyance until such time as
the relevant medical certificate is
presented.”
37. I note that if the worker did present a backdated
certificate and attended an independent medical review as required by s90A,
would be entitled to be paid the weekly payments which accrued during the period
these reasons it is appropriate that I make an order that the worker’s
weekly payments “remain” suspended
until he takes certain actions
required by the Act.
39. Accordingly, having considered the
provisions of the Act and the submissions of the employer I order
(1) The worker’s weekly payments remain suspended until the last
of the following occurs:
(a) If a medical certificate is issued under the Act and
specifies that the injury has resulted in the worker being totally or partially
incapacitated for work, the worker must, as soon as reasonably
practicable:
(i) notify the employer of the incapacity and the period for
which the incapacity is likely to continue;
(ii) provide a copy of the
medical certificate to the employer.
(b) If the worker choses a primary
treating practitioner to replace Dr Haq, the worker must:
(i) notify the
employer of the name of the new treating medical practitioner;
(ii) authorise Dr Haq, the previous primary treating medical
practitioner, to release to the newly chosen medical practitioner, records,
relation to the injury, that are held by the previous practitioner.
worker is required to submit to an appropriate independent medical review as set
out in s90A of the Act.
(d) The worker must undergo any diagnostic tests,
including but not limited to, CT scans, MRI scans and x-rays of the injury as
recommended
by the medical practitioner who conducts the independent medical
review pursuant to s90A.
(e) The worker is to provide the employer, the
insurer, his treating medical practitioners and the rehabilitation provider
to his claim with updated contact and residential details.
worker is to:
(a) Perform any actions that he is required to perform under
an approved injury management plan or approved return to work plan unless
is a reasonable cause for his failure to perform those actions.
(b) Provide
any workers compensation medical certificates to the employer in a timely
(c) Keep all communications with the employer, the insurer, the
rehabilitation provider, the injury management co-ordinator, his treating
practitioners and any person involved in his treatment, rehabilitation and
40. The representatives for the insurer seek an order for the
costs associated with the s143Q notice. In their submissions they refer
paragraphs 11 and 12 of Allianz Australia Limited v L. (supra) where Chief
Commissioner Carey stated:
to the issue of costs, although the Tribunal has a general discretion as to the
award of costs, it is accepted that in the
normal course, costs ought to follow
the event. In this case it was the non-compliance by the worker to the
significant efforts
made by the insurer and employer that obliged the insurer to
make this referral to the Tribunal. There is nothing as to the conduct
insurer that ought to displace the general rule as to entitlement to
The Tribunal is mindful that costs are not awarded by way of punishment of
the unsuccessful party but rather compensatory to the successful
party in order
to indemnify that party against the expense they have been put by reason of the
legal proceedings (Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR
41. I adopt the reasoning of Chief Commissioner Carey and make
a further order pursuant to s59 that the worker pay the insurer’s
and incidental to the s143Q notice and this s42 referral.
42. Formal orders
in the above terms will be issued.
A. M. CLUES
CHIEF COMMISSIONER
See s143Q(3) and (4) of the
Affidavit of Nola Baxter
Affidavit of Nola Baxter
Affidavit of Nola Baxter
[7]; affidavit of Mandy Hillman
Affidavit of Angela
McLean [6].
Email from Angela
McLean dated 11 June 2020, hearing book, item
Affidavit of Mandy Hillman
[14]; affidavit of Angela McLean [7]; hearing book, item
Affidavit of Nola Baxter
[8]; affidavit of Mandy Hillman [15]; hearing book, item
Affidavit of Nola Baxter
[9]; affidavit of Mandy Hillman [15]; hearing book, item
Affidavit of Nola
Baxter [10]; affidavit of Mandy Hillman [15]; hearing book, item
Hearing book, item
Hearing book, item
Affidavit of Nola
Baxter [12]-[15].
of Angela McLean [8]; affidavit of Mandy Hill man [19]; affidavit of Nola Baxter
Affidavit of Nola
Baxter [18]; hearing book, item
Affidavit of Nola
Baxter [19]; affidavit of Angela McLean [9]; hearing book, item 41.
Affidavit of Angela McLean
[10]; affidavit of Nola Baxter [20]; affidavit of Mandy Hillman [21]; hearing
book, item 42.
Affidavit of
Angela McLean [11]; hearing book, item
Affidavit of Angela
McLean [12],; Nola Baxter [22]; hearing book, item
Affidavit of Nola
Baxter [23]; hearing book, item
Affidavit of Angela
McLean [13]; affidavit of Nola Baxter [24]; hearing book, item
Affidavit of Angela
McLean [14], hearing book, item
Affidavit of Nola
Baxter [25]; hearing book, item
Affidavit of Nola
Baxter [26]; hearing book, item
Affidavit of Angela
McLean [?]; hearing book, item
Affidavit of Nola
Baxter [27]; hearing book, item
Affidavit of Angela
McLean [16]; affidavit of Nola Baxter [28]; hearing book, item
Affidavit of Angela
McLean [17] and [18]; hearing book, item
Affidavit of Nola
Baxter [30]; hearing book, item
Affidavit of Angela
McLean [19]; affidavit of Nola Baxter
Affidavit of Angela
McLean [20]; affidavit of Nola Baxter [32]; hearing book, item
Affidavit of Angela
McLean [21] and [22]; affidavit of Nola Baxter [33]; hearing book, items 55 and
Affidavit of Angela
McLean [23]; affidavit of Nola Baxter [34]; hearing book, item 57.
Affidavit of Angela McLean
[24]; affidavit of Nola Baxter [35]; affidavit of Mandy Hillman [25]; hearing
book, item 58.
Affidavit of
Nola Baxter [36]; affidavit of Mandy Hillman
Affidavit of Angela
McLean [25]; affidavit of Nola Baxter [37]; hearing book, item
Affidavit of Angela
McLean [26].
Affidavit of
Angela McLean [27]; affidavit of Mandy Hillman [27].
Affidavit of Angela McLean
[28]; affidavit of Nola Baxter [38]; affidavit of Mandy Hillman [28]; hearing
book, item 60.
Affidavit of
Angela McLean [28]; affidavit of Nola Baxter [39]; hearing book, item
Hearing book, item
Affidavit of Angela McLean
[30], affidavit of Nola Baxter [40]; affidavit of Mandy Hillman [29]; hearing
book, item 62.
Affidavit of
Angela McLean [31] and [32]; affidavit of Mandy Hillman
Affidavit of Mandy
Hillman [31].
Affidavit of
Sheree Jones [5] to [17].
Affidavit of Sheree Jones
[22]; affidavit of Nola Baxter [42]; affidavit of Mandy Hillman [33]; hearing
book, item 63.
Affidavit of
Mandy Hillman [34].
Affidavit of Nola Baxter [43]; hearing book, item
Hearing book, item
Affidavit of Mandy
Hillman [35]; affidavit of Nola Baxter
Affidavit of Mandy
Hillman [36]; affidavit of Nola Baxter [45]; hearing book, items 68 and
Affidavit of Mandy
Hillman [38] and [40]; hearing book, items 70 and 71.
Affidavit of Mandy Hillman
[39]; affidavit of Sheree Jones [23]; affidavit of Nola Baxter [46]; hearing
book, items 71 and 72.
Affidavit of Sheree Jones
[24] to [40]; affidavit of Mandy Hillman [43]; affidavit of Nola Baxter [48];
hearing book, item 74.
Affidavit of Mandy Hillman [42]; affidavit of Nola Baxter
Affidavit of Angela
McLean [35] to [36].
Hearing book, item 73.
Affidavit of Mandy Hillman [45]; hearing book, item
Affidavit of Mandy
Hillman [46]; hearing book, item
Affidavit Nola Baxter
submissions dated 17 August 2021, page
Hearing book, item
Written submissions
dated 17 August 2021, page
Written submissions
dated 17 August 2021, page
Written submissions
dated 17 August 2021, page 3
Viney v Roney Management Pty Ltd
[1996] TASSC 27
(1996) 6 Tas R 240
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (235 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter