URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFC/2024/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:14:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
GFR v SRP (No 2) [2024] TASFC 6 (13 November 2024)
[2024] TASFC 6
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (FULL
GFR v SRP (No 2)
[2024] TASFC
APPEALED FROM:
[2023] TASSC 15
DELIVERED ON:
13 November 2024
HEARING DATE:
20 May 2024
JUDGMENT OF:
CJ, Porter AJ
Succession – Probate and letters of administration – Costs
– General principles – Intestate estate –
Action for grant of
letters of administration brought by paternal grandfather for benefit of child
– Mother of child asserted
entitlement to whole estate as partner of
deceased – Mother successful at first instance but unsuccessful on appeal
Whether costs should follow the event – Whether costs of mother
should be paid out of estate.
Aust Dig Succession [1160]
Autodesk Inc v Dyason
[1993] HCA 6
(1993) 176 CLR 300
Burrell v The
[2008] HCA 34
238 CLR 218
Calderbank v Calderbank
DJL v Central Authority
[2000] HCA 17
201 CLR 226
Electrolytic Zinc Company of Australasia Limited v Fisher
Johnston v Todd
[1845] EngR 833
(1845) 8 Beav 489
Harrison's Share under a Settlement
[1955] 1 All ER 185
Re Grazebrook
[1928] VicLawRp 27
[1928] VLR 212
Sheil v Doneley
[1903] NSWStRp 12
(1903) 3 SR (NSW) 60
REPRESENTATION
R McTaggart SC
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Butler McIntyre &
Judgment Number:
[2024] TASFC 6
paragraphs:
Serial No 6/2024
File No 1658/2023
GFR v SRP (No 2)
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
13 November
Orders of the
the defendant to action no 1787/2022 pay the costs of the plaintiff of and
incidental to that action on a party/party basis.
the costs of the plaintiff of and incidental to that action be paid out of the
estate of the late HMW on an indemnity basis,
to the extent that those costs are
not recovered from the defendant.
the respondent to this appeal be indemnified from the estate of the late HMW in
respect of the costs of the appellant of and
incidental to the appeal paid by
her, to the extent that she is not indemnified in respect thereof from the
Appeal Costs Fund.
the appellant's costs of and incidental to this appeal be paid from the estate
of the late HMW on an indemnity basis, to the
extent that those costs are not
recovered from the respondent pursuant to the order for costs made on 3 May
Serial No 6/2024
File No 1658/2023
GFR v SRP (No 2)
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
13 November
this appeal, which was a successful one, each party has applied for orders as to
costs, both in respect of the appeal and the
action that gave rise to it.
proceedings concerned the estate of a man ("HMW") who took his own life. He did
not leave a will. The respondent ("SRP") lived
with him in a marriage-like
relationship until shortly before his death. She and the deceased had a son who
was two years old at
the time of the death. A controversy arose as to whether
the couple were in a "significant relationship" within the meaning of the
Relationships Act
at the time of the man's death. The respondent
contended that they were, and that the whole of the estate should pass to her on
intestacy. If the relationship was not a significant relationship at the time
of death, the child was entitled to the whole of the
estate on intestacy.
child's paternal grandfather ("GFR") brought an action contending that the boy
was entitled to the whole of the estate, and seeking
a grant of letters of
administration to himself and another relative. At first instance the
respondent was successful. Holt AsJ
dismissed the action and made an order that
letters of administration be granted to her:
[2023] TASSC 15.
grandfather appealed. He was successful. The Full Court allowed the appeal and
set aside the orders of Holt AsJ:
[2024] TASFC 2.
on 3 May 2024, this Court ordered that letters of administration be granted to
the appellant; that the respondent pay
the appellant's costs of and incidental
to the appeal; and that an indemnity certificate be granted to her under the
Appeal Costs Fund Act
. The costs order was neither opposed nor
consented to.
for the respondent applied for an order that the appellant pay the costs of the
action. Counsel for the appellant asked for
some time to consider the issue of
the costs of the action. As a result, this Court ordered that any costs
applications relating
to the action be adjourned sine die.
Subsequently
it was realised that it was not appropriate for letters of administration to
have been granted to the appellant, and
that the Court needed to hear the
parties as to who should administer the estate. On 20 May 2024, after hearing
counsel, this Court
rescinded the order for letters of administration to be
granted to the appellant, ordered that letters of administration be granted
the Public Trustee, and published revised reasons for judgment. All questions
of costs were adjourned sine die at that time.
The parties were directed to make
written submissions as to costs.
Subsequently
the appellant sought orders as to costs to the following effect:
respondent pay the appellant's costs at first instance on a party/party
That the estate
of HMW pay the appellant's costs at first instance on the indemnity basis, to
the extent that those costs are not
recovered from the respondent.
respondent be indemnified in respect of the appellant's party/party costs of the
appeal (which she had already been ordered
to pay) "first from the Appeal Costs
Fund and second from the estate of [HMW]".
That the estate
of HMW pay the appellant's costs of the appeal on the indemnity basis, to the
extent that those costs are not recovered
from the respondent.
the respondent sought orders to the following effect:
parties' costs of the first instance proceedings be taxed on a solicitor and
client basis and paid out the estate of HMW.
That the order
as to costs made on 3 May 2024 be vacated.
appellant's costs of the appeal be paid by the estate of HMW on a solicitor and
client basis.
indemnity certificate be granted to the respondent under the
Appeal Costs
respondent be indemnified by the estate of HMW for any surplus solicitor and
client costs of the appeal incurred and not
covered by the indemnity under the
Appeal Costs Fund Act
both parties were seeking orders for the payment of costs from the deceased
estate, the Public Trustee was afforded an opportunity
to make submissions as to
the competing costs applications. Counsel for the Public Trustee has informed
the Court that his client
supports the appellant's applications and does not
wish to make any separate submissions as to costs.
parties and the Public Trustee all accept that the appellant should not be left
out of pocket since he instituted and prosecuted
the action and the appeal for
the benefit of his grandson and not for any personal benefit. The parties and
the Public Trustee all
accept that he should receive at least some of his costs
out the estate.
parties and the Public Trustee also all accept that the respondent should not be
left out of pocket in relation to the appellant's
costs of and incidental to the
appeal. The position of the appellant and the Public Trustee is that she should
be required to pay
the appellant's party/party costs of and incidental to the
appeal in accordance with the order of 3 May, but that she should be indemnified
in respect of those costs, to the extent possible, from the Appeal Costs Fund,
with an indemnity for the balance from the estate.
The respondent contends that
she should not have to pay any of the appellant's party/party costs in relation
to the appeal, but
that he should get his solicitor/client costs of the appeal
out of the estate.
scope of the matters in controversy can be summarised as follows:
The appellant
contends that the respondent should pay his party/party costs of the proceedings
at first instance, but she opposes
such an order.
The respondent
contends that both parties' costs of the first instance proceedings should be
paid out of the estate on a solicitor/client
basis, but the appellant opposes
any payment out of the estate in respect of the respondent's costs of those
proceedings.
The respondent
contends that the Court should rescind the order requiring her to pay the
appellant's costs of and incidental to the
appeal, but the appellant opposes the
rescission of that order.
The respondent
contends that she should have an indemnity certificate under the
Appeal Costs
even if she is not required to pay any of the appellant's costs
relating to the appeal.
The respondent
contends that she should be indemnified from the estate for her solicitor/client
costs of the appeal, to the extent
that they are not recovered from the Appeal
Costs Fund. That is opposed by the appellant.
making of the orders sought by the respondent in relation to the costs of the
appeal would involve this Court rescinding the
order that it made on 3 May 2024
that the respondent pay the appellant's costs of and incidental to the appeal
and that she be granted
an indemnity certificate under the
Appeal Costs Fund
Since no formal order has been prepared and sealed, we have the power
to make the orders sought, though the power to rescind final
orders should be
exercised sparingly:
Autodesk Inc v Dyason
[1993] HCA 6
(1993) 176 CLR 300
CJ at 302, Brennan J at 308, Gaudron J at 322;
DJL v Central Authority
[2000] HCA 17
201 CLR 226
Burrell v The Queen
238 CLR 218
Re Harrison's Share under a Settlement
[1955] 1 All ER 185
Electrolytic Zinc Company of
Australasia Limited v Fisher
[1989] TASSC 35.
orders sought by the respondent reflect a misunderstanding as to the scheme of
Appeal Costs Fund Act
of that Act empowers the Supreme
Court to grant an indemnity certificate in respect of an appeal to a respondent
to the appeal.
Section 9(1)
deals with the effect of an indemnity certificate.
the possibility that a respondent might be granted an indemnity
certificate without first having been ordered to pay costs of an
appellant is
not contemplated. The section is designed to deal with a situation where an
appeal succeeds because of error on the
part of a court or tribunal below, and
the successful appellant obtains an order for payment of costs by a respondent.
The sub-section
provides relevantly as follows:
"(1) Subject
to this Act, where a respondent to an appeal has been granted an indemnity
certificate, the certificate entitles the
respondent to be paid from the Fund
(a) an amount equal to
the appellant's costs –
(i) of the appeal in respect of which the
certificate was granted; and
being costs ordered to be paid and actually paid by or on behalf of the
respondent;
(b) an amount equal to the respondent's costs
(i) of the appeal in respect of which the
certificate was granted; and
not being costs that were ordered to be paid by any other party; and
(c) where the costs referred to
in paragraph (b) are taxed at the instance of the respondent, an
amount equal to the costs incurred
by him or on his behalf in having those costs
is appropriate that an indemnity certificate be granted because the orders
appealed from have been set aside as a result of error.
It is both just and in
the interests of both parties that they receive the maximum advantage of the
availability of funds from the
Appeal Costs Fund.
Court has a general discretion to award costs by virtue of
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act
. Significantly,
as follows:
"(2) Subject as provided in subsection (1) the
costs of all proceedings whatsoever in the Court, including the administration
and trusts, shall be in the discretion of the Court or judge, and the
Court or judge shall have full power and authority to determine
by whom or out
of what estate, fund, or property, and to what extent such costs are to be
a general rule, courts apply the principle that "costs follow the event". That
is to say an unsuccessful party will ordinarily
be ordered to pay a successful
party's costs. That rule is frequently departed from in cases concerning
deceased estates. The courts
seek to strike a balance to ensure that doubtful
claims should not easily succeed because of the cost of opposing them, while at
the same time ensuring that parties will not be tempted to prosecute
unmeritorious claims or defences because of a likelihood that
their costs are
likely to be met or defrayed out of the estate. See Dal Pont,
Law of Costs,
5th ed, Lexus Nexus Australia, 2021, at [10.18].
outcome of the competing applications depends on how we characterise this
litigation. The critical question was whether the
deceased's relationship with
the respondent had ceased to be a "significant relationship" before his death.
Was this a case in which
each party came to the Court in good faith seeking the
resolution of a difficult question? Or should we characterise the litigation
contentious all-or-nothing litigation?
appellant contends that we should treat this litigation as ordinary contentious
litigation and depart from the general rule that
costs follow the event only to
the extent of making orders for indemnities out of the estate. His contentions
can be summarised as
The respondent
sought a personal benefit by opposing the action and prosecuting a
counterclaim.
An order for the
payment of her costs out of the estate would, for all practical purposes,
require the child to meet her costs.
The proceedings
at first instance were acrimonious. The parties did not cooperate to place
evidence before the Court to seek a determination.
The respondent
was well aware of the facts that led the Full Court to find against her.
She sought an
order for costs against the appellant personally when she succeeded at first
In resisting the
appeal, she unsuccessfully contended that, as a matter of law, the appellant, as
the father of the deceased, was
not an appropriate person to have applied for
letters of administration. If that submission had succeeded the Full Court would
been precluded from considering the merits of the orders under appeal.
In settlement
negotiations she proposed that she receive 80%, and later 70%, of the
The appellant
made an offer of settlement on 24 April 2023 which was not accepted by the
respondent. He offered to settle on the basis
that the respondent abandoned her
claims in the proceedings, and consented to him and his wife being appointed as
administrators
and to the child being entitled to the whole estate on intestacy,
in return for which an order would be made for her party/party
costs to be paid
out of the estate. That offer was only open for a very short time. There was an
unsuccessful mediation on Friday
21 April 2023. The trial was due to start on
Wednesday 26 April. Tuesday 25 April was a public holiday. The offer was made
24 April at 10.14am and remained open only until 5pm. It was made on a
"without prejudice except as to costs" basis in accordance
Calderbank v
[1975] 3 All ER 333.
respondent's contentions can be summarised as follows:
inevitable that contentious proceedings would have to be instituted.
determination of her claim was necessary for the administration of the
The deceased's
conduct, including him raping her, was a significant contributor to the
litigation.
significant evidence to support her contention that the significant relationship
had not ended at the time of death.
Since she is the
sole carer and provider for the child, her prosecution of her case was not just
for her own benefit but for the child
unreasonable for her not to accept the
offer of 24 April
She had made
reasonable efforts to settle all her claims in relation to the estate, without
success. Apart from her claim to be entitled
to the whole of the estate on
intestacy, she had, and still has, a claim to be entitled to a part interest in
the estate by virtue
of a constructive trust and/or a resulting trust, and a
claim for damages for battery. She also has a claim in respect of the
superannuation.
party objected to the Court having regard to the material relied upon by the
other in relation to offers of settlement. It
would have been highly desirable
for a settlement to have been negotiated in relation to all the respondent's
claims. It remains
highly desirable that a total settlement should be
negotiated in respect to those of her claims that are still outstanding. However
this Court is not in a position to assess the reasonableness or otherwise of the
proposals that were made on behalf of the respondent.
We do not have evidence
that would enable us to reach conclusions as to the likely outcomes of the
respondent's other claims, and
it would not be appropriate for us to undertake
such a task. It would therefore not be appropriate for us to attach any
significant
weight to the fact that the respondent made attempts to achieve a
total settlement, or to the size of her demands.
the offer of 24 April 2023 was open for so short a period and at such a late
stage in the litigation, we do not regard the
respondent's non-acceptance of
that offer as a significant factor.
are some old authorities in which it has been held that next-of-kin who succeed
in establishing their claims on an intestacy
should be paid their costs out of
the estate, but that an unsuccessful claimant in an inquiry as to an intestate's
next-of-kin should
not receive costs out of the estate unless the investigation
has benefitted the estate:
Re Grazebrook
[1928] VicLawRp 27
[1928] VLR 212
[1903] NSWStRp 12
(1903) 3 SR (NSW) 60
Johnston v Todd
[1845] EngR 833
, Lord Langdale MR made an order for costs in favour of some
plaintiffs who unsuccessfully claimed that they were the next-of-kin
testator following a partial intestacy. However his Lordship said, at Beav
"... it was so doubtful who was right, and so impossible to
decide the matter without careful investigation, that if they had not
forward their claims, there could have been no adjudication."
fundamental question that we have to decide is whether we are persuaded that we
should depart from the usual position that costs
should follow the event in
relation to the appellant's first instance costs and all the respondent's costs.
We are not so persuaded.
Although the respondent had an arguable case, this was
contentious all-or-nothing litigation that was robustly conducted. There
four-day trial involving the cross-examination of many witnesses. It was not a
proceeding in which the parties worked together
to provide evidence of
uncontested facts to obtain a determination of a judicial officer. The
respondent even sought a costs order
against the appellant personally after she
succeeded at first instance.
appeal was also robustly conducted, to the extent that the respondent sought to
avoid the possibility of this Court re-determining
the question of when the
significant relationship ended by making a submission as to the appellant never
having had appropriate standing
to bring an action seeking a grant of letters of
administration.
orders made on 3 May for the respondent to pay the appellant's costs of the
appeal, and to receive an indemnity certificate under
Appeal Costs Fund
will not be disturbed. In accordance with the submissions of the
appellant, we make the following orders:
the defendant to action no 1787/2022 pay the costs of the plaintiff of and
incidental to that action on a party/party basis.
the costs of the plaintiff of and incidental to that action be paid out of the
estate of the late HMW on an indemnity basis,
to the extent that those costs are
not recovered from the defendant.
the respondent to this appeal be indemnified from the estate of the late HMW in
respect of the costs of the appellant of and
incidental to the appeal paid by
her, to the extent that she is not indemnified in respect thereof from the
Appeal Costs Fund.
the appellant's costs of and incidental to this appeal be paid from the estate
of the late HMW on an indemnity basis, to the
extent that those costs are not
recovered from the respondent pursuant to the order for costs made on 3 May
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (139 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter