URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASGAB/2021/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ER (Consent to Medical Treatment) [2021] TASGAB 17 (30 March 2021)
ER (Consent to Medical Treatment)
[2021] TASGAB 17
HEARING DATE(S):
30 March 2021
DATE OF ORDERS:
30 March 2021
DATE OF STATEMENT OF REASONS:
1 April 2021
Ms R Holder, President
Ms M Duvnjak, Member
Dr M McArthur, Member
APPLICATION
Application for Medical Treatment
CATCHWORDS:
Medical treatment - COVID-19 vaccination – lack of capacity to
consent – whether treatment can be given under Part 6 of
the GAA without
an Order – no person responsible – limitations of medical treatment
without consent under section 41
of the GAA – meaning of necessary
treatment – whether treatment is in the best interests of the person
treatment approved
LEGISLATION CITED:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
CASES CITED:
UI (Consent to Special Medical Treatment)
[2020] TASGAB 48
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication
STATEMENT OF REASONS
is a 70 year old widowed lady who transferred from Millbrook Rise Centre in 2012
to [the aged care facility], where she continues
Board received an Application for Consent to Medical Treatment from XU, Care
Manager at [the aged care facility], seeking consent
for a COVID-19 vaccination
to be administered to ER (‘the Application’).
is subject to an Administration Order made by the Board on 17 June 2020, which
appointed the Public Trustee as the administrator
of her estate. She is
therefore a ‘Represented Person’ for the purpose of the Application,
and as referred to in
Guardianship and Administration Act
(‘the Act’) .
on the Australian Government website is information pertaining to the consent
process and clinical governance requirements
for the COVID-19 vaccine rollout.
As part of the consent process, residential aged care facilities
(‘RACF’) are required
to determine the suitability of residents to
participate and to seek consent from residents and/or substitute decision makers
behalf of residents. It provides that the RACF is responsible for
facilitation, seeking and recording informed consent for all residents
as suitable to receive the vaccine, including residents that have a substitute
decision maker and those who do not have
a substitute decision maker. Evidence
of the resident’s consent must be made available to the immunisation
provider on the
day. A consent package forms part of the documentation to be
The Hearing
Board heard the Application on 30 March 2021.
attendance at the hearing by telephone were:
the Proposed Represented Person (‘the PRP’);
Substitute Applicant; and
Martin Neuberger, General Practitioner.
Board had before it the following documents:
Application dated 1 March 2021;
Care Professional Report (‘HCPR’) of Dr Martin Neuberger dated 2
March 2021;
COVID-19 Vaccine Consumer Medicine Information (CMI) summary published by Pfizer
Administration
Order dated 17 June 2020;
of Dr Martin Neuberger dated 26 March 2020; and
Trustee Report dated 15 May 2020;
Board has produced this Statement of Reasons of its own motion.
Legislation
6 of the Act applies to a person with a disability who is incapable of giving
consent to the carrying out of medical and dental
treatment, whether or not the
person is a represented person.
section 36 of the Act a person is incapable of giving consent to the carrying
out of medical treatment if the person –
(a) is incapable of
understanding the general nature and effect of the proposed treatment; or
(b) is incapable of indicating whether or not he or she consents or does not
consent to the carrying out of the treatment.
person who the Board is satisfied has a proper interest in the matter may make
application to the Board for the carrying out of
medical treatment on a person
to whom Part 6 applies (section 44 of the Act).
45 of the Act provides:
(1) On hearing an application for its
consent to the carrying out of medical or dental treatment the Board may consent
to the carrying
out of the medical or dental treatment if it is satisfied that
(a) the medical or dental treatment is otherwise lawful; and
(b) that person is incapable of giving consent; and
(c) the medical or dental treatment would be in the best interests of that
(2) For the purposes of determining whether any medical or dental treatment
would be in the best interests of a person to whom this
Part applies, matters to
be taken into account by the Board include –
(a) the wishes of that person, so far as they can be ascertained; and
(b) the consequences to that person if the proposed treatment is not carried
(c) any alternative treatment available to that person; and
(d) whether the proposed treatment can be postponed on the ground that better
treatment may become available and whether that person
is likely to become
capable of consenting to the treatment; and
(f) any other matters prescribed by the regulations.
Board must also balance the principles in section 6 of the Act for every
function or power conferred by the Act, and these are:
(a) the means
which is the least restrictive of a person's freedom of decision and action as
is possible in the circumstances is adopted;
(b) the best interests of a person with a disability or in respect of whom an
application is made under this Act are promoted; and
(c) the wishes of a person with a disability or in respect of whom an
application is made under this Act are, if possible, carried
into effect.
Person with a proper interest
Applicant, an employee of [the aged care facility] where ER resides, made
Application to the Board. The Applicant is the Care
Manager and she has
oversight of the clinical care needs of residents at [the aged care facility],
including the care needs of ER.
The Board is satisfied that for the purposes of
section 44(1) of the Act, the Applicant has a ‘proper interest’ in
Application.
Medical treatment is lawful
proposed treatment being sought is a COVID-19 vaccination, namely the Pfizer
vaccination, by way of two intramuscular injections,
three weeks apart
(‘the proposed treatment’).
Board finds for the purpose of section 45(1)(a) of the Act, that where consent
exists, the proposed medical treatment is ‘lawful
treatment.’
Capacity to give consent
Board considered whether ER is a person to whom Part 6 of the Act applies, and
in particular whether, pursuant to section 36 of
the Act, ER is capable of
giving consent to the proposed medical treatment in that she ‘understands
the nature and effect of
the treatment.’ The Board has previously
considered and set out the limited superior court authority and quasi-judicial
law considering the meaning of ‘nature and effect’ in its
decision of UI (Consent to Special Medical Treatment)
[2020] TASGAB 48
Neuberger, General Practitioner who has known ER for over eight years and sees
her at least every three months states ER has a
diagnosis of schizophrenia,
which has been evident for more than 20 years. Dr Neuberger states in his
opinion her disability impacts
on her planning and reasoning skills, receptive
communication, impulse control and susceptibility to influence/suggestibility.
Neuberger gave oral evidence that as a consequence of her disability, ER
cannot hold ideas long enough to make decisions as to the
proposed treatment and
does not understand the risks COVID-19 poses to her or to others. Dr Neuberger
stated ER does not understand
the benefits to her and to others in the
residential aged care facility of having the vaccination, and does not
understand the possible
side effects of the proposed treatment. Dr Neuberger
stated in his opinion ER is incapable of giving consent to the COVID-19
vaccination
as she does not understand the nature and effect of the treatment.
No medical evidence to the contrary was submitted.
Board finds that ER lacks capacity to consent to the proposed treatment, in that
she is unable to comprehend and retain the information
which is material to the
decision and unable to use and weigh the information in order to make an
informed decision.
Whether treatment can be provided under Part 6
of the Act without an Order
the Board considers whether it should make an order, the Board needs to be
satisfied that there is no other consent mechanism
under Part 6 of the Act that
could apply.
Board heard evidence from the Applicant that ER does not have a Person
Responsible who may consent to the proposed
was not suggested by anyone at hearing that section 40 of the Act applies, which
allows for urgent medical treatment to be carried
out on a person without
consent so as to save the person’s life; prevent serious damage to the
person’s health; or to
prevent the person from suffering or continuing to
suffer significant pain or distress.
41 allows medical treatment to be provided without consent.
(1) Where –
(a) it is proposed to carry out any medical or dental treatment which is not
special treatment on a person to whom this Part applies;
(b) there is no person responsible for that person; and
(c) the treatment is necessary and is the form of treatment that will most
successfully promote that person's health and well-being;
(d) that person does not object to the carrying out of the treatment –
it is lawful, subject to subsection (2), for the medical or dental treatment to
be carried out on that person without consent under
this Division.
(2) The regulations may provide that in such cases as are specified in
the regulations medical or dental treatment may not be carried
out on a person
to whom this Part applies without consent under this Division.
(3) A medical practitioner or dentist who carries out or supervises any
medical or dental treatment under subsection (1) without
the consent of the
relevant person must certify in the clinical records relating to the treatment
(a) the treatment is necessary and is the form of treatment that will most
successfully promote that person's health and wellbeing;
(b) the person does not object to the carrying out of the
proposed treatment, is not special treatment. ER does not have a Person
Responsible. At hearing ER did not object to the carrying
out of the proposed
treatment. The question therefore is whether the treatment is
‘necessary’ and is the form of treatment
that will most successfully
‘promote ER’s health and well-being.’
‘Necessary’
is not defined in the Act, nor has there been judicial or quasi-judicial
consideration of its meaning in the
context of section 36 of the Act. The
ordinary plain English meaning of the word ‘necessary’ offers a
number of alternatives.
See, for example Macquarie Dictionary (online
1. something necessary or indispensable.
2. the fact of being necessary or indispensable; indispensableness.
3. an imperative requirement or need for something: necessity for a
4. the state of fact of being necessary or inevitable.
5. an unavoidable compulsion to do something.
6. a state of being in difficulty or need; poverty.
Substitute Applicant submitted that the treatment is ‘necessary’
because ER is at high risk herself and there is a
high risk of transmission of
COVID-19 within a residential aged care facility. The Board does not accept
these risk factors make
the treatment ‘necessary’.
Australian Government has stated every adult in Australia will be offered the
COVID-19 vaccination. All adults with decision making
capacity can consent to or
not consent to having the COVID-19 vaccination. The same right should equally
apply to a person with
disability who is incapable of consenting to it but has a
substitute decision maker who can consider the person’s wishes and
the vaccine would be in the person’s best interests to have. The COVID-19
vaccine cannot be described as ‘indispensable’
that is ‘not
dispensable; absolutely necessary or requisite’ or an ‘imperative
requirement.’ This would not
allow for individual choice and therefore be
contrary to a person’s human rights.
while this vaccination may reduce the likelihood of ER getting COVID-19 and
therefore reduce the likelihood of being unwell
with the virus or even dying,
there is no evidence before the Board that the vaccine would be lifesaving, and
in this respect ‘necessary.’
There is no compelling medical evidence
before the Board that indicates the treatment is necessary.
Board finds in relation to the Application, the COVID 19 vaccination is not
‘necessary treatment.’ As it is not ‘necessary’
treatment, section 41 of the Act does not apply.
Is the proposed
treatment in the best interests of ER?
Board needs to apply the criteria in section 45(2) of the Act, that is, whether
the proposed treatment is in ER’s best interests.
wishes of ER
was evidence that ER agreed to have the COVID-19 vaccination when discussing it
with staff at [the aged care facility] but refused
to have it when it was
discussed with Dr Neuberger. Dr Neuberger confirmed that ER had objected to the
proposed treatment when he
discussed it with her. At the hearing ER indicated
she wanted to have the proposed treatment and ‘would line up with other
residents for it.’
Application states that ER has had recommended vaccinations in the past,
including the flu injection last year. Dr Neuberger states
that she has
‘mostly refused flu vaccinations in the past.’ The substitute
Applicant stated ER had her flu injection
last year. While it is not necessary
to make a finding as to whether ER had the flu injection last year, the Board
makes the observation
that it is unclear where consent came from for this
treatment if it was given to ER.
Consequences to ER if the
treatment is not carried out
Application states that if the proposed treatment is not carried out the
consequence is that ER would have ‘reduced immune
response to COVID-19
resulting in possible serious unwanted health outcomes’.
Neuberger gave evidence that in his opinion ER is at risk if she does not have
the proposed treatment, as she is over 70 years
of age, she lives in an aged
care facility, and she has advanced ‘active’ breast cancer and
diabetes. Dr Neuberger opined
ER is a high risk person with a significant risk
of morbidity if she was to get COVID-19.
Any alternative
treatment available to ER
Neuberger gave evidence that there is no cure for the COVID-19 virus. He stated
there is no other alternative treatment to receiving
a vaccination for COVID-19.
Dr Neuberger stated there are currently two COVID-19 vaccinations available in
Australia, that is the
Pfizer/BioNTech and the AstraZeneca. The AstraZeneca
requires 2 injections, 3 months apart. The evidence at hearing was that ER would
receive the Pfizer vaccine. Dr Neuberger indicated Public Health have
recommended the Pfizer vaccination be used for the high risk
group which
includes residents of the RACF as he understands this vaccination creates a
better immune reaction to better prevent
serious consequences from the virus
should she come in contact with it.
Applicant attached the Pfizer Australia COVID-19 Vaccine Consumer Medicine
Information (CMI) which outlines the possible risks
and complications of the
COVID-19 vaccination. The CMI outlined a number of very common side effects
including pain/swelling at
injection site, tiredness, headache, muscle pain,
chills, fever, joint pain, and common side effects such as redness at injection
site and nausea, to uncommon side effects such as enlarged lymph nodes, feeling
unwell, pain in limbs, insomnia, itching at injection
site and more rare side
effects such as temporary one-sided facial drooping and a severe allergic
reaction. The CMI also stated there
could be other side effects not listed here
which may occur in some people. Dr Neuberger stated ER is not on any medications
as steroids or immunosuppressants and was at low risk of experiencing an
acute or severe allergic reaction to the vaccine. He believed
ER would tolerate
well the vaccination but noted the localised side effects may be greater than
what would be experienced from a
flu vaccination.
Whether the
proposed treatment can be postponed on the ground that better treatment may
become available and whether that person is
likely to become capable of
consenting to the treatment
Neuberger opined at some stage there is likely to be a better treatment
available to treat the COVID-19 virus but it is unlikely
to be any time soon. Dr
Neuberger was of the view that the treatment should not be postponed.
was no medical evidence before the Board which indicated any likelihood that ER
is likely to become capable of consenting to
the proposed
Findings as to section 45(2) of the Act
was able to express and communicate her wishes at hearing as to the proposed
treatment. A person who is found to lack the capacity
to understand the nature
and effect of the treatment does not lose their right to express their wishes
and, in this way, contribute
to medical decisions about them. It is required by
virtue of section 45(2)(a) and section 6 of the Act that the person’s
are, if possible, carried into effect. Accordingly the Board gives weight
to ER’s wishes. The Board also gives weight to the
fact no one present at
the hearing was against the proposed medical treatment proceeding.
Board finds that the proposed treatment has the potential of some risk and side
effects, but accepts Dr Neuberger’s evidence
that the risk to ER of having
an adverse reaction is considered small and her risk of a serious reaction like
an allergic reaction
would be rare or unlikely. Further, the Board accepts the
medical evidence that if ER is not vaccinated she remains at risk of getting
COVID-19 and experiencing symptoms which could make her very unwell, and given
her pre-existing medical conditions and age increases
her risk of mortality
should she come in contact with the virus.
Board accepts the medical evidence of the Applicant that there is no benefit in
postponing treatment as it is not likely better
treatment will become available
in the foreseeable future. No alternate treatment is available now.
for the reasons set out above as to ER’s understanding of the nature and
effect of the proposed treatment, the Board
does not find that ER is likely to
become capable of consenting to the proposed treatment. Additionally,
postponement of the proposed
treatment would be contrary to ER’s stated
wishes of ‘lining up with the other residents for the vaccine’ when
Public Health attend [the aged care facility] on the 8 and 20 April 2021.
Board needed to consider whether the treatment should be provided immediately
pursuant to section 45(4) of the Act or whether
it be postponed to allow for the
period of appeal. The substitute Applicant gave evidence that [the aged care
facility] had been
advised that COVID-19 vaccinations would be administered to
residents on site on the 8 and 29 April 2021. COVID-19 vaccinations would
be administered to those who could give consent or who had a substitute decision
maker, which is in Tasmania a Person Responsible
or Board appointed guardian or
Enduring Guardian. The substitute Applicant stated that if ER is unable to
receive the vaccine on
the 8 and 29 April it is more likely than not that she
would have to attend a public health clinic or other site away from [the aged
care facility] which would cause her agitation and distress, particularly as she
rarely came out of her room at [the aged care facility].
There was also concern
expressed that the number of the Pfizer vaccines received by the State were
limited and this vaccine was deemed
more suitable for those likely to experience
serious illness due to COVID-19. The Board gives weight to these reasons.
The Board consents:
medical treatment being provided to ER comprising of COVID-19 vaccination in the
form of two intramuscular injections, three weeks
the medical treatment being provided immediately, pursuant to
section 45(4)
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (258 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter