URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASRPDComm/2009/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:20:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kingborough Planning Scheme 2000 Amendment PSA-2008-3 [2009] TASRPDComm 20 (27 April 2009)
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Planning and Approvals Act 1993
Resource Planning
and Development Commission Act 1997
Decision and Reasons for Decision
KINGBOROUGH PLANNING SCHEME 2000
Draft Amendment 2008-3
Draft amendment
The draft amendment is to rezone part of lots 500 and 501 Redwood Road, Kingston
(CT 56907/500 and 56907/501) from Recreation to
Residential.
Date and Place of Hearing: Thursday 2 April 2009 Kingborough Council Chambers
In accordance with its decision dated 2 March 2009 and in exercise of the power
conferred upon it by s.8 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission
, the Resource Planning and Development Commission hereby delegates
to Mr Robin Nolan:
powers and functions under
sections 40
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
in relation to draft amendment
2008-3 to the Kingborough Planning Scheme 2000; and
connection with the exercise of those powers in performance of those functions,
its powers under Part 3 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Representations
Thirty six representations were received from the
Ms Jennie Holmes
Mr John Mills
Ms Anne Warren
Ms Jean Clarke
P M Roberts
Ms Shirley Hayden
Ms Margaret Broadby
Ms Jenny Weld
Ms Lorraine Amphlett
Mr & Mrs D & V Holvey
Mr Michael Williams
M E Petterd
Mr & Mrs J & L Cannell
Mr & Mrs N & J Russell-Green
Ms Maria Bucher
Mr & Mrs D & J Wikeley
Mr John Langford and Ms Daisy Langford
W J & G L Martyn
A O’Flaherty
Ms Joan Perrett
Ms Nora Durell
Ms Anthea Eddy
One representation - illegible
Issues raised in Representations
Of the 36 representations received, 30 were in support of the draft amendment,
three opposed the draft amendment and the intention
of the remaining 3
representations was unclear. Thirty one representations were presented in a
standard letter format simply indicating
whether or not the representor agreed
with the draft amendment, providing little or no further justification or
explanation.
Representations in support of the draft amendment indicated that Residential
zoning will provide opportunities for additional apartments
and allow the
restoration of community facilities.
The issues raised in the representations opposing the draft amendment
- Concerns regarding the loss of recreation zoned land
and the loss of access to community based facilities;
- Increased residential
development will cause a loss of existing amenity;
- Lack of detail
regarding future development of the site;
- The need for community consultation in planning the redevelopment and
community involvement in management of the recreational facilities;
- Concerns regarding increased traffic on Village Drive and costs associated
with maintenance;
- Public transport in the area should be
- Retention of the age restriction of the retirement village to
over 50 years of age;
- Concerns surrounding ensuring final plans are
complied with.
Council’s Response to the
Representations
Council’s s.39(2) of LUPAA report considered the representations and the
draft amendment. Council resolved that issues raised
in the representations
warranted modification to the draft amendment by including an additional
provision within the Residential
zone for the Kingston area to provide a Desired
Future Character Statement and Strategy for 500/501 Village Drive Redwood
Appearances at the hearing
: Mr D Masters Kingborough Council
: Mr A Goodsell, Town and Country Planning Pty Ltd obo the
Representors:
The Commission heard from the following:
Mrs J Holmes
Mr C Halloran
Mr P Roberts.
Mrs M Hodgson (interested person who asked to be heard)
In addition Mr D Wikeley, Mr R Goodwin, Mr M Brahan, Mrs J Clarke, Ms D
Langford, Mr D Barrell, and Mrs J Barrel were in attendance.
Commission’s assessment of the draft amendment
The draft amendment
The draft amendment is to rezone lot 500 and part of lot 501 Village Drive from
Recreation to Residential.
Site and locality
Redwood Village is an 8 hectare private retirement village located southwest of
central Kingston. The village was granted planning
approval in 1985. The
original concept included approximately 400 dwelling units, nursing home and
community and recreational facilities.
The community and recreational facilities
are located on lots 500 and 501 Village Drive which, in part, form the site
the draft amendment.
Frontage for the Redwood Village site is Redwood Road. Village Drive and the
internal access drives comprise a network of private
roads. Village Drive is
part of Lot 500. Strata lots within Redwood Village have rights of carriage way
and rights of drainage over
Village Drive. Village Drive is managed and
maintained by the various corporate bodies comprising Redwood Village.
Lot 500 is located centrally within Redwood Village and is adjacent to lot 501
which is an irregular shaped lot that extends southwest,
parallel to the
boundary of the village. Lots 500 and 501 are zoned Recreation and have a
combined area of 3.5 hectares. The surrounding
land is zoned Residential. The
draft amendment proposes to rezone lot 500 and part of lot 501 comprising 1.3
hectares of the existing
Recreation zoned land to Residential.
The development on lots 500 and 501 includes a golf course, tennis courts,
bowling greens and a community complex with indoor swimming
pool, meeting rooms
and commercial kitchen. The complex was owned and operated by the RSL from
1996-2003, since that time the building
has been closed and the associated
outdoor facilities have not been maintained. The facilities on lots 500 and 501
are in a state
of disrepair. The purpose of the draft amendment is to
facilitate the redevelopment of the site.
Consideration of issues raised by the Representors
Loss of recreational and community facilities
It would appear that the original concept of the Village comprising housing and
shared access to a wide range of recreational facilities
disassembled with the
recreational facilities being placed on separate strata lots that were
subsequently sold to other parties.
There remains an expectation by the
residents that they should have access rights to the facilities. However, there
are no mechanisms
by which the residents’ right of access, perceived or
otherwise, can be undeniably restored. It is acknowledged that the site
significant community values and the suggested modifications to the draft
amendment endeavour to provide, so far as practicable,
that community uses
remain on a site that is privately owned.
The representors’ view that retaining recreation zoning will assist in the
rehabilitation of the recreational facilities has
not been the experience with
facilities lying idle since 2003. Similarly, it is not for the approval of the
draft amendment to be
conditional on the restoration of the recreational
facilities. The zoning of the land is inconsequential to the current state of
the community facility, other than the residential zone provides for mixed use
and development of the site providing the potential
to financially supplement
the restoration of the facilities and offers opportunities for their ongoing
social and economic viability.
While Recreational zoning or the proposed Residential zoning will not
necessarily secure the retention, restoration or access to
the recreational
facilities, there is merit in Council’s view that residential zoning
provides greater scope for the reuse
of the site and potentially the
availability of some of the facilities previously enjoyed by some of the
Roads, Traffic and Access
Representors were concerned that redevelopment of the site will increase traffic
on Village Drive which in turn will increase maintenance
and repair costs for
The traffic generation as a consequence of residential zoning or retention of
recreational zoning cannot be assessed until specific
use and development is
known, nor will either zoning escape the consequence of the Village being
established based on private roads
and the strata unit holders sharing the cost
of maintenance repairs. Residential zoning however will mean redevelopment of
is oriented to residential amenity considerations.
Loss of residential amenity
Redevelopment of the site for other than recreational or industrial uses can
proceed under Recreational zoning. In contrast Residential
zoning provides
greater scope for protecting and improving residential amenity than is otherwise
available under the current zoning.
Other issues
Representor concerns about what is proposed for the site and consultation in
relation to those proposals are matters for subsequent
permit applications.
Issues on restoration of public transport, age restrictions on residents and
revised covenants on titles are
not matters for the planning scheme to
Planning scheme provisions
Clause 10.3 of the scheme contains the status of use classes in the Recreation
zone as follows.
10.3.1 Planning permit required Use Classes in this zone
Environmental
Business and
10.3.2 Prohibited Use Classes in this zone are:
Residential
Clause 5.3 of the scheme contains the status of use classes in the Residential
zone as follows.
Planning permit required Use Classes in this zone
Residential
Environmental
Business and
Prohibited Use Classes in this zone are:
The draft amendment would allow residential use classes on the site and prohibit
primary industries and industrial uses. The status
of other use classes are the
same in both zones.
Development standards in the Recreation zone are principally confined to maximum
building height and building setbacks. By comparison
the standards for
development in the Residential zone are comprehensive for residential
development and residential amenity.
In addition to the zone standards Council has recommended the inclusion of a
site specific Desired Future Character Statement and
Strategy in response to the
representations seeking retention of a mix of facilities on the site.
Council’s recommended additional
Desired Future Character Statement and
Strategy is as
Desired Future Character Statement
The properties identified as Lots 500/501 Village Drive are important in the
provision of commercial and community facilities to
the Redwood Village
locality. Future development of the site must not be solely residential and must
allow continued provision of
community, business and recreational
facilities.
New development should incorporate a mix of residential, community and
commercial uses that provide services and recreational facilities
Redwood Village locality. Lots 500 and 501 Village Drive will serve as a focal
point for community activity for the Redwood
Village community. In planning for
future use and development on this site the needs of future Redwood Village
residents must be
a priority and facilities for their use are to be incorporated
into any future development at the site.
The recommended Desired Future Character Statement and Strategy provides context
for assessing developments for the site that would
provide for a range of
residential, community and commercial uses. The additional provision is
accepted subject to modification
to rationalise the statement and strategy.
Application of State Policies
State Coastal Policy 1996.
The site is not within 1km from the coast and therefore the
State Coastal
Policy 1996
is not applicable.
State Policy on Water Quality Management 1997
There is no evidence to suggest that the draft amendment will impact on water
quality as the site is fully serviced.
The draft amendment is assessed as being prepared in accordance with the Policy.
Interim State Policy on the Protection of Agricultural Land 2008
The draft amendment does not involve agricultural land as defined in the
The national environmental protection measures are not applicable to the draft
Schedule 1 Objectives
Part 1 Objectives
(a) to promote the sustainable development of natural and
physical resources and the maintenance of ecological processes and genetic
The area subject to the
rezoning has been modified from its original bushland state. Although some
individual native trees remain,
the draft amendment is not considered to
threaten ecological processes and genetic diversity.
(b) to provide for the fair, orderly and sustainable use and development of
air, land and water.
The draft amendment provides for the fair, orderly and sustainable use of land
that is suitably serviced and located for residential
(c) to encourage public involvement in resource management and
The application has been through processes with public involvement under
(d) to facilitate economic development in accordance with the objectives set
out in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c).
The draft amendment facilitates the economic viability of the complex by
allowing a mixed use development to proceed on the site
and is in accordance
with the above objectives.
(e) to promote the sharing of responsibility for resource management and
planning between the different spheres of Government, the
community and industry
in the State.
The draft amendment has involved the sharing of responsibility for resource
management and planning between different spheres of
government and the
Part 2 Objectives
The part 2 objectives are
furthered principally in terms of establishing a system of planning instruments
to be the principal way
of setting objectives, policies and controls for the
use, development and protection of land and to secure a pleasant, efficient
safe working, living and recreational environment.
In accordance with s.40(1) of LUPAA, the draft amendment, representations and
Council’s report have been considered. The draft
amendment will allow for
residential use for the site within the Redwood Village and the prospect of all
or some of the existing
recreation facilities being retained and available for
use by the Village residents. The rezoning from Recreation to Residential
demonstrates planning merit and should be approved subject to
modification.
Pursuant to
Section 41(ab)
Land Use Planning
and Approvals Act 1993
the Commission modifies the draft amendment as set
out in Annexure A and gives its approval to the draft amendment as modified
to Section 42 of the Act.
Robin Nolan
Resource Planning and Development Commission.
27 April 2009
Annexure A: The modified amendment
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Kingborough Planning Scheme 2000
Draft Amendment 2008/3
(i) The ordinance is amended as follows:
Insert the following in section
Desired Future Character Statement
The properties identified as Lots 500 and 501 Village Drive Kingston are
important in the provision of facilities to the Redwood
Village locality. Future
development of the site must not be solely residential and must make provision
for community, business and
recreational facilities.
Lots 500 and 501 Village Drive will serve as a focal point for community
activity for the Redwood Village community. Development
should incorporate a mix
of residential, community and commercial uses that provide services and
recreational facilities for the
Redwood Village locality.
In planning for use or development on this site the needs of the Redwood Village
residents must be a priority and facilities for
their use are to be incorporated
into any future development on the site.
(ii) the Plans are amended as attached.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (137 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter