URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASGAB/2020/48.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
UI (Consent to Special Medical Treatment) [2020] TASGAB 48 (2 December 2020)
UI (Consent to Special Medical Treatment)
[2020] TASGAB 48
HEARING DATE(S):
28 April 2020, 15 May 2020, 11 September 2020, 18 September 2020
DATE OF ORDERS:
2 December 2020
DATE OF STATEMENT OF REASONS:
20 November 2020
Ms R. Holder, President
Mr C. Lee, Member
Dr M Fasnacht, Member
APPLICATION
Application for Consent to Special Medical Treatment –
Sterilisation
CATCHWORDS:
Sterilisation; capacity to give consent to the treatment; meaning of
general nature and effect of proposed treatment
LEGISLATION CITED:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Guardianship Act 1987
CASES CITED:
C v Guardianship and Administration Board
[2002] TASSC 29
B v Mental Health Tribunal
[2020] TASSC 10
Hunter and New England Area Health Service v A
[2009] NSWSC
PBU & NJE v Mental Health Tribunal
[2018] VSC 564
[2015] NSWCAGD 54
Secretary, Department of Health and Community Services v J.W.B. and
S.M.B. (Marion’s Case)
[1992] HCA 15
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication
STATEMENT OF REASONS
Guardianship and Administration Board (‘the Board’) heard and
determined an Application for Consent to Special Medical
Treatment dated 21
February 2020 (‘the Application’) for Ms UI.
Board determines that Ms UI is a person to whom
Guardianship
and Administration Act
(‘the Act’) applies.
Board gives consent for Ms UI to undergo the proposed treatment that is a tubal
ligation under general anaesthetic.
UI is a 37 year old single woman who lives in supported group home accommodation
with [the Supported Accommodation Facility].
UI is the mother of two children, aged 12 and 13 who live with their father and
who spend time with Ms UI, usually each fortnight.
UI enjoys a relationship with her father, who at the time of the hearing was
away. Ms UI indicated her father was not aware of
the Application before the
undisputed medical evidence provides that Ms UI developed fungal meningitis on 4
January 2017 and was admitted to the Royal Hobart
Hospital (‘RHH’)
in a reduced conscious state. Following neuro-imaging and an MRI brain scan, Ms
UI was diagnosed with
an acquired brain injury.
Foley, neuropsychologist at the RHH states:
the functional
consequences of this injury were significant and Ms UI sustained global
cognitive deficits, reduced balance and coordination
(including gross and fine
motor skills) and speech impairments (voice initiation and breathing
coordination). She required a prolonged
hospital stay and extensive inpatient
and outpatient rehabilitation.
UI was discharged from the RHH requiring support services to meet her needs. Ms
UI lived at [the Supported Accommodation Facility]
initially, before moving to
[another Supported Accommodation Facility].
Application for Guardianship and Administration was made, given it was
considered Ms UI did not have capacity to make lifestyle
or financial decisions.
After hearing the Application for Guardianship and Administration on 28 April
2017, the Board made a twelve
month plenary guardianship order and a plenary
administration order for Ms UI, appointing the Public Guardian and Public
respectively.
26 April 2018 after hearing a Review of Order Application the Board continued
the administration order until 25 April 2021. The
Board varied the guardianship
order and limited the order, appointing the Public Guardian to make decisions
pertaining to where Ms
UI is to live; providing consent to the provision of
support services and negotiating and putting into effect arrangements for
until 25 April 2021.
Guardian, Ms Russell from the Office of the Public Guardian (the Guardian),
states she has been Ms UI’s delegated Guardian
since September 2017.
UI moved to supported group home accommodation with [the Supported Accommodation
Facility] in July 2019, which was consented to
by her Guardian.
evidence before the Board is that Ms UI has a history of persistent pelvic pain
predominantly on her left side. This issue was
first raised by the disability
accommodation provider with the Guardian.
UI consulted her General Practitioner and was subsequently referred by her
General Practitioner to the RHH Gynaecological Clinic
(the Clinic). In May 2019
she attended the Clinic and was reviewed by Obstetrics and Gynaecology
Consultant, Dr Greg Bower.
Guardian gave evidence that she was contacted by Ms UI’s previous
disability accommodation provider after the appointment
indicating Ms UI had
been recommended for tubal ligation and had been provided with paper work
pertaining to the procedure. The Guardian
stated she wrote to Dr Bower setting
out the requirements for special treatment under the Act and raised the
possibility of needing
to make an Application under the Act. The Guardian
received no response. The Guardian then attended an appointment with Ms UI and
her General Practitioner. It is understood Ms UI’s General Practitioner
referred Ms UI back to the Clinic for further assessment.
January 2020 Ms UI attended the Clinic and met with consultant Dr Diane Keating
for assessment. Tubal ligation was again discussed.
Ms UI underwent a pelvic
ultrasound, which identified an adnexal cyst, which within a few months
self-resolved. A diagnostic laparoscopy
was recommended to explore the cause of
Ms UI’s pelvic pain. This has not occurred, but is intended to occur at
the same time
as the proposed treatment.
January 2020 the Guardian received a call from Dr Sue Keating concerning Ms
UI’s capacity to consent to the proposed treatment,
the guardianship order
and whether she needed to make application to the Board. The Guardian referred
to a neuropsychology assessment
report by Dr Caitlin Foley on Ms UI in 2017 and
suggested a further psychology assessment may need to be completed.
UI again attended the Clinic on 21 February 2020 and attended upon the
Applicant, and tubal ligation was again discussed, including
the risks of the
procedure and other alternatives to treatment. After this consultation, the
Applicant made the Application to the
Board for Consent to Special Treatment.
the care of her General Practitioner, Ms UI has been prescribed a number of
forms of contraception, including oral contraceptives,
Implanon, and a Mirena
intrauterine device. For the last 18 months she has been prescribed Depo Provera
injections which is a hormone
given every three months which has resulted in her
not menstruating.
the course of her evidence Ms UI also stated she frequently feels depressed and
has done so for the last seven years.
The Hearing
Board held a Directions Hearing on 28 April 2020. A direction was made pursuant
to section 17(2) of the Act that the Public Guardian
investigate and report to
the Board as to Ms UI’s understanding of the proposed medical treatment,
the practical effect of
having it and her views and wishes about the
Application. Further the Public Guardian was asked to report on Ms UI’s
wishes and understanding as to pregnancy, menstruation, contraception and
protective behaviours.
Board part-heard the Application on 15 May 2020 and adjourned the matter to
enable further medical assessment and reporting by
Dr Foley as to Ms UI’s
capacity to consent to the proposed treatment.
further adjournment on 11 September 2020, given the unavailability of a witness
to give evidence, the Board continued to hear
the Application on 18 September
attendance at the hearing on 18 September 2020 were:
UI, in person;
Jacqueline Berry, the Applicant, by telephone;
Victor Murray, Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania (LACT), representing Ms UI in
Sarah Campbell, LACT, assisting Mr Murray in person;
Maddy Russell, the Guardian, in person;
Caitlin Foley, neuropsychology registrar at the RHH, by telephone;
EC, accommodation services, [the Supported Accommodation Facility], in person;
DE, support worker, in person.
Board had before it the following documents:
Guardianship
and Administration Orders dated 26 April 2018;
Application dated 21 February 2020;
Care Professional Report (‘HCPR’) of Dr Jacqueline Berry dated 24
February 2020;
Neuropsychological
Assessment Summary of Dr Caitlin Foley dated 5 February 2018;
Neuropsychological
Assessment Report of Dr Caitlin Foley dated 22 April 2020;
Order to adjourn the Application dated 28 April 2020;
of the Office of the Public Guardian dated 28 April 2020;
of the Office of the Public Guardian dated 30 April 2020;
Order to adjourn the Application dated 15 May 2020;
Neuropsychological
Report of Dr Caitlin Foley dated 11 August 2020;
submissions filed on behalf of Ms UI by the Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania;
between the Guardian and Ms UI.
the conclusion of the hearing the Board reserved its decision.
Board has produced this Statement of Reasons of its own motion, rather than at
the request of a party to the proceedings.
Legislation
6 of the Act applies to a person with a disability who is incapable of giving
consent to the carrying out of medical and dental
treatment, whether or not the
person is a represented person. Ms UI is a represented person as defined in
section 3 of the Act, as
there are guardianship and administration orders in
force for her.
section 36 of the Act a person is incapable of giving consent to the carrying
out of medical treatment if the person –
(a) is incapable of
understanding the general nature and effect of the proposed treatment; or
(b) is incapable of indicating whether or not he or she consents or does not
consent to the carrying out of the treatment.
Act prescribes that if a person is incapable of giving consent to special
treatment then under section 45 of the Act, only the
Board may provide
treatment’ is defined in section 3 of the Act as including ‘any
treatment that is intended, or is reasonably
likely, to have the effect of
rendering permanently infertile the person on whom it is carried
person who the Board is satisfied has a proper interest in the matter may make
application to the Board for the carrying out of
medical treatment on a person
to whom Part 6 applies (section 44 of the Act).
45 of the Act provides:
(1) On hearing an application for its
consent to the carrying out of medical or dental treatment the Board may consent
to the carrying
out of the medical or dental treatment if it is satisfied that
(a) the medical or dental treatment is otherwise lawful; and
(b) that person is incapable of giving consent; and
(c) the medical or dental treatment would be in the best interests of that
(2) For the purposes of determining whether any medical or dental treatment
would be in the best interests of a person to whom this
Part applies, matters to
be taken into account by the Board include –
(a) the wishes of that person, so far as they can be ascertained; and
(b) the consequences to that person if the proposed treatment is not carried
(c) any alternative treatment available to that person; and
(d) whether the proposed treatment can be postponed on the ground that better
treatment may become available and whether that person
is likely to become
capable of consenting to the treatment; and
(f) any other matters prescribed by the regulations.
10. The Board must also balance the principles in section 6 of the Act for
every function or power conferred by the Act, and these
(a) the means which is the least restrictive of a person's freedom of
decision and action as is possible in the circumstances is adopted;
(b) the best interests of a person with a disability or in respect of whom an
application is made under this Act are promoted; and
(c) the wishes of a person with a disability or in respect of whom an
application is made under this Act are, if possible, carried
into effect.
Person with a proper interest
outlined above, Ms UI attended numerous appointments/assessments with
consultants at the Clinic. Ms UI also attended a consultation
with the Applicant
at the Clinic on 21 February 2020. The Applicant subsequently made the
Application to the Board seeking the Board’s
consent for Ms UI to have
special treatment. The Board is satisfied that for the purposes of section 44(1)
of the Act, the Applicant
has a ‘proper interest’ in this
Application. She has treated Ms UI as a medical practitioner and intends to
the treatment.
Proposed treatment
Applicant’s written and oral evidence is that the proposed treatment would
be a tubal ligation. The procedure would require
Ms UI to be under general
anaesthetic and would be performed as keyhole surgery. The Applicant recommends
removal of the fallopian
tubes rather than clipping them, where there is no
potential for reversal of the procedure at a later date. The tubal ligation does
not affect the ovaries and so does not cease Ms UI’s menstruation. The
tubal ligation would result in Ms UI being rendered
permanently infertile.
the same time a laparoscopy for the purpose of investigation of Ms UI’s
left sided lower abdomen/pelvic pain would occur
and treatment would follow if
there was a clear cause of the pain. The laparoscopic procedure could be
consented to by her Guardian,
Responsible.
Board finds for the purpose of section 45(1)(a) of the Act, that where consent
exists, the proposed medical treatment is ‘lawful
treatment.’
Evidence – Capacity
issue of whether Ms UI is a person to whom Part 6 of the Act applies, and in
particular whether Ms UI has capacity to consent
to the proposed medical
treatment, was a significant issue under consideration at hearing.
are two bases provided in section 36(2) of the Act upon which it might be
concluded a person is incapable of giving consent.
Section 36(2)(a), whether Ms
UI is incapable of understanding the general nature and effect of the proposed
was the issue at hearing. As is apparent from her evidence set
out below, Ms UI is capable of indicating she consents to the carrying
the treatment.
Applicant’s evidence
Application has been filed on the basis that the Applicant does not believe Ms
UI has capacity to consent to the proposed treatment.
Applicant stated Ms UI had discussed sterilisation with her General Practitioner
and raised it at a Clinic consultation in 2019.
Tubal ligation had been
discussed at other clinic sessions with consultants prior to Ms UI consulting
with the Applicant on 21 February
Applicant stated that in the medical notes other consultants had raised the
issue as to whether Ms UI had capacity to consent
to the proposed treatment.
Applicant stated that at her consultation with Ms UI she went through with her
the proposed treatment, the risks of the proposed
treatment and discussed other
alternative forms of contraception with her.
Applicant stated Ms UI had expressed to her she wanted to proceed with the
proposed treatment so she can menstruate regularly.
Applicant indicated from the medical notes and from her own discussions with
her, it was clear Ms UI had consistently expressed
a wish not to have any more
children, as she believed her family is complete. Ms UI had stated to the
Applicant she recognised she
has limited ability to care for any more children.
Applicant stated that after assessing Ms UI she consulted with Dr Bower and they
determined an Application to the Board should
the Application, the Applicant states Ms UI is unable to adequately comprehend
the risks of the proposed treatment, the benefits
of the proposed treatment and
is unable to consider the alternatives to the proposed treatment.
hearing the Applicant stated she is concerned Ms UI does not understand the
nature and effect of the procedure. In her opinion
Ms UI does not understand the
consequences of the treatment, for example, that the procedure may not fix her
abdominal pain. The
Applicant stated Ms UI does not appear to understand that
removing hormonal contraception may contribute to more pain, that is, her
periods may be heavy as per the notes of her General Practitioner and may
themselves cause discomfort or pain.
Applicant stated that despite going through the risks of the proposed treatment
with Ms UI as simply as possible, she does not
believe Ms UI understands the
‘surgical risks of treatment but appeared to understand the anaesthetic
risk.’ The Applicant
stated by way of example: ‘talking with her I
don’t think she could understand that if there was injury to the abdomen
then you may end up with a stoma. I went through that with her in the simplest
way.’ In her evidence she outlined that there
could be damage to the
organs and structures within the abdominal cavity including the bladder,
ureters, the bowel and blood vessels.
She stated there was a very small risk of
death and opined that is was highly unlikely that serious complications would
Applicant stated Ms UI had tried most forms of contraception. She had discussed
with her alternative treatments including the
Mirena, Implanon, estrogen
containing pill and the Depo Provera but not the progesterone containing pill or
the barrier method as
she did not believe these forms of contraception were
appropriate options for Ms UI. Ms UI continued to express a wish for tubal
Dr Caitlin Foley’s evidence
Caitlin Foley in her report dated 22 April 2020 noted ‘three brief
neurological assessments on the 29
of March 2017, 7
June 2017 and 14
of December 2017, to monitor her recovery over
time,’ were completed and ‘[h]er performance across all time points
characterised by global cognitive impairments, with most scores falling
within the ‘borderline’ to ‘extremely low’
range for her
neurological assessment on 20 April 2020 Dr Foley reported:
regard to her cognitive function, examination of Ms UI’s scores and
qualitative performance across time suggests possible
improvements, in semantic
verbal fluency and memory for contextualized verbal information. Other skills
remain unchanged; she continues
to experience strengths in her auditory
attention span and basic language skills (naming) whereas processing speed,
visuospatial/constructional
skills, memory for unstructured verbal information
and executive functions remain poor and mostly fall within
‘borderline’
and ‘extremely low’ ranges.
Foley reviewed Ms UI on 17 July 2020 specifically to provide a report to the
Board. In her report dated 11 August 2020 she referenced
that she had begun the
assessment by determining Ms UI recognised there were two procedures, the
diagnostic laparoscopy and the tubal
ligation, that could be performed
separately or together.
Foley opines:
Ms UI’s responses to capacity questions
indicated limited understanding of the nature and effect of tubal sterilisation.
Specifically,
her reasoning as to the purpose of the procedure was medically
inaccurate and conflated with investigations and treatment for the
pelvic pain (i.e. she believe the fallopian tubes were the cause of her pain and
tubal sterilisation would thus reduce or
eliminate it). While she recognised the
diagnostic laparoscopy and tubal sterilisation as separate medical procedures,
she appears
to see them both as designed to address her pain, and I suspect they
have become associated as they were discussed simultaneously
during the same
gynaecology appointments. Her understanding of the actual procedure was also
limited and there were two key points
of misunderstanding that, once clarified,
appeared to change her mind and she indicated that she would not consent to
them. These
were (1) she thought the fallopian tubes would be clipped, not
removed, and (2) she did not realise an instrument would be inserted
through the
vagina. She made it clear that she did not want either of these things to
happen. Ms UI did understand that tubal sterilisation
was intended to stop her
being able to become pregnant, and this was the desired outcome for her;
however, she did not have a good
understanding of the alternatives (e.g.
continuing with the Depo Provera injections, trying other forms of hormonal
contraception,
or using barrier protection) and showed little evidence of having
thought through and weighed up the alternatives. Her current form
contraception
is considered effective protection against pregnancy, and her reasons for
choosing tubal sterilisation over this current
method was due to mistaken
beliefs that tubal sterilisation would directly (via clipping fallopian tubes)
or indirectly (via recommencing
periods) reduce her pain. Therefore, Ms
UI’s understanding of why tubal sterilisation was proposed, the mechanisms
of the procedure,
and her reasoning behind choosing this option were based on an
erroneous association between the procedure and her chronic pelvic
result, I do not feel that she adequately understands the
Unsurprisingly, this misunderstanding has influenced her perceptions of the
of the treatment, as she falsely believes that her pain is likely
to improve, and this is a key motivating factor for having tubal
sterilisation
in general, as well as for wanting to have it right now. I do feel that she
fully appreciates the tubal sterilisation
will permanently stop her being able
to become pregnant, however my concern is that she has not reasonably considered
alternative,
less invasive and less permanent options for establishing the same
desired effect. She said that she had not considered tubal sterilisation
it was suggested in a gynaecology appointment, and did not recall having
discussed any other options. I also do not feel that
Ms UI appreciates the full
spectrum of risks associated with the surgery, or correctly understands the
implications of not having
the procedure (e.g. that her pain will still be
explored and addressed via diagnostic laparoscopy and she will continue to be
from pregnancy with the contraceptive injections). Overall, I
don’t feel that she reasonably understands the
of the tubal
sterilisation procedure and has adequately weighed up the relevant risks and
benefits in arriving at her decision.
It is my opinion, therefore, that Ms UI does not have capacity to consent to
tubal sterilisation at this time.
hearing Dr Foley clarified that Ms UI could not identify why the alternative
forms of treatment were not suitable without significant
leading and prompting
by her. She indicated when she asked if oral contraceptives were a treatment
option instead of the proposed
treatment Ms UI replied no, but could not
describe why.
LACT– Ms UI’s solicitors
UI’s solicitors submitted written submissions to the Board prior to the
hearing on 18 September 2020. The submissions outlined
the requirements of the
Act in relation to medical treatment, consideration of the term
‘understanding the nature and effect
of treatment’ and identifying
case law in relation to capacity and an analysis of some of the evidence before
the Board, primarily
Dr Foley’s report dated 11 August 2020.
UI’s solicitors stated in the written submissions:
issue is the ability to understand
in a general sense
the material facts,
and the reasonably likely effects, including the ability to weigh outcomes
against each other.
Ms UI should not be held to a higher standard of decision-making than other
members of the community....
Ms UI has a disability that affects her cognitive abilities. Despite this,
her capacity in respect of any particular decision not
covered by an existing
determination must be presumed.
The evidence before the Board is not, with respect to Ms Foley’s expert
opinion, sufficient to dislodge the presumption in favour
of capacity. The
conclusions reached by Ms Foley are not accepted by Ms UI.
The Board is required to determine the material facts and apply the law to
those facts. The Board should therefore give Ms Foley’s
conclusions
little weight, even if the factual propositions are wholly accepted....
UI’s solicitor submits that Ms UI has a ‘generally good
understanding of the nature of the procedure and its primary
consequence.’
Further it was submitted Ms UI has an ‘adequate understanding of the
risks’ of the proposed treatment.
submissions also refer to Ms UI’s motivation for the proposed treatment
being birth control, experience of menstruation
and reduction in persistent
pelvic pain. It is submitted birth control is the dominant motivation and the
other reasons should not
impact on the determination of whether Ms UI
understands the nature and effect of the proposed treatment.
Foley was not questioned by Ms UI’s solicitors at hearing.
UI’s solicitors did not tender any alternative medical evidence on Ms
UI’s behalf.
was submitted by Ms UI’s solicitor that the Board should find Ms UI
capable of giving consent to the proposed treatment and
the application should
be dismissed.
The Guardian
Guardian provided an Investigation Report and copies of emails she sent to Ms
UI, and Ms UI’s responses, to the Board. The
Guardian questioned Ms UI by
email and met with her once in order to complete a report to the Board.
relation to her understanding of the proposed treatment, the risks, benefits and
impact on her, Ms UI stated she would be ‘...under
anaesthetic 40 minutes,
they make a small incision just below my belly button and tie my tubes....I can
have unprotected sex... I’ll
get my periods. ...There is a risk with any
surgery.’ When prompted she added; ‘I might bleed out’ and
of infection’ and ‘I hope for no more pain.’
Guardian’s report states Ms UI does not want any more children and hopes
the procedure will help with her abdominal pain.
Ms UI wants tubal ligation
because it is permanent and wants to menstruate normally. The Guardian opines
‘she seemed to demonstrate,
in the course of our discussion, that she had
considered in a reasonable way the nature and effect of the proposed
treatment.’
Guardian submitted at hearing it was her belief Ms UI could be ‘supported
to make the decision herself.’
Ms UI’s evidence at
UI gave oral evidence at hearing on 15 May 2020 and 18 September 2020. Ms UI
gave evidence that the benefit of the proposed treatment
was so she was
‘able to have sex.’ Ms UI also stated she wouldn’t be able to
have more children and indicated she
didn’t want more children because she
found it hard enough looking after herself.
UI described the treatment as a cut under her belly button and ‘move the
tubes around and search around.’ Ms UI indicated
the operation would be an
hour or two and she would be in bed two weeks after the operation.
asked by the Board if there were any risks having the proposed treatment Ms UI
stated ‘there isn’t’ and then
added there is ‘a risk in
every operation under anaesthetic.’ When asked if anything particular
could go wrong with the
surgery she responded ‘I don’t think
so.’ The Board put to her that Dr Berry had said there is a small chance
other organs could get damaged by the instruments and she responded
‘I don’t care.’ She then indicated ‘nothing
wrong.’ When asked if the doctor had gone through what could go wrong, Ms
UI responded she had but could not remember
what she had said. She expressed she
would be ‘sore afterwards’.
UI gave evidence that she wanted the treatment to help her pain which she said
is like a bad period pain which is there all the
time and which is on the left
side of her body. She stated the pain has existed for over two years. In
response to the Board’s
questioning Ms UI stated fixing the pain is more
important to her than not having children. Ms UI stated fixing the pain was more
important to her than fixing the side effects of the Depo Provera, which she
described to be weight gain. At the hearing on 15 May
2020 Ms UI’s main
focus and reason for having the proposed treatment was to ‘fix the
pain’ and ‘have sex’.
hearing on 18 September 2020 Ms UI stated the proposed treatment would result in
her having her fallopian tubes tied and didn’t
care if they were clipped
response to questioning, Ms UI stated the proposed treatment is the best option
for her because she is worried she will get pregnant
and won’t be able to
raise a child. When asked about her current contraception she is using, she
responded ‘I don’t
bleed.’ She confirmed this is the main
reason for doing things differently. She asserted ‘bleeding is a release
from her body’ which is important to her. She identified that
the ‘needle’ however stopped her from getting pregnant.
what the other options apart from the needle to stop her from getting pregnant
are, she stated ‘I don’t think
there is anything.’
hearing Ms UI stated ‘it is my life. My body. I don’t have control
over my life.’ When asked how the procedure
gives her control over her
life she responded: ‘I can have sex whenever I want.’ When asked
how that is different to
now, Ms UI responded ‘I don’t bleed. I want
to feel like a lady.’
UI said she was on oral contraceptives when she was in her teens. She said she
is now a heavy smoker. She indicated the Implanon
made her feel suicidal, as did
the Mirena. She said being on the Depo Provera makes her feel she needs to
UI stated she could not remember how it felt menstruating as it has been too
long since she had a period. Further she indicated
she still wanted the
treatment to proceed even though she was not aware instruments would be inserted
through her vagina, and had
told Dr Foley she did not want this to happen.
Application of Part 6 of the Act
person is incapable of giving consent to medical treatment if the person:
(a) is incapable of understanding the general nature and effect of
the proposed treatment; or
(b) is incapable of indicating whether or not he or she consents or does not
consent to the carrying out of the treatment.
is limited superior court authority concerning the application and meaning of
section 36 of the Act. In
C v Guardianship and Administration Board
[2002] TASSC 29
the then Justice Blow makes the point (at
[3]) that the findings on the evidence in relation to each of these aspects may
be different
to the other. The provision is concerned with the treatment as it
relates to the individual concerned, not with the effect of treatment
patients in general. His Honour also notes (at para [6]) that the word
“general” ‘does no more than refer to
an understanding in
general terms, rather than an understanding as to matters of detail.’
B v Mental Health Tribunal
[2020] TASSC 10
Chief Justice Blow hearing an appeal from
a decision of the Mental Health Tribunal (Tas) states at paragraph
There is a presumption that an adult is capable of deciding
whether to consent to or to refuse medical treatment. However, the presumption
is rebuttable. In considering the question of capacity, it is necessary to take
into account both the importance of the decision
and the ability of the
individual to receive, retain and process information given to him or her that
bears on the decision.
common law, the presumption exists that adults have the capacity to make
decisions that affect their own lives unless that presumption
the Act does not state it, the presumption of capacity must be the starting
point from which Part 6 of the Act applies. Part
6 would not apply if a person
had capacity to consent to the carrying out of medical treatment.
Hunter and New England Area Health Service v A
[2009] NSWSC 761
the Court sets out the common law
23 There is a presumption of capacity, whereby an adult
"is presumed to have the capacity to consent to or to refuse medical treatment
unless and until that presumption is rebutted"(see Butler-Sloss LJ in Re MB
[1997] 2 FCR 514
24 In this context, it is necessary to bear in mind that there is no sharp
dichotomy between capacity on the one hand and want of
capacity on the other.
There is a scale, running from capacity at one end through reduced capacity to
lack of capacity at the other.
In assessing whether a person has capacity to
make a decision, the sufficiency of the capacity must take into account the
of the decision (as Lord Donaldson pointed out in Re T at 113). The
capacity required to make a contract to buy a cup of coffee may
be present where
the capacity to decide to give away one's fortune is not.
Butler-Sloss LJ said in
at 553 – 554, in deciding whether a
person has capacity to make a particular decision, the ultimate question is
whether that
person suffers from some impairment or disturbance of mental
functioning so as to render him or her incapable of making the decision.
will occur if the person:
(1) is unable to comprehend and retain the information which is material to
the decision, in particular as to the consequences of
the decision;
(2) is unable to use and weigh the information as part of the process
of making the decision.
(7) In considering the question of capacity, it is necessary to
take into account both the importance of the decision and the ability
individual to receive, retain and process information given to him or her that
bears on the decision.
consideration of the common law position was also set out in
PBU & NJE v
Mental Health Tribunal
[2018] VSC 564
at paragraph 157, as referred to by Ms
UI’s solicitors in their submissions.
PBU & NJE v Mental Health Tribunal
[2018] VSC 564
Justice Bell found
that the capacity threshold is a ‘relatively low’ threshold which
requires that a patient ‘understands
and is able to remember and use or
weigh the relevant information, and communicate a decision, in terms of the
general nature, purpose
and effect of the treatment, and should not be an
inquiry into whether the person can make a sensible, rational or well-considered
decision’ (at [182]).
[2015] NSWCAGD 54 the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal applied a
common law meaning to ‘capable of giving consent to the
carrying on of
medical treatment’ and stated that the Tribunal need to make findings as
to the following matters:
The nature of the proposed treatment.
The effect of the proposed treatment.
Is Miss UMG incapable of understanding the general nature and effect of the
proposed treatment, in that, is she unable to comprehend
and retain the
information which is material to the decision, in particular as to the
consequences of the decision, or is she unable
to use and weigh the information
as part of the process of making the decision.
indicated by Ms UI’s solicitors, the
Guardianship Act 1987
South Wales has an identical provision to that of
hearing, Ms UI was able to state the proposed treatment as outlined in paragraph
36 above, was to ‘tie’ her fallopian
tubes. She understood the
procedure would be under general anaesthetic. At the hearing she described the
treatment as ‘a cut
under her belly button and move the tubes around and
Guardian and Dr Foley. Ms UI was also able to confirm to Dr Foley that the
proposed treatment is keyhole surgery performed as day
surgery. She was not able
to identify that the proposed treatment would result in a cutting and removal of
her fallopian tubes rather
than a clipping. Further she was not aware until her
meeting with Dr Foley on the 17 July 2020, that instruments would be inserted
via the uterus into her vagina so pelvic organs can be manipulated. In respect
of this Ms UI was adamant when she met with Dr Foley
she did not want either of
these situations to happen as it was too invasive. However at hearing on the 18
September 2020 she stated
in respect of the instruments ‘I don’t
really want it, but if it has to happen, I guess so.’
UI demonstrated a very basic understanding of the proposed treatment and how it
would be conducted. There were some factual inaccuracies
in her evidence as to
how the surgery would be conducted and the length of her recovery. The Board
needs to be satisfied Ms UI has
a ‘general ‘understanding of the
nature of the proposed treatment’ and ‘is a level of understanding
of the general population, with or without a decision making
disability.’
The Board adopts
Justice Bell’s finding that that the capacity threshold is a
‘relatively low’ threshold so as
not to discriminate against people
with disability,
and the Board is
persuaded Ms UI has a general understanding of the nature of the procedure.
relation to whether Ms UI understands the ‘effect’ of the proposed
treatment, Ms UI was able to identify some but not
all risks or possible
complications arising from the proposed treatment. She identified risk of
infection and that she may ‘bleed
out’ (haemorrhage) and that
‘there is always risks with a general anaesthetic’ but was unable to
identify what
side effects may arise from the general anaesthetic. More
importantly she was unable to identify risk of injury to organs and major
vessels. The Applicant gave the example that ‘I don’t think she
could understand that if there was injury to the
abdomen then you may end up
with a stoma. I went through that with her in the simplest way.’ Dr Foley
also stated that Ms UI
could not identify a rupture of a major blood vessel
resulting in internal bleeding, accidental damage to other organs or that the
keyhole surgery could progress to open surgery in the event of complications or
unexpected findings, which were matters she had checked
the Applicant had gone
through with her. Ms UI does not appear to have retained these material facts
provided to her by the Applicant,
as demonstrated in her discussion with the
Guardian and her evidence at hearing.
a limited extent Ms UI was able to explain the short term consequences
associated with the surgery but showed confusion with the
period of recovery,
believing she may be in bed for two weeks after the proposed treatment to
was clear that Ms UI was able to understand the proposed treatment would mean
she would permanently be unable to have children.
Board was not satisfied that Ms UI understood that the proposed treatment would
not resolve the pelvic pain she experiences. Dr
Foley was of the opinion that Ms
UI believed the proposed tubal ligation would treat the pelvic pain: ‘she
believes the fallopian
tubes were the cause of her pain and tubal sterilisation
would thus reduce or eliminate it.’ The Board accepts Dr Foley’s
evidence in this respect and notes that similar concerns were expressed by the
Applicant at hearing, and particularly evidenced to
the Board when Ms UI gave
evidence on 15 May 2020.
the hearing on 18
September 2020, Ms UI expressed she wanted the
proposed treatment so she could menstruate to make her feel ‘like a
Ms UI acknowledged, however, she was unable to recall what
menstruation felt like and was unable to recall that her periods had been
previously and may be a source of pain going forward. In her consultation with
Dr Foley she also raised the resumption of menstruation
as a key motivation for
having the proposed treatment, as she believed her pelvic pain may be as a
result of not having a period
while on the Depo Provera injections and having
the insertion of the Mirena. She theorised that her fallopian tubes are blocked
menstruating would unblock them, or alternatively that the fallopian tubes
are bleeding and causing the pain. The Board finds that
Ms UI’s reasoning
for wanting the treatment and the weight she places on wanting to menstruate
when she had no memory of menstruation,
or because she believes it will fix her
pelvic pain, is clearly confused and not based on relevant material information
by the Applicant.
Ms UI at hearing stated she wanted the proposed treatment so she can have sex.
Ms UI is able to have sexual intercourse now,
and is protected from pregnancy by
the Depo Provera. From this response, there is no benefit to her in having the
proposed treatment
and it is not a basis for her to have it.
Board finds that while Ms UI was able to clearly communicate her wish for
sterilisation, her reasoning for why she wants it remains
confused and
inconsistent. Ms UI demonstrated through her evidence and in her responses to Dr
Foley and the Applicant that she has
placed inappropriate weight on reasons that
aren’t factually correct or that are not a benefit. Putting weight on
contraception,
the pain, and experiencing menstruation as her reasoning for the
treatment does not weigh relevant material required in making the
UI was unable to demonstrate an understanding of alternative treatment options
without significant prompting (e.g. continue with
the Depo Provera injections,
trying other forms of hormonal contraception, or using barrier protection). Even
in a general sense
she is unable to weigh alternative treatment options against
the proposed treatment and consider what the risks and/or likely benefits
each option, including those treatment options she had tried. For example, she
was unable to articulate that the proposed treatment
would mean by ceasing the
Depo Provera she would avoid having three monthly injections, the pain,
inconvenience and intrusion of
those injections and the associated weight gain.
The Board is not satisfied Ms UI demonstrates sufficient capacity to have an
understanding
of the potential benefits of the treatment, as weighed against
alternative treatments. She has been unable to understand the choices
and unable to weigh up the consequences of those choices.
are many inconsistencies and factual inaccuracies in Ms UI’s evidence. In
her mind she clearly wants sterilisation but
the reasoning and the information
she attached to it is confused and at times factually incorrect.
the Applicant and Dr Foley raise concerns about Ms UI’s capacity to
understand the nature and effect of treatment. No alternative
medical evidence
has been relied on to rebut these concerns.
the case law cited earlier, it is clear that in assessing whether a person has
capacity to make a decision the sufficiency of the
capacity must take into
account the importance and gravity of the decision. The proposed treatment will
result in permanent and irreversible
sterilisation. The Board finds that Ms UI
lacks capacity to consent to the proposed treatment, in that she is unable to
the effects of the proposed treatment.
Best interests
Board then needs to apply the criteria in
section 45(2)
of the Act, that is
whether the treatment is in Ms UI’s best interests.
wishes of Ms UI
the hearing Ms UI’s wish has consistently been to be permanently
sterilised. She has demonstrated this with whomever
she has spoken.
Consequences to Ms UI if the treatment is not carried
the proposed treatment is not carried out the consequence is that Ms UI would
continue as she is, not permanently infertile. Presumably
she would continue to
take the Depo Provera for contraceptive purpose, to prevent pregnancy.
Any alternative treatment available to Ms UI
Applicant, both in the Application and in her oral evidence, detailed
alternative treatments that are available. The alternative
treatments available
are continued use of the Depo Provera, or use of the oral contraceptive pill,
the use of intrauterine contraceptive
devices such as the Mirena, and the
Implanon, which has been tried and were not successful.
Berrry outlined her reasons for forming the view that each of the other possible
treatments would not be appropriate for Ms UI.
With the Mirena Ms UI, through
her General Practitioner, requested it be removed and not put back in due to
abdominal pain. Further
Ms UI stated she felt depressed and was experiencing
suicidal thoughts during the time it was inserted. Ms UI expressed she felt
similar way when she had the Implanon. The Applicant stated that moving into her
forties, the Implanon can cause irregular bleeding
which may cause issues for Ms
UI. Dr Berry indicated it was plausible that concerns about low mood and
suicidal ideology may arise
from the use of the Implanon, and to a lesser extent
the Mirena, and because of these concerns held by Ms UI, she would not recommend
Berry stated oral (oestrogen containing) contraception was not suitable given Ms
UI was a heavy smoker and other factors, including
her age, weight, risk of
pulmonary embolism and potential death. She did not discuss the progesterone
only oral pill with Ms UI given
the failure rate was more significant and it
needed to be taken within 3 hours of the same time every day.
Berry stated long term usage of Depo Provera has a risk of osteoporosis which
may put Ms UI at risk of falls and also at risk of
weight gain and mood
disturbance.
The nature and degree of any significant risks
associated with the proposed treatment or any alternative treatment
Applicant gave evidence that the possible risks and complications of the
laparoscopic tubal ligation would include an adverse
reaction to the
anaesthetic, damage to nearby organs as set out earlier in these Reasons,
infection, and haemorrhage.
Whether the proposed treatment can
be postponed on the ground that better treatment may become available and
whether that person is
likely to become capable of consenting to the
Applicant gave evidence that there were no new medical procedures or alternative
treatment that she was aware of that may become
available in the future.
her report Dr Foley states that:
It is difficult to
make a judgement as to whether this may change in the future; while her
cognitive function has shown no reliable
improvement since 2017, without having
been present during her gynaecology consultations I also cannot be confident
that she was
provided with all relevant information in a way that she
understands. Ms UI has shown capacity for new learning, and with adequate
repetition of key facts, explicit discussion of the alternatives and pros and
cons of each, and further education to correct errors
of mistaken understanding,
then there may be potential for a different outcome.
Guardian states ‘in some ways, the investigation and assessment process
during the period of adjournment has amounted to
a supported decision-making
Board accepts the general proposition that a person’s capacity may improve
over time or be enhanced with support. Ms UI
has had ongoing consultations with
her General Practitioner, has met with three consultants and the Applicant at
the Clinic discussing
the proposed treatment, risks and alternative treatments,
has met and communicated with her Guardian about the possibility for treatment
over many months, has undergone formal capacity assessment with Dr Foley and has
been in front of the Board to give evidence on two
occasions. Despite the
repetition of key facts, regular discussion and education, and as the Applicant
indicated ‘giving information
in the simplest way possible’, Ms UI
has not been able to demonstrate she understands the effect of the proposed
Findings as to
section 45(2)
Board finds that Ms UI is be able to express and communicate her wishes as to
the proposed treatment. Ms UI has received support
through this process and had
ample opportunity to express her views and wishes. While her reasoning for
wanting the proposed treatment
has varied she remains adamant that she wants it.
A person who is found to lack the capacity to understand the nature and effect
of the treatment does not lose their right to express their wishes and, in this
way, contribute to medical decisions about them.
It is required by virtue of
section 45(2)(a)
of the Act that the person’s wishes are, if
possible, carried into effect.
in determining the means which is less restrictive of Ms UI’s freedom of
decision and action, it is necessary to take
these wishes into account. While
the Board cannot be certain that Ms UI’s wishes will not change in the
future, the same level
of uncertainty would apply to any woman faced with a
similar decision. The Board determines it is appropriate to give weight to Ms
UI’s wishes.
Board accepts the evidence of the Applicant set out in above as to the reasons
why the contraception alternatives are not appropriate.
In doing so, the Board
also gives consideration as to what the risks are in carrying out the proposed
treatment. The Board finds
that the proposed procedure has some identified
serious risks; however, based on the Applicant’s evidence, which the Board
accepts, the likelihood of these complications arising is small. There is no
evidence before the Board that Ms UI is at any greater
risk of any of these
complications arising than any person without her disability.
Board accepts the medical evidence of the Applicant that there is no benefit in
postponing treatment on the basis no better treatment
is likely to become
available in the foreseeable future. Further, for the reasons set out above as
to Ms UI’s understanding
of the nature and effect of the proposed
treatment, the Board does not accept that Ms UI is likely to become capable of
to the proposed treatment. Additionally, postponement of the proposed
treatment would be contrary to Ms UI’s stated wishes.
Board also needs to consider whether the proposed treatment is the least
restrictive means. The proposed treatment is an invasive
procedure with
permanent consequences, that is, infertility. The High Court in
Marion’s Case
Sterilisation is a step of last resort....In the context of
medical management ‘step of last resort’ is a convenient way
saying that alternative and less invasive procedures have all failed and it is
certain that no other procedure or treatment will
UI’s solicitors submitted:
The Marion’s case analysis is
not apposite to Ms UI’s circumstances. In contrast it would be the denial
of the treatment
that she would experience as a denial of her personal integrity
and human dignity.
Board is persuaded by this submission. Ms UI has the right to be treated equally
before the law. This is clearly set out in the
International Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities (the CRPD), ratified by Australia and
entered into force in 2008.
Article 17 of the CRPD provides that every person
with a disability has a right to respect for his or her physical and mental
on an equal basis with others. Article 23(1) (c) states
Parties shall take effective and appropriate measures to eliminate
discrimination against persons with disabilities in all matters
relating to
marriage, family, parenthood and relationships, on an equal basis with others,
so as to ensure that: ...Persons with
disabilities, including children, retain
their fertility on an equal basis with others.
is not to say that a person with disability does not have the right to be
rendered infertile when, as it is in Ms UI’s
situation, it is her clear
wish to be so and this is supported by her treating medical practitioners as
being in her best interests.
Sterilisation is not being imposed on Ms UI, it is
what she wants.
Board is satisfied the proposed treatment is in the best interests of Ms UI and
will improve her quality of life by removing her
worry and fear about becoming
one present at the hearing or any of the medical practitioners she has consulted
are against the proposed medical treatment proceeding.
Ms UI clearly wants to
proceed with the proposed treatment and to allow this upholds her dignity and
autonomy in having her wishes
heard and acted upon.
The Board consents:
treatment for Ms UI comprising of a tubal ligation under general
anaesthetic.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Hunter and New England
Area Health Service v A
[2009] NSWSC
Guardianship Act 1987
[2015] NSWCAGD 54 at [170].
PBU & NJE v Mental Health Tribunal
Secretary, Department
of Health and Community Services v J.W.B. and S.M.B. (Marion’s Case)
[1992] HCA 15
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (311 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter