URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASADT/2021/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:11:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Joseph Buga and Ors v Patrick Clark and Ors [2021] TASADT 6 (21 September 2021)
[2021] TASADT 6
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
Joseph Buga and Ors v Patrick Clark and Ors
BUGA, Joseph
BUGA, Margaret
CLARK, Patrick
CLARK, Philip
McGRATH, Kylie
McGRATH, Jessica
CLARK, Andrew
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
16 June 2021
DELIVERED ON:
21 September 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Tribunal Member Mackey
CATCHWORDS:
Discrimination, prohibited conduct and incitement–
inquiry – race and accommodation – accessorial liability –
compensation – aggravated damages
Anti-Discrimination Act
Acts Interpretation Act 1931
s29AB(1)(a)(ii)
Pop v Taylor
[2015] FCCA 1720
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
Kelly v Pensalfini
[2019] TASSC 2
Burton v Houston
[2004] TASSC 57
Purvis v New South Wales
[2003] HCA 62
Durston v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal (No 2)
Richardson v Oracle Corporation Australia Pty Ltd
[2014] FCFCA
Power v Bouvy
[2015] TASADT 2
Lucy Orchard v Frayne Higgins
[2020] TASADT 11
DETERMINATION:
The complaint of discrimination, prohibited conduct
and incitement made by the applicants is upheld against Patrick Clark, Breanna
Devine, Kylie McGrath, Jessica McGrath and Andrew Clark. The complaint against
Philip Clark is dismissed. Orders made for compensation
appear in the body of
the decision.
REPRESENTATION:
Complainants:
Respondents:
No appearance
[2021] TASADT 6
INTRODUCTION
1. Joseph Buga was born in Uganda. He and his family emigrated
to Australia and in 2015 purchased property at Claremont which became
residential home.
2. Joseph Buga made a complaint under the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998 (ADA) to the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner
(Commissioner)
against several persons who are either his neighbours or their
relatives or associates. The Commissioner investigated the complaint
believing it could not be resolved by conciliation referred it to the Tribunal
for inquiry, s78. The Commissioner identified
the possible breaches of the ADA
(a) direct discrimination,
(b) prohibited conduct
(c) incitement.
THE PARTIES
3. In its terms the complaint was made by Joseph
Buga on his own behalf and for his wife, three sons, a nephew, and an uncle.
up to the inquiry those parties seeking remedy were clarified as being
Joseph Buga his wife Margaret Buga and son John Duku. With
their consent
Margaret Buga and John Duku were formally added with Joseph Buga as parties to
the inquiry, s81(2). The applicants
all reside at the Claremont
4. There are six respondents to the complaint.
5. Patrick Clark
resides in a unit in Box Hill Road in Claremont. The unit backs on to the rear
of the applicants’ home. Jessica
McGrath also resides at that unit.
6. Kylie McGrath and Breanna Devine reside in the unit next to and co joined
with that of Patrick Clark in Lamond Drive in Claremont.
Breanna Devine is
Jessica McGrath’s sister.
7. Patrick Clark, Philip Clark, Andrew Clark,
Breanna Devine, Kylie McGrath, and Jessica McGrath are all claimed to have been
and participated in an incident at the applicants’ home on 19 to
20 of September 2019 (the September incident).
ACCESSORIAL
8. For a finding to be made against any one of the respondents they
must be found individually to have engaged in conduct in breach
unless s21 of the Act is engaged. In that instance one or more of the
Respondents can be held jointly and severally liable
for another’s breach
of the ADA if they knowingly caused, induced, or aided a person to engage in
that conduct.
9. Accessorial liability was considered in the context of the
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
(Cth) in Pop v Taylor
[2015] FCCA 1720.
that case Ms. Pop, a bookkeeper employed under a labour hire arrangement between
two corporate entities was summarily dismissed
because of a work caused shoulder
injury/disability. The termination of the employment was conveyed to her by the
office administrator,
Mr. Taylor. Subsequently both corporate entities were
placed into voluntary liquidation and proceedings claiming breach of the
Disability Discrimination Act
against Mr. Taylor were pursued. Mr. Taylor
claimed that the decision to terminate the employment of Ms. Pop was not his but
of either or both corporate entities and that he could not be held liable
for conveying the decision to Ms. Pop, he sought a dismissal
of the proceedings
on that basis. The
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
, provided that
a “...person who causes, instructs, induces, aids or permits another
person to do an act that is unlawful under
Division 1, 2, 2A or 3 of
for the purposes of this Act, taken also to have done the act.” The
question therefore became whether that section operated
to give rise to a
liability in Mr. Taylor. In applying s122 Brown J of the Federal Circuit Court
of Australia followed Cooper v
Human Rights and Equal Opportunities Commission
[1999] FCA 180
(1999) 93 FCR 481
first step in establishing whether liability exists under section 122, for
auxiliary involvement of contravention of the
DD Act, is to determine whether
“there was the unlawful act of a principal” under the provisions of
the Act... In the
context of section 122, the issue is whether his conduct has
caused, instructed, induced, aided or permitted one or all of these
to act in a way which has resulted in the unlawful termination of Ms Pop’s
employment.
Madgwick J discussed the manner in which section 122 was to be construed in
Cooper. He referred to the responsibility of courts to
interpret legislation,
such as the DD Act, beneficially, given that the legislature had intended it to
have far- reaching consequences.
In this context, he noted that section 122 was
also widely drawn and had gone beyond the traditional formulations of the
law relating to accessorial liability. His Honour said as
“The civil and compensatory nature of the remedies for breach of the
duties established by the Act, and its broad purposes...would
adequate reason why such a departure [from criminal law concepts] would likely
have been intended.”[36]
In this context, Madgwick J considered that a person might permit another
person to act in an unlawful way, even without having full
knowledge of all
relevant circumstances of the discriminatory conduct in question. In Elliott v
Nanda[37] Moore J also considered
that section 122 was not to “be
approached narrowly” in its application...
In this particular case, I am satisfied that Mr Taylor has both permitted and
aided any principal source of the discrimination against
Ms Pop. He was the
office administrator at the time; he was a party to the purported discussion
between Ms Taylor and Mr Leverington,
which determined that Ms Pop’s
employment should be terminated.
Clearly he aided this decision to be made in the sense that he conveyed it to
Ms Pop and then facilitated its carrying out. Without
Mr Taylor’s
assistance, there would have been no unlawful conduct in this case. More
importantly, he did nothing to dissuade
either Ms Taylor or Mr Leverington from
the conduct on which, on Mr Taylor’s evidence, both were intent.”
10. Whilst the decision concerned
Discrimination Act
the comments are apposite and applicable to the operation of
of the ADA. Both require the conduct of a principal to be in breach of the
Act and the conduct of the other party to have caused,
induced, or aided that
breach. If any of the respondents, whilst not found to have directly breached
the ADA are found to have facilitated
the principal in carrying out, or did
nothing to dissuade the principal from committing, a breach of the ADA, to adopt
the language
of Brown J in Pop, their conduct may be found to have caused,
induced or aided the breach and as such they can be found to be jointly
severally liable with the principal for that breach.
THE RESPONDENTS’
ABSENCE AT THE HEARING OF THE INQUIRY
11. The respondents did not take an
active role in the Commissioner’s investigation nor in the proceedings in
the Tribunal.
Efforts were made by the Commissioner to engage them in the
investigation through the provision of written notices alerting them
complaint and inviting them to respond to it.
12. Notices were also issued by
the Tribunal advising the respondents of the date, time, and place of a
directions hearing and the
hearing of the inquiry into the complaint. The
notices advising of the hearing of the inquiry informed the respondents that the
may procced in their absence if they failed to attend.
notices of the hearing in the Tribunal were able to be personally served on
Breanna Devine, Kylie McGrath and Andrew Clark.
Several attempts at service
were made on Patrick Clark, Phillip Clark and Jessica McGrath at the Box Hill
Road address. At the
time of these attempts at service it was noted by the
process server that the lights were on inside the property, and a CCTV camera
was in operation above the front door. Service was effected by affixing the
notices to the front door of the property.
14. These efforts were
unsuccessful in causing any of the respondents to contact the Commissioner or
attend at the Tribunal except
for contact made by Kylie McGrath to the
Commissioner on one occasion when she denied involvement in the matters
complained of and
stated a response would be provided. No further response was
received from her.
15. The provision of notices of hearing to the respondents
is a necessary step to afford procedural fairness. Its purpose is to provide
the respondents with sufficient notice to respond to the claims being made
against them and the opportunity of producing their own
evidence and challenging
that given by the applicants at the hearing of the inquiry. This is
particularly important as the Tribunal
may, following a hearing, make factual
findings and issue penalties against them.
16. In circumstances where the
service of notices is statutorily required the
Acts Interpretation Act 1931
s29AB(1)(a)(ii)
, provides that service can be affected on a natural person
it at, or sending it by post to, the person's residential or postal address or
place or address of business or employment
whichever is last known to the server
of the notice or other document;”
In circumstances where, as here, notices are not statutorily
required but are necessary for procedural fairness, I adopt
s29(1)(a)(ii)
guide for what could constitute personal service.
17. In this matter the
notices of hearing were successfully served on three of the respondents
personally and for the other three
it was left at their last known residential
address. The respondents have resisted engagement in the Commissioner’s
investigation
and referral and the Tribunal directions hearing. The terms of
the notice of hearing of the inquiry contained a statement advising
respondents that failure to attend at the appointed time date and place for
hearing could result in the hearing being conducted
in their absence. The
ongoing delay in the resolution of this matter in circumstances where the
respondents have demonstrated disinterest
whilst it has progressed through Equal
Opportunity Tasmania and Tribunal causes the applicants prejudice as their
complaint remains
unresolved and relates to an ongoing relationship between
neighbours.
18. In the circumstances I was satisfied that sufficient notice
had been provided to the respondents of the hearing and that, despite
failure by them to attend the hearing should proceed in their absence, the
obligation to afford them procedural fairness having
been satisfied. I
accordingly heard the inquiry in the absence of the respondents, s86(3).
19. English is not the first language of either Joseph or Margaret
Buga. The inquiry was, as a result, conducted with the assistance
interpreter who attended the hearing via video link. The interpreter assisted
in translating the evidence given orally
by Joseph and Margaret Buga and the
statements and questions asked of each of them by the Tribunal.
addition to the oral evidence given by each of the applicants at the inquiry,
the Tribunal also received the following documents
into evidence.
(a) The Commissioner’s file consisting of:
(i) the complaint;
(ii) copy of photographs attached to the
(iii) correspondence between the Commissioner and Tasmanian
(iv) assessment decision and reasons for decision of the Commissioner
dated 13 August 2020;
(v) affidavits of service of Jordan
(vi) letter Derwent Mercantile dated 5 November 2020 regarding the
attempted service;
(vii) letter from the Commissioner to Breanna Devine dated
10 February 2021;
(viii) investigation and reasons for decision dated 24
February 2021;
(ix) referral report from the Commissioner to the Tribunal
dated 22 March 2021.
(b) Statutory declaration of Joseph Buga sworn 13 May
(c) Letters from Eumarrah.
(d) Statutory declaration of Margaret
Buga sworn 13 May 2021.
(e) Statutory declaration of John Duku sworn 14 May
(f) Statutory declaration of Mussa Joseph sworn 13 May
(g) Statutory declaration of Alex Madara sworn 13 May
(h) Statutory declaration of John Wani unsworn.
(i) Tasmanian Police
return on summons consisting of:
(i) offence report 623552 facts and complaint details and
witness statements re the 20 September 2019 incident;
(ii) offence report
623321 re the graffiti incident.
(j) Sue Hickey return on summons.
(k) Royal Hobart
Hospital return on summons consisting of the medical record of Joseph
21. It is the applicants’ burden to persuade
the Tribunal that the respondents have breached the ADA either directly by their
conduct or by causing, instructing, inducing, aiding, or permitting one of them
to have breached the ADA.
22. The degree of persuasion required is on the
balance of probabilities as informed by the approach in Briginshaw v Briginshaw
60 CLR. This has recently been confirmed by the Supreme Court in Kelly
v Pensalfini
[2019] TASSC 2
per Porter AJ;
complainant (respondent) bore the onus of proof , and that although the
standard of proof was that of the balance of
probabilities, the approach to be
followed was that set out in Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
per Dixon J at 362. That is to say, the seriousness of an allegation
made, the inherent unlikelihood of a particular occurrence,
the gravity of the
consequences flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must
affect the answer to the question
whether the issue has been proved. The quality
of evidence which will satisfy the standard in a particular case may vary
to the gravity of the issue. ".
23. The Tribunal at first instance in Kelly applied the test to
the circumstances of that case and observed that a finding that the
had breached the Act may negatively impact upon their personal and business
reputation and accordingly the Tribunal needed
to be “comfortably
satisfied” of the complainant’s version of events to find that a
breach of the ADA had occurred.
This approach was endorsed by Brett J,
24. The allegations made by the applicants here are serious. They
involve conduct which when measured against contemporary standards
poorly on the character of those involved. Whilst there is no suggestion that
the finding of a breach of the ADA against
any of the respondents would impact
upon them personally or their business interests, due to the gravity of the
allegations made,
I apply the same test as applied in Kelly. The burden on the
applicants is to persuade the Tribunal to a level of comfortable satisfaction
that the events they assert occurred.
THE CONDUCT
25. The applicants claim
to have been the subject of conduct in breach of the ADA by reason of their race
and in the context of their
accommodation.
26. In 2015 Joseph Buga and his
family bought and moved into the house at Claremont. Behind the back fence of
their property were
units. At some point in time Patrick Clark moved into one
of the units.
27. In 2018 Patrick Clark’s dog died after attempting to
jump the fence between his and the applicants’ property and becoming
caught on its leash effectively hanging itself. Following this incident
relations between Joseph Buga and Patrick Clark became hostile.
September 2019 Tasmania Police were called out to a disturbance at the units.
The respondents had gathered there and there
was drinking and loud
29. Joseph Buga has given several accounts as to what then occurred.
The accounts that are before the Tribunal are those that he
gave in oral
evidence at the inquiry, to Tasmania Police when they arrived at his home
immediately following the incident, to Ambulance
Tasmania when they conveyed him
from the scene to hospital and which form part of the Royal Hobart Hospital
medical records, his
complaint to the Commissioner and a statutory declaration
filed at the Tribunal. All the accounts given by him have remained consistent
and are consistent with the evidence given by Margaret Buga and John Duku. The
Tribunal accepts that evidence as an accurate reflection
of what occurred at the
September incident.
30. Joseph Buga was watching the goings on that night
on his security camera. He felt a sense of unease. He could see, from the
camera, Patrick Clark entering his back yard. He observed him collect cardboard
and dry grasses and pile them up against the back
wall of the house. Concerned
that he was about to set alight the material, Joseph Buga opened his back door.
When he did so he
saw that Patrick Clark had a long kitchen gas lighter with
him. He asked him what he was doing. Patrick accused him of having called
police on him, Joseph Buga denied he had done so. Patrick Clark then punched
Joseph Buga to the ear, breaking the lighter he
was holding
31. Upon this
happening more men and women jumped over the back fence onto Joseph Buga’s
property. They started hitting him
and he yelled out for help. His son John
Duku responded but was, for a time, held back from helping. At some point John
free and yelled at Joseph Buga to get back inside the house. As they
retreated into the house one of the women present followed
them in. They then
pushed her out of the house closing the back door.
32. Patrick Clark then
obtained an axe and used it to strike the front door. He and other members of
the group broke several windows
in the house. Tasmania Police and Ambulance
Tasmania attended the scene. Joseph Buga was conveyed to hospital and
discharged later
that morning.
33. Photographs depict the shattered windows
and the marks to the door consistent with being struck by an axe.
34. Patrick
Clark made a statement to police which is in evidence. In that statement he
confirms that he was present as was Andrew
Clark, Jessica McGrath, Kylie McGrath
and Breanna Devine. He claims to have been at Joseph Buga’s house to talk
to him about
an incident. He states that Joseph Buga came out of the door as
did his son. Joseph Buga grabbed his neck ripping off his two necklaces
fought him in response. He states that Joseph Buga grabbed a log and he felt he
was going to be hit with it. He then saw
Joseph Buga hit Jessica McGrath in the
head with a piece of wood causing her to fall over at the back door.
further stated that Joseph Buga then grabbed Breanna Devine and dragged her in
through the back door after which she came back
out screaming and saying she had
been stabbed. She had a wound to her knee.
36. Police documents reveal
that their investigations did not support the allegation made by Breanna Devine
of being stabbed in the
the property was, however, consistent with Breanna Devine, cutting her knee
star picket as she climbed over the back fence to gain access to the
37. Other than identifying who was present, that they had entered
onto the property of Joseph Buga, that Breanna Devine had for a
short period
entered the Buga residence on the property, and that he used an axe to hit the
front door of the residence, I find Patrick
Clark’s statement to be
self-serving and do not accept it as an accurate record of the events of that
38. The evidence before the Tribunal reveals that Andrew Clark was
charged with common assault, trespass and destroy property. No
evidence was
tendered in respect of the charges of assault and destroy property and a
conviction was recorded following a plea of
guilty in respect of the trespass
matter. Breanna Devine was charged with trespass. She failed to appear at
Court in respect of
the matter and a warrant for her arrest was issued. It is
unclear whether the warrant was activated or what, if anything, has transpired
with respect to the charges since.
39. In a brief statement given to the
attending police a witness, Mr. Docherty, stated that he had observed the
residents of the Lamond
Drive address jumping over the back fence and that they
yelled out “...something to the effect of ‘black dogs’”
before he then heard windows smashing. The residents of the Lamond Drive
address are Breanna Devine and Kylie McGrath. The statement
does, however, lack
precision. The maker of the statement was not called to give evidence in the
inquiry. The witness refers to
the statement as having been made by
“them” but does not clarify if the statement was made more than once
by both the
residents or once and by only one and which one. He states he saw
the residents from the Lamond Drive address jump the fence but
does not mention
those from the Box Hill Road address. Whether this is because he intended to
mean the residents from both units
is unknown. Accordingly other than finding
that the statement “black dogs” was made on at least one occasion
no direct evidence as to the identity of the persons or persons who
uttered it.
40. In the wake of the September incident the issues between
Patrick Clark and the applicants continued. Bottles were thrown from
property onto that of the applicants. Margaret Buga gave evidence, which I
accept, that she was often taunted with racial
abuse as she hung clothes on her
clothesline or sat outside including the words “fucking African” and
to your country”.
41. Overnight on 12 to 13 February
2020 the words “black dogs” were spray painted in black paint onto a
fence at the applicants’
property facing directly onto the footpath of
Boxhill Road. The words could be clearly seen from the street. The words were
on a fence which was adjacent to the unit occupied by Patrick Clark. A
young girl and boy offered to clean the graffiti off the
fence having observed
it from the street and being upset by it. The police were called but took no
42. Joseph, Margaret and John Buga were and remain on friendly terms
with their other neighbours.
THE DRAWING OF INFERENCES
43. This case
necessarily involves the drawing of inferences. In Kelly (supra) Brett J
considered that for an inference to be drawn:
the evidence must have induced in the mind of the Tribunal an actual persuasion
of the fact. Where circumstantial evidence
is relied on, it is not necessary
that all reasonable hypotheses consistent with the non-existence of the fact, or
inconsistent with
its existence, be excluded before the fact can be found; a
rational choice between competing hypotheses, informed by a sense of actual
persuasion in favour of the choice made, will support a finding, on the balance
of probabilities, as to the existence of the fact
in issue: Nguyen v
Cosmopolitan Homes (NSW) Pty Ltd
[2008] NSWCA 246
Although all that is required is that the circumstances raise a more probable
inference in favour of whatever is alleged, there is
no authority to "choose
between guesses, where the possibilities are not unlimited, on the ground that
one guess seems more likely
than another or the others": Jones v Dunkel
(1959) 101 CLR 298
at 304 per Dixon CJ, ACCC v Metcash Trading Ltd
, 198 FCR 297 at
. A court is entitled to draw an inference from
"even slim circumstantial facts that exist so long as that goes beyond
speculation":
Progressive Recycling Pty Ltd v Eversham
[2003] NSWCA 268
per Young CJ in Eq; Condos v Clycut Pty Ltd
[2009] NSWCA 200
44. I accept that the words “black dogs” were
spoken during the September incident and that the words “fucking
and “go back to your country”, were yelled out at
Margaret Buga at times when she was on the property external to the
45. When giving evidence about the yelling out at her Margaret Buga
said “they” shouted at me. In the context in which
that evidence
was given I think it a reasonable inference to draw that she was referring to
Patrick Clark and some of the other respondents.
46. Patrick Clark was the
instigator of the September incident. He was the owner of the dog that died.
He was angry on that evening
as he believed that Joseph Buga had called the
police disrupting his party. He was the first one onto the property with the
purpose of setting debris alight. He had prior to and since the
September incident thrown empty bottles over his fence onto the
applicants’ property and as found above, yelled racial abuse at Margaret
Buga when she was outside the home. The fence on
which the words “black
dogs” had been painted was proximate to his residence. This was the same
language used during
the September incident. I am comfortably persuaded by
these matters to find that Patrick Clark was the principal actor in these
47. The Tribunal further finds that Breanna Devine, Kylie McGrath,
Jessica McGrath and Andrew Clark were present at the September
incident on or
close to the applicants’ property. They were present when the words
“black dogs” were said and
persisted in the incident. They assisted
by one or more of them holding back John Duku whilst Patrick Clark was striking
Buga and by causing physical damage to the applicants’ property.
These actions aided Patrick Clark in his assault on Joseph
Buga and the
applicants’ property.
48. There is no evidence before the Tribunal
which allows a finding that Phillip Clark was present on the property or played
role in the September incident or indeed the bottle throwing, abuse of
Margaret Buga or the graffiti on the fence. Patrick Clark,
whilst identifying
the other respondents as being present at the September incident did not
identify that Philip Clark was there.
The Tribunal is not persuaded to the
requisite degree that Philip Clark was present at any of these incidents or
otherwise aided
their occurrence.
DOES THE ACT HAVE APPLICATION?
conduct to be discrimination or prohibited under the ADA it must be conduct
taken by or against a person in connection with
a prescribed area of activity,
s22. Accommodation is a prescribed activity. Accommodation is defined in the
ADA as including residential
and business accommodation, s3. In Burton v
Houston [2004] 57 TASSC Blow J, as he then was, considered the meaning of
accommodation
as used in s22 and found it had a wide ambit. In that case the
activity proscribed under s22 was required to be determined by reference
“victim” only whereas now the section has been amended such that it
can now be satisfied by reference to either
of the parties. The interpretation
given by Blow J of accommodation in Burton remains, however, apposite:
would expect that a piece of anti-discrimination legislation concerned with
accommodation would be intended to prohibit
discriminatory behaviour by
landlords against tenants or prospective tenants on grounds such as race, sexual
orientation, and family
responsibilities. No doubt s22(1)(d) achieves that, at
least when the victim of discrimination is engaged in an activity in connection
with accommodation, such as looking for a residence to rent. But if the
Tribunal's interpretation of s22(1) is correct, Pt5 of the
Act applies not just
to persons in positions of power, but to anyone who has any contact with someone
who is engaged in or undertaking
an activity that has some degree of connection
with one of the matters listed in s22(1). For example, if a tenant is
undertaking
an activity in connection with accommodation by doing some gardening
in the front yard of his or her rented home, and a passer-by
makes an unwelcome
comment of a sexual nature in circumstances in which a reasonable person would
have anticipated that the tenant
would be offended, Pt5 would apply...
Interpretation Act 1931
, s8A(1), requires an interpretation that promotes the
purpose or object of the Act to be preferred to one that does not. That
must be borne in mind when considering what degree of connection is
necessary between an activity engaged in or undertaken by a complainant
of the matters, such as accommodation, listed in s22(1), in order for the
provisions of the Act as to discrimination and
prohibited conduct to apply. In
my view a very wide interpretation of s22(1) would promote the objects and
purposes of the Act relating
to discrimination and prohibited conduct. In those
circumstances, I cannot see any appropriate basis for giving s22(1) a narrower
interpretation than that adopted by the Tribunal.” [p19 –
50. The conduct here occurred at the residential home of the
applicants. It includes the causing of damage to the home by the smashing
windows, striking the front door with an axe, throwing bottles and painting
graffiti on the fence. The conduct has been sustained
over a lengthy period and
at times Margaret Buga has been told to “go home” suggesting an
intent to so disrupt the capacity
of the applicants to peacefully enjoy and
occupy their home so as to elicit a motivation for them to leave. The principal
perpetrator
of the conduct, Patrick Clark, is their neighbour as are some of the
other respondents. The conduct, I find, was undertaken in
connection with the
accommodation of both the Applicants and the Respondents.
DISCRIMINATION
51. The ADA, s14, provides;
discrimination takes place if a person treats another person on the basis of any
prescribed attribute, imputed prescribed
attribute or a characteristic imputed
to that attribute less favourably than a person without that attribute or
characteristic.”
The attributes prescribed by the ADA, s16, include a
person’s race. Race is defined in the ADA, s3, as including.
“(a) colour;
(b) nationality; and
(c) descent; and
(d) ethnic, ethno-religious or national origin; and
(e) status of being, or having been, an
immigrant;”
52. In Cain v The Australian Red Cross Society
[2009] TASADT 3
the Tribunal identified the elements required to establish direct discrimination
in breach of s14 of the ADA as:
“1. Whether the reason
for the treatment is on the basis of the prescribed attributes of lawful sexual
activity or sexual orientation
or a characteristic imputed to that
2. Whether the treatment of the complainant was less favourable or equal
3. The identification of the comparator - the person without that attribute
or characteristic.
4. Whether the complainant suffered a detriment”
53. When considering the first limb of the above test in Kelly
Brett J, following Purvis v New South Wales
[2003] HCA 62
(2003) 217 CLR 92
“Questions of motive
and intention may assist in the resolution of the question as to whether
something was done on the ground
of an attribute, but the question is –
why was the aggrieved person treated as he or she was?”
WHY WERE THE APPLICANTS TREATED AS THEY WERE?
relationship between Patrick Clark and Joseph Buga soured following the death of
Patrick Clark’s dog. The September
incident was precipitated by Patrick
Clark’s belief that Joseph Buga had called police interrupting his
gathering. These matters
may have been a motivation for Patrick Clark and his
associates to have engaged in the conduct they did at the September incident,
although they likely became less of a motivator over time.
55. The use of
language describing the applicants as black and African, telling them to go home
and calling them dogs however brings
into prominence the applicants’ race
as an operative cause for the conduct as does the fact that the conduct has
56. Whilst the September incident may have been
precipitated by the belief that it was Joseph Buga that had called the police on
Clark and his party on the background of hostility since the death of
Patrick Clark’s dog neither of those causes explain the
use of racial
language at the time of the incident and since.
57. The fact that there is
more than one cause for the conduct, the other causes not being in breach of the
ADA, does not afford a
defence to a claim of discrimination, s14(3)(a). Direct
discrimination contrary to s14 can occur where only one of several reasons
the conduct is discriminatory. In Kelly Brett J, following other cases, observed
that it is the “true” or “real”
reason for the conduct
that is the relevant inquiry.
58. I find that the applicants’ race was
a true and real basis for the respondents’ conduct toward them. There is
evidence that suggests that similar treatment has been afforded to others in
the neighbourhood. Significantly the conduct, the September
incident, the racial
taunts directed to Margaret Buga and the graffiti on the fence, were actions
that explicitly referred to the
applicants’ race and colour in a way that
was derogatory and demeaning. Whilst at times events have occurred or beliefs
which have precipitated the respondents to act in a certain way against the
applicants there was a pervasive racial tone to they
way that the respondents
acted and what was said by one or more of them. The applicants were treated the
way they were because of
their race and colour and by reason of that treatment
they have suffered detriment. They have been deprived of the peaceful
of their home. They were yelled at, physically abused and have had
to live in fear and remain vigilant for fear of further attacks
on their person
PROHIBITED CONDUCT
59. Section 17 of the ADA prohibits a person
from engaging in conduct which “offends, humiliates, intimidates, insults
or ridicules
another person on the basis of an attribute”. The attributes
which are specified as the attributes in respect of which the
prohibited include race. Section 17 was considered by Brett J in Durston v
Anti-Discrimination Tribunal (No 2)
[2018] TASSC 48:
17(1) is also a provision which prohibits conduct. By its terms, it is apparent
that the provision has an extremely
wide ambit of operation. Some aspects of
this are as follows:
(a) The scope of conduct is unlimited. It encompasses "any conduct" which
falls within the description contained in the section. However,
the section will
almost always be concerned with conduct which involves communication in one form
or another...
(b) Read literally, the words ‘offends, humiliates, intimidates,
insults or ridicules’ are vague terms which have the
potential to
encompass a broad range of subjective emotions and feelings. The emotional
response will vary from one person to another.
However, judicial interpretation
of the words ‘offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate’ in respect of
similar but not
identical provisions under
Racial Discrimination
(Cth) suggests that the operation of the section is more restricted
than the literal meaning of the words would suggest. In Eatock
197 FCR 261
, Bromberg J endorsed judicial statements which require the
conduct caught by
to have ‘profound and serious effects and not to
be likened to mere slights’...
(c) It is not required that the person engaging in the conduct intend or even
subjectively foresee that the conduct may have the said
effect. The
qualification requires objective foreseeability or anticipation. This
requirement places some limit on the ambit of the
provision, but places an
obligation on the communicator to think through the potential effect of the
proposed communication...
(d) To fall within the section, the conduct must offend, humiliate,
intimidate, insult or ridicule another person ‘on the
basis of an
attribute’ as defined. The connection required between the conduct and the
attribute, is that the conduct is done
by reference to the attribute, rather
than the stronger and more direct causal relationship required by some other
formulations,
such as ‘because’ or ‘by reason of’. See
Macedonian Teachers' Association of Victoria Inc v Human Rights
Opportunity Commission
[1998] FCA 1650
(1998) 91 FCR 8
at 29-30 (Weinberg J);
Wotton v State of Queensland (No 5)
[2016] FCA 1457.
60. The conduct of Patrick Clark, aided by Breanna Devine,
Jessica McGrath, Kylie McGrath and Andrew Clark during the September incident,
was the physical attack on Joseph Buga and John Duku, the damaging of the
applicants’ home, the attempt or threat to burn down
the home and the
shouting of “black dogs”. All respondents, excluding Philip Clark,
are jointly and severally liable
with Patrick Clark for the conduct at the
September incident.
61. Separate to and following from the September incident
Patrick Clark also undertook the following actions;
(a) The yelling out to Margaret Buga at times when she was
external to the residence on the property “fucking African”
“go back to your country”.
(b) The painting of the words
“black dogs” onto a fence on the applicants’
(c) The throwing of bottles onto the applicants’
62. The evidence does not allow a finding that any of the
remaining respondents caused, induced or aided him to engage in this conduct.
accordingly find that Patrick Clark alone was responsible for the post
September incident treatment of the Applicants as set out
in paragraphs a to c
63. Contemporary standards of society are such that a reasonable
person would anticipate that all of the conduct; the September incident
of Patrick Clark which followed, were actions which on any objective basis would
cause the applicants offence and intimidate
them. Indeed, subjectively they
have done so with Margaret Buga stating that she felt safer in war torn Sudan
than at her Claremont
applicants’ race. Explicit reference was made of the applicants’
colour as black and their heritage as African. The intent of Patrick Clark
appears to have been to make life so uncomfortable for
the applicants that they
indeed returned to their country or at least left his neighbourhood. Whilst
other reasons also contributed
to his anger toward the Applicants their race
remained a fundamental theme and the basis for him acting in the manner he did.
Tribunal finds that the conduct of Patrick Clark was prohibited conduct,
of the ADA.
of the ADA provides:
person, by a public act, must not incite hatred towards, serious contempt for,
or severe ridicule of, a person or a group
of persons on the ground of
(a) the race of the person or any member of the group; or
(b) any disability of the person or any member of the group; or
(c) the sexual orientation or lawful sexual activity of the person or any
member of the group; or
(d) the religious belief or affiliation or religious activity of the person
or any member of the group; or
(e) the gender identity or intersex variations of sex characteristics of the
person or any member of the group”
65. In Durston Brett J considered the proper interpretation of
and followed the decision of Bathurst CJ who dealt with the corresponding
Queensland provision in Sunol v Collier (No 2)
[2012] NSWCA 44
and held at
“(a) Incite means to
rouse, to stimulate, to urge, to spur on, to stir up or to animate and covers
conduct involving commands,
requests, proposals, actions or
encouragement.
(b) It is not necessary for a contravention that a person actually be
(c) It is not sufficient that the speech, conduct, or publication concerned
conveys hatred towards, serious contempt for, or serious
ridicule of
homosexuals; it must be capable of inciting such emotions in an ordinary member
of the class to whom it is directed.
(d) It is not necessary to establish an intention to
66. The conduct of Patrick Clark in the main occurred on
private property nevertheless it did have a public aspect to it. The writing
the words “black dogs” on the fence of the applicants’ home
was placed in such a way that it was observable
to all who travelled or resided
on that street.
67. The words were written with the intention to hurt and
humiliate the Applicants. For there to be a breach of
it is not necessary
to have intended to incite hatred nor is it necessary to have actually incited
hatred. What is required is a
public act that is sufficient to convey hatred or
serious contempt toward, in this case, the race or the colour of the
Applicants.
68. The impact of the words “black dogs” on being
seen written large in black paint on the applicants’ fence in
achieved the opposite effect. The applicants were visited by people wanting to
clean the words off their fence, who were upset
by it having been written there.
The words conveyed a hatred of the applicants by virtue of their race and
colour. The words had
the potential of being seen by other less tolerant
members of the community. I find that the painting of the words “black
dogs” onto the Applicants fence by Patrick Clark was conduct in breach of
of the ADA.
DETERMINATION
69. I find that Patrick Clark was the principal in this matter.
He is found to have breached the ADA,
direct discrimination,
conduct and
incitement to hatred by his conduct by way of:
(a) the September incident;
(b) yelling out to Margaret
Buga at times when she was external to the residence on the property
“fucking African” and
“go back to your
(c) painting of the words “black dogs” onto a
fence on the applicants’ property; and
(d) throwing of bottles onto the
applicants’ property.
70. The respondents Andrew Clark, Breanna Devine, Jessica
McGrath and Kylie McGrath are found to have aided the contravention by Patrick
Clark of the ADA in respect of the September incident and are found jointly and
severally liable to that extent.
71. No finding of a breach of the ADA is
made in respect to Phillip Clark.
72. Having found the
complaint substantiated consideration must now be given as to the appropriate
orders to be made under s89 of
73. Given the prolonged nature of the
conduct against the applicants and the ongoing and understandable fear and
intimidation they
have felt whilst occupying their own home and going about
their ordinary business, an order that the respondents, excluding Phillip
must not repeat or continue the discrimination and prohibited conduct appears
appropriate.
74. The applicants’ also seek compensation. It is within
the power of the Tribunal to order that the respondents must pay to
applicants “...an amount that is appropriate as compensation for any loss
or injury suffered by the complainant and caused
by the respondent's
discrimination or prohibited conduct”, s 89(1)(d).
75. The evidence
given by Joseph Buga is that the conduct has had a significant and ongoing
impact upon him. He lives in constant
fear and vigilance. His sleeping is
interrupted. He is highly alert to any noises during the night and often
monitors his security
cameras. He feels like crying and has
nightmares.
76. Joseph Buga is employed at Eumarrah Wholefoods in the
warehouse. He has held this employment for over four years and by all accounts
was a productive and reliable employee. Since these events his warehouse
manager has noted a change in him. He has required several
days of absence; he
appears more stressed when at work and distracted.
77. The Royal Hobart
Hospital medical records reflect that the physical injuries suffered by Joseph
Buga due to the September incident
were multiple superficial abrasions and
contusions over his head, chest, wrists, elbows, and knees.
78. Aside from
his physical injuries and general hurt and distress Joseph Buga has also
suffered a loss of community. He wishes to
host his friends, many of whom share
his racial background, in his home but cannot due to his and their fear that
their presence
may provoke further incidents.
79. Margaret Buga gave evidence
of the pain and trauma she experienced because of the conduct of the
respondents. She also has trouble
sleeping and is constantly worried about her
and her family’s safety in their own home. She is also employed and has
take time off work following the September incident, now finds
concentration difficult and as a result worries that she may lose
employment.
80. John Duku described himself as traumatized by the conduct.
He does not feel like himself, is fearful of future events and has
sleeping as a result.
81. Joseph Buga has estimated that the damage to the
claim made for $12,000.00 for the damage to the car of one of the sons of Joseph
Buga. This is put on the basis that the stress
and fatigue resulting from the
September incident caused the son to have an accident in the vehicle. There
was, however, no more
cogent evidence supporting this claim beyond the mere
assertion of a link between the conduct and the accident and accordingly no
allowance is made in respect of this loss.
82. Whilst there was no specific
medical evidence as to the suffering of diagnosed psychiatric injury the
applicants have suffered
over a sustained and significant period feelings of
fear, intimidation, heightened vigilance and lack of sleep.
83. Burton v
[2004] TASSC 57
is often cited when considering an award of compensation
under the ADA. In that case Blow J, as he then was, established the following
principles:
(a) an injury under the ADA is not limited to physical
injury or psychiatric harm but extends more broadly to include injury to
(b) compensation under the ADA does not include punitive
damages; [28]
(c) compensation under the ADA can include aggravated damages;
84. The case concerned the sexual harassment of the
complainant, including by jabbing her to the chest. The Court upheld an award
of $4,000.00 compensation made by the Tribunal albeit indicating a likely lesser
award would have been made if it had been heard
by Blow J at first
85. Time has however marched on. As highlighted in Richardson v
Oracle Corporation Australia Pty Ltd [2014] FCFCA 82, also a matter
harassment albeit involving a breach of the Human Rights Commission Act 1986
(Cth), community standards are relevant to
the assessment of compensation as are
awards for damages for non-pecuniary loss in a civil context [95]. In that case
considered within range of $18,000.00, was nevertheless found to be
manifestly inadequate and in lieu an award of $130,000.00 was
substituted.
86. There is no reasonable basis to distinguish the approach in
Richardson nor to confine it to matters of sexual harassment or matters
in breach of the Human Rights Commission Act. I adopt the approach to this
matter and specifically to racial discrimination,
prohibited conduct, and
incitement in breach of the ADA.
87. The Richardson decision has been cited
with approval in this Tribunal in Power v Bouvy
[2015] TASADT 2
and Lucy Orchard
v Frayne Higgins
[2020] TASADT 11.
88. The Power case involved
discrimination and verbal sexual harassment over the telephone. There were
aggravating features including
the threat of future physical harm. In making an
award of compensation of $25,000.00 the Tribunal held:
“I take into
account all of the comments of the court in Richardson v Oracle especially those
as to prevailing community standards,
and indeed the sevenfold increase in the
damages awarded at first instance as a result of the change in those
I am conscious that the award should not be minimal because this
would tend to trivialise or diminish respect for the public policy
to which the
Anti-Discrimination Act gives effect. Neither should it be disproportionate to
amounts commonly awarded for pain, suffering
and loss of amenity in tortious
personal injuries cases.
In my view, taking into account that it is
impossible precisely to translate the loss of enjoyment of life and the hurt,
humiliation,
fear and anxiety felt by the complainant as a result of the
respondent’s conduct into a money value, having regard to general
standards prevailing in the community, the appropriate compensation is the sum
of $25,000.00.”
89. In Orchard the Tribunal also awarded compensation
in the sum of $25,000.00 for a victim of sexual harassment which occurred over
period of months causing her “distress and humiliation” but not
“serious psychiatric illness or ongoing psychological
[322]. To this was added a further award of $20,000.00 aggravated damages due
to the respondent’s conduct
in threatening the Applicant with
defamation.
90. I find that the Applicants have been denied the peaceful
sanctity and enjoyment of their own home by the conduct of those of the
Respondents against whom I have made findings of a breach of the ADA. They have
lived in fear not knowing what Patrick Clark and
his friends will do next.
Margaret Buga is faced with racial slurs and abuse frequently when outside her
been physically assaulted. The applicants’ home
was significantly damaged, and they have had the indignity of their fence
graffitied with the words “black dogs”.
91. It is disappointing
that the applicants’ distress and the efforts of their elected
parliamentary representative, were unsuccessful
in persuading the Department of
Housing to remove the respondents from their housing considering their conduct
and to restore peace
to the applicants occupation of their home. The Tribunal
lacks the power to force this change of occupation on either the respondents
their landlord.
92. As a result of the September incident there are specific
losses which call to be compensated specifically the loss of income suffered
the applicants for periods off work following the September incident and which
is claimed at a total of $4,000.00. I find that
claim to be reasonable and award
$4,000.00 to the applicants for loss earnings in respect of the September
93. For the injury to their feelings and their hurt and distress,
including the physical injuries suffered by Joseph Buga, I award
a total sum of
$25,000.00 to the applicants. Of this award $15,000.00 is awarded in respect of
the September incident and $10,000.00
for the remaining conduct.
further find that the circumstances of the breaches call for an award of
aggravated damages. The conduct of Patrick Clark has
been sustained, at times
physical, and certainly confronting. The conduct is a particularly egregious
example of racial discrimination
against a family seeking to live quietly in
their own home. I award $5,000.00 for aggravated damages.
95. The orders
that I make are as follows:
(a) That the respondents must not repeat or continue the
discrimination and/or prohibited conduct.
(b) That the respondents jointly
and/or severally make payment to the applicants in the total sum of $19,000.00
($15,000.00 for hurt
and distress and $4,000.00 for lost income).
(c) That in
addition Patrick Clark pay to the applicants the total sum of $15,000.00
($10,000.00 for hurt and distress for the incidents
other that the September
incident and $5,000.00 aggravated damages)
(d) That the compensation paid by
the respondents to the applicants be divided between the applicants such that
50% is retained by
Joseph Buga, 35% retained by Margaret Buga and 15% is
retained by John Duku.
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (328 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter