URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASADT/2020/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:11:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Capocchi v West & Bates [2020] TASADT 10 (10 December 2020)
[2020] TASADT 10
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
Capocchi v West & Bates
[2020] TASADT
CAPOCCHI, Zoe
WEST, Roderick
BATES, Celeste
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
By written submissions
DELIVERED ON:
10 December 2020
REFERRING SECTION(S):
S99A Anti-Discrimination act 1998
DECISION OF:
Chairperson Clues
CATCHWORDS:
complainant unsuccessful after review - discretion to
award costs to respondents – Calderbank offer
Anti-Discrimination Act
Cutler v Maine & DHHS; Cutler v Martin & DHHS
[2008] TASADT
; State of Tasmania v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal
[2008] TASSC 23
v University of Tasmania and Walters
[2016] TASADT 13
Baulderstone Hornibrook Engineering Pty Ltd (No. 2)
[2007] NSWSC 486
DETERMINATION: That the complainant pay the respondents’
costs with respect to the review from the date the Calderbank letter
23 October 2020, such costs to be calculated on a party/party basis at 80% of
the scale of fees presently allowed to practitioners
and counsel under the
Supreme Court Rules 2000
of Schedule 1.
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant:
Respondents:
Solicitors:
Complainant:
Respondent:
Fitzgerald & Browne Lawyers
[2020] TASADT 10
Chairperson Clues
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. This decision concerns an application on behalf of the
respondents for costs pursuant to s99A of the Anti-Discrimination Act 1988
2. The complainant made a complaint to the Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner (the Commissioner) on 19 December 2019 that the respondents
discriminated against her and engaged in prohibited conduct on the basis of
lawful sexual activity in connection with accommodation.
3. The Commissioner
accepted the complaint, investigated it and dismissed it on 31 July 2020. The
complainant applied to this Tribunal
to review the Commissioner’s
decision. The review hearing took place on 12 November 2020. On 25 November
2020, the Tribunal
determined that the decision of the Commissioner to dismiss
the complaint was the correct decision and therefore the complaint lapses;
Capocchi v West and Bates
[2020] TASADT 8.
The Legislation
4. The provisions of the Act that deal with costs are ss95 and
99A which provide as follows:
, each party to an inquiry is to pay his or her own
“99A. Order for costs
(1) The Tribunal may make an order as to costs in relation to any inquiry or
review before it if the Tribunal considers circumstances
justify the
5. In the decision of Cutler v Maine & DHHS; Cutler v
Martin & DHHS
[2008] TASADT 6
Tribunal Member Brett (as he then was)
considered an application for costs made by the respondents as a result of
complaints being
dismissed against them following an inquiry. He stated at
the State of Tasmania v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal
[2008] TASSC 23
Evans considered the effect of these provisions. It seems to me that the
following principles can be drawn from his Honour’s
Reasons for
(a) Section 95 expresses a general rule that parties are to pay their own
(b) However that rule ‘must yield whenever the Tribunal finds in a
particular case that there are circumstances justifying the
making of an order
for costs’.
(c) The power to award costs under these provisions can be distinguished from
an unconstrained grant of power. The outcome of the
proceedings will not have
the same primacy that is accorded when exercising an unconstrained discretion as
(d) The power must be exercised judicially, and not arbitrarily, capriciously
or so as to frustrate the legislative intent.
(e) The costs discretion must not be exercised on a ground unconnected with
the proceeding. For example, the financial circumstances
of a party, or an
imbalance between the financial resources of the parties, will ordinarily not be
relevant to the exercise of the
discretion with respect to
6. The respondents in this case submit that “The prima
facie position that the parties pay their own costs as set out in s95
only applies to an inquiry. On the other hand, s99A is a broader grant of power
and applies to a review without the constraint
accept that s95 only applies to an inquiry and not to a review.
accept the proposition that in this jurisdiction parties will normally be
expected to pay their own costs unless there are
special circumstances
justifying the making of a costs order.
9. I further accept that this
Tribunal has no power to make orders in respect to costs in proceedings before
it which might be purely
referable to events which occurred during any
investigation before the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner at Equal Opportunity
I have found that s95 which provides that subject to s99A each party is to pay
his or her own costs only applies to an
inquiry and not to a review of a
dismissal, the Tribunal still has the power to make an order for costs of a
review pursuant to s99A.
It follows that I find I have the power to make an
order for costs pursuant to s99A in this matter.
Matters relevant to the exercise of the discretion in relation
11. In the decision of Summers v State of Tasmania (Department
of Education) & Ors
[2020] TASADT 5
, Tribunal Member Wilkins noted at [11]
that matters which have previously been considered by this Tribunal to be
relevant to the
exercise of the discretion in relation to a costs application
have included:
• conduct of the parties during the
proceedings;
• the motivation of the complainant in making the
• whether there was a reasonable basis to make the
• whether the complaint was trivial, vexatious or lacking in
• whether the position taken by the applicant was genuine
(if ultimately found to be misconceived);
• public interest
considerations.
12. Tribunal Member Wilkins went on to state at [12]
Tribunal’s discretion to order costs, however, is not confined to previous
decisions in relation to whether s99A
13. Tribunal Member Wilkins referred to the decision of Evans
J. in the State of Tasmania v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal (supra) where
he referred to the following passage from a decision of Barsten JA in Hunter
Development Brokerage Pty Ltd v Cessnock City
Council (No 2)
[2006] NSWCA 292
(2006) 68 NSWLR 177:
“...care must be taken
to avoid broad discretionary powers being inflexibly confined by comments of the
court in previous cases,
or by comments in appellate courts. Whilst
explanations as to the exercise of the power may provide guidance in future
caution reflected in the observations of Brennan J in Norbis v Norbis
[1986] HCA 17
(1986) 161 CLR 513
at 537 quoted in Oshlack at [35], are
‘It is one thing to say that principles may be expressed to guide the
exercise of a discretion; it is another thing to say that
the principles may
harden into legal rules which would confine the discretion more narrowly than
the Parliament intended. The width
of a statutory discretion is determined by
the statute; it cannot be narrowed by a legal rule devised by the court to
control its
exercise.’”
14. With respect to the complainant’s conduct, I am not
persuaded that she conducted herself before the Tribunal in such a way
disadvantage the respondents other than in the usual cost of preparation and for
counsel’s fees or that she unreasonably
delayed the proceedings before the
15. There is insufficient evidence to persuade me that the
complainant acted maliciously or had a lack of good faith in making the
complaint. It was clear at the review hearing that the complainant genuinely
believed she had a valid claim against the respondents.
She believed there were
issues with respect to the way the respondents ran their business and as a
result she was subjected to unfair
and unreasonable treatment.
result of the evidence before the Tribunal a finding was made that the
respondents did not breach any provision of the Act.
However, there is no
evidence that the complaint was trivial, vexatious or lacking in substance. The
position taken by the complainant
was genuine but it was ultimately found to be
misguided and misconceived. I accept that she has not acted vexatiously or
deliberately
abused process.
17. There was no particular complexity to this
case and contrary to the submission made on behalf of the complainant this is
case where a conclusion can be drawn that the issues raised any public
policy or public interest considerations. There was no finding
respondents ignored any legislation or that they exploited the
complainant.
18. With respect to the issue of public interest, counsel for
the complainant submitted that “The Scarlet Alliance” had
that it was prepared to provide statements and material in support of the
complainant’s case. It was planned for this
to be provided either at the
investigation stage or at the inquiry stage, but “this case did not reach
either of those stages”.
Clearly there was an investigation. If the
complainant or her counsel were of the view that that the material before the
Commissioner
was inadequate further material could have been placed before the
Tribunal as part of the review. Counsel for the parties were clearly
29 October 2020.
19. As stated the mere fact that the respondents were
successful does not alone justify an order for costs in their favour. It is
contested that the respondents were wholly successful in the proceeding and they
have been put to expense. The complaint may
well have been misguided, but any
feeling of sympathy to the respondents for the cost, loss of time and
frustration incurred in being
involved in the complaint that was ultimately
dismissed must be ignored in an application for costs.
Calderbank Offer
20. An issue that does require consideration in this
application for costs is the respondents’ Calderbank offer which was made
by way of letter dated 9 October 2020.
21. In that letter counsel for the
respondents stated:
review is now listed for a hearing on 12 November 2020 in Launceston.
The Respondents will be seeking leave to be represented at the hearing and it
is anticipated that leave will be granted.
The costs of this matter are inevitably increasing.
The purpose of this letter is to put your client on notice that if the review
is unsuccessful, my clients will be making an application
for an order that your
client pay their costs pursuant to
Anti-Discrimination Act
22. The letter then sets out the reasons why counsel for the
respondents considered the review would be unsuccessful.
23. The letter
concludes as follows:
of this amounts to direct or indirect discrimination or any other breach of the
Act. I suggest the review will be dismissed.
In that event, I will tender this
letter to the Member or other person conducting the review in support of an
application that the
applicant pay the respondents’ costs of the
This review is set for a pre-hearing conference on Thursday, 29 October 2020
at 9:30am. The applicant is invited to abandon her review
by 4:00pm on Friday,
23 October 2020. If the review is withdrawn by then, my clients will take no
further action to pursue costs
and will treat this matter as being at an end.
On the other hand, if the review proceeds past 23 October 2020 my clients will
their costs of the review as earlier foreshadowed in this
24. The offer to withdraw the complaint on the basis that each
party pay their own costs was not accepted by the complainant. In
dated 14 October 2020 counsel for the complainant stated as follows:
“Your clients simply
contend that the Commissioner was correct in her reasoning. Your clients have
failed to engage with the
substance of our client’s contentions as to why
the Commissioner erred when determining our client’s complaint. Your
clients appear to merely adopt the reasoning of the Commissioner with no
meaningful exploration of the relevant factors which the
Commissioner ought to
have regard to. For the reasons that we have already set out, your
clients’ approach will fail at hearing.
Your clients fail to acknowledge that their business model, as it stood at
the time our client rented rooms form your clients, was
not compliant with the
Sex Industry Offences Act 2005
. This will be a principal issue, as it cannot
possibly be suggested that the Anti-Discrimination Act 1999
permit the imposition of a condition that is unlawful. The test in Cain did not
involve weighing up whether or not a proposed
course of action was lawful or
unlawful – and therefore the Commissioner’s bare application of Cain
without having regard
to the broader legal framework that applies to enterprises
within the sex industry was erroneous and ought to have resulted in a
conclusion. A condition that is unlawful ought to be considered to be
unreasonable.
We invite your clients to avoid incurring further costs and the likelihood of
media attention by considering the commercial realities
associated with
continued resistance to our client’s
application.”
25. The complainant did not make a counter-offer.
the Calderbank letter dated 9 October 2020, counsel for the respondents did not
specifically address the issue about whether
or not the respondents’
business model was compliant with the
Sex Industry Offences Act 2005
the conditions imposed by the respondents in the rental agreement were unlawful.
It is likely that these submissions were
not specifically addressed on the basis
that there was no evidence to support them and therefore they were not
27. At the review hearing there was no evidence in relation to the
unlawfulness of the respondents’ business model or the imposition
relevant condition.
28. In the decision of Summers v State of Tasmania
(Department of Education) & Ors (supra) Tribunal Member Wilkins discussed
principles relating to the discretion to award costs where a Calderbank
offer has been made. At [14] to [17] she refers to the case
of Marrone v
University of Tasmania and Walters
[2016] TASADT 13
and notes that:
an application for costs, the respondent’s submissions relied upon the
complaint’s refusal to accept an offer
in a Calderbank letter which
contained an offer to pay the complainant $5,000.00 in settlement of the
complaint. The correspondence
concluded ‘bearing in mind the strength of
your case and the range of likely awards of compensation that will be made to
if you were successful, we believe the offer is a generous one. We strongly
urge you to seek legal advice in relation to the offer
and your claim more
generally.’
In considering the Calderbank offer that had been made in the context of the
principles relating to the discretion to award costs
in the Tribunal, the
Tribunal stated at paragraph 10:
‘The Tribunal accepts that regard ought to be had to this offer in
respect of the costs application but does not accept that
of itself it is
circumstance that would justify an award of costs against the complainant. In
this regard the letter refers to ‘the
strength’ of the
complainant’s case but does not identify the deficiencies in evidence or
law so as to put him on proper
notice of the risks he bore in pursuing his
complaint. In particular, the Tribunal was not directed to any material
indicating that
notice was given to the complainant, either whilst the matter
was before the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner or the Tribunal, that
factual circumstances of the bullying incident or any other employment issues
raised by the complainant could not, as a matter
of law, satisfy the definition
of ‘industrial activity’ under s3 of the Act.’
The Tribunal noted that:
‘This was a complaint of some substance to the complainant; he honestly
believed that his professional development and employment
options had been
markedly affected by this incident. On the face of it, given the extent of the
evidence considered, it could not
be categorised as action by the complainant
that was vexatious or lacking in substance in so far as the factual
circumstances were
concerned. It did however lack substance as a matter of law;
but this circumstance does not appear to have been conveyed to the
complainant
either during the ADC [Anti-Discrimination Commissioner] process or the
interlocutory stage before the Tribunal. It
was raised by the Tribunal at
29. Unlike the Calderbank offer in Marrone v University of
Tasmania & Walters (supra) counsel for the respondents did identify
deficiencies in the complainant’s case and referred to the relevant law so
as to put her on proper notice of the risks
she bore in pursuing her
30. In the Calderbank letter, counsel for the respondents
client is pursuing this matter on the basis of an understanding and a belief, it
appears, that the concept of ‘lawful
sexual activity’ is a paramount
principle and fails to pay regard to how that phrase (as an attribute) is
applied in the context
of the Act as a
31. The respondents’ counsel then sets out his analysis
of the facts and the relevant law that led him to conclude:
“None of this amounts
to direct or indirect discrimination or any other breach of the Act. I suggest
the review will be dismissed.”
This is what ultimately occurred.
32. In this case, the
complainant believed she had been treated unfairly. However, her complaint
lacked substance as a matter of law
and this was pointed out to her in the
respondents’ Calderbank letter.
33. In the case of Summers v State of
Tasmania (Department of Education) (supra) the Tribunal also referred to the
decision of Cutler
v Maine; Cutler v Martin (supra) at [19] to [22] she
Member Brett, in considering the Calderbank letter as part of the basis for the
application for costs observed that
the mere fact of the Calderbank letter did
not justify making the order for costs, but that he ought to have regard to it
overall determination of the application. He said ‘the relevant
consideration is not simply whether the complainant by failing
to accept the
offer has ended up in a worse position at the conclusion of the case, but rather
whether she acted unreasonably in
rejecting the offer, and if she did, whether
that unreasonable conduct justified the making of an order for costs.’
Member Brett referred to Pollard v Baulderstone Hornibrook Engineering
Pty Ltd (No. 2)
[2007] NSWSC 486.
The passage that Tribunal Member Brett was
referring to in Pollard states as follows:
‘The Court may have regard to a Calderbank letter when deciding
questions of costs but “in the end the question is whether
offeree’s failure to accept the offer, in all the circumstances, warrants
departure from the ordinary rule as to costs,
and that the offeree ends up worse
off than if the offer had been accepted does not of itself warrant
departure’ – SMEC
Testing Services Pty Ltd v Campbelltown City
[2000] NSWCA 323
, Jones v Bradley (No 2)
[2003] NSWCA 258.
Relevant factors are whether the rejection of the compromised offer was
reasonable in the circumstances and the timeframe in which
the offeree had to
consider the offer – Crump v Equine Nutrition Systems Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2007] NSWSC 25
. It is for the defendant to persuade the Court that the
plaintiff acted unreasonably in rejecting the Calderbank offer – Gretton
at [16]. Circumstances to be considered in determining whether the failure to
accept the offer was unreasonable or not include the
making of an assessment of
the strengths and weaknesses of the plaintiff’s case looking at the claim
prospectively at the time
the offer was made. This task is not to be determined
with the benefit of hindsight – Gretton at 924].’
In Pollard, the Calderbank letter relied upon was dated 21 July 2006. It was
expressed to be open until 10.00 am on 24 July 2006.
It was received by the
plaintiff’s solicitors by fax at 11.00 am on Friday 21 July 2006. The
hearing of the proceedings was
listed too, and did commence, at 10.00 am the
following Monday (that is, the time that the Calderbank offer expired). Hislop
that the plaintiff was a young man, living outside Sydney, and not well
educated. His Honour was prepared to infer that the plaintiff
met with his
legal advisers on the morning of the hearing (but not before), but did not
accept there was ample opportunity to discuss
the offer before it expired. He
said ‘The time allowed was insufficient to discuss the offer, obtain
appropriate advice upon
it, fully consider that advice and reflect upon the many
considerations relevant to whether the offer should be accepted or
In Cutler, Tribunal Member Brett observed:
‘A careful examination of the letter tendered by [counsel for the
respondents] reveals that the offer related not only to both
complaints, but
also to a ‘workers compensation claim’. Both counsel attempted to
give me information as to the nature
of that claim, from the bar table, but at
the end of the day, I have no evidence as to the merits of that claim at the
time the offer
was made. I have no way of assessing the reasonableness of the
offer having regard to the fact that it was intended to compromise
these claims but also the workers compensation claim. In those circumstances it
seems to me that it is impossible for me
to say that the complainant acted
unreasonably in rejecting the offer.
Furthermore, I note that that the offer remained open for 10 days only. I
have no material before me which would enable me to assess
whether that was an
adequate time for the complainant to properly understand and assess the offer,
particularly given what she was
being asked to compromise.’”
Tribunal Member Brett, for those reasons, was not prepared to conclude that
the complainant acted unreasonably in rejecting the offer,
and therefore the
Calderbank letter carried little weight in his consideration of the application
for costs. The application for
34. In this case, the complainant was given 14 days from 9
until 23 October 2020 to consider the Calderbank offer. The pre-hearing
conference was scheduled for 29 October 2020 and the hearing was scheduled for
12 November 2020. Unlike the decision in Pollard
the complainant had sufficient
opportunity to discuss the offer with her counsel before it
35. Further, unlike Cutler the Calderbank offer only related to the
complaint before the Tribunal and did not seek to compromise any
other claim.
Further, of relevance in the decision of Summers v State of Tasmania (Department
of Education) (supra) the Tribunal
noted at [46]:
a complainant has been legally represented in the proceedings before the
Tribunal, the question of whether they hold
an honestly held belief as to the
strength or veracity of their claim ought not carry the same weight as it might
in circumstances
where a complainant is self- represented. This is because the
complainant will have had the benefit of legal advice in relation
application of relevant law to their claim, and the benefit of objective advice
in assessing the relative strengths of the
parties’ positions when making
decisions in relation to settlement and/or the risks of proceeding to hearing.
The complainant
was much better placed to understand her position and the
ramifications of the respondents’ expressed case than an unrepresented
litigant with a genuine, but ultimately misguided
Consideration
36. Taking into account the relevant case law, the submissions
before the Tribunal and the factors set out above, the Tribunal finds
until the making of the Calderbank offer on 9 October 2020, the circumstances of
this review lacked features that would justify
the making of a costs order in
favour of the respondents.
37. However, I accept the submission made on
behalf of the respondents that “a costs entitlement does not always flow
from a party being successful in this jurisdiction. Something more is
usually required.” I accept that the “something
more” in this
matter was the Calderbank letter dated 9 October 2020.
38. By virtue of the
Calderbank letter, the complainant and her counsel were put on notice of the
respondents’ arguments and
the reasons why the complaint would not
39. The complainant and her counsel had sufficient opportunity to
consider the respondents’ position, assess the merits of the
complaint and
make an informed decision in relation to whether the offer to withdraw the
application for review on the basis that
each party pay their own costs or to
proceed to hearing.
40. From the date of the Calderbank letter the
complainant could not have assumed there would be no risk as to costs. The
is of the view that it was unreasonable for the complainant not to
accept the Calderbank offer made at that time.
Determination
41. Accordingly, the Tribunal determines that there be an order
that the complainant pay the respondents’ costs with respect
to the review
from the date the Calderbank letter expired on 23 October 2020.
42. As stated
in the decision of Summers v State of Tasmania (Department of Education) (supra)
at [59], the practice of the Tribunal
has been to set costs at 80% of the
Supreme Court scale. I determine that is the appropriate scale to be applied to
the costs order
in this matter.
43. The Tribunal makes the following orders:
(1) That the
complainant pay the respondents’ costs with respect to the review from the
date the Calderbank offer expired on
23 October 2020, such costs to be
calculated on a party/party basis at 80% of the scale of fees presently allowed
to practitioners
and counsel under the
Supreme Court Rules 2000
Schedule 1.
(2) That in the absence of agreement as to the costs ordered in
order 1 above, the costs are to be taxed by the Registrar of the
CHAIRPERSON
See respondents’
submissions in relation to application for costs letter dated 27 November
Law v Dennison
Dental Surgeries and Ford (Costs)
[2012] TASADT 4
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (145 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter