URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFPT/2010/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:14:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
AT Scott v Forest Practices Authority [2010] TASFPT 3 (19 April 2010)
File No:09/09 F D3/2010
AT Scott Appellant
Forest Practices Authority Respondent
This was the hearing of an appeal against a decision of the Forest
Practices Authority for a Forest Practices Plan DF0048 at Tunbridge
The appeal was heard at Hobart on 15
The appellant A Scott appeared in person.
Practices Authority was represented by A Chuter and S Hardie.
application for Forest Practices Plan DFR0048 FPA (the FPP) was for clear
felling and conversion to hardwood plantation of 234.8
ha of native forest and
the establishment of a hardwood plantation on 87 ha of native grassland. The
area of the Forest Practices
Plan lies in the catchment of Lakes Sorell and
Crescent in central Tasmania.
application was recommended for refusal by the Forest Practices Authority on the
grounds of the impact of the proposed activities
on the habitat of the
Golden Galaxias
, and of the presence of a threatened vegetation
Highland Poa
Grassland Forest.
Appellant appealed against the decision.
evidence was that the
Golden Galaxias
is endemic in Tasmania and occurs
naturally only in the interconnected Lakes Crescent and Sorell. This species is
listed as 'rare'
under the Tasmanian
Threatened Species Protection Act
1995, and 'endangered' under the Commonwealth
Environmental Protection
and Biodiversity Conservation Act
fish lives for 3 to 4 years, and prefers to breed in shallow areas on rocky
shores and littoral aquatic vegetation when it is
available, and wetlands when
they contain sufficient water. Populations of the species are accordingly
susceptible to significant
declines within relatively short periods, especially
if breeding is unsuccessful for 1 to 2 successive years. The main
the species are low water levels and alterations to seasonal water
level fluctuation patterns; predation and competition with the
introduced fish,
brown trout; competition and habitat alterations associated with the introduced
fish, European carp; and degradation
of shoreline habitats, including
Golden Galaxias
is currently managed under the
Tasmanian Galaxiidae
Recovery Plan
2006 - 2010 (Threatened Species Section, 2006), and its
ecological and habitat requirements are incorporated into the management
water resources in the Lakes Crescent - Sorell system and Clyde River Valley by
the Tasmanian State Government.
Forest Practices Act
1985 requires that forest practices are conducted in
accordance with the
Forest Practices Code
Forest Practices
(Section D3.3) states that threatened species will be managed in
accordance with procedures agreed between the Department of Primary
Parks, Water and Environment (DPIPWE) and the Forest Practices Authority
‘agreed procedures’ include the implementation of endorsed
management prescriptions delivered through the
Threatened Fauna Adviser
The latter document was developed through consultation with landowners, Forest
Practices Officers and relevant specialists and
has been endorsed by the Forest
Practices Advisory Council, which at least at its inception comprised
representatives of various
organizations, including the Tasmanian Farmers and
Graziers Association, the Forest Industries Association of Tasmania and Private
Forests Tasmania.
Threatened Fauna Adviser
Recommendation number 9 for threatened fish, in
its strategic part, is:
"To maintain undisturbed levels and patterns of stream flow, any strategic
plans for these species should aim to ensure that not more
than 15% of the basal
area of the forest within the catchment, upstream where the species occurs, is
harvested in 10 years. This
means that in the forested portion of the
catchment (excluding cleared land) 85% of the forest area must not have been
in the last 10 years. Note that work is in progress, to further
develop and implement that aim."
Lakes Sorell and Crescent Water Management Plan
November 2005 ‘aims to
implement a management system that recognises the needs of all water users and
the environment’.
One of the objectives of the plan is to manage the
lakes' water regime so as to ‘(b) maintain the health and population of
the endemic native fish,
Golden Galaxias (Galaxias auratus),
is a listed threatened species.’ The Plan recognises the importance of
maintaining appropriate water levels in the Lakes,
but addresses that by dealing
with the removal of water from the Lakes, rather than the management of the
catchment upstream of the
Lakes, which is the subject of the present
11. All of the above evidence was uncontested, and the
Tribunal finds accordingly.
was contended on behalf of the Forest Practices Authority (FPA) that while
Recommendation 9 was literally stated to be for the
preparation of management
plans, it nevertheless provided an appropriate aim or standard for regulation of
forestry in the catchment
of the Lakes. The forested area in the Forest
Practices Plan, upstream of the Lakes, is all within the catchment of the Lakes.
the inflowing creeks to the Lakes do not provide significant habitat for
the species, as the creeks only flow intermittently, they
are frequently dry for
significant periods; and that the water provided by the inflowing creeks to the
Lakes is critical to the condition
of the Lakes. The proposed Forest Practices
Plan area is located in the catchment of Agnews Creek, which is the largest
of Lake Crescent apart from the canal which is the outflow of Lake
Sorell, and a small unnamed creek that flows into
Lake Sorell.
evidence on behalf of the FPA was that the proportion of forested area harvested
in the last 10 years within the combined catchment
of the two lakes is
approximately 17.7%. Taken as two separate catchments, Lake Crescent is at
19.2%, and Lake Sorell is at 17.2%.
The proposed FPP spans both
catchments, equally. Based on those figures, if certified, the FPP would
include harvesting of 243.8
ha of forest, which would increase the percentage of
forest harvested within the last 10 years, to 19.9% of the two catchments taken
evidence on behalf of the FPA was that as the level of harvesting of forest in
the Lakes Crescent - Sorell catchment has already
exceeded the 15% level,
harvesting of forest under the proposed FPP would not comply with the strategic
rule set for the
Golden Galaxias
Threatened Fauna
was contended on behalf of the Appellant that Recommendation 9 could not be
reasonably applied, because the figure of 15% came
from Victorian rather than
Tasmanian studies; and because it related to the creation of management plans,
rather than providing any
criteria for management of the
Threatened Fauna Adviser
was developed as a consultative process
including forestry and agricultural landowning interests as well as the
Government, the Tribunal
considers that the adoption of the 15% level was
appropriate as a representative exercise involving different interests.
Notwithstanding
that the origin of the 15% may have been in another State, the
evidence was, and it was uncontested, that it has remained unchanged
adoption, notwithstanding that its application has not been required until the
present case.
the immediate context of the Recommendation limiting clearance to 15% of the
catchment forest basal area is the preparation
of strategic plans, that is the
level to which the strategic plans are to be directed, and later parts of the
Recommendation show
it is intended for application to individual coupes, so the
Tribunal considers it is appropriate for application as a guide in this
was contended on behalf of the Appellant that the measurements of the extent of
forestry clearance in the catchments of Lakes Sorell
and Crescent advanced on
behalf of the FPA, were unreliable. That was because they were calculated not
on the basis of the basal
area of wood in the forest, but rather on the land
area involved. The evidence on behalf of the FPA was that given the extent of
the potential excess over the 15% level (i.e.19.2% if the Forest Practices Plan
was approved), there was substantial room for inaccuracy.
the extent of thinning nor the extent of forest reserves in the area were
sufficiently evidenced for the Tribunal to make
a confident finding as to the
extent of basal area remaining at present or after harvesting under the
evidence did not allow the Tribunal to be satisfied that the area of forest
harvested had any measurable relationship to the ‘15%
of the basal area of
the forest within the catchment’. The Tribunal is not satisfied that the
level of accuracy is sufficient
to justify a finding that the proposed Forest
Practices Plan would result in an increase which is contrary to the 15% level
in Recommendation 9 of the
Threatened Fauna
evidence was further that the Threatened Species Section (DPIPWE) (the
‘TSS’) was consulted on the implementation
of the TFA recommendation
in these circumstances, and the impacts of plantation on the
habitat. The TSS supported implementation of Recommendation 9 for
‘threatened stream fish’. The main reasons supporting
implementation of the recommendation were potential impact on the health of the
fish; potential impact on the Interlaken reserve;
and potential impact on the
ecology of the lakes and wetlands. That does not equate to a statement that the
application of the Recommendation
resulted in a finding that the 15% basal area
of forest would be exceeded by harvesting under the FPP.
Tribunal is not satisfied having regard to all of those matters, that if the
present FPP were approved the threatened species
would not be managed in
accordance with procedures as required by the
Forest Practices Code
Section D3.3, or accordingly would not be consistent with the
Practices Act
1985, requiring forest practices to be conducted in accordance
Forest Practices Code
Threatened native
vegetation community
evidence was that the proposed FPP contains approximately 35 ha of
grassland. Highland
grassland is a plant
community listed on Schedule 3A of the Tasmanian
Nature Conservation Act
as a threatened (Rare and Endangered) community.
area was identified by Mr F Duncan, a well-recognised botanist, and
Ms A Chuter in the company of an FPO on 25 May 2009. Previously,
area had been identified as being in a degraded condition due to heavy grazing.
At the time of the field inspection, the
tussocks, a
distinctive feature of Highland
grassland community, had grown
back and clearly dominated the grassland area. Exotic species were present in
low numbers, but did
not represent 50% of the vegetation cover the grassland
evidence on behalf of the Appellants consisted of a number of photographs, said
to demonstrate that no substantial cover of Highland
existed. It was
however, uncontested that
Poa gunnii,
the specific sub-species concerned
does not grow into large tussocks, and is therefore less visible in photographs;
and that grazing
by native animals and stock, would have reduced its
addition, the evidence on behalf of the Appellants given by
Mr P Lockwood, was that no
tussocks were visible; however,
the Tribunal considers that Mr Lockwood was speaking of the larger variety
which had been the subject of his training and experience; not
regard to all those matters, the Tribunal finds that the FPP area does have a
substantial cover of
species, predominantly
Poa Gunnii,
is Highland
glrassland, and accordingly that operations under the
proposed plan would involve the clearance and conversion of a threatened native
vegetation community within the meaning of section 19(1AA) of the
Practices Act 1984
section provides that the FPA is not to certify a forest practices plan
involving the clearance and conversion of a threatened
native vegetation
community, unless the Authority is satisfied of one or more of a number of
those factors in turn, there are no exceptional circumstances, demonstrated by
the evidence; there is no overall environmental
benefit, which would arise from
implementation of the FPP; on the evidence, clearance and conversion of the
community would detract
substantially from its conservation, i.e. it would
destroy it; and there was no evidence of that clearance, and conversion of the
community would be unlikely to detract substantially from conservation values in
the vicinity of the community.
Tribunal, acting in place of the FPA, is accordingly required not to certify the
Forest Practices Plan in its present form.
Tribunal may however pursuant to the Act ss.19 and 36, amend an FPP and certify
the plan as amended. In the present case the
Applicant did not oppose
certification of the plan so as to exclude from the operational area the 35ha of
grass. The Tribunal considers that if the FPP is to be approved
it should be on the basis of such an amendment.
matters which were put on behalf of the appellant were as
Appellant had constructively endeavoured to negotiate an acceptable outcome to
the FPP application, which occupied over 18 months;
in that time, 2 other FPPs
had been approved, the result of which was to take the extent of clearance of
forest in the catchment
of the two relevant lakes, to over 15%; with the result
that application of the 15% criteria would preclude approval of his FPP.
this appears unfair and unfortunate, it is not a matter which the relevant
legislation entitles the Tribunal to take into
potential financial effect of refusal of the FPP upon the Appellant was the
subject of evidence by the Appellant. That evidence
satisfies the Tribunal that
the Appellant would suffer appreciable financial loss by reason of the refusal.
At the same time, the
Tribunal takes into account the entitlements of the
Applicant to apply for compensation under the
Nature Conservation Act
decision of the Tribunal is that FPP - DFR 0048 is amended by excluding from the
area of forestry operations the 35 ha area of
shown highlighted in pink hatching on the FPP plan; and the Tribunal certifies
the plan as so amended.
Tribunal will entertain any application for an order for costs in this appeal,
if made to the Tribunal in writing with supporting
submissions within the next
14 days. If requested the Tribunal will reconvene to hear any evidence in
respect of any matter bearing
on an order for costs.
the absence of any such application for an order for costs the order of the
Tribunal is that each party bears its own costs.
Dated this 19
day of April 2010
KAM Pitt QC
Chief Chairman
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (257 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter