URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMC/2023/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Monson v Insight (Tas) Pty Ltd [2023] TASMC 5 (27 November 2023)
[2023] TASMC 05
MAGISTRATES COURT OF TASMANIA
v Insight (Tas) Pty Ltd
[2023] TASMC 05
Gerald, by and on behalf of the Latrobe Council
INSIGHT (TAS) PTY LTD
ACN 116 865 439
DELIVERED ON:
November 2023
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
September 2023
DECISION OF:
Magistrate Ken Stanton
CATCHWORDS:
Courts – Court of Petty Sessions – Practice and procedure –
Summons to produce documents – Setting aside –
Power to set aside
– Whether summons is an abuse of process - Legitimate forensic purpose
– Materially supporting a case
which is on the cards - Fishing
Coroners Act
Justices Act
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act
Attorney-General v Barnes
(2023) TASSC
Attorney-General (Tas) v Von Stalheim
[2008] TASSC 88
v Kenworthy
(1998) 99 A Crim R 541
Connell v Reynolds SM and Anor
(1993) 9 WAR 27
Darcey v Pre-Term Foundation Clinic
Glare & Anor v The Magistrates Court of Victoria and
[1992] VicRp 7
[1992] 1 VR 91
Pham v Taylor
[2000] VSC 53
[2000] NSWCA 52
(2000) 49 NSWLR 429
Principal Registrar of the Supreme Court
of New South Wales v Tastan
75 A Crim R 498
(1972) 4 SASR 1
Llewellyn v Commissioner of Police for the
Northern Territory
[1994] NTSC 80
R v Turner & Ors (No 10)
[2001] TASSC 100
(1989) 16 NSWLR 14
(1994) 75 A Crim R 498
Commissioner for Railways v
[1938] NSWStRp 29
(1938) 38 SR (NSW) 564
Alister v R
[1984] HCA 85
(1984) 154 CLR 404
R v Turner & Ors (No 11)
[2001] TASSC 102
General for NSW v Chidgey
[2008] NSWCCA 65
[2023] WASC 2023
105 MVR 103
, [92] and [97]
Commissioner of Government Transport
(1960) Weekly Notes Volume 77, 81 and
Llewellyn v The Commissioner of Police for the Northern
Territory of Australia
(1994) NT SC 80
An Hong Pham v Taylor
& the Magistrates Court of Victoria
(1972) 4 SASR 1
Lillico v McKenna
[1995] TASSC 32
5 Tas R 147
Quarrell v Russell
[2011] TASMC 23
[2010] TASMC 12
Smith & Madden v R
[2003] TASSC 91
Tasmania v Farhat
[2017] TASSC 42
[1994] 2 All ER 478
R v Keogh (No 2)
[2015] SASC 180
Mallard v The Queen
[2005] HCA 68
224 CLR 125
R v Farquharson
[2009] VSCA 307
, 26 VR 410
[2015] VSCA 36
R v Reardon
[2004] NSWCCA 197
60 NSWLR 454
R v Spiteri
[2004] NSWCCA 321
, 61 NSWLR 369 at
[2011] NSWCCA 247
82 NSWLR 123
Potier v The Queen
[2015] NSWCCA 130
Cooley v Western
[2005] WASCA 160
155 A Crim R 528
[2010] SASCFC 5
107 SASR 471
D v The State of Western
[2007] WASCA 272
R v Tennent; ex parte Henderson; Henderson
[2001] TASSC 14
; (2001) 118
1 A Crim R 143
Interim Planning
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant:
Solicitors:
Complainant:
Tremayne Fay
Rheinberger
Glynn Williams Legal
[2023] TASMC 05
Number of paragraphs:
GERALD MONSON, BY AND ON BEHALF OF THE LATROBE COUNCIL
INSIGHT (TAS) PTY LTD ACN 116 865 439
REASONS FOR DECISION
27 November 2023
(Tas) Pty Ltd has been charged with a breach of
Planning and Approvals Act
. At the instigation of Insight, a Justice of
the Peace issued summonses to produce documents to various witnesses. The
complainant
has applied to set aside those summonses. Recognising that the
complainant is differently named in the complaint I will, for the
convenience refer to the complainant as “the
first issue I must decide is whether a Court of Petty Sessions has power to set
aside a summons issued by a Justice of the Peace.
is no express power to do so in the legislation governing the jurisdiction of
the court. However in
Attorney-General v Barnes
[2023] TASSC 2
held that a Coroner had an implied power to set aside a summons if it amounted
to an abuse of process because it was oppressive
or lacked a legitimate purpose:
at [66] and [69]. That case dealt with the power of a Coroner under the
Coroners Act
. In reaching the conclusion about the implied power of
the coroner Wood J referred to
Attorney-General (Tas) v Von Stalheim
[2008] TASSC 88.
In that case, Porter J observed
that a Court
of Petty Sessions would have the power to set aside a witness summons issued in
proceedings of which it is seized based
on the implied power to control
incidental and procedural matters in proceedings before it.
are interstate authorities which might support the power of a Magistrate or
inferior court to set aside a subpoena:
Falconer v Kenworthy
(1998) 99 A
Connell v Reynolds SM and Anor
(1993) 9 WAR 27
Pre-Term Foundation Clinic
[1983] 2 NSWLR 497
Glare & Anor v The
Magistrates Court of Victoria and Anor
[1992] VicRp 7
[1992] 1 VR 91
Pham v Taylor
[2000] VSC 53
Witness v Marsden
[2000] NSWCA 52
(2000) 49 NSWLR 429
Registrar of the Supreme Court of New South Wales v Tastan
In my view all or at least many of those cases are distinguishable or the
support they provide for the power of an inferior court
to set aside a subpoena
or summons is contained in
obiter dicta.
are other interstate authorities which hold that a Court of Petty Sessions
operating in a relevantly identical statutory framework
has no power to set
aside a witness summons:
Holland v Sammon
(1972) 4 SASR 1
per Walters J
Llewellyn v Commissioner of Police for the Northern Territory
[1994] NTSC 80
per Martin CJ. It would seem that Wood J and Porter J were
not referred to in any of those authorities.
the law might be in other jurisdictions, in my view, the statutory framework
dealing with summonses in the
Coroners Act
is in all relevant respects
indistinguishable from that which applies under the
Justices Act
am therefore bound to follow the determination in
Attorney-General v
. Even if I were not bound to do so, the strong support for the
existence of the power in the
obiter dicta
of Porter J in
Attorney-General (Tas) v Von Stalheim
is highly persuasive. That
conclusion is further supported because a summons is set aside to prevent an
abuse of process and the
authorities clearly support an implied power in a Court
of Petty Sessions to prevent that: e.g.
Lillico v McKenna
[1995] TASSC
5 Tas R 147
the existence of such a power is supported by pragmatic considerations. It means
that a Court of Petty Sessions can deal
with summonses in respect of proceedings
before it without the parties incurring the additional cost and delay of having
to the Supreme Court exercising its supervisory jurisdiction in respect
of an interlocutory matter.
all of those reasons I am satisfied this court has the power to set aside the
summonses if it is otherwise appropriate to do so.
The need to
establish a legitimate forensic purpose for the summonses
R v Turner & Ors (No 10)
[2001] TASSC 100
Blow J as he then was
expressed the principles to be applied in an application to set aside a subpoena
in the following terms at
“When an issue as to a
legitimate forensic purpose is raised in relation to a subpoena, it is the duty
of the court to require
the party calling on the subpoena to identify expressly
and precisely the legitimate forensic purpose for which access to documents
sought, and to refuse access unless a legitimate forensic purpose is identified:
(1989) 16 NSWLR 14
(1994) 75 A Crim R 498
A party is not entitled to use a subpoena
duces tecum
for the purpose of
"fishing", i.e. to seek documents, not for the purpose of supporting his or her
case, but to discover whether there
is a case at all:
Commissioner for
Railways v Small
[1938] NSWStRp 29
(1938) 38 SR (NSW) 564
at 575. It may be enough if it
appears to be "on the cards" that the documents sought will materially assist
the defence:
Alister v R
[1984] HCA 85
(1984) 154 CLR 404
at 414. There needs to be
something beyond speculation, or some concrete ground for belief that the
documents will support the case
of the issuing party:
Alister v R
[1984] HCA 85
154 CLR 404
R v Turner & Ors (No 11)
[2001] TASSC 102
, a subsequent decision in
the same proceedings, Blow J refused to set aside subpoenas
“...there is some chance – probably not a
strong one – that the documents sought will materially assist the defence
in relation to the forthcoming submissions as to the exclusion of evidence. In
the light of the comments of Gibbs CJ in
Alister v R
[1984] HCA 85
(1984) 154 CLR 404
at 414 – 415, I do not think there needs to be a strong chance that a
document or group of documents will materially assist
the defence in order for a
legitimate forensic purpose for access thereto to be demonstrated”
Honour appears to have equated the phrase
“on the cards”
Alister v R
with a chance, even a chance that is less than strong, that
the documents might materially assist the defence case. In
Attorney General
for NSW v Chidgey
[2008] NSWCCA 65
, Beazley JA (at [77] to [80]), with whom
the other members of the Court agreed, rejected such an expression, preferring
the metaphorical test of
“on the cards”
consider I am bound to apply the test articulated by Blow J but I do not think
those different articulations of the test lead
to a different outcome in this
is clear is that the onus is on the defendant to establish a legitimate forensic
purpose for the summonses. That involves establishing
that the documents sought
are relevant to issues which may arise at the hearing of the charge and that
they will materially assist
the defendant’s case. A legitimate forensic
purpose does not exist where the summonses involve a fishing
expedition.
The issues to be determined at the hearing
assessing the legitimate forensic purpose it is necessary to understand the
issues in the proceeding, the elements of the charge.
The allegation is that the
defendant contravened
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act
which provides as
63. Obstruction of sealed
. . . . . . . .
(2) A person must not use land in a way,
or undertake development or do any other act, that –
(a) is contrary to a State Policy or a
planning scheme;
(3) A person who contravenes
is guilty of an offence punishable, on summary conviction, in
accordance with
(4) A person convicted of an offence
is liable to a fine not exceeding 500 penalty units....
is to be construed as rendering unlawful any use or development that
was completed pursuant to a permit in force before the commencement
particulars of the complaint, as articulated in Further and Better Particulars
dated 24 June 2021 are as follows:
(“the Date”
) Insight (Tas.) Pty Ltd
) was the owner of land at Arthur Street,
Shearwater in Tasmania
(“the Land”
the Date the Land was being used for the purpose “visitor
accommodation”.
all material times there was no permit in force for the use of the Land for
visitor accommodation within the meaning of that term
as contained within the
Latrobe Interim Planning Scheme (
Land is within the municipal area of Latrobe and in an area where the LIPS was
at all material times in force.
LIPS requires that use or development of land must not be commenced or carried
out without a permit granted and in effect.
use of the Land for the purpose of visitor accommodation without a permit in
[sic] contrary to the LIPS:
Particulars of the use
buildings on the Land were used for short-term or medium-term accommodation for
60-70 people who were away from their normal place
of residence.
buildings contained 5+ bunk beds and bedding.
were 32 bunk beds and bedding on the ground floor.
were 15 bunk beds and bedding and on the first floor.
the building called the “original shack” there were 8 bunk beds and
the garage there were 10 bunk beds and bedding.
as a cleaning roster for the residents to follow.
were at least 4 washing machines.
were tables and bench seating arranged to accommodate a large number of people
at the one time.
essence, the prosecution case is that the defendant used the property as visitor
accommodation on 24 January 2020. If so, the Latrobe
Interim Planning
Scheme (LIPS) requires a planning permit for that use. It is alleged no permit
for that use existed.
those general propositions are relatively straightforward, they will require the
determination of a number of subsidiary
issue will be the nature of the use of the property on 24 January 2020 and
whether that use can properly be categorised as visitor
accommodation within the
meaning of the LIPS.
definition of visitor accommodation in the LIPS as amended by Planning Directive
No 6 – Exemption and Standards for Visitor
Accommodation in Planning
Schemes (PD No 6) is:
“[U]se of land for providing short or
medium term accommodation for persons away from their normal place of residence,
commercial basis or otherwise available to the general public at no cost.
Examples include a backpackers hostel, bed and breakfast
establishment, camping
and caravan park, holiday cabin, holiday unit, motel, overnight camping area,
residential hotel and serviced
apartment.”
second issue will be whether the LIPS requires a permit in respect of use as
visitor accommodation on this property. In accordance
with clause 3.1(b) of PD
No 6, dwellings used by the owner or occupier as their main place of residence
are exempt from the requirement
for a permit where the property is let while the
owner or occupier is temporarily absent on vacation or visitors are accommodated
in not more than 4 bedrooms. Clause 3.1(c) of PD No 6 otherwise makes
visitor accommodation permitted use in certain zones. It will
be necessary to
decide how the property is zoned within the LIPS and whether the provisions of
the LIPS in relation to that zoning
of the property require a permit to be
granted for use as visitor accommodation. That will principally be a question of
construction
of the provisions of the LIPS and PD No 6 but may involve the
determination of some factual issues as to whether the property is
used as the main place of residence and the number of bedrooms in which visitors
are accommodated.
third issue may be whether there is any exemption from a requirement in the LIPS
for a permit. For example, Mr Williams for the
defendant submitted the
particulars did not address the historical use of the property. I initially
understood that to be a submission
that there may be existing use rights under
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act
. That would
require findings about the nature of the use of the land at, or prior to the
LIPS coming into force and comparison of
that use with use of the land on 24
January 2020. However in a letter dated 10 February 2023 to the Registrar of the
Devonport Magistrates
Court, Mr Williams also referred to existing permissions
issued by the Council as a permit authority. It might be that he is submitting
there are other permits which authorise the use of the land in the manner it was
being used on 24 January 2020.
addition, during oral submissions the parties agreed that whether a permit was
required might involve consideration of the classification
of the building as
class I or class II within the meaning of building legislation which was
otherwise not identified for me. That
will also involve a categorisation of
the parties agreed that expert evidence would be required as to classification
of the property. I have some reservations
expert evidence in a case such as this. It seems to me findings of fact will
need to be made about
the use of the property at relevant times and the legal
consequences of those facts will need to be determined based on a proper
construction of the relevant legislation: see
Wright v Uznovic
105 MVR 103
, [92] and [97]. An improper concession as to
admissibility does not render the expert evidence admissible. Nonetheless, the
agree in respect of the need for expert evidence. The nature and content
of that evidence is not before me. I am therefore not prepared
at this point to
conclude that it will not be admissible. If such evidence is to be given,
documents relevant to the basis and formulation
of any such expert opinion would
also be relevant. Again, that is likely to involve facts related to the use of
the property at various
of the issues identified above will involve construing the LIPS, the
Planning and Approvals Act
and any relevant building legislation.
Although 24 January 2020 is the date of the alleged offence, the use of the
property over
time will also need to be considered along with the length of time
any persons stayed or intended to stay at the property, the nature
activities during the time they were staying there and where their normal place
of residence was.
Evidence Act
there may be a question
that does not affect the outcome
of this application.
summonses are, in the following terms:
recording, or relating to, your, and / or Latrobe Council’s (and any of
its officers, employees, or agents) investigation
of, and assessment of, the use
and occupation of the land and buildings situated at 30 Arthur Street,
Shearwater Tasmania
("Property"
), including any use and occupation
allegedly contrary to, or in compliance with, any planning scheme or planning
related legislation,
rule, regulation, directive or instrument
(including text messages, messages, memoranda, letters, notes or emails)
recording any communications between yourself and
Latrobe Council’s Mayor,
Mr Peter Freshney in the period from 1
February 2020 inclusive, concerning the Property and the Property Use.
(including text messages, messages, memoranda, letters, notes or emails)
recording any communications between yourself (and
/ or Latrobe Council) with
Mr Steve Bramich of the business known as Braddon Building Surveying,
concerning the Property and the
Property Use, in the period from 1
February 2020 inclusive.
personal diary entries, and calendar records, concerning or relating to the
Property and the Property Use in the period from
February 2020 inclusive.
(including text messages, messages, memoranda, letters, notes or emails)
recording any communications between yourself (and
/ or Latrobe Council) with
the Commonwealth Government's Department of Education, Skills and Employment
), concerning the Property and the Property Use
including the years 2019 – 2021 inclusive.
(including text messages, messages, memoranda, letters, notes or emails)
recording any communications between yourself (and
/ or Latrobe Council) with
Owen Pacific Workforce Pty Ltd and / or any of its officers or employees,
concerning:
Property and the Property Use;
use, or potential use, by Owen Pacific Workforce Pty Ltd, of land and buildings
owned by Latrobe Council at 1 Anderson Street,
Port Sorell, Tasmania
), on commercial terms with Latrobe Council, for the purposes of
accommodation and housing of agricultural workers, and / or workers,
foreign visa holders, supplied or procured by Owen Pacific Workforce Pty Ltd,
subsequent to Council issuing Emergency Orders
dated 5 February 2020 to
Insight (TAS) Pty Ltd and Simon Baldock which required the Property to be
vacated with immediate effect.
agreement/s and / or lease, and / or licence/s to occupy (and any variations
thereto) Camp Banksia between Latrobe Council
as landowner / lessor / licensor
and Owen Pacific Workforce Pty Ltd as tenant / occupier / lessee / licensee,
relating to Camp Banksia’s
occupation by Owen Pacific Workforce Pty Ltd
for the purposes of accommodation and housing of agricultural workers, and / or
and / or foreign visa holders, supplied or procured by Owen Pacific
Workforce Pty Ltd, subsequent to Latrobe Council issuing Emergency
Orders dated
5 February 2020 to Insight (TAS) Pty Ltd and Simon Baldock which required the
Property to be vacated with immediate
and / or claims for payment issued by Latrobe Council to Owen Pacific Workforce
Pty Ltd relating to the occupation of Camp
Banksia by Owen Pacific Workforce Pty
Ltd as referred to in paragraph 7 above.
"Documents"
that are the subject of production pursuant to this Summons to produce documents
as defined in
Evidence Act 2001
(TAS) and which
definition includes: anything on which there is writing, or anything from which
sounds, images or writings can be
reproduced, or any map, plan, drawing or
photograph, and which definition therefore includes but is not limited to:
letters / correspondence,
notes, file notes, memoranda, diary entries, emails,
text messages, photographs, drawings, plans, recordings, writing, and
photographs
held anywhere that are in your possession or power, and on any
electronic device including mobile phone or computer that is in your
documents that are the subject of this Summons to produce do not include the
documents that have been previously produced by Latrobe
Council in these
proceedings as listed in the List of Documents served by Latrobe Council dated
13 September 2022.
To Glenys Nichols, Latrobe
recording, concerning, or relating to, your, and / or Latrobe Council’s
(and any of its officers, employees, or agents)
investigation of, and assessment
of the use and occupation of the land and buildings situated at 30 Arthur
Street, Shearwater Tasmania
(“Property”
), including any use
and occupation allegedly contrary to, or in compliance with, any planning
scheme, or planning related legislation,
rule, regulation, directive, or
(“Property Use”
(including text messages, messages, memoranda, letters, notes or emails)
recording any communications between yourself and
Latrobe Council’s Mayor,
Mr Peter Freshney in the period from 1st February 2020 to 7th February 2020
inclusive, concerning
the Property and the Property Use.
(including text messages, messages, memoranda, letters, notes or emails)
recording any communications between yourself and
Latrobe Council’s
General Manager Mr Gerald Monson in the period from 1 July 2019 to 7th February
2020 inclusive, concerning
the Property and the Property Use.
personal diary entries, and calendar records, concerning or relating to the
Property and the Property Use, in the period from
1st to 7th February 2020
"Documents"
that are the subject of production pursuant to this Summons to produce documents
Evidence Act 2001
(TAS) and which definition
includes: anything on which there is writing, or anything from which sounds,
images or writings can be
reproduced, or any map, plan, drawing or photograph,
and which definition therefore includes but is not limited to: letters /
correspondence,
notes, file notes, memoranda, diary entries, emails, text
messages, photographs, drawings, plans, recordings, writing, and photographs
held anywhere that are in your possession or power, and on any electronic device
including mobile phone or computer that is in your
possession or power.
documents that are the subject of this Summons to produce do not include the
documents that have been previously produced by Latrobe
Council in these
proceedings as listed in the List of Documents served by Latrobe Council dated
13 September 2022.
To Owen Pacific Workforce Pty
(including emails, memoranda, letters, messages / text messages, messages,
reports, notes, site visit records, diary entries,
calendar entries, or
photographs) recording, concerning, or relating to the use and occupation of the
land and buildings situated
at 30 Arthur Street, Shearwater Tasmania
(“Property”) by Insight (TAS) Pty Ltd ACN 116 865 439 and / or Owen
Workforce Pty Ltd ACN 158 702 893, including any use and / or occupation
allegedly contrary to, or in compliance with, any planning
scheme, or planning
related legislation, rule, regulation, directive, or instrument (“Property
(including emails, memoranda, letters, messages / text messages, reports, notes,
site visit records, diary entries, calendar
entries, or photographs) recording
any communications between yourself and / or Owen Pacific Workforce Pty Ltd ACN
158 702 893 on
the one part, and Latrobe Council (and any of its officers,
employees, or agents) of the other part, concerning:
Property and the Property Use;
use, or potential use, by Owen Pacific Workforce Pty Ltd, of land and buildings
owned by Latrobe Council at 1 Anderson Street,
Port Sorell Tasmania ("Camp
Banksia"), pursuant to commercial terms with Latrobe Council, for the purposes
of accommodation and housing
of agricultural workers, and / or workers, and / or
foreign visa holders, supplied or procured by Owen Pacific Workforce Pty Ltd
158 702 893, subsequent to Council issuing Emergency Orders dated 5 February
2020 to Insight (TAS) Pty Ltd and Simon Baldock
which required the Property to
be vacated with immediate effect.
agreement/s and / or lease, and / or licence/s to occupy (and any variations
thereto) Camp Banksia between Latrobe Council
as landowner / lessor / licensor
and Owen Pacific Workforce Pty Ltd ACN 158 702 893 as tenant / occupier / lessee
/ licensee, in
the year 2020, relating to Camp Banksia’s occupation by
Owen Pacific Workforce Pty Ltd ACN 158 702 893 for the purposes of
accommodation
and housing of agricultural workers, and / or workers, and / or foreign visa
holders, supplied or procured by Owen
Pacific Workforce Pty Ltd ACN 158 702 893,
subsequent to Latrobe Council issuing Emergency Orders dated 5 February 2020 to
(TAS) Pty Ltd and Simon Baldock which required the Property to be
vacated with immediate effect.
and / or claims for payment issued by Latrobe Council to Owen Pacific Workforce
Pty Ltd ACN 158 702 893 relating to the occupation
of Camp Banksia by Owen
Pacific Workforce Pty Ltd ACN 158 702 893 as referred to in paragraph 3 above,
for year 2020.
(including emails, memoranda, letters, messages / text messages, messages,
reports, notes, site visit records, diary entries,
calendar entries, or
photographs) recording any communications between yourself (and / or to Owen
Pacific Workforce Pty Ltd ACN 158
702 893) with the Commonwealth
Government’s Department of Education, Skills and Employment
), concerning the Property and the Property Use,
including the years 2019 – 2021 inclusive.
personal diary entries, and calendar records, (and those of Owen Pacific
Workforce Pty Ltd ACN 158 702 893 if in existence) concerning
or relating to the
Property and the Property Use, in the period from 3
February 2020 inclusive.
"Documents"
that are the subject of production pursuant to this Summons to produce documents
Evidence Act 2001
(TAS) and which definition
includes: anything on which there is writing, or anything from which sounds,
images or writings can be
reproduced, or any map, plan, drawing or photograph,
and which definition therefore includes but is not limited to: letters /
correspondence,
notes, file notes, memoranda, diary entries, emails, text
messages, photographs, drawings, plans, recordings, writing, and photographs
held anywhere that are in your possession or power, and on any electronic device
including mobile phone or computer that is in your
possession or power.
To Braddon Building Surveying
(including emails, memoranda, letters, messages / text messages, messages,
reports, notes, site visit records, diary entries,
calendar entries, or
photographs) recording, concerning, or relating to, your, and / or Latrobe
Council’s (and any of its officers,
employees, or agents) investigation
of, and assessment of the use and occupation of the land and buildings situated
at 30 Arthur
Street, Shearwater Tasmania (
including any use and occupation allegedly contrary to, or in compliance with,
any planning scheme, or planning related legislation,
rule, regulation,
directive, or instrument
(“Property Use”
contract, agreement, or retainer that you, or the business that you control
known as Braddon Building Surveying Services has had
or have with Latrobe
Council relating to your, and / or Latrobe Council’s (and any of its
officers, employees, or agents) investigation
of, and assessment of, the use and
occupation of the land and buildings situated at 30 Arthur Street Shearwater
(“Property”
) including any use and occupation
allegedly contrary to, or in compliance with, any planning scheme, or planning
related legislation,
rule, regulation, directive, or instrument
(“Property Use”
"Documents"
that are the subject of production pursuant to this Summons to produce documents
Evidence Act
(TAS) and which definition
includes: anything on which there is writing, or anything from which sounds,
images or writings can be
reproduced, or any map, plan, drawing or photograph,
and which definition therefore includes but is not limited to: letters /
correspondence,
notes, file notes, memoranda, diary entries, emails, text
messages, photographs, drawings, plans, recordings, writing, and photographs
held anywhere that are in your possession or power, and on any electronic device
including mobile phone or computer that is in your
possession or power.
summary, the defendant wants production of all documents which might reveal
information held by the various officers of the Council
and a building surveyor
relevant to the use of the property at various times.
Identifying the legitimate forensic purpose
submissions for the defendant are somewhat discursive but as I understand them
the legitimate forensic purpose for the summonses
is to remedy alleged
deficiencies in the investigation of the allegations the subject of the
complaint and the disclosure made by
the Council. In particular it is submitted
as follows:
Council is a private prosecutor not subject to the policies of the usual
prosecuting authorities such as the police and the DPP.
investigation by the Council has been inadequate.
has been inadequate disclosure by the Council.
prosecution constitutes an abuse of process.
summonses are necessary to address those matters.
overarching submission of the Council is that the summonses are a fishing
expedition which is not a legitimate forensic purpose.
In particular, the
Council submits as follows:
is no proof that many of the documents exist (
Oborn v Commissioner of
Government Transport
(1960) Weekly Notes Volume 77, 81 and 83).
they are not requested for a legitimate forensic purpose (
Llewellyn v The
Commissioner of Police for the Northern Territory of Australia
(1994) NT SC
not described with reasonable particularity.
the named person to chase through masses of documents to see whether they exist
or may or may not exist.
respondent fails to discharge the onus on it to show there is an issue or raises
issues relevant to the prosecution or whether
what is being done is to embark on
a fishing expedition (
Llewellyn v The Commissioner of Police for the Northern
Territory of Australia
(1994) NT SC 80).
to provide a definition of the documents that it is reasonably expected the
addressee may have (
An Hong Pham v Taylor & the Magistrates Court of
justice who issued the summonses failed to take reasonable precautions to
satisfy himself that the evidence intended to be produced
by the documents have
some probative value in relation to the issues the Court will be required to
determine (
Holland v Sammon
(1972) 4 SASR 1).
support of finding that the summonses have a legitimate forensic purpose, it
might be that if the documents sought exist and were
produced at the trial, that
they would have some relevance to the issues the Court has to determine.
I am not satisfied the summonses sought serve a legitimate forensic purpose for
the following reasons.
some of the purposes identified by the Insight are not relevant to the issues to
be determined in the proceedings. For example,
the fact the Council is a private
prosecutor is not related to any fact in issue in the proceedings. Neither is
the fact that it
is not subject to the policies of more common prosecuting
authorities.
defendant submits that the prosecution constitutes an abuse of process. The
possibility of
mala fides,
spite or some other unidentified motive is
alleged. That seems to be on the basis that the prosecution was commenced for
some ulterior
purpose to bring about a benefit to the Council by housing the
occupants of the property elsewhere. Whether or not the prosecution
is an abuse
of process is not an issue in the proceedings on a plea of not guilty. An
allegation of abuse of process is raised on
a plea under
s 74A(5)(c)
Justices Act
Lillico v McKenna
[1995] TASSC 32
Quarrell v Russell
[2011] TASMC 23
Lusted v Jenkins
On a plea of not guilty it is the elements of the offence which must
be considered.
and even if I am wrong as to that, the nature of the submissions opposing the
setting aside of the summonses is redolent with
language which suggests an
attempt to see whether there is a case that can be made rather than to
materially support a case which
might be on the cards. For example, paragraph
[22] of the defendant’s written submissions suggests the summonses are
to avoid the background to the complaint being buried by the exclusion
of evidence from employees or officers of the Council where
the application is
vexatious, an abuse of process or otherwise improper. It is submitted that
should not be allowed because,
“It is speculated that there are
compelling reasons”
not to exclude such evidence. Something more than
speculation is required.
[29] of the defendant’s submissions suggests the summons is to gather
evidence by summons
“...in order to consider its defence”
That suggests the material sought in the summonses is not to support a defence
but to see whether or not one exists.
[30] suggests that is to
“bring pressure to bear on this
prosecution”
. That does not seem to bear any relationship to advancing
a particular case but rather to see whether a case can be mounted.
[32] suggests the purpose of the summonses is to enhance the defendant’s
“...ability to pick holes in the case against it”
decrease the chance it will have to proffer its own evidence where
“...evidence that might end to rebut presumptions, such as to the use
of the house, is not put forward”
Whatever the meaning of
that sentence might be, it
suggests the purpose is to seek out a defence
rather than support a defence; that the purpose is to find a case rather than
a case which is on the cards.
[34] submits that the summonses are necessary because:
package of evidence ... prepared on a false premise about planning law, or on
the results of a flawed investigation to
do with the occupation of a residence
by a group of people, cannot be remedied at the prosecution stage unless the
prosecutor is
alert to the possibility that key lines of inquiry have not been
pursued and then is prepared to challenge the investigator on that
The nature of the false premise about planning law and the manner in which
the investigation is flawed are not identified with any
precision. Again, this
submission suggests the summonses have the purpose of trying to find a defence
rather than supporting a case,
even an unlikely one.
course, it must be kept in mind that the defendant has the right to remain
silent and is entitled to simply challenge the prosecution
“pick holes in it”
if you will. But that does not entitle a
defendant to issue and serve summonses that will require production of broad
ranging material
to see whether or not it will reveal an unidentified hole in
the prosecution case or support an unidentified positive defence. The
defendant’s submissions make it clear that is what it is seeking to do.
Indeed, nowhere does it identify what the case which
is on the cards might
the defendant submits that the summonses are necessary to remedy a flawed
investigation. Any inadequacies in the investigation
of the offence are not
directly relevant to the issues which need to be determined. Any such
inadequacies might create difficulties
in establishing the elements of the
charge beyond reasonable doubt. But that does not justify summonses which seek
to ascertain whether
such gaps in the proof exist. In any event, although the
flawed nature of the investigation is stated as a conclusion, the basis
conclusion is not identified. The flaws or inadequacies in the investigation are
not identified. That again supports the
conclusion that the summonses are
fishing expedition relying on the speculative possibility of the summonsed
documents revealing
a defence rather than an attempt to elicit information which
will materially support a defence which is on the cards.
the defendant submits the summonses are necessary to remedy inadequate
disclosure by the Council. Despite the defendant’s
complaints about the
unregulated duties of the Council as a prosecutor, the common law governs a
prosecutors’ obligations including
the obligation in respect of
disclosure. As a prosecutor, the Council is obliged to disclose to the defendant
all evidence in its
possession or available to it which is necessary to ensure a
fair trial:
Smith & Madden v R
[2003] TASSC 91
per Underwood J at
Tasmania v Farhat
[2017] TASSC 42
Pearce J, at [14]-[16],
referred to the authorities stating the nature and extent of the duty as
The prosecution duty of disclosure has been stated and considered in many
cases. Most statements of the nature and extent of the
duty derive from the
statements of the English Court of Appeal in
[1994] 2 All ER 478
in the following
"I would judge to be material in the realm
of disclosure that which can be seen on a sensible appraisal by the
prosecution:
(1) to be relevant or possibly relevant to an issue in the case;
(2) to raise or possibly raise a new issue whose existence is not apparent
from the evidence the prosecution proposes to use;
(3) to hold out a real (as opposed to fanciful) prospect of providing a
lead on evidence which goes to (1) or (2)."
nature and extent of the duty is, with respect, helpfully described by reference
to the authorities by Blue J in
[2015] SASC 180
At [54] his Honour summarised the
"54 The prosecution owes a
duty to disclose to the defence on a timely basis:
(a) evidence proposed to be adduced by the prosecution including the
evidence of witnesses and proposed exhibits;
(b) evidence of witnesses who the prosecution does not propose to
(c) material that tends to reflect materially on the credibility of
prosecution witnesses;
(c) material that tends to weaken the prosecution case or assist the
defence case;
(e) material that is relevant to an issue in the case." [Citations
Vanstone J in
Police v Wells
[2015] SASC 184
, I do not agree that there is an
obligation upon the prosecution to "go out into the world and investigate
matters which might reflect
upon the credibility of prosecution witnesses and
then to disclose those matters". Subject to that reservation, the passages just
quoted are consistent with statements made by intermediate courts of appeal in
other States and in the High Court: see for
Mallard v The
[2005] HCA 68
224 CLR 125
R v Farquharson
[2009] VSCA 307
, 26 VR 410;
Kev v The Queen
[2015] VSCA 36
R v Reardon (No
[2004] NSWCCA 197
60 NSWLR 454
[2004] NSWCCA 321
61 NSWLR 369
[2011] NSWCCA 247
82 NSWLR 123
Potier v The Queen
[2015] NSWCCA 130
Cooley v Western Australia
[2005] WASCA 160
155 A Crim R 528
R v Andrews
[2010] SASCFC 5
107 SASR 471.
would respectfully add
D v The State of Western Australia
[2007] WASCA
to the list of authorities referred to by His Honour.
Council is clearly obliged to disclose documents in accordance with those
principles. If it fails in that duty, a summons might
be issued and made
returnable before the relevant hearing:
R v Tennent; ex parte Henderson;
Henderson v Fehlandt
[2001] TASSC 14
; (2001) 118
1 A Crim R 143
this case the Council has provided a list of documents. That list is in a form
which is more akin to discovery procedures in civil
proceedings rather than the
disclosure required in proceedings under the
Justices Act
of an offence. There are important differences in those obligations but those
differences do not affect the outcome of
this application.
list of documents identifies 94 documents or bundles of documents. I have not
been provided with any of the documents but, except
in one regard, that list
appears to rather fulsomely comply with the Council’s obligation of
disclosure. That exception is
document 30 which is an invoice from an
investigator. The report of that investigator does not seem to have been
disclosed. However,
insofar as that is a failure to comply with the prosecution
obligation of disclosure, it does not justify production of the broad
documents sought in the summonses.
of the documents in the list of documents fall within the description of the
documents sought in the summonses. The submissions
of the defendant do not
indicate areas in which the list of documents is inadequate or where disclosure
has been incomplete. The
allegation of inadequacy seems to flow rather from
speculation about the identity and experience of the prosecutor, assuming that
will lead to an inadequacy rather than pointing to any substantive failure to
comply with its disclosure obligations. I do not consider
there has been any
failure to disclose relevant documents other than the possible failure in
respect of the investigator’s
report I have identified above.
the very broad nature of the documents sought suggests the purpose is to
ascertain whether a defence exists rather than to
support a case which is on the
cards, even a case which relies on inadequacies in the prosecution case.
all of the above reasons I am not satisfied that the summonses serve a
legitimate forensic purpose. In the metaphorical language
of the applicable
authorities they are not directed at materially assisting a case which is on the
cards. They are a fishing expedition
to see whether there might be such a case.
I order that each summons referred to in the application is set
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (339 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter