URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMC/2024/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Equity Australia Corporation Pty Ltd v Aldridge [2024] TASMC 6 (22 May 2024)
[2024] TASMC 06
MAGISTRATES COURT OF TASMANIA
Equity Australia Corporation Pty Ltd v Aldridge
[2024] TASMC 06
EQUITY AUSTRALIA CORPORATION PTY LTD
, Crystal Lee
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
DECISION OF:
CATCHWORDS:
Costs - principle giving discretion to order indemnity costs on the basis
of some relevant dishonesty on the part of the unsuccessful
party - high-handed
or impudent reliance on defence known to be untrue - order made
Residential Tenancy Act 1997
Magistrates Court (Civil
Division) Act 1992
Magistrates Court (Civil Division) (Minor Civil
Claims Regulations) 2023
Magistrates Court (Civil Division) Rules
Reissig v Tubb (No. 2)
[2013] TASMC 27
Staines (No. 2)
[2012] TASMC 17
TasWater v Kitto
[2017] TASMC
Ugly Tribe Co Pty Ltd v Sikola & Ors
Medsara Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2004] NSWSC 262
Degnam Pty Ltd (In Liq) v
Wright (No. 2)
[1983] 2 NSWLR 354
Currie & Co v Law Society
[1977] QB 990
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Ogilvie Jennings
Respondent:
Tenants Unition of Tasmania
Paragraphs:
Serial No. 06
File No. M/2024/67
EQUITY AUSTRALIA CORPORATION PTY
CRYSTAL LEE ALDRIDGE
REASONS FOR DECISION
22 May 2024
19 March 2024 I made an order for vacant possession. In my reasons for decision
I found that Ms Aldridge had lied about paying
rent and the security
deposit and fabricated receipts to support that lie. I also found that the
non-payment of rent was not a breach
of the agreement because the time period
for payment of rent breached the
Residential Tenancy Act
Nonetheless, the non-payment of the security deposit was a breach of the
agreement justifying the order for vacant possession.
applicant has applied for an order that Ms Aldridge pay its costs on an
indemnity basis and that some of those costs be apportioned
to the legal
practitioner representing Ms Aldridge.
power to award costs is contained in
Magistrates Court
(Civil Division) Act
. It states:
“(1) The costs of and incidental
to all proceedings are in the discretion of the Court and the Court may
determine by whom and
to what extent the costs are to be paid.
(2) In the due exercise of the discretion
conferred by
, in any proceedings before the Court, the Court may order a
practitioner to pay the costs of the proceedings or a portion of the
this claim is a minor civil claim:
Regulation 3(2)(b)
Magistrates
Court (Civil Division) (Minor Civil Claims Regulations)
. The exercise
of the power to award costs is therefore limited by s 31AF of the Act which
“(1) In a minor civil claim, costs for getting
the action up to trial or by way of counsel fees are not to be awarded
(a) all parties to the action were
represented by counsel; or
(b) the Court is of the opinion there are
special circumstances justifying the award of costs.
(2) The Court may award compensation to a
party in a proceeding before it if the Court considers that the minor civil
claim to which
the proceeding relates is a frivolous or vexatious
the prohibition on awarding costs in a minor civil claim is removed because one
of the exceptions in s 31AF(1) is established,
the discretion is again
unfettered.
is trite law that the judicial exercise of that discretion gives rise to the
usual rule that costs follow the event. Generally
the successful party is
awarded costs.
addition r138 of the
Magistrates Court (Civil Division) Rules
provides so far as relevant:
“(1) Unless the Court orders
otherwise, a successful party in a proceeding is entitled on judgment to costs
against an unsuccessful
party in accordance with this rule and
the power to award costs in a minor civil claim exists, that rule would apply
because in the exercise of its power under
Magistrates Court
(Civil Division) Act
, the Magistrates Rules Committee has defined a
claim to include a minor civil claim:
Magistrates Court (Civil Division)
r3 definition of claim.
decision or order of the Court finally disposing of the proceeding is a judgment
of the Court:
Magistrates Court (Civil Division) Act
of judgement. An order for vacant possession therefore constitutes a judgment to
which r138 of the
Magistrates Court (Civil Division) Rules
Reissig v Tubb (No. 2)
[2013] TASMC 27
Magistrate Pearce (as he then was)
raised some doubt about whether r138 could legitimately fetter the discretion
of the Act: at [5]. His Honour did not decide the question but
observed that r138 essentially restates the usual rule that costs
follow the event which will result in the same outcome whatever the source of
that rule might be.
power to award costs includes the power to award indemnity costs:
Staines (No. 2)
[2012] TASMC 17
Tubb (No. 2)
TasWater v Kitto
[2017] TASMC 6
Indemnity costs are awarded to compensate more fully, not to punish or deter
litigation:
Hamod v State of New South Wales
(2002) 188 ALR 659 at 20.
to when it is appropriate to award such costs, Magistrate Pearce said in
Reissig v Tubb (No. 2)
above at [12] and [13]:
Such an order is generally only made if "there is some special or unusual
feature in the case to justify the court exercising
its discretion in that
way": Preston v. Preston
(1982) 1 All ER 41
at 58. It is only in a
special case that the discretion to depart from the normal rule will be properly
exercised; see NMFM Property
Pty Ltd v Citibank Ltd (No 2)
[2001] FCA 480
(2000) 109 FCR 77
, Re Wilcox; Ex parte
Venture Industries Pty Ltd (No 2)
[1996] FCA 1942
(1996) 72 FCR 151
at 152-153 per Black CJ,
and at 158 per Cooper and Merkel JJ, Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission v Australian Safeway
Stores Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2002] FCA 1294
, Colgate-Palmolive
Company v Cussons Pty Limited
[1993] FCA 536
; (1993) 46 FCR 225 at 232-233 per Sheppard
J, Ruddock v An Vadarlis (No 2)
[2001] FCA 1865
(2001) 115 FCR 229
at 234 per Black CJ and
Australian Competition & Consumer Commission v Leahy
Petroleum Pty Ltd
[2007] FCA 1844.
13. It is impossible to provide a comprehensive definition of what is an
appropriate case. However in Colgate-Palmolive Company at
Sheppard J set out principles that his Honour derived from the authorities and
gave guidance as to some of the circumstances
in which courts have ordered that
costs be paid on an indemnity basis. These circumstances included "the making of
allegations of
fraud knowing them to be false and the making of irrelevant
allegations of fraud", "evidence of particular misconduct that causes
time to the Court and to other parties", "the fact that the proceedings were
commenced...in disregard of known facts or clearly
established law", and "the
wilful making of allegations which ought never to have been made or the undue
prolongation of a case by
groundless contentions": see also Fountain
Selected Meats (Sales) Pty Ltd v International Produce Merchants Pty Ltd
[1988] FCA 202
; (1988) 81 ALR 397 at 400-401 per Woodward J
and Australian Transport Insurance Pty Ltd v Graeme Phillips Road Transport
[1986] FCA 85
(1986) 10 FCR 177
at 178 per Woodward J
and Cook v Pasminco Ltd (No 2)[2000] FCA 1819;
[2000] FCA 1819
(2000) 107 FCR 44
reference in s 31AF(1)(b) to special circumstances and the requirement that
there be some special or unusual feature in the case
to justify the award of
indemnity costs means that there will be common matters relevant to both of
those issues: cf
Taswater v Kitto,
above, at [58].
this case the applicant was represented by counsel throughout the proceedings.
Ms Aldridge was only represented by counsel after
the first directions hearing
and at the hearing of the application. Nonetheless, at least from the date Ms
Aldridge was represented
by counsel the exception to the prohibition on the
award of costs in s31AF(1)(a) existed. The power to award costs therefore exists
for the period both parties were represented by counsel. The usual rule
therefore applies, that is, the successful applicant would
be entitled to its
Ms Aldridge submits there are factors which mean that rule should not be
she relied on the status of the proceedings as a minor civil claim. Some support
for that view might be found in
TasWater v Kitto,
above where Magistrate
McTaggart said, at [54]:
“The broad discretion as to costs
must be read in light of section 31AF which specifically
prescribes the circumstances for awards of costs in the minor civil division.
The provision reflects the nature of the jurisdiction and the intention that
costs should only be awarded where clearly justified
circumstances”.
statement is clearly correct in the context of her Honour’s consideration
of whether special circumstances exist to justify
an award of costs under s
31AF(1)(b). However I do not consider her Honour was suggesting that the status
of a claim as a minor civil
claim requires a successful party to be refused
costs in the absence of clear justification when the prohibition on the award of
costs is removed by the operation of s 31AF(1)(a) because the parties are both
represented. In such a case, although the nature and
importance of the dispute
is a relevant consideration, once the parties both choose to have legal
representation there is no need
to show special circumstances for the exercise
of the power to award costs. Where both parties are represented the power to
costs exists independently of the need to establish special
circumstances.
course the exercise of the power must be justified. In that sense there is
always a burden of persuasion on an applicant for costs.
But in this case there
is no requirement that costs be refused unless clearly justified in the
circumstances. In any event, a clear
justification for the exercise of that
power exists because the applicant was successful.
and related to the first point, Ms Aldridge submitted that to order costs when
both parties are legally represented would
be taking advantage of the leave
required and granted by the Court. That might discourage vulnerable litigants
from choosing to be
represented which would in turn undermine dealing with the
proceedings as required by
Magistrates Court (Civil Division)
and r4 of the
Magistrates Court (Civil Division) Rules
i.e. with expedition and cost saving, taking account of the financial position
of the parties and ensuring they are on an equal
accept that representation of Ms Aldridge assisted the Court in the efficient
resolution of the claim. I also accept that it is
inappropriate to make any
order for the purpose of punishing Ms Aldridge or for prudently obtaining
representation or otherwise to
act as a deterrent to responding to an
application to the Court.
the decision to obtain representation inevitably involves a cost benefit
analysis for the party seeking it. Competent legal
representation enables a
party to present their case in the most favourable way. Where the other party is
represented it exposes
all parties to the risk of an adverse costs order. The
fact that risk comes to fruition does not mean the inevitable negative effect
such an order is a punishment, that it puts the parties on an unequal footing or
otherwise offends against the principles for
the fair and efficient disposition
of proceedings stated in the
Magistrates Court (Civil Division) Act
Magistrates Court (Civil Division) Rules
. In my view, those
matters do not weigh against an award of costs in favour of the applicant in
it was submitted for Ms Aldridge that she had a legitimate defence. I reject
that submission. It may have been an arguable
defence, but my findings mean it
is factually unfounded. In any event, the usual rule applies in cases where
there is an arguable
defence. The time taken for consideration and decision does
not add strength to any argument that costs should not follow the event.
applicant was successful in obtaining the order sought. It did not conduct the
litigation in a manner which might disentitle it
to an award of costs. Even if
there was an additional persuasive burden imposed because the proceedings are a
minor civil claim,
it is appropriate to award costs to the applicant.
turning to consider the basis of the assessment of those costs I observe that
the matters relevant to that issue, which I discuss
below, provide further
support for the conclusion that Ms Aldridge should pay the applicant’s
costs. In addition, insofar as
s 31AF(1)(b) requires special circumstances to be
established, the following matters meet that requirement.
special circumstances relied on by the applicant can be reduced to the fact that
Ms Aldridge’s defence of the application
involved dishonesty on her part;
that she lied about paying the rent and the security deposit and fabricated
receipts for payments
she had not made which she tendered in evidence to support
that position. I found that to be the case.
Ugly Tribe Co Pty Ltd v Sikola & Ors
[2001] VSC 189
Harper J said, at
“The position changes where a litigant acts
dishonestly in the litigation, or where the rights and privileges of a litigant
are flouted or abused. Then, the rationale for refusing to order that the losing
party indemnify an opposite party against that party's
costs is less compelling.
Indeed, costs are more frequently if not invariably awarded on an indemnity or
like basis (such as that
of solicitor/client) where findings of dishonesty or
serious misconduct have been made against the party ordered to
that case the Court held such special circumstances did not exist. However in
Sande v Medsara Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2004] NSWSC 262
, Burchett AJ awarded
indemnity costs where the losing party:
“...knew the
crucial evidence on which the case would turn was true, but called false
evidence to deny it and made a collateral
attack on the credit of the relevant
witness in an attempt to induce the Court to reject his evidence.”
is precisely such a case.
Degnam Pty Ltd (In Liq) v Wright (No. 2)
[1983] 2 NSWLR 354
made a special costs order because the allegations of fact made by the
“...were in my opinion false and deliberately
concocted by her in an attempt to deny the plaintiff its rights and to shift all
blame and legal liability to the plaintiff from herself to the second
cross-defendant.”
this is precisely such a case. Ms Aldridge’s dishonesty in giving false
and evidence including producing fabricated receipts
is a special circumstance
which justifies an award of costs in a minor civil claim and the award of those
costs on an indemnity basis.
Aldridge submitted that she successfully argued that the claim could not succeed
based on non-payment of rent. I accepted that
submission. However the success of
that submission was not the result of any improper conduct by the applicant or
any merit in the
conduct of the proceedings by Ms Aldridge. The applicant failed
on that issue because the terms of the lease were unenforceable.
That lease was
a template prepared by a professional real estate body. It would be reasonable
for both parties to consider it would
be enforceable, as they did. Ms Aldridge
did not raise the question of the enforceability of the lease until closing
submissions.
She actively maintained, as I have found dishonestly, that she had
paid the rent. That was the issue which took most of the time
at the hearing.
those reasons, I am satisfied Ms Aldridge should pay the applicant’s costs
on an indemnity basis.
applicant also seeks an apportionment of costs against Mr Smith, counsel for Ms
Aldridge tenant. There is power to make such an
Magistrates
Court (Civil Division) Act
inherent jurisdiction of a superior court to make a costs order against a lawyer
is usually exercised to compensate a party for
wasted costs resulting from a
breach by the lawyer of a duty to the Court:
Currie & Co v Law Society
[1977] QB 990
per May J at 997-8. Curial reticence attaches to its exercise:
Law of Costs
, [23.7]. Serious
misconduct or gross negligence is usually required: dal Pont,
, [23.16]. That conduct must have been a cause of the wasted costs: dal
Law of Costs
, [23.17] Although the jurisdiction conferred by
is not fettered, I consider similar principles apply to its exercise.
applicant submits such an order should be made in this case because Mr Smith did
not draw the attention of the Court to annotations
on the various versions of
the putative receipt dated 26 January 2024. It is submitted he therefore
breached his duty to the Court
by misleading it.
copy receipt dated 26 January 2024 attached to the affidavit of Ms Aldridge
sworn 29 February 2024 contained an annotation correcting
the last day of the
rent period from 9 January 2024 to 9 February 2024. The receipts produced
as the originals purportedly received
by Ms Aldridge contained a correction
although that correction was clearly made under a different hand. The copy of
that receipt
provided by the solicitors for Ms Aldridge to the solicitors for
the applicant which was attached to the affidavit of Mr Hosken sworn
February 2024 did not contain any annotation. There were therefore three
versions of that receipt in evidence.
my view, Ms Aldridge’s affidavit should have addressed the provenance of
the annotation on the receipt attached to that affidavit.
To allow it to be
produced to the Court without that explanation was misleading. Mr Smith should
not have allowed that situation
to occur. He could have led oral evidence to
have the affidavit corrected. It was a breach of his duty to the Court not to
that issue before it arose.
applicant was not prepared to accept the statements of Mr Smith from the bar
table to the effect that he had made the annotation
and Mr Smith was compelled
to give evidence that he had made the annotation and had not averted to it when
Ms Aldridge swore her
affidavit. I accept what Mr Smith said about making the
annotation and unintentionally overlooking that when preparing the affidavit
producing it to the Court. The hearing then proceeded on that basis.
my view, the unintentional breach of duty by Mr Smith was not serious misconduct
or gross negligence. It is not conduct of sufficient
seriousness to justify a
costs order being made against him personally.
while that issue did add to the length of the hearing that was principally the
result of the way the applicant chose to deal
with it. The discrepancies in the
receipt did not become apparent to counsel for the applicant until the hearing.
Given the discrepancy
would have been apparent on comparison of the receipts
annexed to the affidavits of Mr Hosken and Ms Aldridge, it could have been
discovered before the hearing. If it had been discovered it might have been
corrected without taking anything more than nominal hearing
time. When the
differences came to light the matter was stood down for a relatively short time
so counsel of the applicant could
consider that.
small amount of additional hearing time was principally the result of the way
the applicant chose to respond to the issue rather
than the effect of the
failure by Mr Smith to bring the attention of the Court to the error in the
affidavit. That undermines any
causative connection between the conduct of Mr
Smith and any additional costs resulting from addressing that issue.
causative connection is also undermined because the length of time the matter
was stood down and the additional hearing time
taken have not been shown to have
added to the cost to the applicant. Ordinarily counsel is engaged for a hearing
day. The matter
did not proceed to another day as a result of dealing with that
issue. Dealing with that issue added minutes to a hearing which would
have taken hours in any event.
as my reasons of 20 March 2024 indicate, the existence of the annotation by Mr
Smith carried no determinative weight. Indeed,
despite the force with which the
issue was pursued by the applicant, I viewed that issue as a matter which had no
significant relevance
to the principal question, which was
Ms Aldridge’s conduct, not the conduct of her lawyer.
all of those reasons, I consider there should be no apportionment of costs
against Mr Smith. Indeed I consider the application
for such an apportionment to
be quite unmeritorious. I dismiss it.
submissions were made as to whether the costs order should be made only from
some point in the proceedings. Ms Aldridge was not
represented at the first
directions hearing. I infer she obtained representation at some point after
that. However for the reasons
indicated above, her dishonesty was maintained
throughout the proceedings. Her entire defence was based on that dishonesty at
times. That constitutes special circumstances which enlivens the
costs on an
indemnity basis. I do not see any need to limit the award of costs to a
particular time.
those reasons I order that the respondent pay the applicant’s costs of the
application to be assessed on an indemnity basis.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (144 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter