URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASRPDComm/2009/29.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:20:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Brighton Planning Scheme 2000 Amendment RZ 2008/04 [2009] TASRPDComm 29 (30 June 2009)
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Planning and Approvals Act 1993
Resource Planning
and Development Commission Act 1997
Decision and Reasons for Decision
PLANNING SCHEME 2000
Draft Amendment RZ04-08
Permit Application No SUB 08/40
Draft amendment RZ04-08 is to rezone land at 14 Nielsen Esplanade,
Bridgewater from Recreation to Residential.
Permit SUB 08/40 provides for subdivision of 26 lots and balance lot.
The subject land comprises ‘Fairfield’, a
4.5ha private property located south-east of the Bridgewater Bridge and accessed
off Nielsen Esplanade, Bridgewater. The property is fully serviced with water
and sewer reticulation. The land is under old title
that extends to the Derwent
River and contains a single storey late Victorian-era weatherboard house and
associated farm outbuildings.
The property is listed on the Tasmanian Heritage
The subject land is currently zoned Recreation. Land to the west, south and east
adjacent to the subject site is also zoned Recreation.
Land to the north of the
site is zoned Residential and has been fully developed for residential use. The
draft amendment is to rezone
the majority of the site to Residential with a
riparian reserve parallel to the foreshore to remain zoned
Recreation.
The draft amendment is accompanied by a s.43A permit granting conditional
planning approval to Town and Country Planning Pty Ltd
on behalf of the land
owners to provide for the subdivision of 26 lots. For reasons provided below,
the permit was refused at the
meeting on 30 March 2009 and pursuant to Section 8 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission Act 1997
, the Commission
delegated to Mr Robin Nolan and Executive Commissioner Greg
powers and functions under
sections 40
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
in relation to draft
amendment RZ 04/08 to the Brighton Planning Scheme 2000 and Permit No. SUB
connection with the exercise of those powers in performance of those functions,
its powers under Part 3 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Mr Alomes withdrew from the delegation prior to the
Date and Place of Hearing
Wednesday 29 April 2009 at
Brighton Council, Tivoli Road Gagebrook commencing at 10.00am. The hearing
reconvened on Monday 4 May 2009.
Representors
During the public exhibition period, twenty two (22) representations were
received. Of those, twenty (20) representors raised objections
to the proposal
and two (2) were in support.
The representors
Mr Michael Gallagher
Mr & Mrs Steven & Linda McKenzie
Mr & Mrs SC & LM Rimon
Ms Rae Story
Mr & Mrs Michael & Linda Vamplew
Mr & Mrs Peter & Janina Bourke
Mr Patrick Pickard
Mr & Mrs Bruce & Christine Hoskinson
Mr & Mrs David & Lorraine Gandy
Mr David Roberts & Ms Sally Gregory
Ms Valerie D Arnott
Mr Hank Petrusma
T K Harrold
Mr & Mrs John & Sue Argee
Mr & Mrs R & J Bone
Mr & Mrs Lucas & Annie Jacometti
Mr D Haworth
Mr & Mrs Luis & Maria Feliciano
Ms Cheryl Baker
Attendance at the Hearing
: Miss J Tyson for Brighton Council
: Mr C Gunson & Ms K Turner, legal counsel
Mr A Goodsell, Town and Country Planning Pty Ltd
Mr I Ferris and Mr P Milner (by phone)
Mr G Corney
Mr L Jacometti (the applicant)
Mr P Wood (owner)
Representors:
Mrs S Argee
Mr D Haworth
Mr M Vamplew
Mrs L Rimon
Mr and Mrs P & J Bourke
Issues raised in representations
Representations in support of the draft amendment and permit were expressed in
terms of providing additional land for housing and
to create public open space
along the waterfront.
The issues raised in the representations objecting to the draft amendment and
permit were expressed in the following terms:
For the amendment
− threaten the property’s heritage significance;
− adversely impact on the habitat of native fauna using the site;
− compromise road and traffic safety and increase the cost of road
maintenance;
− suitability of the site for residential purposes from climate change
causing sea level rise and increasing flood events;
− residential development will reduce existing residential amenity;
− result in the devaluation of surrounding land;
− fails to further the Objectives of the Resource Management and Planning
System and the
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act
− fails to comply with the State Coastal Policy;
− cause conflicts with other land use and development in the region;
− cause loss of views and recreational space;
− there is more appropriate land in the area that is available for high
density residential development; and
− adverse impacts on the River Derwent.
For the permit
− removal of vegetation causing loss of visual amenity;
− use of Crown land for private purposes;
− validity of the application as Crown consent for the access has not been
− queries regarding the zoning of the Crown land used for the access road
given the prohibited status of Major Roadworks in
the Recreation zone;
− concerns regarding the proposed access and traffic safety;
− application requirements have not been fulfilled including the
requirement for a site analysis showing soil conditions and
a site plan;
− proposed boardwalk, gazebo and access road are located within 30m of a
waterway thereby contradicting the provisions of the
Waterway Overlay;
− the proposal has an adverse impact on existing residential amenity and
is not consistent with the character of area;
− concerns regarding adequacy of existing infrastructure to cope with
increased capacity;
− concerns regarding the suitability of the boardwalk for disabled users;
− negative impact on heritage values.
Council’s Response to the Representations
Following the public exhibition period, Council recommended refusal of the draft
amendment on the grounds that it failed to meet
(c), (f) and (g) of
the Schedule 1 Objectives of the
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
The reasons articulated in Council’
report are as follows:
- Objective 2(c):
The proposal will impact adversely on flora, fauna and ecological processes
and does not adequately take into account the environmental
attributes of the
river interface in the light of the increasing highwater mark. Additionally the
land has been a source of local
pride and the rezoning would have adverse social
impacts on neighbouring residents.
- Objective 2(f):
The proposed amendment detracts from the current pleasant sustainable
residential development and a reduction of recreational land
in Bridgewater and
the openness it provides will devalue the amenity of that which currently
- Objective 2(g):
The conservation value of the heritage listed property know as
“Fairfield” and surrounding sheds and other outbuildings
lost or severely compromised by residential encroachment defeating the reason
for the current Recreation zoning.
In addition, Council states:
Council concurs with the objectors letters in relation to the presence and
adverse impact on wildlife in the area as well as the refusal
by the Tasmanian
Heritage Council. Land is currently zoned recreation the purpose of which is (a)
to recognise areas for public recreation
and open space; (b) to protect and
conserve areas of significance where appropriate, as stated in Section 6.9.1 of
the Brighton Planning
Scheme 2000.
In relation to the
permit, Council’
report states:
As access over the Crown land to the proposed 26 lot subdivision has not been
finalised and the Tasmanian Heritage Council recently
refused a Works
Application for the subdivision the recommendation before the Council is to
support the rezoning only.
development of the site will be subject to a new
development application.
Council’s position at the hearing was that Recreation zoning was the most
suitable zone to protect the area.
Commission’s assessment of the draft amendment
The draft amendment
The draft amendment is to rezone part of the land at 14 Nielsen Esplanade,
Bridgewater from Recreation to Residential. Recreation
zoning is retained for
the creation of a riparian reserve parallel to the Derwent
Preliminary matters
Validity of the application
A preliminary matter raised at the hearing was the validity of the application
as there was no evidence that the owner’s consent
was present in the
documentation provided by Council.
Section 33(2A)
of LUPAA requires that a
request to a planning authority to amend the planning scheme by a person who is
not the owner of the land
(a) signed by the owner or owners of land; or
(b) accompanied by the written permission of the owner or owners to the
making of the request.
Mr Gunson, legal counsel for the applicant, submitted that although the
provisions of the Act were considered mandatory, the absence
of owners consent
was not fatal to the request for the amendment as it is a procedural matter that
can easily be rectified. In addition
as noted later, with the removal of the
permit from consideration, the need for the Crown’s approval as land owner
was removed,
as the application did not then involve Crown land. The Commission
agreed with Mr Gunson’s submission on the matter.
Resolution of outstanding matters
Mr Gunson sought an adjournment of the hearing in order for outstanding matters
relating to the permit to be resolved. The refusal
of the heritage works
application for the subdivision was pending an appeal at the Resource Management
and Appeals Tribunal (RMPAT)
and the Crown consent to facilitate access is under
review by the Minister. Mr Gunson argued against the separation of the amendment
and permit on the basis that this would allow resolution of heritage matters and
address issues of the validity of the permit application.
Mr Gunson also sought revision of the s.39 report by Council submitting that the
document was inadequate and provided minimal grounds
for Council to no longer
support the application following the public exhibition period. The Commission
did not concede to Mr Gunson’s
request for an adjournment and determined
that Council’s s.39 report fulfilled the intent of that part of the Act.
S.43A permit
The Commission rejected the s.43A permit at the hearing on the basis that the
heritage works application was refused and that an
altered subdivision plan, as
presented by the applicant in response to the outcomes of mediation through
RMPAT, represents a substantial
alteration to the plan that underwent Council
assessment and public exhibition.
As a result of the Commission’s rejection of the permit, only those issues
relevant to the draft amendment were addressed at
the hearing.
Relevant provisions of the scheme
Part 2 of the
planning scheme provides the objectives. The residential objectives include
encouraging diversity in residential type,
to ensure that the future patterns of
residential development protect and enhance the natural and man-made assets and
to encourage
infill within the existing townships. The recreation and leisure
objectives include encouraging open space linkages within the urban
along the foreshore and watercourse areas.
The purpose of the Recreation zone at clause 6.9.1 is:
(a) To recognise areas for public recreation and open space.
(b) To protect and conserve areas of significance where
appropriate.
The standards for subdivision in the Recreation zone provide for permitted
development when for consolidation of lots, boundary adjustment,
utilities or public open space. There is no minimum lot size and the lot
configuration must reflect the minimum requirement
to accommodate the designated
use or development and its necessary infrastructure.
The permitted uses in the zone as listed in the table of use or development at
table 6.9.1 are community services (public park or
playground), natural and
cultural values management and utilities (reticulated services). Discretionary
uses are sports and recreation,
tourist accommodation, tourist operation,
permitted uses not meeting the condition and undefined use or development.
The purpose of the Residential zone at clause 6.2.1 is:
(a) To ensure sufficient land is available to meet anticipated demand for
residential use in the next 5 years.
protect residential amenity by reducing the potential for land use conflicts
between residential uses and other uses.
allow for a range of housing types within the zone, subject to meeting
performance guidelines, so as to satisfy different housing
needs within the
restrict non-residential uses to those that are compatible with maintaining
residential amenity and servicing local needs.
broad range of residential options should be accommodated subject to the
maintenance of satisfactory levels of amenity for new and
development.
Permitted use and development as listed in the table of use or development at
clause 6.2.3 are community services (public park or
play ground), natural and
cultural values management, residential (if not more than 2 dwellings) and
utilities (reticulated services).
Discretionary uses include residential (where
not permitted) and tourist accommodation.
The Waterway Overlay applies to the part of the site that remains in the
Recreation zone. The provisions for the Waterway Overlay
include a minimum
setback for development of 30m from the nearest bank of a waterway and
restrictions on development within the area
of the waterway.
Schedule 5 – Coastal and River Foreshore Development applies to use and
development within 30m of the High Water Mark of the
Derwent River. Proposals
must demonstrate that they ‘
will satisfy the State Coastal Policy and
that any building will not be subject to inundation from the 1 in 100 year
estimated flood
levels (ie. 3 metres AHD)
The site is listed in Schedule 9 – Heritage Schedule as being on the
Register of Places of Cultural Significance. Council is
required to take into
consideration matters listed in Clause S9.5 before deciding on an
application.
Consideration of issues raised by the Representors
Loss of views and recreational space/decreased residential
Representors raised objections to the rezoning on the basis that it facilitates
residential development and that would result in
the loss of semi-rural
character, views and open space which will detrimentally impact on their
residential amenity. Access to the
site is required from Gunn Street which
requires the use of an area of Crown land. Representors objected to the loss of
part of this
Crown reserve as it is considered by residents as valuable public
recreational space.
Council’s submissions were that the strategic basis for zoning the land
Recreation was to preserve the site’s cultural
heritage value and in the
absence of a more appropriate zone, Recreation zoning was deemed to achieve this
outcome. By limiting
use and development on the site the Recreation zoning
protected the open space qualities, enhancing visual amenity for surrounding
An analysis of the site and characteristics of the surrounding area reveals that
there is adequate recreational space available to
the community. While
currently the majority of the site consists of vacant land in the form of
disused paddocks, the recreational
opportunities under the existing Recreation
zoning are not available to the public because the site is privately owned.
Council has
indicated that there is no intention to acquire the land for public
open space. In this regard, the Recreation zoning does not meet
the purpose
stated for that zone in terms of recognition of public recreation and open space
or as discussed below to protect and
conserve areas of significance. Recreation
zoning does not reflect the existing use and does not of itself ensure the
of open paddocks into the future. In addition alternative uses of the
site are significantly restricted by the provisions in the
While it is accepted that the draft amendment will impact the visual amenity of
existing residents by changing their outlook towards
the river, this outlook is
not necessarily preserved with Recreation or Residential zoning unless dedicated
as public open space.
The rezoning facilitates the orderly expansion of
residential use and development consistent with Residential zone provisions
reinforcing
the surrounding urban pattern and form.
Land Use Strategy
Representors questioned the need for making this land available for housing when
there appears to be larger and more suitable areas
of land in the vicinity which
could be more appropriately used for residential purposes. Concerns were also
raised regarding the
ability of the land to be serviced appropriately given the
adequacy of Council’s existing water mains and sewerage pump
The location provides for the consolidation of urban residential use and
development in an area that has demonstrated suitability
for such purposes
consistent with the residential objectives and residential zone purpose. There
is no evidence before the Commission
to suggest that the provision of
reticulated services to the site will cause an unnecessary burden on the
capacity of existing infrastructure.
Land use conflict
Issues were raised in the representations regarding the potential for increased
land use conflict as a result of the draft amendment.
Representors claimed that
high density residential development will conflict with those objectives of the
Recreation zone that encourage
the maintenance of open space linkages within
urban areas and provide for long term use for recreational activity.
Although the site is zoned Recreation it is not public land and therefore can
not provide public open space linkages within urban
areas. The Commission does
not conclude there is a potential conflict between residential and recreational
Representors objected to the use of Crown land to gain access to the site. The
applicant identified the availability of alternative
access arrangements to the
site. However the final position on access point(s) to Gunn Street is a matter
relevant to the consideration
of a permit rather than the draft amendment.
Traffic management and safety
Representors raised concerns that an increase in traffic to the area will
significantly affect road safety and residential amenity
due to noise.
A Traffic Impact Assessment (TIA) was prepared for the site based on the 26 lot
subdivision which, although the Commission has rejected
the s43A permit, the TIA
is nonetheless relevant to the representors’ issues associated with the
rezoning and reduced amenity
through increased traffic as a result of future
residential use. The TIA demonstrated that the refused s.43A permit would
349 vehicle trips per day and that this would not significantly alter
the current level of service in Gunn Street or existing user
Future development of the site will be serviced by Gunn Street and/or via
Nielsen Esplanade and must comply with relevant access
standards. The planning
scheme requires a TIA for developments likely to generate in excess of 100
traffic movements per day. Ultimately
this is a matter for consideration with
any subsequent permit application.
‘Fairfield’ is listed on the Tasmanian Heritage Register, the
Register of the National Estate, National Trust (Tasmania)
and the Heritage
Schedule of the
Brighton Planning Scheme 2000
. Representors raised
concerns about the impact the rezoning and future residential development will
have on the heritage values
of ‘Fairfield’.
Any future proposal for the site will require a Works Application to be approved
by the Tasmanian Heritage Council. In addition,
Clause S9.5 of the scheme lists
those matters that Council must consider before deciding on an application
listed on the Register
of Places of Cultural Significance. They
cultural significance of the place and wether the proposal will adversely affect
the cultural significance;
applicable heritage study and any applicable conservation
the location, bulk, form and appearance of the proposed building will adversely
affect the cultural significance of the place;
the location, bulk, form and appearance of the proposed building is in keeping
with the character and appearance of adjacent
buildings and cultural
significance of the place;
the demolition, removal or external alteration will adversely affect the
cultural significance of a place;
the proposed works will adversely affect the cultural significance of a
the proposed subdivision or consolidation will significantly adversely affect
the cultural significance of a place;
the proposed subdivision or consolidation may result in development that will
significantly adversely affect the cultural
significance of a place;
the pruning, lopping or development will significantly adversely affect the
health, appearance or cultural significance of
a tree specified on a
advice sought and/or received from the Tasmanian Heritage Council or the
Aboriginal Heritage Office; and
Although Council failed to assess the s43A permit against the provisions of
Schedule 9, future use and development must take into
consideration the heritage
values of the site and all applications are discretionary for the title
containing the heritage place.
Discretionary status affords the public the
right of appeal should they consider Council neglected to implement Schedule 9.
matter for heritage is the setting and the protection of the curtilage of
buildings within that setting. The principal view of the
setting is from the
Midland Highway causeway to Woods Point and the prominence of this setting in
relation to the river that can
be retained by houses being setback from the
water. This setback will be achieved through the riparian reserve and the
building setback for future coastal processes and sea level
The conservation plans have defined the curtilage of the buildings and
demonstrates scope for additional residential development
on the site and that
preserves the heritage setting.
Natural hazards
Concerns were raised regarding the impact of sea level rise on any future
development due to the riparian location of the site on
the banks of the Derwent
The Commission heard (via telephone) from Mr Ian Ferris who authored the Coastal
Vulnerability Report for the subject site. It was
Mr Ferris’s submission
that coastal processes affect this site albeit the site is in the upper
extremities of the tidal zone.
Mr Ferris submitted that the site is generally
between 2-4m AHD with a lower area to the south. Based on a number of projected
scenarios which take into consideration the extent, rate and degree of sea level
rise, storm surge, surge (king) tide and wave action,
Mr Ferris assessed a
conservative inundation level of 2.42m AHD, based on a 100 year life of asset
and a 70% exceedance probability.
Schedule 5 – Coastal and River Foreshore Development states;
S5.3 An application for development or use which is proposed within 30 metres
of the High Water Mark of the tidal reaches of either
Derwent River)
shall be accompanied by a report demonstrating that the
proposal will satisfy the State Coastal Policy and that any building will
subject to inundation from the 1 in 100 year estimated flood levels (ie 3 metre
Council submitted that the figure of 3m AHD was derived from an assessment of
sea level rise on land located at Old Beach but the
assessment is that the 1:100
year flood is not 3m AHD. The Commission acknowledges the Ferris description of
the site taking its
geographical location, being located upstream of Old Beach,
more protected from prevailing winds, shorter fetch reducing the size
wave and its erosional capacity and the weakly tidal shoreline, and accepts the
inundation minimum level of 2.42m AHD as appropriate
for this site. Mr Ferris
submitted that the 2.42m AHD should be the lowest level for development
including roads, piped services,
changes to the land and buildings.
Mr Goodsell referred to the fact that setting a minimum floor height of 2.75m
would protect against a 1:100 year event in 2100.
The evidence is that for the
purpose of the draft amendment most of the site will not be subject to
inundation for estimated sea
level rise. A final position on building setback
from the Recreation zone boundary, a building site free of inundation as
by s.109(1)(h) of the
Local Government (Building and Miscellaneous
(Provisions) Act 1993
and the establishment of a minimum habitable floor
level are matters for subsequent subdivision and residential approval processes.
At this stage however the evidence partly supports the claim of the representors
that the land is unsuitable for residential development
where below 2.42m AHD.
Figure 4 page 6 of Mr Ferris’s evidence plots the 2.42m AHD contour, this
should define the limit of
development, with the actual residential yield from
the site yet to be determined.
Part of the evidence suggested
‘backyards’ of lots could be in the area below 2.42m AHD, the
appropriateness of this
is also a matter for later
determination.
Environmental impacts
Representors raised concern that future use and development facilitated by the
rezoning will adversely impact on the environment,
including destroying the
habitat of native bird species.
A Vegetation Assessment, Flora and Fauna Habitat Survey for the site was
undertaken by Philip Milner. Mr Milner’s submission
was that no
threatened species of flora or fauna observed on the property. The submission
noted that the extent of the foreshore
reserve will adequately conserve the
foreshore zone and its remnant vegetation and provide opportunities for
revegetation and shoreline
management.
The representors questioned the adequacy of the survey in providing a
representative account of the diversity of species using the
site given the
temporal restraints that are a cause of limitation to such assessments. Mr
Milner made the distinction between those
species that are
‘residents’ and those which are ‘visitors’ to the site.
A resident animal requires the use
of the site to perform its ecological
functions while a visitor may use the site for some of its ecological functions
fundamentally an opportunistic basis. While Mr Milner agreed that
threatened species such as the White Bellied Sea Eagle and Wedge
Tailed Eagle
may be seen in or around the site, such species have large feeding territories
and are likely visiting the site for
foraging purposes. With the riparian
setback for buildings, the impact of the draft amendment on visiting animals is
acceptable.
Riparian reserve
As noted above the riparian area of the site is to remain in the Recreation zone
and as part of any subdivision it should be dedicated
as public open space. The
plan scales this area as a minimum setback of 30m from high water. Based on the
evidence of Mr Ferris,
the high water mark at the south eastern end of the site
should be the ‘current terrace’ as shown on Figure 2, page 3
evidence. The Recreation zoning is then a minimum width of 30m. This then may
be expanded as part of an open space contribution
taking additional land based
on the design of any subdivision with a minimum development height of
Application of State Policies
State Coastal Policy 1996
The draft amendment provides for residential development based on an existing
town, retains Recreation zoning on the foreshore to
protect coastal features,
aquatic environments and provides separation from coastal hazards. The draft
amendment is assessed as
being prepared in accordance with the Policy.
State Policy on Water Quality Management 1997
The site is within the sewered area and erosion and stormwater can be
appropriately managed. The draft amendment is assessed as
being prepared in
accordance with the Policy.
Interim State Policy on the Protection of Agricultural Land 2008
The Policy defines ‘agricultural land’ as meaning:
All land that is in agricultural use or has the potential for agricultural
use that has not been zoned or developed for another use
or would not be unduly
restricted for agricultural use by its size, shape and proximity to adjoining
non-agricultural uses.
The site is not agricultural land. Rezoning to Residential is not inconsistent
with the State Policy.
The national Environmental Protection Measures are not
applicable to the draft amendment.
Schedule 1 Objectives
Part 1 objectives
promote the sustainable development of natural and physical resources and the
maintenance of ecological processes and genetic
The site has been significantly modified from its original riparian habitat.
The draft amendment is assessed as not a threat to
ecological processes or
genetic diversity.
(b) to provide for the fair, orderly and sustainable use and development of
air, land and water;
The draft amendment represents the fair, orderly and sustainable use and
development of land as it provides for residential consolidation
in an area that
is adequately serviced for that purpose.
(c) to encourage public involvement in resource management and
The draft amendment has included public processes.
(d) to facilitate economic development in accordance with the objectives set
out in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c);
The draft amendment facilitates economic development in accordance with the
above objectives.
(e) to promote the sharing of responsibility for resource management and
planning between the different spheres of Government, the
community and industry
in the State.
The draft amendment and subsequent use or development will require the sharing
of responsibility consistent with the objective.
Part 2 Objectives
Part 2 Objectives are furthered principally in terms of
local government while ensuring systems of land use and development planning
policy integrate environmental, social, economic,
conservation and resource
management policies at State, regional and municipal levels.
The draft amendment to rezone land from Recreation to Residential is appropriate
in terms of the suitability of the site for residential
use and the limitation
of Recreation zoning where there is no intention to acquire for public open
space. Residential zoning through
subsequent development offers the prospect of
public open space and riparian reserve on the Derwent River foreshore that
in the Recreation zone.
As determined at the hearing the permit is refused because of the redesign as
part of the gaining of a works permit under the
Historic Cultural Heritage Act
but with no assessment by the Council.
The Commission is satisfied that the draft amendment is in order and gives its
approval pursuant to
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act
Pursuant to
Section 43H
(1)(b)(i) of the
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act
the Commission refuses the permit.
Robin Nolan
Resource Planning and Development Commission
30 June 2009
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (201 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter