URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASADT/2020/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:11:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lucy Orchard v Frayne Higgins [2020] TASADT 11 (1 September 2020)
[2020] TASADT 11
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
Lucy Orchard v Frayne Higgins
[2020] TASADT
ORCHARD, Lucy
HIGGINS, Frayne
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
2, 3, 4, 5 & 10 March 2020 and by written
submissions
DELIVERED ON:
1 September 2020
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Tribunal Member Cuthbertson
CATCHWORDS:
Discrimination and prohibited conduct - inquiry - sexual
harassment – prohibited conduct – victimisation – compensation
– aggravated damages
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
(1)(d); Rees, Rice
Australian Anti-Discrimination Law: Second Edition
Federation Press, Sydney, 2014;
Australian Equal Opportunity Commentary
Durston v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal (No.2)
[2018] TASSC 48
Supplice v Skalos
[2007] TASADT 4
Johanson v Michael Blackledge Meats
(2001) FMCA 6
Cain v The Australian Red Cross Society
[2009] TASSADT
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1939) 60 CLR 336
Stalheim v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal and Attorney-General for the State of
[2007] TASSC 9
Vidler v Queensland and Williams
[2010] QCAT
Chi v Technical and Further Education Commission (No. 3)
Sivananthan v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Service
[2001] NSWADT 44
Chi v Technical and Further Education Commission
[2012] NSWCA 421
Chi v Technical Further Education Commission
HCATrans 146
Finch v Heat Group Pty Ltd
[2010] VSCA 256
[2004] TASSC 57
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police v Mooney (No
[2004] NSWADTAP 22
Power v Bouvy; Bouvy v Power
[2015] TASADT
Henville v Walker
[2001] HCA 52
(2001) 206 CLR 459
Richardson v
Oracle Corporation Australia Pty Ltd
[2014] FCFCA 82;
Alexander v Home
[1988] 2 All ER 118
Evans v Pasadena Foodland and Crugnale
[2019] SAET 222
Hill v Hughes
[2019] FCCA 1267
Abdallah (Human Rights)
[2019] VCAT 259
STU v JKL (Qld) Pty Ltd
[2016] QCAT 505
DETERMINATION:
Complaint of sexual harassment made by Lucy Orchard
against Frayne Higgins is upheld. Mr Higgins is ordered to pay Ms Orchard the
sum of $45,000.00 in compensation.
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant:
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Complainant:
Dobson Mitchell
Respondent:
[2020] TASADT 11
Tribunal Member Cuthbertson
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. Lucy Orchard (the complainant) made a complaint to the
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner (the Commissioner) on 30 December 2017
that Frayne Higgins (the respondent) had breached
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
(the Act). The conduct alleged occurred between
late 2013 and November 2017. The complainant was employed at Sanity in Eastlands
throughout that period. The allegations concern the respondent’s conduct
towards the complainant during the course of his
work as a delivery driver
contracted by Toll Transport Pty Ltd (Toll) and in causing a letter dated 6
November 2017 to be delivered
to her. The letter was said to be a concerns
notice issued pursuant to
Defamation Act 2005
2. In brief,
between 2013 and late 2014, the complainant alleged that when the respondent was
delivering stock to the Sanity store
while she was at work, he:
• frequently called her “Juicy
• on occasion come into the store, walked behind the racks
and popped up and scared her;
• frequently asked whether the
complainant had a boyfriend;
• generally engaged in sleazy,
intimidating and favouring behaviour towards her; and
• on one occasion
in around July 2014 slapped her on the bottom without her consent when she bent
over to check some stock that
he had delivered.
3. In early August 2017, the complainant mentioned to the
Sanity Area Manager who was visiting the store that the respondent had slapped
her on her bottom. This information was conveyed by the Area Manager to the
State Manager who in turn escalated the matter resulting
in a complaint being
made to Toll. The complainant had no knowledge that a complaint was being made
4. The complainant was alerted to the fact that the complaint had
been made when she received a phone call from an unknown number,
later told that a person identifying themselves
as the respondent’s wife
had phoned the store that same day demanding to speak with the complainant
regarding “a sexual
harassment claim” against her husband.
complainant caused the complaint to be discontinued. Following this, a letter
was sent to her at her workplace by a lawyer
acting for the respondent. In that
letter it states that the complainant made a statement to her store manager that
the respondent
had sexually assaulted her by grabbing her on the backside. The
letter stated that the allegation was defamatory and had caused
the respondent
to sustain significant damage. The letter demanded that the complainant deliver
a written apology retracting her
statement and defamatory imputations and
acknowledging that her statement and defamatory imputations were untrue and that
to the respondent a sum of $30,000.00 which was said to be compensation
for the economic loss he had suffered as a result of the
alleged defamatory
6. It is this letter that forms the basis of the victimisation
allegation.
7. The matter was listed for inquiry and evidence was heard by
the Tribunal over the course of five days.
8. A number of background facts and circumstances are not in
dispute and are determined by the Tribunal as follows:
(a) The complainant commenced working for Sanity in January
(b) At that time, the respondent was a delivery driver contracted by
Toll to deliver to a number of businesses at Eastlands, including
(c) The respondent generally made his deliveries to the Sanity store
in the morning;
(d) The complainant was sometimes the only person working in
the store when the respondent made his deliveries to the store;
August 2017, Kelly Gilchrist, who was then the Sanity State Manager responsible
for Victoria and Tasmania, contacted Simon
Apostolas, Sanity’s General
Manager, Product and Operations, to advise of a concern raised by Ashlee Wood
regarding the respondent’s
behaviour. Ms Wood advised Ms Gilchrist that
after the complainant started working with Sanity, the respondent was delivering
and “walked behind the counter and smacked [the complainant] on the
bum”. She also advised Ms Gilchrist that the respondent
was a lot older
than the complainant and continued to make her feel uncomfortable and regularly
asks her to his house for different
reasons “e.g. Avon parties & other
requests for her attendance”. Ms Wood also advised that “other Team
are aware that this has happened and that his makes (sic.) [the
complainant] uncomfortable and makes inappropriate comments”;
complaint was forwarded to Mr John Slatter who was the Toll Key Account Manager
responsible for the Sanity stores on 1 September
(g) The complaint was
forwarded by email to Roger Menzie that same day who was then the Tasmania Area
Manager for Toll. He was directed
to investigate the “complaint from
Sanity Store Manager in Tasmania claiming a recurring driver harassment of a
female staff
(h) On 1 September 2017, Roger Menzie attended
the Eastlands store and requested to speak to Ms Gilchrist as he wanted to
investigate
the claim made against the Toll driver;
(i) On 1 September 2017,
the respondent met with Mr Menzies and Anita Clay at the Toll depot in Moonah.
Ms Clay took notes of that
meeting. The respondent denied the allegation during
that meeting. He indicated he wanted to seek legal action as the allegations
were false. Ms Clay’s notes indicate that he stated “have not
touched Lucy at all. She only works one day a week”;
(j) Following
the respondent’s meeting with Mr Menzies and Ms Clay, he was stood down
from deliveries for a period of time;
(k) On 1 September 2017, the
complainant received a phone call on her mobile phone from an unknown number.
She did not answer the
call, but looked the number up and discovered that it was
a call from a number belonging to F. Higgins;
(l) On that same day, Mrs
Higgins, the respondent’s wife, attempted to contact the complainant by
phone. She rang the Sanity
store and spoke to a staff member, Ms Smith, and
asked to speak with the complainant. Ms Smith took a message from Mrs Higgins,
who also asked “Did you know that she has put a sexual harassment
complaint” against the respondent;
(m) Following the contact from Mrs
Higgins, the complainant asked for the complaint to be discontinued;
complainant was reinstated as a delivery driver, but instructed not to deliver
(o) On or about 6 November 2017, the respondent caused a letter
to be sent by his solicitor to the complainant care of the Sanity
Eastlands. That letter bore the subject heading “Lucy Orchard - Concerns
Notice Under s.14 of the Defamation Act
2005” (the defamation letter).
The letter relevantly states as follows:
Higgins instructs and Toll confirm, that you made a statement to your store
manager between the middle and end of August
2017, that Mr Higgins sexually
assaulted you by grabbing you on the backside. Your complaint was formally
relayed by Sanity to Toll
Human Resources Department and on 1 September 2017
Mr Higgins was temporarily stood down from his employment as a result of
the statement
Particulars of Imputations of Concern
(a) That Mr Higgins has caused harm and suffering to an employee of one of
his clients by sexually assaulting them;
(b) That Mr Higgins makes unwanted sexual advances on women and violates
their personal boundaries;
(c) That Mr Higgins cannot be trusted in the presence of women; and
(d) That Mr Higgins lacks integrity and respect for women.
The imputations particularised are defamatory of Mr Higgins and by
publication of the said statement he has sustained significant
(a) Injury to his credit and reputation, in particular his personal and
business reputation within Toll and management and colleagues
at his place of
employment;
(b) Economic loss as a result of losing the entitlement to deliver freight to
Sanity at Eastlands Shopping Centre;
(c) Shame and embarrassment within his personal and business relations; and
(d) Damage to his relationships with his family and colleagues.
It has been confirmed by Toll that you later withdrew your statement and
allegation, but only after the investigation process had
been initiated and the
allegation had entered the public sphere. Your statement was not only false, it
is clearly defamatory in
that it impugns Mr Higgins’ personal and business
reputation, integrity, morality and credibility. Your statement inflicted
extreme and unnecessary stress upon Mr Higgins’ relationship with his wife
and considerable hurt and pain to Mr Higgins, his
wife and his family.
As a direct result of your defamatory statement, Toll terminated Mr
Higgins’ entitlement to deliver freight to Sanity at Eastlands
Centre. Mr Higgins routinely delivered 30-40 cartons of freight to Sanity at
Eastlands Shopping Centre per week, which
amounts to a loss of approximately
$2,080.00 per year. Based on Mr Higgins’ age and circumstances he would
have continued
to deliver freight to Sanity at Eastlands Shopping Centre for a
further 15 years, bringing the total loss of earnings over the remainder
working life to in excess of $30,000.00.
We demand that within 28 days of this letter, you:
1. Deliver a written apology, which:
(a) retracts your statement and your defamatory imputation; and
(b) acknowledges that your statement and defamatory imputation therein are
the letter of apology by providing a copy to Mr Higgins c/- Nick Beattie,
Barrister & Solicitor at 114 Bathurst Street,
Hobart 7000.
to Mr Higgins the sum of $30,000.00, that being the compensation for the
economic loss Mr Higgins has suffered directly as a result
of your defamatory
This letter is to be taken to be a concerns notice
pursuant to
Defamation Act 2005
If you do not make an offer to make amends in line with the above and
otherwise fail to comply with the matters set out above, Mr
reserves his right to issue legal proceedings for defamation without further
You are required to respond to this concerns notice within 28
(p) The complainant was advised by another staff member at
Sanity that an official looking letter had arrived for her at her workplace
or about 7 November 2017. She asked her colleagues to open the letter
which was read out to her over the phone;
(q) The complainant ceased her
employment with Sanity in about December 2017;
(r) The respondent had his
engagement with Toll terminated on 2 May 2018. He was provided reasons for
termination by letter. Those
reasons included the allegations made by the
complainant in the proceedings before Equal Opportunity Tasmania. Further, Toll
into account that the respondent had been advised on or about 1 September
2017 not to have contact with the complainant. It was
noted, however, that on 8
November 2017 the respondent instructed a solicitor to write to the complainant
threatening to commence
defamation proceedings if she did not apologise and pay
him damages. It was noted that the matters were serious and fundamentally
odds with Toll’s values and the standards expected of all workplace
participants.
9. The complainant alleges, and the respondent disputes that:
(a) The respondent treated her differently to other staff at
Sanity. The complainant says that the respondent’s demeanour towards
over time became overly-friendly. She said other staff members told her that
she was the respondent’s favourite;
(b) The respondent would frequently
ask her about her relationship status or ask her whether she had a boyfriend or
still had a boyfriend;
(c) The respondent would jump up from behind shelves
in a manner she believed was designed to scare her;
(d) The respondent
referred to her as “Juicy Lucy” in the store 5-6 times prior to the
incident where she alleges she
was slapped;
(e) In or around July 2014 the
respondent came into the store to drop off stock, commented on the pants she was
wearing telling her
that they were “nice pants” and then slapped her
on the buttocks when she bent down to check the boxes that he had
(f) The next day, the respondent delivered stock to the store and
Kristi Cole was also working on that day. The complainant says
respondent came into the store laughing and asked the complainant “Have
you told your boss yet?” She says that
Ms Cole asked her what the
respondent was talking about and that the complainant told her that the
respondent had slapped her “on
the arse”. The complainant says that
Ms Cole became angry with Mr Higgins and had words with him and told him he
do that. She says the respondent was laughing while Ms Cole
spoke to him and that he did not deny that he had slapped her.
10. It is these disputed allegations that form the basis of the
complaint of sexual harassment and offensive, humiliating, intimidating,
insulting or ridiculing conduct contrary to s.17 of the Act.
Sexual Harassment and Prohibited Conduct
11. Section 17(1) of the Act relevantly provides as follows:
person must not engage in any conduct which offends, humiliates, intimidates,
insults or ridicules another person on the
basis of an attribute referred to in
section 16 (b) [age] ... 16(e) [gender] ... in circumstances in which a
reasonable person, having
regard to all the circumstances, would have
anticipated that the other person would be offended, humiliated, intimidated,
or ridiculed.”
12. Section 17(2) provides that a person must not sexually
harass another person. Sexual harassment is defined at s.17(3) as taking
if a person:
“(a) subjects another
person to an unsolicited act of physical contact of a sexual nature; or
(b) makes an unwelcome sexual advance or an unwelcome request for sexual
favours to another person; or
(c) makes an unwelcome remark or statement with sexual connotations to
another person or about another person in that person’s
presence; or
(d) makes an unwelcome gesture, action or comment of a sexual nature;
(e) engages in conduct of a sexual nature in relation to another person that
is offensive to that person-
in circumstances in which a reasonable person, having regard to all the
circumstances, would have anticipated the other person would
be offended,
humiliated, intimidated, insulted or
ridiculed.”
13. Section 22 of the Act relevantly provides that the:
“Act applies to
discrimination and prohibited conduct ... by or against a person engaged in, or
undertaking any, activity in
connection with any of the following:
(a) employment;”.
14. “Conduct of a sexual nature” is defined in s.3
as including:
(a) making an oral or written statement
of a sexual nature to a person or in the presence of a person; and
(b) displaying matter of a sexual nature that relates to a prescribed
15. Section 17(1) of the Act was considered in Durston v
Anti-Discrimination Tribunal (No.2)
[2018] TASSC 48
where Brett J noted the
“63. Section
17(1) is also a provision which prohibits conduct. By its terms, it is
apparent that the provision has an extremely
wide ambit of operation. Some
aspects of this are as follows:
(a) The scope of conduct is unlimited. It encompasses "any conduct" which
falls within the description contained in the section.
However, the section will
almost always be concerned with conduct which involves communication in one form
or another.....
(b) Read literally, the words "offends, humiliates, intimidates, insults or
ridicules" are vague terms which have the potential to
encompass a broad range
of subjective emotions and feelings. The emotional response will vary from one
person to another. However,
judicial interpretation of the words "offend,
insult, humiliate or intimidate" in respect of similar but not identical
Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth) suggests that the operation of the section is
more restricted than the literal meaning of the words would suggest. In Eatock
, Bromberg J endorsed judicial statements which require the conduct
to have "profound and serious effects and not to be likened to mere
slights". ... His Honour also said:
"[267] In my view, 'offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate' were not
intended to extend to personal hurt unaccompanied by some public
consequence of
is directed to avoid. That public consequence need not be significant.
It may be slight. Conformably with what I regard as the intent
, a consequence which threatens the protection of the public interest
sought to be protected by
, is a necessary element of the conduct
is directed against. For the reasons that I have sought to explain,
conduct which invades or harms the dignity of an individual or
group, involves a
public mischief in the context of an Act which seeks to promote social
64. However, the basis of the public aspect was explained as follows:
"[263] The ordinary meaning of these words is potentially quite broad. To
'offend' can mean to hurt or irritate the feelings of another
person. If the
concern of the provision was to fully protect people against exposure to
personal hurt, insult or fear, it might have
been expected that the private
domain would not have been excluded by the phrase 'otherwise than in private'
found in the opening
18C(1). The fact that it is, suggests that the section is at least primarily
directed to serve public and not private
purposes: Coleman at [179]. That
suggests that the section is concerned with consequences it regards as more
serious than mere personal
hurt, harm or fear. It seems to me that s
18C is concerned with mischief that extends to the public dimension. A
mischief that is
not merely injurious to the individual, but is injurious to the
public interest and relevantly, the public's interest in a socially
Of course, a significant difference between ss
18C and 17(1)
is that the latter does not contain the words "otherwise than in private".
will extend to private communications.
(c) It is not required that the person engaging in the conduct intend or
even subjectively foresee that the conduct may have the
said effect. The
qualification requires objective foreseeability or anticipation. This
requirement places some limit on the ambit
of the provision, but places an
obligation on the communicator to think through the potential effect of the
proposed communication....
(d) To fall within the section, the conduct must offend, humiliate,
intimidate, insult or ridicule another person "on the basis of
an attribute" as
defined. The connection required between the conduct and the attribute, is that
the conduct is done by reference
to the attribute, rather than the stronger and
more direct causal relationship required by some other formulations, such as
or "by reason of". ... This also tends to broaden the application of
the prohibition applied by the section ....”
16. In Supplice v Skalos
[2007] TASADT 4
, Chairperson Wood (as
she then was) considered the sexual harassment provisions under the Act at [57].
She noted that sexual harassment
extends beyond unwelcome sexual advances or
conduct that displays an interest in sexual matters. It was noted too that it
to offensive conduct or comments of a sexual nature. At para [56]
she held that the definition of sexual harassment in s.17(3) of
the Act involves
an objective test and that it does not matter whether the respondent intended to
act in a sexual way or was aware
that they were acting in a sexual way. Such an
approach was endorsed in Johanson v Michael Blackledge Meats
(2001) FMCA 6
in the context of s.28A of the Sex Discrimination Act (Cth) Driver FM held at
[84] that the test under that provision, which
is relevantly similar to s.17(3),
is objective and it does not matter whether the perpetrator intended to act in a
sexual way or,
indeed, was aware that he or she was acting in a sexual way. At
[85] his Honour also noted that sexual harassment constituted by
conduct of a
sexual nature can be the result of a single act or single incident.
Factual Determinations - Prohibited Conduct and Sexual
17. The onus is on a complainant to prove the allegations
raised in her complaint according to the civil standard, that is, on the
of probabilities: see Cain v The Australian Red Cross Society [2009] TASSADT 3
at [22]. The approach to be followed by the
Tribunal is that set out in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1939) 60 CLR 336
at 361-362:
the law requires the proof of any fact, the Tribunal must feel an actual
persuasion of its occurrence or existence before
it can be found. It cannot be
found as a result of a mere mechanical comparison of probabilities independently
of any belief in
its reality ... it is enough that the affirmative of an
allegation is made out to the reasonable satisfaction of the Tribunal. But
reasonable satisfaction is not a state of mind, it is attained or established
independently of the nature and consequences of the
fact or facts to be proved.
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an
occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
question whether the issue has been proved
to the reasonable satisfaction of the
18. Given the serious nature of the allegations, it flows that
the Tribunal should not lightly make a finding that the respondent
has engaged
in the conduct alleged.
19. The complainant gave evidence regarding the
incident and called a number of witnesses. The respondent represented himself
the inquiry. He gave evidence and also called witnesses. A number of
documents were tendered by both the complainant and the respondent.
Tribunal also took into evidence an email chain which set out the communication
between various staff members of Toll and
the Sanity Group with respect to the
complaint made about the respondent’s conduct over the period 30 August to
1 September
2017. That email chain had been produced in response to a notice to
produce issued pursuant to s.80(2) of the Act and was regarded
as assisting the
Tribunal in understanding the circumstances of the notification to Toll of the
complaint regarding the respondent’s
behaviour. Neither the complainant
nor the respondent objected to the Tribunal undertaking this course.
Complainant’s Case
Complainant’s Evidence
21. The complainant gave the following evidence by way of
background to her complaint:
(a) She completed her TCE in 2012 and shortly after applied
for a full-time job at Sanity;
(b) As at the time of the inquiry she was 25
years old. She was 18 years old when she commenced work at Sanity;
was initially employed in a position as Assistant Manager and commenced in
January 2013;
(d) The Store Manager at the time was Kristi Cole. Mariel
Butterworth and Jake Morgan were also working there when she started;
generally worked Monday to Friday on one week and four week days on the
following week and a Saturday. She undertook opening
and closing shifts. An
opening shift commenced at 8.45am. On those days, the complainant would arrive
at work at about 8.30 and
sometimes worked by herself until 10.00am when
additional staff were rostered to work;
(f) The opening shift was often very
busy for one staff member. Deliveries had to be accepted and customers
(g) The respondent was already making deliveries to Sanity as a
courier when the complainant started working there. The complainant
that the respondent would deliver nearly every day to Sanity. Deliveries
usually occurred between 9.30 and 10.30 in the
morning. There were occasions
when the respondent made his deliveries and the complainant was the only
employee on the floor. On
other occasions other staff were present;
complainant has no specific recollection of first meeting the respondent. Her
first impression was that he was quite friendly.
The complainant gained the
impression that the respondent had been making deliveries prior to her
commencing work at Sanity and
knew other employees at the business.
22. In terms of the behaviour that is the subject of the
complaint, the complainant says that the respondent’s behaviour towards
her gradually made her feel more uncomfortable. They greeted each other on a
first name basis, which did not appear to be unusual.
Later, other staff
members would tell her that the complainant appeared to be the
respondent’s “favourite”. In
conversations with Mariel
Butterworth and Jake Morgan, they mentioned that the respondent would ask if the
complainant was working
if she was not at the store. The complainant does not
recall being asked by the respondent where other employees were when they
not at work.
23. The complainant describes the respondent as being overly
friendly with her in a way that he was not with either Kristi Cole or
staff. Although he would engage in conversation with them, she says he was more
formal with them.
24. The complainant says that she was a good shop
assistant and engaged in amiable but professional behaviour towards customers
people she encountered in the workplace. She was adamant she was not
flirtatious. In general, she did not consider herself to be
an outgoing person,
but at work had to be pleasant with people that she encountered in that
environment.
25. The complainant was unable to say when the respondent first
started calling her “Juicy Lucy” but that he called her
by that name
on about 5 or 6 occasions. She says she told him she did not think he should
call her that after the first occasion.
On one occasion he called her
“Juicy Lucy” in front of Kristi Cole who in turn told him not to
call the complainant
that. She says the respondent thought it was funny and
just laughed. The complainant said that was the last time he called her
The complainant also said that she had discussed the respondent referring to her
in those terms with Mariel Butterworth, who
was by then a close friend, and her
partner Ashraf Addicoat.
26. The complainant also described the respondent as
being somewhat intimidating on occasion. She described him as sometimes coming
in chewing gum and being in “a sleazy mood”. She says he sometimes
came storming in when he had a fight with someone
complainant explained that when a person was on an opening shift they on
occasion had to do work on the floor, putting stock
on shelves and getting it
out from cupboards below those shelves. She said that on occasion the
respondent would pop up in front
of her from behind a shelf without her noticing
him approaching. This made her jump and she did not think it was professional.
She did not confront him about it as she did not want to make it an
28. At the time that she started work at Sanity and at the time of the
inquiry, the complainant was in a relationship with Ashraf
Addicoat. She says
that the respondent would ask her about her boyfriend. She did not recall ever
telling the respondent that she
had a boyfriend before he commenced asking how
he was. She stated that she would generally respond, “Yeah he’s
but did not open dialogue with him. She said she felt
uncomfortable about the question.
29. When the respondent delivered stock to
the Sanity store, he would come through the main entry and roll the stock up
counter on a trolley. The staff, including the complainant, would
then check each box. They were responsible for signing that all
boxes had been
delivered. The complainant described this as a pretty quick process.
one occasion in 2014 the complainant says that the respondent delivered stock to
the store when she was on an opening shift.
She was on the shop floor at the
time. She was wearing different pants to the ones she usually wore at work.
The respondent stated
to her, “Ooh, nice pants”. The complainant
says that the manner in which he said “nice pants” was “seedy,
like it had overtones about the fit and the shape”. She does not recall
saying anything particular in response, but just being
taken aback.
31. When the respondent dropped the stock off behind the counter, the
complainant had to go and check and had to walk past him. She
bent down in
order to check the details on the boxes. There was not a lot of room behind the
counter. The complainant says the respondent
slapped her on the butt, quite hard
and just once. She jumped and told him, “You can’t do that”.
She was very
shocked. She says the respondent said something like,
“Whoops”. He appeared to think it was funny and was laughing.
also said to her, “Don’t tell your boss that I did that” in a
laughing fashion. The complainant was not laughing.
She completed her task and
gave him a return, which is stock that had to be returned to the supplier.
32. Another staff member, Jack Milbourne, arrived at work at about 10.00am
that day. As soon as he arrived, the complainant told
him what had happened.
She told him something to the effect of, “The courier slapped me on the
arse”. When she finished
work she told her boyfriend Ashraf and she rang
her friend Mariel and told her. She did not report the matter to her manager,
33. The next day the complainant was working the 10.00am shift.
Kristi Cole was already there when she arrived. The respondent came
deliver stock shortly after the complainant arrived at work. The complainant
had not mentioned the previous day’s incident
to Kristi at that stage.
The complainant says that the respondent came into the store laughing. He asked
her, “Have you told
your boss what I did?” Kristi asked,
“What did he do?”. The complainant said she felt awkward and was
with a customer at the time. She then told Kristi that the respondent
had slapped her on the butt. Kristi responded “What?”
complainant says she was embarrassed. Kristi then stated to the respondent that
he could not do that. The complainant says
that Kristi was angry and quite
loud. The respondent on the other hand appeared to just be laughing. The
exchange took place over
a couple of minutes.
34. After the respondent left,
the complainant had a further conversation with Kristi Cole. Kristi said that
it was not appropriate
and told the complainant that the respondent could not do
that. The complainant confirmed to Kristi that it was what happened and
told her that she had told the respondent off. There was no mention of any
further action being taken. The complainant said
she never received any
training about how to handle situations like that.
35. The incident was
never raised by the respondent again. The complainant says that the respondent
did not touch her again, but
would still ask her how her boyfriend was. She
also says there were no further “Juicy Lucy” comments after that
A short time later the complainant started working part-time. She opened
the store on fewer occasions and worked by herself less
often. She says that
she went part-time at Sanity because she was not enjoying it very much. There
were no security cameras in
the store and she did not like working there by
herself in the morning and late on a Friday. She said it did not feel safe and
was not happy with how management handled the security issues. She
described the incidents with the respondent as having “a
effect” on her and not helping, but she gave the impression it was not the
principal reason why she decided to leave
full-time employment with the
36. The complainant also purchased Avon products through the
respondent. She says that her mother asked if she knew someone who sold
She knew that the respondent did through conversations that they had at her
workplace. She used the store phone number and
address on the Avon form when
she put in orders because she did not want to give the respondent her home
address. The respondent
invited the complainant and her mother to an Avon event
at his house on a couple of occasions. She said she did not feel comfortable
around August 2017, Ashlee Wood, who was then the Sanity Area Manager, was
conducting a store visit while the complainant was
there. The complainant
recalls there was a conversation between Ms Wood and Krista-Lee Vienna-Hallam,
who was then the Store Manager,
regarding couriers. There was a discussion
deliveries. The
complainant says that she was asked if she knew the respondent
and she told them, “yeah, he’s a bit of a creep because
me on the bum”. She says that Ms Wood gave no indication that anything
would be done with that information. She
does not exactly recall the words that
she used, but thought that there had been mention of words to the effect of the
being “a sleaze”. She does not recall what Ms
Woods’ response was to the information, but said it was not remarkable.
Although Ms Vienna-Hallam was somewhere in the background, the complainant was
not speaking directly with her.
38. A few weeks later when she was on one
of her days off, the complainant received a phone call on her mobile phone from
that she did not recognise. It was a landline number. She googled it
and her search indicated that it belonged to F and J Higgins.
She did not know
why the respondent would be calling her. She did not call the number back. She
stated that she had never spoken
to the respondent by phone before and had only
spoken to him once outside the Sanity store when she was with her boyfriend and
encountered
him in Fantastic Furniture.
39. Later that same day she received
a phone call from Ms Wood who was at the Eastlands store. She was told that
there was a man
from Toll there who wanted to take a statement from her in
respect of her complaint about the respondent. The complainant said that
did not feel safe because she felt that the respondent had heard about the
complaint before she did. She says that the complaint
was not made in her name.
She says she did not want to make a complaint and cause trouble.
was also told by Jess Smith, another Sanity employee, that Mrs Higgins had
called the store asking to speak with her. She
was told by Ms Smith that the
tone of the call was not pleasant. She says when she heard this she became very
41. Because the respondent’s wife and potentially the
respondent had attempted to contact her, the complainant asked for any
to be dropped. She says she asked for the complaint to be dropped, not because
it was not true, but because she did not
feel safe, was not a troublemaker, and
did not want to cause trouble. She told Ms Wood this and understood that she
was going to
speak to Roger Menzies. She understood that the complaint had been
discontinued following her request that this occur.
42. As a consequence, the
complainant changed her shifts around a bit so that she was always at work with
people. She became very
anxious after this attempted contact with her and
stated that she did not want the respondent to deliver to them at Sanity again.
She was very upset by what had occurred.
43. Even though the respondent was
not delivering to Sanity anymore, she would still see him occasionally deliver
to Boost Juice which
was located directly out the front of the Sanity
44. Sometime later she received another phone call from someone at the
store telling her that there was a legal looking letter with
her name on it that
had been sent or dropped off at the store. She asked the person who rang her to
open it. It was the defamation
letter referred to above.
complainant was very upset by the letter and very angry. She did not return to
work at Sanity for some time. She was initially
told to take stress leave and
obtained a medical certificate. She stated that the demand for an apology made
by the respondent made
her very angry. The letter telling her to retract her
statement also made her angry as in her mind she did not make a statement.
felt that it was an attempt to intimidate her.
46. She had to see a doctor as
a consequence of what occurred. She says that the whole scenario affected her
immensely. From just
tolerating the respondent’s inappropriate behaviour
at work, she then ended up having to seek medical advice and was prescribed
antidepressants. She says that she feels nervous walking in public places where
the respondent might be by herself. She says that
it affected her work
relationships and she felt that she had been an inconvenience to the Sanity
47. Although she returned to the store briefly, she was not able to
stay there for very long. She left Sanity finally in December
Tribunal received into evidence a copy of the defamation letter authored by
Justin Castles from Nick Beattie, Barristers &
Solicitors dated 6 November
2017, a screenshot of the complainant’s mobile phone call log showing the
phone call from the unknown
number on 1 September 2017 and a screenshot of a
phone call made to the Sanity phone on that same day by that same number.
49. Other documents received on the complainant’s case include a
report authored by Dr Virginia Baird, the applicant’s
practitioner, together with an email authored by her. That evidence will be
discussed later in this decision. A file note
of a meeting conducted with the
respondent at the Toll offices on 1 September 2017 was also tendered by the
complainant.
50. The complainant was cross-examined by the respondent. He
asked her questions about the encounter at Fantastic Furniture in 2016.
suggested to the complainant that they had also run into each other at Super
A-Mart that day. He suggested they discussed what
they had been shopping for
that day and that the encounter was pleasant. She was asked if she was
frightened and intimidated by
him, why did she not walk away? The respondent
also questioned why the complainant’s boyfriend did not say something to
during the encounter in Fantastic Furniture and the complainant said that
she did not think that Ashraf knew who the respondent was
on that occasion and
that she had previously asked him not to make a fuss in any event.
cross-examination the complainant was unable to recall exactly when the slapping
incident occurred, but thought it was in
mid-2014. She did not keep a diary, so
could not narrow it down beyond that. She indicated that the incident occurred
shortly after
Jack Milbourne commenced working with Sanity, which she thought
was sometime in June or July 2014.
52. It was put to her that Toll did not
deliver to the Sanity store every day. The complainant countered that she
recalled deliveries
occurring on every day that she was on duty.
respondent cross-examined the complainant regarding an email sent by Ms Wood to
Kelly Gilchrist outlining the allegations.
The allegation reads as follows:
delivery drivers (sic) name is Frayne Higgins, He works for Toll and delivers to
Eastlands. After Lucy started with us
he was delivering the stock and he walked
behind the counter and smacked Lucy on the bum.
He is a lot older than Lucy, He continues to make Lucy feel uncomfortable and
regularly asks her to his house for different reasons
(eg. Avon parties and
other requests for her attendance)
Other Team are aware that this has happened and that this makes Lucy
uncomfortable and makes inappropriate comments.
54. The complainant was asked whether the allegation that the
respondent regularly asks her to his house was correct. She said that
correct, that he had asked her to his house on two occasions for Avon related
purposes, but the balance of the allegation
was correct. She stated that the
allegation as set out in the email was not in her words. She did not recall
telling anyone that
she had regularly been invited by the respondent to his
house and recalled only telling them on two occasions. She was not given
opportunity to review the allegation put to Toll by Sanity before it was
55. In respect of her evidence concerning the respondent being
intimidating and aggressive, the complainant agreed that he had not
and aggressive towards her, but had appeared to be in that state in her presence
in what she described as a bad mood.
She described him as sometimes appearing
in a happy mood, and that at other times he would be blunt and appear to be in a
standoffish. He had told her that someone at the depot did something
to him and would be angry about it. She said that he had overtones
aggressive, not towards her, but to workmates or the boss or whoever had pissed
him off on that date.
56. She was cross-examined by the respondent about
her demeanour at work. It was put to her that she was friendly and
happy-go-lucky
when at work. The complainant agreed that she did not present as
shy when she was at work because she was professional and was required
professional and friendly in that customer service role. She was asked if as an
Assistant Manager she would not have been
able to undertake her role without
being assertive and able to tell employees what to do. She indicated that it was
a weak area of
her management and that she did not think that she had been hired
for her assertiveness skills. She confirmed that she had not received
training about sexual harassment on her employment. She indicated that she
generally knew what it meant, but did not know the
specifics about the law. She
stated that she had let her Store Manager know about the physical contact that
occurred when it occurred
and did not think that anything further needed to be
57. She stated that she had not been told that the respondent had
requested that she make a statement to police about the slapping
incident. She
also confirmed that she asked for the complaint to be stopped when she was told
by Ashlee Wood that there had been
a complaint made to Toll. She told Ms Wood
that she did not want to make a complaint at that time. She also confirmed that
time she spoke with Ms Wood about discontinuing the complaint she did not
know that Mrs Higgins had rung the store. She later found
out that that had
occurred. Nevertheless, she stated that it was correct that she wanted the
complaint withdrawn because she was
scared of the respondent and his wife and
that this was because of the phone call.
58. The complainant was
cross-examined about her allegation that the respondent would sometimes surprise
her in the store by popping
up from behind shelves. She said that she did not
hear the respondent enter the store on every occasion as there was music in the
store and sometimes customers, which made it difficult to hear when people came
in and out of the premises. She denied that he put
down the stock straight away
every time that he came into the store.
59. It was put to the complainant in
cross-examination, that she had been told that more than one courier called her
Lucy”. She denied that was the case. She was asked why would
the respondent call her “Juicy Lucy” and she said
that she assumed
that there were sexual connotations and overtones attached to the comment and
that she found it an uncomfortable
thing to be called. It was put to her that
“Juicy Lucy” was rhyming slang. The complainant said she was not
was the case.
60. In respect of comments about her boyfriend,
the complainant said that this was ongoing conduct and that she was asked about
boyfriend on a number of occasions. It was put to her that general chit
chat such as to do with the weather or about her boyfriend
was not sexual
harassment. The complainant stated that she wondered why she was being asked
as it was none of his business. She
stated that she did not recall the respondent ceasing to ask such questions
until the complaint
61. In respect of the slapping incident, it
was put to her that there were two ways to get behind the counter. One way
would require
her to walk past the respondent and the other way she could avoid
doing so. She was asked why she did not go behind the counter
in the other
direction. The complainant said that she did not foresee that the respondent
would behave in the way that he did and
if she had, she may have gone around the
other way. She confirmed that he smacked her bottom when she bent over to check
label. She was questioned why, if she was scared and intimidated by the
respondent, did she bend over in front of him. She said
that at that stage he
had not done anything physical and that it was a huge overstep. She confirmed
that no-one else saw the incident
and speculated that he perhaps would not have
conducted himself in that way if someone else was there. She was questioned
it was a correct way to bend down to check a box, but she stated that
no-one had trained her on a correct manner in which to bend
down and check a
box. She stated she would be quite interested to hear what that might be.
62. She confirmed that the respondent brought the incident up with Kristi
Cole on the day following the incident. She also stated
that when she spoke to
her friend Mariel and her boyfriend, they pressed her to make a formal
complaint. She stated she did not
want to make a fuss and that although Kristi
was made aware of it, she left it at that.
63. The complainant was also
asked whether she knew in 2014 that the alleged conduct would be classified as
sexual harassment. The
complainant stated that she knew that the behaviour was
not appropriate, but did not know if it would be regarded as serious. She
she felt uncomfortable about it, but did not know how it would be perceived in
the scheme of things. She was asked if she was
so emotionally upset in 2014,
why she did not go to a counsellor or doctor then. She stated that she wanted
to put it behind her
and just do her job.
64. She was asked if Ms Woods
told the complainant that she had heard rumours at other stores. The complainant
said she had heard
this, that the original conversation was vague and that she
had been told there had been an incident at Dotti and at Just Jeans.
also cross examined about where she was when she was talking to Ms Woods about
the respondent. She said it was in the store
behind the counter, that Ms Woods
said she knew of the respondent and that she was not sure whether the respondent
had just made
a delivery to the store. It was not clear whether these questions
and responses related to the occasion when the complainant advised
the slapping incident or concerned later conversations.
cross-examination the complainant confirmed that she was first told that Ms Wood
had told Kelly Gilchrist of the incident when
they spoke on the phone on 1
September. Ms Wood had not told the complainant that she intended to notify Ms
Gilchrist. She was
at home by herself when she first found out that the
complaint had been put in and felt very upset by that.
66. When she was
first informed that a phone call had been made to the Sanity store by the
respondent’s wife, she says that
she did not absorb what Jess Smith was
saying. It was not until they all sat down for a meeting on a later occasion
that she heard
the details about the tone and became fully aware of how
heightened the respondent’s wife had been during that call. She stated
was Ms Vienna-Hallam who called her to notify that the defamation letter had
arrived and not Ms Smith, although she may have
been at the store too on that
day. She also spoke to her friend Mariel after receiving the defamation letter.
67. She was cross-examined regarding some information provided in her
initial statement filed with the Tribunal. The statement refers
continuing to see a counsellor. The complainant said that was correct at the
time of her statement, but is no longer correct.
She says she saw a counsellor
on three occasions, but found her general practitioner more helpful. She
confirmed that she told
a psychologist that the respondent had tried to ring her
on the day the allegation went in on 1 September 2017. She was questioned
whether she told the psychologist that the respondent had tried to contact her
after the legal process was underway. The complainant
stated that she would
have told the psychologist about the phone calls and the legal letter that she
received. That was the only
psychologist and that she had not told her about any other communication. The
complainant
confirmed that she first saw Dr Baird immediately after she had to
take stress leave in 2017.
68. The complainant confirmed that her workmates
had to shoulder more of her shifts following these events so that she could be
accompanied
at all times. She was aware of discussions to the effect that
Sanity was going to ask Toll to withdraw the defamation case, but
did not know
the details. She confirmed that she was not asked to leave Sanity, but felt
like a burden and that she was frightened
and could no longer do the job the
same way. She felt she did not have many options and left employment there
voluntarily.
69. The complainant was not shaken in cross-examination. She
gave her evidence in a considered fashion. It was apparent that she
uncomfortable in the Tribunal environment, but she handled being questioned
directly by the respondent in a reasonably calm fashion.
She was at one point
quite upset by the respondent’s wife’s reaction to her evidence and
made that clear during the
course of her cross-examination. It was also evident
that she found some aspects of the respondent’s cross-examination
She impressed as a truthful witness albeit one who had some
difficulties recalling some of the detail of collateral events. Her evidence
concerning the matters of substance was, however, consistent and
Complainant’s Witnesses
Kristi Cole
70. Ms Cole gave evidence that she had been employed with
Sanity since 2000. She started work at the Eastlands store in 2011 and
Store Manager. She was responsible for hiring the complainant as an Assistant
Store Manager.
71. She gave evidence that the respondent was a delivery
driver for Toll who frequently came to the store. He usually attended the
every morning before 11.00am. She gave evidence that as Manager she opened the
store five days per week, but the days would
vary depending on the roster. The
store opened at 8.45am. She would usually arrive at the store between 8.30 and
8.40am. Part-time
staff would usually turn up at about 11.00am or noon. She
confirmed that more often than not she would be there by herself when
opened the store.
72. She was questioned as to whether she recalled an
occasion when there was a complaint made about the respondent. She stated that
early one morning the respondent came into the store and said something along
the lines of “Have you told your boss yet?”
to the complainant. He
said it a couple of times in a joking manner with a smile. Ms Cole gave evidence
that neither the complainant
nor the respondent enlightened her as to what they
were talking about. She then asked the complainant what happened and the
complainant
told her that the respondent had slapped her on the arse or words to
that effect. She said that the complainant was quite clear
in what she said.
Ms Cole stated that she had words to the respondent to the effect it was
unacceptable and hoped it would not happen
again. She said that it was a mix of
conversation and yelling. She was not happy about what she was told. She did
not recall asking
the respondent why he did it, and she did not recall his
response when she had words to him about it. She was certain that he did
deny the allegation. When asked what the respondent’s general demeanour
was when he was confronted with the allegation,
Ms Cole said that he was not
upset, but appeared amused and did not seem to take it seriously. She said that
the complainant was
standing about two metres away during the course of this
conversation.
73. Ms Cole stated that the respondent had not touched her or
any other store staff to her knowledge.
74. She also said that she had
heard the respondent refer to the complainant as “Juicy Lucy”. She
said this occurred
before the complainant told her about the slap. She said
that this had occurred more than a couple of times, she thought between
times to the best of her memory. She said that she recalled the complainant
saying that it made her uncomfortable and that the
complainant had told the
respondent and Ms Cole this herself. Ms Cole told the respondent it was not a
nice thing to call someone
that and that she did not like it. She could not
recall, but expected that she would have told him to stop as it was her job to
protect staff.
75. Ms Cole was questioned about any training she received
regarding unwelcome contact and how she should respond as a Manager. She
evidence that there were guidelines and workbooks regarding bullying and
inappropriate behaviour, but there was no face to face
direct training delivered
76. Ms Cole remembered speaking to the complainant about the
incident, but they never engaged in any conversation about doing anything
further. She thought that the complainant seemed happy that she had come to her
defence and she did not consider taking the matter
further at that stage.
77. In regard to any further behaviour of the respondent, Ms Cole said that
he sometimes had crass jokes, but did not recall them
being directed at or made
in the presence of the complainant. She did not recall any other inappropriate
78. She was asked if she had any sense that the respondent
favoured the complainant. She said that she thought so. She said that
came into the store he seemed happy to see the complainant and talk to her. Ms
Cole thought that the respondent would talk
to the complainant more than to
others in the store, including herself. She could not recall whether she had
any conversation with
others in the store about this.
79. Ms Cole said that
the respondent’s behaviour improved from the time of the slap until she
left Sanity in 2016. She did
not think that he continued to call the
complainant “Juicy Lucy”. She did notice however that the
complainant remained
uncomfortable when the respondent came in and was less
chatty with him.
80. Ms Cole gave evidence that she remained a friend of
the complainant’s after she left Sanity. Ms Cole became aware that
allegation had been referred to Toll through the complainant. She said the
complainant was very upset about this because it was
something that she did not
want to happen. To Ms Cole’s knowledge, the complainant was not consulted
before the complaint
was referred to Toll.
81. She was asked whether she
noticed whether there had been any effect on the complainant after the complaint
had been made to Toll.
She said that there had definitely been an effect, that
the complainant appeared different mentally, seemed exhausted and sick a
She got thinner and did not appear as happy as before. These changes occurred
after the complaint was put to Toll and when
“it all blew up”. When
she first met the complainant she said she was a happy sort of shy person. She
said they both
got along exceptionally well. She did not find the complainant
to be flirtatious or extroverted. From what she observed, there
could not be
any basis for the respondent to make a mistake about the basis of the
relationship between himself and the complainant.
cross-examination, Ms Cole confirmed that there was a heated verbal conversation
with the respondent after she was notified
of the alleged slapping incident.
She confirmed she did not see the incident herself. She stated that she
believed the respondent
thought it was a joke because of the way he was grinning
the whole time while it was being discussed.
83. Ms Cole confirmed that
after she was told about the slapping incident she started to fire up. She did
not recall if there was
anyone else in the store apart from herself, the
complainant and the respondent. She described the complainant as being upset,
happy that Ms Cole had defended her. She stated that after she had yelled
at the respondent she believed the matter was at an end.
She stated that she
could not recall what was in the workbooks relating to bullying and
inappropriate behaviour. She did not, however,
believe that she needed to go to
management because she thought that what she said to the respondent was enough.
She believed that
as Store Manager she had the right to make the call whether to
take the matter further.
84. It was put to Ms Cole that the conversation
she described with the respondent did not take place. She responded,
would be incorrect.” She disagreed that it could have been
someone else saying it and putting the respondent’s name
stated that the respondent, “100% said those words”.
re-examination, Ms Cole confirmed that she had not discussed the incident with
the complainant before the respondent entered
the store. She said that the
complainant had only just started her shift. She understood that the incident
had happened the day
before she confronted the respondent about it.
Cole gave her evidence in a straightforward fashion and was also not shaken in
cross-examination. She presented as an impressive
and truthful witness.
Ashlee Wood
87. Ms Wood gave evidence that she commenced working for Sanity
in May 2012. She became the Tasmanian Area Manager in about September
She met the complainant at around the same time that she became the Tasmanian
Area Manager. She knew the complainant as a
part-time employee who was second
in charge at the Eastlands’ store.
88. Ms Wood stated that she had
not met the respondent before, but had seen him in Sanity and knew that he was
one of the courier
drivers to the Eastlands’ store. As far as she was
aware, the respondent had only behaved inappropriately towards the complainant.
She says she first discussed it with the complainant in August 2017.
was asked to explain the circumstances of the conversation. She said that she
was in the store with the complainant and Ms
Vienna-Hallam. The respondent had
just delivered to the store and left. She recalled that the complainant
mentioned that she felt
uncomfortable around him. She then told Ms Wood about
an incident that had happened a while ago where the respondent came around
counter and slapped her on the bottom. Ms Wood says she was quite surprised to
be told this and asked the complainant what she
did. She recalls the
complainant telling her that her previous manager had put in a complaint to the
Head Office. She also recalls
the complainant telling her that the respondent
sometimes made inappropriate comments. She believed those inappropriate
occurred after the slap.
90. A week after that, Ms Wood stated
that the State Manager, Kelly Gilchrist was at the store visiting her. The
respondent again
did a delivery and Ms Gilchrist signed for it. Ms Wood says
that she then told Ms Gilchrist what the complainant had told her.
She did not
discuss with the complainant whether the matter would be taken further. When
she spoke to Ms Gilchrist she recalled
being asked the details of the
conversation and was told that Ms Gilchrist would take care of it. She believes
that is when Ms Gilchrist
91. Not long
after, she was again in the store when Mr Menzies came in looking for Ms
Gilchrist. Ms Wood went and spoke to him and
told him that Ms Gilchrist did not
live in the State. She said she had no notice that Mr Menzies was coming to the
store. She also
had no knowledge of what had been forwarded by way of
information to Toll. Mr Menzies told Ms Wood that he was looking for Ms
to get a statement from herself, Ms Gilchrist and the complainant. He
told her that he had been given information regarding the
complaint and that the
respondent had been suspended pending investigation. He also told Ms Wood that
there had been a previous
allegation of a similar nature. Ms Wood said that she
asked him if the other complaint concerned the respondent and Mr Menzies told
her he could not tell her that.
92. After Mr Menzies left the store, Ms
Wood says she went back behind the counter. Jessica Smith, who was working that
her that the respondent’s partner had rung the store and wanted
to speak with the complainant about the complaint. She describes
Ms Smith as
appearing a bit confused and stressed as to why Mrs Higgins had been calling the
store. Ms Wood immediately went out
of the store to try and find Mr Menzies.
She caught him and asked him if he had told the respondent about the complaint
how he knew that it had come from the complainant. Mr Menzies told Ms
Wood that he did not tell the respondent who the complaint
93. Ms Wood returned to the store and had a look at the store phone to see
if there was a phone number recorded so that she could
establish who had been
attempting to contact the complainant. She took a photo of the store phone that
shows the time and the number
that had been used by Mrs Higgins to call the
store. The store phone records the phone call occurring at 10.36am. Ms Wood
Ms Gilchrist to tell her of the phone call and her conversation with
Mr Menzies.
94. It was shortly after this that the complainant told her
that the respondent had tried to contact her. To the best of her recollection
she said that the complainant told her she had not answered the phone. She was
aware that the complainant had asked for the complaint
to be discontinued. She
did not recall having a conversation with the complainant about it herself. She
did notice, however, that
the complainant was distressed, worried and scared
because of attempts made to contact her. She was also not sure whether the
complainant
knew that any complaint was going to be referred to
95. Under cross-examination, Ms Wood was shown the email dated 30
August 2017 which she had sent to Kelly Gilchrist and is set out
at [53] above.
She confirmed that she wrote that email and that it reflected what she had been
told by the complainant on that date.
96. She also said that she did not
mention the respondent to the complainant first. She gave evidence that she did
not know about
any other allegations concerning the respondent at the time that
he made his delivery to the store, so had not mentioned anything
the complainant or anyone else in the store at the time. She also confirmed
that she had not seen the respondent act
inappropriately herself. She thought
that it was either the complainant or Ms Vienna-Hallam who told her that Ms Cole
an allegation to Head Office after the alleged incident.
respect to Mr Menzies’ attendance at the store on 1 September, she
confirmed that she was asked to give a statement.
She clarified that Mr Menzies
did not ask her to provide the statement on that day, but requested that she
provide a written statement.
Mr Menzies asked for statements to be forwarded
from Ms Wood, Ms Gilchrist and the complainant. He provided no timeframe in
98. She did not believe that she had had a direct
conversation with the complainant to the effect that the allegation was being
to more senior management at Sanity or to Toll. She said that from the
time the complainant told her about the incident and the
days between, nothing
was spoken about. Ms Wood told Ms Gilchrist about what she had been told and Ms
Gilchrist took over from there.
Ms Wood said she did not think it was her place
and did not know what Ms Gilchrist was going to do with that information.
99. Ms Wood was asked what she did to ascertain whether the allegation was
in fact true. She stated that she believed what she was
told was true and that
was what she passed on.
100. Ms Wood also stated that she had not received
any particular training from Sanity about sexual harassment. She stated that
of the induction for new employees deals with sexual harassment. She was
not responsible for training the complainant as she was
already employed at the
store when she commenced with Sanity.
101. Ms Wood gave evidence that she had
not told the complainant that she knew the respondent. She could not explain
why the complainant
said that Ms Wood told her that she knew the respondent.
The only knowledge Ms Wood had of the respondent was through his deliveries
the store. As noted above at [64] it is not clear when the complainant says she
had a conversation with Ms Wood to the effect
that she knew the respondent, nor
was it explored with her what had been said by Ms Wood to cause her to reach
102. When asked why she had passed on the information provided to
her by the complainant, she said she had a duty of care to her staff
believed it was important to pass it along. She denied bringing the
respondent’s name up with Ms Vienna-Hallam at her
house before 1
September. She also denied that what was said to her about the respondent by
others had an impact on her referring
the allegation to Ms
103. Much of the evidence given by Ms Wood was not contentious.
She did, however, give the impression that she was not clear about
some of the
detail of the initial conversation she had with the complainant about the
incident. The evidence she gave of the initial
conversation was not entirely
consistent with the content of the email she sent to Ms Gilchrist nor was it
consistent with the evidence
of the complainant and Ms Vienna-Hallam. Those
inconsistencies do not touch on the crucial findings of fact required to be made
the Tribunal.
Ashraf Addicoat
104. Mr Addicoat is the complainant’s partner. As at the
time of the inquiry, he had been in a relationship with her for over
105. He gave evidence about the complainant being upset about a workplace
incident sometime in mid-2014. The complainant came to
his house as she usually
did, but seemed emotional and shut off. After some questioning, he finally got
out of her that an incident
had happened at work that day. She told him that
she was at work in the morning getting a delivery from a courier who put some
behind the counter and that as he walked past he slapped her on the
bottom. She said that the person who did this was the respondent.
She started
crying and was emotional when telling Mr Addicoat about this. Mr Addicoat was
angry. He told the complainant that
he would confront the respondent the
following day. She quickly told him not to do that. She told Mr Addicoat that
she had to work
there and did not want to make a fuss. Mr Addicoat told the
complainant that she had to report to someone. She said she would report
Kristi Cole. She remained emotional and shut off and did not snap out of the
sadness for the rest of the night.
106. Mr Addicoat gave evidence that the
complainant had mentioned the respondent before. He understood from what he had
that the respondent was a courier and that the complainant regarded
him as sleazy. She told Mr Addicoat that the respondent was
always asking if
she had a boyfriend and that he had called her “Juicy Lucy”. Mr
Addicoat said that she had first mentioned
this months before she told him about
the slap incident. They had started dating in January 2014.
complainant told Mr Addicoat that she did not find being called “Juicy
Lucy” funny, but found it annoying. She
told Mr Addicoat that the
respondent found it “hilarious”. He could not recall the
complainant saying that she had said
anything to the respondent about this, but
that Ms Cole had said something to the respondent. He thought that the
complainant mentioned
the respondent calling her “Juicy Lucy” a
couple more times after the slap occurred. He thought that she mentioned the
respondent calling her “Juicy Lucy” about five or six times in
108. In respect of the respondent’s questioning the
complainant about her boyfriend, Mr Addicoat recalled being told that the
respondent would ask her if she has a boyfriend or if she was still with her
boyfriend. He said this was a common occurrence and
that it happened perhaps
two or three times before the slap and two or three times after the slap. He
said the complainant was uncomfortable
with that sort of conversation.
109. Mr Addicoat was asked if he ever confronted the respondent about his
behaviour. He said that he did not, because the complainant
made it clear she
did not want him to. He also stated that he did not believe violence was the
way to behave.
110. He was asked about the complainant’s general
demeanour. He said that she was introverted, shy and kind. He described
bubbly at work, but that she was otherwise a relatively quiet person. He said
that she is not a very social person and does
not even like going to the
supermarket.
111. Prior to the slap, he said the complainant was annoyed by
the respondent’s behaviour. He said that she was strong, but
put up with
it. In his view, the complainant needed her job and although the behaviour was
annoying and upsetting, she needed the
112. After the slap, however,
Mr Addicoat said that it seemed to cross a line with the complainant. She
became more standoffish to
people. It put a dent in their own relationship for
a period of time and he said the physical side of it slowed. She told him that
she was upset about the respondent and it appeared to have an impact for some
3-4 months afterwards, until such time that they were
able to put it in the back
of their mind and start to work through it. One of the things that upset the
complainant was that the
respondent had made a joke about it.
Addicoat gave evidence that he remembered vividly the events of 2017. He
recalls receiving a phone call from the complainant
who he described as being in
hysterics and crying. She told Mr Addicoat that “he is contacting
me”. Mr Addicoat asked
“who” and the complainant told her
that the respondent had her number. He says he was able to calm the complainant
a bit and told her he would be home soon. He thought that this occurred in
around August 2017. He recalls being told that the complainant
had missed a
phone call and searched the number.
114. When he returned home he said the
complainant told him the full story. She said that a manager at work had
brought up the respondent.
She told the manager that the respondent was
inappropriate with her. She described it to Mr Addicoat as a passing comment.
then received a phone call from a random 62 number. She searched the number
and it came up as the respondent. She was very emotional
received a phone call from a manager who had lodged a complaint on her behalf.
She told her manager that she
did not want to go ahead with the complaint. The
only time the complainant discussed the matter with Mr Addicoat, it was clear
she did not want to go ahead because she was scared for her safety because
the respondent had known that she made the complaint.
She seemed surprised that
the respondent had her phone number.
115. The complainant also mentioned that
there had been a phone call to Sanity from Mrs Higgins. She reported being told
by her manager
that Mr Higgins’ wife had rung up angrily asking for her.
That made her even more scared and emotional and made her feel more
the best of his recollection, the conversation regarding Mrs Higgins’
phone call occurred in the weeks following
the discussion regarding the missed
phone call on her own phone. He describes her as being an emotional wreck,
crying and heavy
breathing. In his eyes, she did not appear to be seeing things
properly and was quite irrational. Mr Addicoat had never seen the
complainant
that upset before. He said that she was not good for the following days, was
emotional, distraught and disconnected.
She had two weeks off work.
116. The next relevant event was the defamation letter. The complainant
rang Mr Addicoat at work. She was hysterical again, if not
worse this time. He
describes her as “crying her head off”. He said she was not being
rational at all. The complainant
told him that she had received a phone call
from her manager and received a legal letter addressed to her. She says she
scared and an emotional wreck. He tried to calm the complainant down.
The complainant again took 2 weeks stress leave and was very
Mr Addicoat took a couple of days off to care for her. He was very worried
that she might harm herself. The complainant
told him that she could see no way
out. She told him that she had done nothing and was unhappy with the way Sanity
had behaved towards
her. She thought that they were wiping their hands of her.
They both agreed that the complainant should see a doctor because they
something and could not live that way.
117. Mr Addicoat stated that the
complainant is still emotional, but okay when she can forget about it. Whenever
she receives a phone
call or email from her lawyer she cries. He describes once
finding her in a store in Eastlands in a ball crying. She told Mr Addicoat
was afraid of seeing the respondent.
118. Mr Addicoat said their
relationship had taken a big hit because of these events. They had had periods
of separation.
119. Under cross-examination Mr Addicoat confirmed that the
complainant had said that the respondent had slapped her on the bottom
respondent walked past. He did not recall encountering the respondent at
Fantastic Furniture and Super A-Mart. He told
the respondent that he did not
know who he was at the time and did not recall seeing him. He confirmed that he
told the complainant
to report the incident because it was inappropriate. In
his words, “she didn’t go to work to get her arse slapped”.
He stated that the complainant had not told him that she had already told
someone else.
120. Mr Addicoat was asked whether the complainant had said
that anything happened between 2014 to 2017. Mr Addicoat said that she
was cross-examined as to his recollection of the order of events regarding
googling the phone number. He was not present
when that occurred as he was at
work. To the best of his recollection the order of events was that the
complainant received a missed
call, she then received a phone call from Ms Wood,
then googled the number from the missed call. He confirmed that the complainant
asked for the complaint to be dropped as soon as she realised that the
respondent was trying to contact her as she was scared for
her safety and
intimidated by the respondent. Mr Addicoat confirmed that the complainant
resigned from Sanity because of the respondent’s
behaviour. He denied
that the complainant was fine up until the time of the defamation letter.
Mariel Butterworth
121. Ms Butterworth was also an employee at Sanity. She
commenced work there in 2009 some four years prior to the
complainant.
122. She gave evidence that she knew the respondent as one of
the couriers who delivered to Sanity. She said that the respondent
behaved fine towards her and that they had limited interaction.
gave evidence that the complainant mentioned the respondent to her on a number
of occasions. The first occasion was not
long after the complainant started
working there, perhaps within the first 6 months. She told Ms Butterworth that
at times she felt
uncomfortable and that the respondent favoured her. Ms
Butterworth said that she agreed with that perception. She stated that the
respondent would pick the side of the counter that the complainant was on and
get the complainant to sign for stock more often than
Ms Butterworth. The way
she saw it, the complainant had more contact with the respondent than
Ms Butterworth did and in her view
that was because the respondent
approached the complainant more frequently.
124. Ms Butterworth also said
that about 3-6 months after the complainant started working there, she mentioned
that the respondent
had referred to her a number of times as “Juicy
Lucy”. She recalls being told about this about 5 or 6 times. The
complainant
told Ms Butterworth that she found it uncomfortable. Ms Butterworth
said that all the team members were aware of this. As a consequence,
to try and sign for deliveries from the respondent if she could because she knew
that the complainant felt uncomfortable.
125. Ms Butterworth described the
complainant as shy, timid and quiet. She was noticeably embarrassed by the
respondent’s behaviour
towards her. Ms Butterworth said that she
advised the complainant to tell Ms Cole how she was feeling and let other team
know to take over. She was not privy to any conversations between the
complainant and Ms Cole. Ms Butterworth did, however, have
a discussion with Ms
Cole as she was aware that the complainant had spoken to her about it.
126. Ms Butterworth also gave evidence that when the complainant was not
there, the respondent would ask where she was. He would
make comments such as
“No Lucy today, when is she working next”.
127. In respect of
the slap allegation, Ms Butterworth says she was not working at Sanity that day.
She heard about what occurred
from the complainant. The complainant called Ms
Butterworth after work that day. She told her that she was working in the
stock was being delivered and that she had to accept the stock. She said
that when the stock was delivered she bent over to check
the delivery labels to
make sure that all the items were there and correct. She told Ms Butterworth
that the respondent had inappropriately
slapped her on the bottom and that she
felt uncomfortable with this. She also told Ms Butterworth that Jack was working
that day and that she had told him what had occurred. The complainant
was quite upset when she called Ms Butterworth. Ms Butterworth
told her she
needed to tell Kristi Cole as soon as she could. Ms Butterworth said that she
and the complainant were quite close
friends at that stage and Ms Butterworth
was doing a law degree. She did not recall if the complainant mentioned saying
to the respondent. She expressed that she felt violated and appeared
distraught. Ms Butterworth thought that she seemed shocked
by what had
128. Ms Butterworth confirmed that she had other conversations
with the complainant about the incident. It was mentioned “here
there”. She said that she had a conversation with Ms Cole within the next
few days. Ms Cole told Ms Butterworth that
she had words about the situation
with the respondent and told him that behaviour of that type was not tolerated
in the store. She
told Ms Butterworth this conversation had occurred within the
store. To the best of her recollection, she thought that this had
within the next day or so of the incident.
129. Ms Butterworth gave
evidence that she did not recall the respondent’s behaviour changing
toward the complainant after the
slap. She did, however, think that other team
members at Sanity stepped in and tried to protect her and make her interactions
the respondent as limited as possible. She did not recall the complainant
mentioning that the respondent called her “Juicy
Lucy” again. She
did, however, notice that the complainant appeared uncomfortable around the
respondent.
130. Ms Butterworth was not working at Sanity in 2017.
She was, however, still good friends with the complainant. The complainant
phoned Ms Butterworth straight away after what she found out that Sanity had
made a complaint to Toll. This was in 2017. At first
she told Ms Butterworth
that Sanity had progressed the incident. She said she was very distressed by
this and was distraught that
it had escalated beyond the comment that she had
made within the store. When it was later alleged that the comments were
defamatory,
the complainant wanted to defend that suggestion.
Butterworth confirmed that the incidents of the last few years had impacted on
the complainant. She described the complainant
as being quite fragile and shy
and that things impact her differently. She was very upset and very confused
and felt the incident
had dragged on for such a long time. She said the slap
had affected the complainant, who felt violated and lost confidence.
Butterworth was also cross-examined by the respondent. She confirmed that she
was admitted as a legal practitioner in 2016.
She gave evidence that she did
not recall telling the complainant that a slap would be classed as sexual
harassment.
133. Ms Butterworth confirmed that she was good friends with the
complainant. She confirmed under cross-examination that the complainant
frequently made her aware that she was uncomfortable around the respondent
between 2013 and 2017. She confirmed that the reason
for this was that the
respondent appeared to favour the complainant over other team members, would go
to her side of the counter
and have more interactions with her.
Butterworth confirmed that the complainant contacted her the day she received
the defamation letter. She was asked what advice
she gave the complainant. She
said that the complainant had been told that Sanity would organise for her to
get legal advice.
135. Ms Butterworth did not recall ever hearing the
respondent refer to the complainant as “Juicy Lucy”. She did not
see the respondent behave inappropriately towards the complainant, but did
confirm her observations of the favouritism already referred
to above. She also
confirmed that the respondent was always asking where the complainant was and
when she was next on shift.
136. Ms Butterworth presented as an impressive
and truthful witness. She was clear in her evidence and not swayed during the
of cross-examination.
Jack Milbourne
137. Mr Milbourne gave evidence that he also worked at Sanity
in 2014. He commenced in May or June of that year and left at the end
He remembers the complainant, but cannot recall the respondent. He says that he
was one of the complainant’s co-workers,
that they were friendly, but not
friends. He recalled the complainant speaking to him about the respondent on
one occasion. He
came into work in the middle of the day. The complainant told
him that when she bent over to look at labels the respondent touched
bum. He said that this happened a month or two after he started at Sanity.
There was just the complainant and himself
at the store at the time. He was the
first other staff member that had turned up that day.
138. Mr Milbourne was
asked to recall as best he could the exact words used by the complainant. His
recollection was that she said
she bent over to pick up boxes and that the
respondent had touched her on the bum. He said that the complainant had used
“slapped”. He says that he asked the complainant whether
she was going to talk to their manager about it and she said
that she would
bring it up the next time she worked with her. Their manager at the time was
Kristi Cole.
139. Mr Milbourne said he understood the incident occurred
earlier that day and that the complainant seemed shocked or startled and
exactly herself. He never spoke with the complainant about the incident
140. He also recalled that the complainant had mentioned that the Toll
courier had called her “Juicy Lucy” on a couple
of occasions prior
to mentioning the slapping incident. The complainant did not name the person
who had called her this and Mr Milbourne
had never met him. She mentioned it in
passing on one occasion. From what she said, it sounded like it had happened on
of occasions. This conversation happened prior to the slap.
141. Under cross-examination, Mr Milbourne denied developing a friendship
with the complainant. He himself had not heard the complainant
being called
“Juicy Lucy”. He had also never seen the respondent be
inappropriate or aggressive to the complainant.
He was told that the person
responsible for the behaviour referred to above was “the Toll
courier”. He told the Tribunal
that he recognised the respondent’s
face, but could not say whether he recognised it from Sanity.
142. It was
clear that Mr Milbourne had little personal involvement with the respondent at
the store, if at all. His evidence concerning
what he was told by the
complainant was not shaken during cross-examination.
Krista-Lee Vienna-Hallam
143. Ms Vienna-Hallam was also employed at the Sanity store.
She worked there as the Store Manager from March 2017 until January 2018.
gave evidence regarding a conversation involving herself, Ms Wood and the
complainant that took place in August 2017. She could
not now recall how the
conversation arose. She was, however, made aware that the complainant was
slapped on the bottom by the respondent
when delivering stock on one occasion.
Ms Wood was present when they were both told this by the complainant. She said
were all in the back room or just to the side of the store and off the
shop floor.
144. She was asked who raised the issue. She gave evidence
that she thought that Ms Wood had mentioned the respondent’s behaviour
towards the complainant in the store, in particular that he appeared to take a
fondness to her or was lingering around. Ms Vienna-Hallam
knew the respondent;
he delivered stock to her quite regularly and had made a delivery earlier that
day. She said the conversation
occurred almost immediately after he left the
store. She told Ms Wood that she had observed the same behaviour and attention
to the complainant. She said that she personally had tried to make sure
the complainant was not alone when stock was delivered and
uncomfortable that someone in her employ was put in that position. She recalls
something being said about the respondent
being “a dirty old man”.
She was not sure if those were the exact words or whether they were said after
the complainant
disclosed what had happened.
145. The complainant told Ms
Wood and Ms Vienna-Hallam that the respondent had slapped her on the bottom
during the course of a delivery.
She told them that it had occurred a couple of
years or a year prior. Ms Vienna-Hallam recalls being told that Ms Cole was
when it occurred.
146. Ms Vienna-Hallam said that the complainant
had previously told her that the respondent liked to chat to her a lot and made
uncomfortable. The complainant had mentioned that she would get Avon from
the respondent and that he would get angry if she had
not made an order. She
was not aware of the complainant raising being called any names by the
respondent.
147. In respect of the information she received, Ms
Vienna-Hallam made sure that the complainant was not going to be alone in the
store. Other than that, as Ms Wood was present and the Area Manager, she left
her to deal with the information as she saw fit.
A couple of days after the
initial conversation, Ms Vienna-Hallam was at Ms Wood’s house. They had a
conversation about what
they had been told by the complainant. Ms Vienna-Hallam
told Ms Wood that she had not witnessed the respondent cross the line in
said or did, but that he had made her feel uncomfortable in how he lingered
around. Ms Wood’s partner Toby had told
the pair of them that it was not
the first time something like that had been said about the respondent. There
was a discussion about
escalating the matter to get the respondent taken off the
Sanity route.
148. Ms Vienna-Hallam gave evidence that she reached out to
the complainant to let her know what was going on, but that it was too
Either the respondent or his wife had called the complainant directly before
anyone at Sanity could speak with her. When
she was able to speak with the
complainant, she was devastated. It was clear that it was not her choice to
escalate the matter in
the way that it had been and she was upset that her name
had been released. She went on stress leave. Ms Vienna-Hallam says that
did not think that the complainant worked for Sanity much after that. It
appeared to her that the incident had affected her
mental health. She recalled
the complainant asking if there was any way that she could stop the
investigation. She reiterated that
she felt uncomfortable around the respondent
and felt as though she had been left out in the cold. She was definitely upset
the way it was handled.
149. Ms Vienna-Hallam gave evidence that she
had conversations with Sanity about supporting the complainant through the
matter, particularly
when she received the defamation letter. Ms Vienna-Hallam
said that she saw the letter and read it to the complainant at the
complainant’s
request. She rang her to let her know it had arrived and
read it to her over the phone. Her partner came and collected the letter.
Ms Vienna-Hallam spoke to the complainant she was devastated and in tears.
150. Under cross-examination, Ms Vienna-Hallam confirmed that she had not
seen the respondent cross the line physically or verbally
with any other team
member or with the complainant. She told the Tribunal that she did socialise
with Ms Wood and would see her
to talk about work and occasionally socially
outside of work as well at the time. The respondent’s name was brought up
Ms Wood’s house because Ms Wood was clarifying the story that the
complainant had told her and wanted to get more details of
the interaction
between the respondent and the complainant.
151. In respect of the defamation
letter, Ms Vienna-Hallam said that she rang the complainant because she thought
she might be upset
and knew that she was opening up the store herself the next
day. She knew she would be upset because she considered that the complainant
was a sensitive soul. When she opened up the letter and told her its contents,
she said that the complainant was disbelieving and
very upset. Ms Vienna-Hallam
could no longer remember the exact conversation.
152. She was cross-examined
Vienna-Hallam stated that she
felt that had been said, but she was not too sure.
She clarified that she could be wrong in saying that and could now not remember
whether the complainant said that the incident had been witnessed or followed up
by Ms Cole.
Jessica Smith
153. Ms Smith gave evidence that she started work at Sanity in
November 2010 and still worked for the business as at the time of the
She first started at the Rosny Park store in July or August 2017. She knows the
complainant and they are still in contact.
She regards her as a
154. She gave evidence that she knew of the respondent. He was a
delivery driver at the Rosny Park store. Ms Smith was fairly new
at the Rosny
Park store when the allegation concerning the respondent came to light and she
did not recall him actually delivering
goods to that store.
155. Ms Smith was
asked about the complainant’s behaviour while at work at Sanity. She
described her as someone who was shy
and friendly, but not particularly
outgoing. The complainant had never said anything to her about the
respondent’s behaviour.
156. In September 2017 she answered a phone
call at work and a woman stated that she wanted to speak with the complainant
if she was in the store. She sounded angry and agitated to Ms Smith.
Ms Smith told the woman that the complainant was not in the
store. The woman
stated “Did you know that she has put a sexual harassment complaint
against [the respondent]”. Ms
Smith took Mrs Higgins’ details, then
spoke to Ms Wood in the store that day. She explained what had occurred during
call. Ms Wood took a photo of the store phone. She was shown a copy
of the photo of the store phone and said that she recognised
part of the number,
specifically the first four digits “6249”. She also recalled
telling the caller that she could not
give out a team member's phone number,
although she could not recall whether the caller asked for it. This was the
first time that
Ms Smith had heard about any issues concerning the complainant
and the respondent.
157. Ms Smith was also at the store on the day when the
letter arrived for the complainant who was not at work at the time. Ms
Vienna-Hallam
was at the store too. They discussed what they should do. They
decided between the two of them that they did not think it would
be right to
leave it there for the complainant to discover. They reached this conclusion
because the complainant is a fragile person
and appeared to suffer some anxiety.
They decided to call the complainant and ask her if she wanted them to open the
letter and read
it. She says that Ms Vienna-Hallam made the phone call, but
that she was present while it was made. She recalls the complainant
being quite
upset and not in any frame of mind to be speaking. Ms Smith could hear her
crying on the phone. She did not now recall
the specific conversation, but did
recall the complainant taking a couple of weeks off work after the letter
158. Under cross-examination, Ms Smith stated that she did not
recall ever seeing the respondent at Sanity, so had never seen him
inappropriately towards any team member at the store. She confirmed that the
respondent’s wife appeared angry when
she rang the store. She formed that
view because of the tone of voice used by Mrs Higgins. She could hear it in her
she was agitated. She had had no previous dealings with the
respondent’s wife. She confirmed that she told the respondent’s
wife that she would take her information and pass it on to the State Manager.
159. Ms Smith was cross-examined about a matter raised in her statement that
had been filed with the Tribunal to the effect that the
respondent was loitering
outside Boost Juice. Ms Smith confirmed she made that statement. She thought
that the respondent was making
deliveries, but in her opinion it appeared that
the respondent was spending more time than she would have thought necessary.
could not recall whether anyone else was present on the date that she
observed this behaviour.
Roger Menzies
160. Mr Menzies was issued with a notice to attend pursuant to
s.97(1) of the Act. A request had been made by both the complainant
respondent for Mr Menzies to attend to give evidence. He was called as part of
the complainant’s case.
161. He gave evidence that he had previously
worked for Toll, having started with the business in 2013/14. He was the State
from 2016 until 2019. That position was based in Launceston, but he
travelled extensively throughout country Victoria and Tasmania.
oversight of all the managers across the State. There was a Branch Manager in
each depot and he reported to the Melbourne
162. He knew the
respondent through his work at Toll. The respondent was a sub-contractor for
Toll and had been undertaking work
in that capacity prior to Mr Menzies
commencing with the business. He gave evidence that the respondent’s run
included deliveries
on the Eastern Shore, including Eastlands.
163. He gave
evidence that there were multiple stores in Eastlands and that the truck was
full every day. Deliveries were also made
to Kmart, Priceline and lots of the
clothing stores including Katies, Sussan, Jeanswest and Dotti.
164. He first
became aware of the allegations concerning the respondent’s behaviour
towards people that he delivered to when
he received a phone call about two
years ago. He thought it could have been in 2017. The phone call was from a
store manager at
Sanity. He could not now remember who made the complaint. He
was told that a complaint had come from one of the manager’s
The employee was not named. Mr Menzies said he passed the information on to the
HR team in Melbourne. As a consequence
he was asked to speak to the store
manager. He understood the complaint involved allegations of sexual harassment,
but he had no
further details.
165. He confirmed that he went to the store on
1 September 2017. Ms Woods’ evidence about that was outlined to Mr
That evidence was to the effect that Mr Menzies attended the store and
told her that he needed statements from Kelly Gilchrist,
the complainant and Ms
Wood and that HR had directed him to obtain those statements. Mr Menzies
confirmed he did attend the store
that day. He did not understand that he was
tasked to undertake the investigation but went to the store to inform them what
going on and that Toll were conducting interviews. He did not think that he
had spoken to the respondent prior to going into the
store, but spoke to him
after that attendance.
166. Mr Menzies confirmed that he had told Ms Wood
that there had been a similar incident involving the respondent in the past. He
gave evidence that was something he had been told, but he did not know the whole
story. He agreed that after he left the store Ms
Wood had caught up with him
afterwards and told him that Mrs Higgins had rung the store asking for the
complainant. He also agreed
that Ms Wood asked him how the respondent knew that
the complaint was about the complainant. Mr Menzies confirmed he told Ms Wood
that he was not aware how the respondent knew and that he would investigate. He
rang HR as soon as he got back to his car and spoke
to a female. He was
instructed to make contact with the respondent and get him to return to the
depot straight away and tell him
not to make contact with anyone from Sanity. He
was also directed to tell the respondent that no-one from his family was to make
167. Mr Menzies was asked how Mrs Higgins
knew that the complaint concerned the complainant. Mr Menzies said that the
only person
who could have told the respondent was Anita Clay and he had not
asked her if she had done that.
168. Mr Menzies gave evidence that he stood
the respondent down. HR spoke with him after and told him that he would be
present during
any phone calls conducted with the respondent. Mr Menzies was
not a part of the investigation process. He was shown the file note
meeting that took place on 1 September and stated that he had never read the
169. In respect of the information he provided to Ms Wood about a
previous incident concerning the respondent, Mr Menzies said that
he had been
told this by Anita Clay that day when he spoke with her. The extent of what he
was told was that this had happened before
and that it involved another female.
Mr Menzies understood that this was therefore the second claim of harassment of
a female relating
to the respondent.
170. When Mr Menzies was asked further
party to the meeting
with the respondent on 1 September. He first became aware
of the complaint involving Sanity on the day that he attended the store.
thought that Anita Clay had told him.
171. Mr Menzies was shown an email
chain which included him. It appeared from that group of emails that Mr Menzies
was sent a message
on 1 September 2017 at 9.33am by John Slatter, who is
described as the Key Account Manager responsible for the Sanity Store. A
part of that email chain shows that Mr Menzies forwarded that email
to Kathleen Newbury at 9.48am that day. That email chain outlines
allegation, including referring to the complainant as “Juicy
172. Under cross-examination, Mr Menzies confirmed that he
classified the respondent as a friend, although they never socialised outside
work. He was cross-examined as to the order of events that occurred on 1
September 2017. It was put to him that Mr Menzies made
a phone call to the
respondent at 10.33am which was after the respondent had been stood down. It
was put to him that Mr Menzies
had rung the respondent earlier at 9.27am and
told him to return to work. Mr Menzies thought it was in fact around lunch
Phone records later tendered by the respondent and the time of the file
note tend to support that it was earlier in the day that
the phone call was
173. Mr Menzies confirmed reading out an allegation to the respondent
and recalled that it was on Ms Clay’s computer. He was
pretty sure that
he did not tell the respondent that the complainant was the one who had put in
the complaint. His evidence was
that he was pretty sure that the respondent was
the one that told him that the complaint related to the complainant. It was put
to him that when the respondent asked Mr Menzies who put in the complaint, that
he said it was the complainant. Mr Menzies thought
that he recalled telling the
respondent that it was the Store Manager who put in the complaint. He agreed
that the respondent asked
for a copy of the allegation, but that his request had
been refused because he had been directed not to provide a copy to him by
174. It was suggested to him that the allegation that was put to the
respondent was that he was accused of grabbing someone on the
bum and calling
her “Juicy Lucy” and inviting her to Avon parties. Mr Menzies
denied that that was the allegation put
to the respondent at that time. He
denied that the respondent was told that the allegation was one of sexual
harassment, but he
agreed that the respondent had been told he was stood down
until further notice. He agreed that the respondent requested that Mr
find out when the allegation was meant to have occurred.
175. Mr Menzies
confirmed that he received instructions from Mr Slatter to go to Sanity and
investigate the complaint and obtain a
formal statement. He denied being told
to get statements from particular people. He said he was told to talk to the
store manager,
speak to them and find out who made the allegation and get
statements from them as well. He said that he was told to get a statement
the store manager and the complainant.
176. He confirmed that he later
this had been as a consequence
of a direction he had received from HR. He also
confirmed that the respondent requested that Mr Menzies ask the complainant to
a Police statement. He said that he had forwarded that request on to HR.
Mr Menzies was asked questions about his response to the
respondent’s
email request. The response he provided that same day is in the following
I acknowledge receipt of your email below. We are currently undertaking
inquiries regarding the complaints that have been made and
will contact you
again for a further meeting once we have received additional
information.
In the meantime, as I instructed you in our meeting of Friday morning and
again in our conversation on Friday night, you are not to
the staff at Sanity Records in any way at all, whether directly or indirectly,
by phone, in person or any
other means of contact.
We appreciate this may be a difficult time for you. Should you wish to speak
with our Chaplain at any time, please contact Millin
Curtis on 0466 152
177. Mr Menzies gave evidence that the body of the email
response to the respondent were words provided to him by HR. He confirmed
there was a further meeting held on 5 September and that the respondent had
asked for his union representative to be involved
in the conference call. He
denied that the union representative was not allowed to attend the meeting.
178. Mr Menzies gave evidence that he was not aware whether people at Toll
knew about the allegation prior to 1 September. As far
as he knew, Ms Clay and
himself were the only ones who knew about it at the depot.
179. Mr Menzies
was shown a letter terminating the respondent’s employment dated
2 May 2018. He indicated he recalled the letter,
that it was drafted by HR
and signed by himself.
180. Mr Menzies was asked who took over the
respondent’s run when the respondent’s contract was terminated. He
that he could not recall.
181. Mr Menzies was re-examined and was
equally unclear about the order of events. He recalled that the first time he
told the respondent
not to contact Sanity was in the afternoon, thought that the
meeting between himself, Anita Clay and the respondent occurred later
9.45am and did not recall ringing the respondent at 9.27am.
182. In respect
of the email chain that he forwarded to HR, he stated he did so without reading
it. His recollection was that he
rang HR after the Sanity visit and was then
instructed to ring the respondent to return to the depot. It was after that
that the meeting occurred with Ms Clay. His recollection was that
after that meeting that he rang the respondent telling him not
to contact Sanity
and that was the result of instructions from HR.
183. The precise order in
which the respondent was notified of the complaint and Mr Menzies visited the
Sanity store is not of particular
significance to the matters that are required
to be established by the complainant to prove her complaint. What is clear is
the allegation made to Toll about the respondent’s conduct was that
he had slapped the complainant on the buttocks. If the
respondent was told that
the allegation was that he had grabbed the complainant on the buttocks, it was
not as a result of anything
that had been communicated by the complainant or any
Sanity staff.
Dr Virginia Baird
184. Dr Baird was called as a witness. A report authored by
her dated 14 March 2018 was also tendered together with an email dated
2020 addressed to the complainant’s lawyer, Mr Mackie. Her 2018 report
sets out that she first met the complainant
on 13 November 2017 and again on 27
November 2017. This was following the complainant’s receipt of the
defamation claim and
demand for $30,000.00 from the respondent. The complainant
presented as distraught and anxious and told Dr Baird that she felt physically
sick about the claim. She told Dr Baird that the claim was threatening in
nature, partly because it stated that she had to respond
within 30 days in
addition to accusing her unjustly. She was also upset about the way the claim
had come about in that her employer
had spoken to Toll without her permission
and that had led to the respondent attempting to contact her on her mobile
felt threatened by the respondent and so had asked for the
investigation of the respondent to stop as she thought it would stop him
trying to contact or harass her.
185. Dr Baird noted that the complainant had
feelings of low self-worth as a direct result of the defamation claim. She did
what to do and felt helpless as decisions had been made without her
authority and the respondent had attempted to contact her on
her mobile phone
and had served the defamation claim against her. Her extreme symptoms of stress
and anxiety included hypervigilance,
insomnia, anorexia and restlessness. She
was teary and emotional and experiencing mild symptoms of depression as well,
a sense of helplessness, worthlessness, anhedonia and low mood.
Contemplating returning to work at Sanity exacerbated her symptoms.
noted that her symptoms were much improved when she was not going to Eastlands
which reduced the risk of seeing the respondent.
186. The complainant also
outlined to Dr Baird the respondent’s behaviour towards her. Dr
Baird’s report noted that the
complainant had been very upset about the
2014 incident when the respondent had “grabbed her on the buttocks”
she and her workmates had adjusted her work so that no further unwanted
physical contact could be made. The complainant reported
to Dr Baird that she
was able to avoid seeing the respondent when he made deliveries to the store.
Despite this he was able to continue
making sexual innuendos towards her. The
complainant reported that she enjoyed her job at Sanity and just wanted to move
the incident in 2014.
187. Dr Baird in her 2018 report stated that
she had no doubt that the symptoms of depression, stress and anxiety that the
complainant
presented with in November 2017 were caused by the letter from the
respondent’s lawyer threatening defamation proceedings and
demanding money
from her. In addition she also believed that the complainant’s symptoms
were caused by, and exacerbated by
the recollection and recognition of the
chronic sexual harassment of her. It was noted that the complainant had been
significantly
affected by the respondent’s behaviour towards her and that
she will likely remain hypervigilant, fearful and anxious for many
years, always
worrying that she might be contacted by the respondent or that she might
inadvertently see him. It was considered
likely that the chronic sexual
harassment and threatening behaviour would lead to long-term anxiety, reduced
self-confidence and
self-worth.
188. In her email of 2 March 2020, Dr Baird
indicated that she had consulted the complainant on a further three occasions
her distress and that she also saw one of Dr Baird’s colleagues
on another occasion. The complainant was noted to remain hypervigilant,
low energy, poor concentration and poor sleep.
Dr Baird stated that the
complainant's treatment included an anti-depressant, exercise, mindfulness and
that she had been referred
to a psychologist.
189. Dr Baird gave evidence
during the inquiry. She was asked about the events reported to her by the
complainant as set out in her
2018 report. She gave evidence that to the best
of her recollection the complainant had told her that some time prior to 2014
respondent had touched her inappropriately. The complainant also reported
that she had tried to avoid contact with him afterwards
with store support. Dr
Baird had been told that somehow the report of the incident came to light and
that it had been brought to
the attention of his employers. This formed the
background to the defamation letter.
190. Dr Baird was asked specifically
conceded that a different
term may have been used by the complainant when
providing background, but the complainant had definitely indicated there had
hand to buttock contact which was absolutely without her consent. During
her evidence, she confirmed her observations of the complainant’s
presentation and the symptoms that she had reported experiencing as a
consequence of the behaviour. It was noted that any symptoms
she experienced
were exacerbated once the letter came, because that generated a sense of
hopelessness and powerlessness that the
complainant found
overwhelming.
191. Dr Baird gave evidence that she last saw the complainant
in December 2019. The email of 20 March 2020 was based on that December
review. Dr Baird indicated that following moving to a new workplace which
reduced the complainant’s fear of having contact
with the respondent, her
symptoms appeared to have improved. The thought of seeing the respondent
through the hearing process, however,
made her feel worse and Dr Baird was
consequently concerned about the complainant. She had organised to see the
complainant on a
Saturday due to her concern about her welfare. It was noted
that anti-depressant medication had been prescribed by one of Dr Baird’s
colleagues, who had seen the complainant in between her first and second visit
with Dr Baird. Dr Baird was not entirely clear as
to when that medication was
first prescribed to the complainant or whether it continued to be prescribed.
192. Under cross-examination, Dr Baird was asked whether the complainant
stated she had been grabbed on the buttocks. Dr Baird indicated
complainant made a comment that the respondent had touched her bottom or
buttock. She confirmed that she could only go
on what she hears and what she
sees when forming an opinion. She agreed that the complainant could have been
upset about the allegation
put into Toll without her consent. She was
questioned about her use of the term chronic sexual harassment. Dr Baird
explained she
used that term because the allegations reported to her by the
complainant indicated incidents occurring on more than one occasion.
that what had been described to her occurred over multiple occasions. Chronic
in a medical sense means more than 3 months.
Respondent’s Case
The Respondent’s
193. The respondent gave evidence that he had never been
accused of anything like this before. He recounted the events of 1 September
2017. He stated he received a phone call from Mr Menzies, his manager, asking
if he had delivered to Eastlands that day. This call
was at 9.27am. He was
asked to return to work, but Mr Menzies told him that he could not tell him why.
194. The respondent arrived at the depot between 9.45 and 10.00am. He
waited for Mr Menzies to arrive, and when he did, went into
Clay’s office. Anita Clay is another employee of Toll. A meeting took
place during which the respondent was told that
an allegation had come to light.
He says that it was read out and that it referred to the respondent sexually
harassing someone by
grabbing her on the bum, calling her “Juicy
Lucy” and inviting her to Avon parties. The respondent says that he asked
Mr Menzies who put the allegation in and was told that it was the complainant.
He said that it could not be, because he knew her
from the time she started work
and knew her very well. He said he was stood down with pay pending an
investigation. Some other
people at Toll helped him unload the truck between
10.00 and 10.30 that morning.
195. He then left the Toll depot to pick up
an empty pallet. He drove to Station Street in Moonah and rang his wife at
and told her that he had been stood down for sexual harassment on
the basis of an allegation made by the complainant. Mr Menzies
rang him back
shortly after and the respondent says he asked Mr Menzies to find out when this
was meant to have happened.
196. He went back to Eastlands, picked up the
pallet he had to pick up and returned home. He says he got home between 12.15
and 12.30pm.
His wife wanted to know what happened, so he told her. After he
had told her, his wife advised that she had already rung Sanity
and attempted to
speak to the complainant. The respondent says that he had a go at his wife for
doing that. The respondent says
that he was only instructed to not go near the
complainant after he had been stood down at the meeting at Toll. He stayed
most of the day because he did not want to confront his wife. He made
numerous phone calls to a union rep and to his friend, David
Coleman, who was
also a co-worker. He thought he might have spoken to his friend Dave about
30-40 times over the course of the weekend.
197. On Sunday 3 September he
decided to go to the Glenorchy Police Station to see if he could make a
statement. He had formed the
view that an allegation concerning grabbing
someone on the bum would be classified as sexual assault and wanted his name
as he had not done anything. He also rang Mr Menzies to get his
email address so that he could get HR at Toll to get the complainant
the Police and make a statement. The respondent says he sent an email to that
effect and received a response.
198. The respondent was rung on 4 September
by Mr Menzies and advised there would be a conference call on 5 September at
The respondent requested to have a union representative present and for
his brother in law to attend as a support person. He recalls
that Anita Clay
put the call through to HR on 5 September and he could not remember who else was
present. He was advised that he
would be reinstated on 7 September and told
that everything was finished.
199. Over the course of the next couple of
weeks he rang HR and spoke with staff there. He had been told that the
investigation was
over and had been sorted out. He also contacted the Toll
chaplain, who advised him that he needed closure. It was then that he
legal advice.
200. During the course of the conference call on 5 September,
he was asked by Toll not to undertake any deliveries to Sanity on behalf
Toll. When he sought legal advice, he was asked about loss of income. He was
also advised that what had occurred amounted to
defamation.
201. In respect
of instructing that the defamation letter be sent, the respondent said that it
was not about victimisation. He stated
he just wanted to get the complainant to
talk about it. He said he was not after money, but he was just trying to get
two parties
to talk. He stated that did not eventuate and was not followed up
and that he left it at that. His legal adviser had also sought
from Toll a copy
of the allegation that was read out to him. He got no response from Toll as to
202. It was after these events that the complainant went to Equal
Opportunity Tasmania.
203. The respondent said that his health had not been
good since 1 September 2017. He said he does not like saying this, but he had
thought about ending it all. He had not acted on those thoughts as he had not
done anything wrong. He was unable to understand
why this was not brought up
before September 2017.
204. In respect of any interaction with Ms Cole, he
stated that the only time she had ever slightly raised her voice with him was
relation to putting cartons in a pile behind the counter. On that occasion she
raised her voice with him and asked him to put
the boxes in consignment order.
He thought this may have been before or after 2014. He denied that he ever
brought up anything
concerning interactions with the complainant and that Ms
Cole had never brought up anything with him. He denied that the conversation
referred to by the complainant and Ms Cole in the store the day after the
complainant says that the respondent slapped her on the
buttocks ever occurred.
205. The respondent also denied ever trying to sneak up behind the
complainant or scaring her. If he had scared her on occasion,
he says that was
not intentional. He could not recall ever doing it accidentally, but said that
if he had he would have apologised.
206. He also denied ever calling the
complainant “Juicy Lucy” or referring to her in that way to any
other staff. He
also denied ever having a conversation with Ms Cole to the
effect that it was not appropriate to call the complainant “Juicy
207. In respect of his interactions with the complainant, he
stated that if she was there they would have a chat and that would include
general conversation. He denied ever asking about the complainant’s
boyfriend. He also denied asking other staff where the
complainant was when she
was not in the Sanity store. He denied that she was his
“favourite”. He regarded her as easy
going and as a consequence he
was more likely to speak with her than to a new employee. As a general rule
though, he stated that
he only got paid for each item he delivered, so he did
not have time to stand around for idle chit chat.
208. The respondent also
denied ever loitering outside the Sanity store. He explained that he had to
deliver to Boost Juice once
a week and wait for a key if they did not have it.
209. The respondent was cross-examined. He agreed that in 2014 he was
subcontracted to work as a driver for Toll and that part of
his run included
deliveries to Sanity in Eastlands in 2014. He also agreed that when he
delivered stock he frequently met with employees
of Sanity. He agreed it was
his practice to take boxes up to the counter for them to be processed. This
involved staff members
examining the boxes and labels and signing something. He
was asked to place the boxes behind the counter in consignment order before
were checked.
210. He also agreed that the complainant worked there at that
time and that she was present on occasions when he delivered boxes to
There were times when she would sign for the stock and times when others would
sign. He agreed that the only point of difference
between his evidence and that
of the complainant was as to whether the respondent had slapped her on the
bottom on one occasion.
211. He was asked why he did not put to her during
the course of cross-examination that she was lying about the incident. The
stated that the incident did not happen and that he was the victim.
212. During the course of his evidence, the respondent tendered a Tasmania
Police IDM report setting out contact made by the respondent
concerning this
allegation. The report is redacted, but it recorded that the respondent was
seeking advice in relation to a sexual
harassment claim that had been made
against him on 1 September 2017 that resulted in him being stood down from
his work at Toll.
The report outlined that the respondent stated Sanity had
submitted the claim on behalf of someone who works at the Northgate Store.
respondent stated that the allegation was that he had allegedly grabbed her on
the bottom. The respondent denied this ever
happened stating he has known her
for a number of years through work and they are both Avon representatives. He
stated that he had
never had an issue with her before and is confused where the
allegation has come from as it is not true. He was of the belief that
maybe being set up because Toll were currently letting workers go and he was of
the belief that this may have been a way to
get him out. He asked Police if
they could force her to make a Police statutory declaration in relation to the
matter to show that
it was not true and he was happy to provide a statutory
declaration. The Police advised the respondent to go through his union rep
because he had stated the matter had not been reported to Police.
respondent was cross-examined as to his belief recorded in the police report
that he may have been set up. He confirmed
that was what he said to Police. He
confirmed that he believed that Toll wanted to set him up and replace him with
Mr Menzies’
brother, David Menzies. He was unable to really explain how
the complainant fitted into this belief. He believed the complainant
involved because her name was on the allegation. He conceded, however, that he
did not know whether she was involved in this
strategy. He was asked if he
thought that someone from Toll had requested that the complainant put the
allegation against him.
He said he did not know. He denied touching the
complainant. He stated that the reason he believed that the complaint was made
in order to get rid of him was because the allegation was fabricated. He agreed
with the proposition that, according to his theory,
the complainant must have
agreed with Toll to make this allegation. The respondent stated that it looked
like that. He was unable
to explain what he thought she was getting out of
being involved in this strategy or conspiracy. He was asked whether the other
witnesses who gave evidence that the complaint had told them that the respondent
had slapped her buttocks were involved. He stated
he had no idea who else was
involved. He was unable to provide any explanation as to why any of those
witnesses would be lying about
what they were told.
214. In cross-examination
the respondent reiterated that he had not favoured the complainant. He denied
that he would always ask
for the complainant to sign for the boxes even if there
were other staff members there. He denied asking where the complainant was
she was not at Sanity and asking when she was working next. He denied ever
using sleazy and inappropriate language towards the
complainant. He denied
calling her “Juicy Lucy”. He stated he did not take notice whether
the complainant was attractive
and just tried to do his job. He did not make an
assessment of whether she was pretty or attractive and had no special
relationship
with her. He stated that he did not think much about her.
215. The respondent confirmed that he was 52 or 53 years old in 2014. He
was asked whether it would be appropriate for a 52 or 53
year old man with no
special relationship with a 20 year old to call her “Juicy Lucy”.
He stated that would be inappropriate
and that if he had heard that, he would
say it was inappropriate and would step in. He was unable to explain in what
not right, stating that “it doesn’t sound nice” but
agreed that it would be inappropriate to say such a thing to
the complainant and
that was why he did not say it. He agreed that it would be judged as
inappropriate because of sexual overtones.
He said that the complainant was
lying when she said that he had called her “Juicy Lucy” some two to
six times. He
also said that Ms Cole was lying when she said that she had
overheard him calling the complainant “Juicy Lucy”.
216. During
cross-examination he denied asking the complainant questions about her
boyfriend. He denied ever talking to her about
her personal life and also
denied trying to flirt with her, embarrass her or dominate her. He also denied
ever trying to frighten
her by hiding behind the racks, although he conceded
that may have happened, but it was not intentional.
217. The respondent
denied knowing that his wife was going to contact the complainant after the
allegation came to light. He denied
attempting to contact the complainant
himself on her mobile phone.
218. He was cross-examined about the
defamation letter. The terms of the letter were put to him and it was suggested
that it would
be disgraceful to request a young woman to retract an allegation,
apologise and pay $30,000.00 if the allegation was in fact true.
The respondent
agreed with that proposition. It was put to him that those were the exact
circumstances in which the letter was
sent and that it was a disgraceful thing
for him to do. The respondent denied that was the case and again stated that he
slap the complainant.
219. The respondent was further cross-examined
the complainant to talk. He was asked how the complainant was supposed
to work out that the purpose of the letter was different
to what it expressly
says. The respondent stated that all the complainant had to do was write a
letter of apology and retract her
statement. He denied that he was thinking
that it would be an opportunity to try and clear his name and make money out of
220. In respect of the allegations that he called the complainant
“Juicy Lucy”, the respondent stated that he had heard
complainant being called “Juicy Lucy” by another courier named
Shane. He said he had heard Shane call her that once.
He denied ever calling
her that himself. He did not confront Shane about it, as he was doing his
deliveries and left. He denied
coming up with the name or even saying it. It
was put to him that it was a coincidence that the complainant says that the
was the one that called her “Juicy Lucy” and he says that
some other courier called her by that name. He agreed it was
a coincidence. He
was unable to recall the business that Shane worked for. It was not Toll. He
said that at least a dozen couriers
delivered to Eastlands. He denied that he
The respondent’s witnesses
Joanne Higgins
221. Mrs Higgins is the respondent’s wife. She gave
evidence that they had been married for 31 years and in that time he had
been unfaithful, nor had she witnessed him being flirty with anyone. She
described him as someone who was friendly and will help
anyone. In her
experience he had not gone out of his way to speak to women in a flirtatious
222. In respect of her contact with the complainant, she believed
she had been contacted by the complainant in 2016 or early 2017
either by text
or phone in relation to Avon. Mrs Higgins confirmed that she had never been
worried about the respondent delivering
to Avon customers. She confirmed that
her and the respondent had Avon open homes before Christmas, usually in
November. Those events
were normally held at the Girl Guides Hall and, if they
had time, they liked to do a second one just before Christmas. Invitations
usually provided with the Avon catalogues they distributed and people would also
receive an email and sometimes a reminder by
223. Mrs Higgins said
that she had not known the respondent to ever be aggressive, nor was she aware
of him ever laying a finger on
either herself or anyone else. She did, however,
acknowledge that the respondent does get upset if people do not do their job
and displays that by sighing and verbalising that he wished they had
done it properly.
224. Mrs Higgins first became aware of the allegation on
Friday 1 September 2017 when the respondent rang her sometime after 10.00am.
The respondent told her that he would actually be home shortly and she asked
why. He told her that he had been stood down for sexual
harassment. Mrs
Higgins asked who had said that and she was advised that it was the complainant.
Mrs Higgins then rang the Sanity
store and the complainant’s phone number,
but she could not remember in which order. She confirmed that it was her
number from the home she shared with the respondent that was in the
photo taken of the Sanity store phone. Mrs Higgins said that
she knew the
complainant a little bit, thought that the allegation was a joke and wanted to
get her version of what happened. She
spoke to someone at Sanity who she
thought said they were the Store Manager. She asked if she could please speak
to the complainant.
She was told that the complainant was on a day off. The
Store Manager asked if she could help Mrs Higgins. She indicated that there
had been a sexual harassment claim made against her husband. The person who
answered the phone said they had only been in the store
for two weeks, so knew
nothing about it. The person also indicated the State Manager would be in that
afternoon, so she took Mrs
Higgins’ name and number so that she could be
called back. Mrs Higgins stated that this was a normal conversation that
in the context of not knowing something, but wanting to know what was
225. When the respondent got home at around lunch time, he told her
what had happened. She could not recall the exact words, but
it was something
to the effect of the complainant putting in a complaint that the respondent had
grabbed her on the bottom or arse.
Mrs Higgins told the respondent that she had
rung the complainant and said that he was not very happy with her. The
told Mrs Higgins to delete the complainant’s phone number off
her phone and email so that she would not accidentally ring or
226. Mrs Higgins said that the respondent’s demeanour that
weekend was very depressed. He was moping around, appeared quizzical
to keep busy. She described him as not being in a good way. She gave evidence
that she was with the respondent when
he attended the Glenorchy Police Station
and that she understood he wanted to go there because the complaint involved
something that
could be classified as sexual assault and that he wanted the
matter to go through the correct channels to clear his name.
227. She was
also present when the respondent received a phone call telling him that the case
had been dropped. Mrs Higgins says
that the respondent started crying when he
received that news. She confirmed that the respondent had always denied
engaging in the
conduct alleged. She thought that the respondent appeared
depressed when he returned to work and felt like all eyes were on him because
had done something wrong. He was concerned about people talking behind his back
and told his wife that he felt uncomfortable
working there.
228. After the
respondent was terminated from his employment, his state of mind deteriorated
considerably. He moped for the next
three months and did not really sleep. He
kept on telling Mrs Higgins that no-one wanted to believe him. She was scared
was getting into a rut. She was worried that the respondent may harm
himself. She said that the respondent refused to go to the
doctor and kept
saying he was fine. Since then, he has obtained alternative work that has kept
229. Under cross-examination, Mrs Higgins was asked why she had
rung the complainant. She stated that she thought it was a joke,
she knew the
complainant and wanted to verify what was going on. She was asked why she
thought it was a joke given that her husband
had been suspended from his
employment due to an accusation that he was sexually harassing a young woman.
Mrs Higgins clarified
that it was not a joke as in funny, but more because she
was in disbelief. In her mind it could not have been true and he could
230. She was asked what she meant when she said that she knew the
complainant a little. She said this was because she was an Avon
customer and
had met her in that capacity and also was with the respondent when they came
across the complainant at Fantastic Furniture
or A-mart. She also referred to
the message or phone call that had occurred in respect of the Avon transaction.
231. She said that it was because of these dealings that she felt
comfortable to call her to verify what was going on. She agreed
that it did not
cross her mind at that stage that it may not be appropriate to try and contact a
young woman who was the alleged
victim of sexual harassment. She said this was
because she herself was in shock and reacting from the position of a wife. She
that she was angry when she made the phone call, only that she was
shocked. She denied that her voice was raised during the phone
call. She did
not think it was inappropriate to contact the complainant on her mobile phone
for the reason that she had that phone
number due to their Avon contact. She
did not think that it was inappropriate at the time she made that contact and in
should have waited until the respondent returned home.
cross-examination she also said that the respondent did not tell her that he was
no longer entitled to go to Sanity, nor
did he mention that he was not able to
complainant or to
ring her at her workplace.
233. Mrs Higgins was also
cross-examined as to why she had never asked her husband if he had sexually
harassed the complainant. She
was asked whether that was because the only
relevant thing to her was damage control or was it because she did not care
did or not. Mrs Higgins said neither of those were the case. She
never questioned her husband about the accusation because, when
she saw the lies
told about her, she was in no doubt that people were lying about everything
else. The Tribunal infers that she
was referring to the information provided by
the other witnesses regarding the phone call she made to Sanity on 1 September
234. Ms Clay was the Operations Supervisor at Toll in September
2017. She gave evidence of what occurred when the respondent was
called back to
the office on 1 September. She stated that she was present in the room with Mr
Menzies and the respondent when the
allegation was put to him. She could not
remember if it was Mr Menzies who put the allegation or someone on the phone.
not recall if the allegation was on a phone or on a computer. She
thought that someone was speaking over their phone, but she could
not recall who
235. She was asked as to her recollection of the allegation. To
the best of her recollection, she understood the allegation to be
that a young
girl at Sanity accused the respondent of touching her on the buttocks. She did
not recall being told not to give a
copy of the allegation to the respondent.
Ms Clay stated that she took notes of the meeting, which were tendered in
evidence. She
was asked if Mr Menzies had informed the respondent not to
not recall telling Mr Menzies about a previous incident concerning the
respondent prior to the meeting.
236. She did not recall the date and time of
the subsequent meeting held with the respondent, but did recall that he came
the office for a conference call. She recalled that he had a support
person there, but she did not recall whether he had asked for
representative to be there. She also could not recall if the respondent was
reinstated to start work the next day. She
was asked if she remembered the
respondent coming in a couple of days after the conference call and asking for
the phone number for
HR. Ms Clay said that was possible and that if he had
asked for a number she would have written a name and phone number down for
She was also asked if the respondent had been inappropriate to anyone. Ms Clay
responded, “not to me”.
237. Under cross-examination she
confirmed that she had not seen the respondent behave inappropriately towards
anyone. She also agreed
that she had never been to Sanity while the respondent
was there, nor had she seen the complainant. She agreed that she therefore
no idea if the allegations were true or not.
238. She was asked questions
notes record the following:
advised that he had previous aligations (sic) against him from Dotti. But
advised that this was untrue and he was the one
propositioned.”
239. Ms Clay gave evidence that she was not aware of the Dotti
allegation prior to the meeting. She described herself as a support
was not there to ask questions. She also did not recall anyone else asking
questions about such an allegation. She no
longer had an independent
recollection of any discussion and did not know if anyone at Toll conducted any
further investigation in
respect of the matter. She confirmed that the notes
were taken at the time of the meeting.
Kelly Gilchrist
240. Ms Gilchrist also gave evidence. She was the Victorian
and Tasmanian State Manager for Sanity in August/September 2017. She
evidence that Ms Wood told her about the allegation on 30 August 2017. She
confirmed that she did not contact the complainant
asked why she did not verify the allegation with the complainant, she stated
that it was her role to
go to Head Office regarding any duty of care.
241. She was asked if she had rung the Toll State Manager (Mr Roger Menzies)
at any stage between 30 August and 1 September. She
indicated that she had no
go to the Sanity Store to
investigate, nor did she tell Sanity that the
Eastlands’ Manager had witnessed the incident. She had not been told of
allegations concerning the respondent from other stores in Eastlands. She
did, however, say that some store members had been told
of other allegations by
other stores though she could not remember who.
242. Ms Gilchrist stated
that she had not received any training in sexual harassment, but that is what HR
at Sanity were responsible
for. She was not told about the phone call made by
the respondent's wife to Sanity, nor was she instructed by Simon Apostolas to
investigate the matter. She did however confirm that she wrote an email to
Simon on 20 November 2017.
243. In her email to Mr Apostolas, she stated
the following:
morning Simon is the below ok
On the 30/08.2017 Ashlee Wood contacted me to raise the concern regarding the
Toll delivery driver and our Team at Rosny Park. The
Team had communicated to
Ashlee that the Toll delivery driver had been making inappropriate comments to
Lucy and had slapped her
on the bottom.
I Kelly Gilchrist contacted Simon Apostolas on the 30/08/2017 to discuss my
concerns regarding the Toll delivery driver and our Team
at Sanity Rosny
A representative from Toll went into our Rosny Park store on the 1st
September and asked for myself as he wanted to investigate the
against the Toll driver. He also stated that this wasn’t the first time
he had to investigate this driver.
Communication around the Centre is a team member from Dotti has made a
compliant (sic) regarding the same delivery driver and he has
been taken off the
delivery to Dotti also. Thanks,
Kelly Gilchrist”
244. Under cross-examination, Ms Gilchrist was asked who within
Sanity referred the allegation to Toll for investigation. She indicated
Apostolas had done this. She also stated that she believed Mr Apostolas went to
Toll before contacting the complainant.
245. Mr Lewis gave evidence that he was at the Toll depot on 1
September 2017 when the respondent was stood down. Mr Lewis had returned
depot at 10.00-10.30am that day and found it a bit odd that the respondent was
there at that time. He gave evidence that
he was phoned by a person who used to
be the Manager at Toll later that day and advised that there had been an
allegation concerning
the respondent and that the respondent had been stood
down. This phone call had happened before the respondent had called Mr Lewis
ask him to meet him to collect some pallets. The respondent had rung Mr Lewis at
246. Under cross-examination, Mr Lewis confirmed that he did not
know the complainant and had not been to the Sanity store at Eastlands
respondent. He also gave evidence that he had not heard the respondent use the
phrase “Juicy Lucy” nor had
he heard any other Toll driver use
David Coleman
247. Mr Coleman gave evidence that as at 2017 he was not
employed by Toll. On 1 September he was called by another person who worked
Toll. He was asked if the respondent had called him and spoken to him. When he
asked why, he was told it would be best if he
spoke to the respondent himself.
He was provided no specifics about what had been occurring.
248. Mr Coleman
confirmed that he spoke with the respondent on several occasions from Friday
until late on Sunday night. These conversations
occurred by phone and were
instigated either by himself or by the respondent. Those phone calls concerned
the allegations. They
discussed the respondent’s state of mind. It also
came to light that quite a lot of people were aware of the matter before
the respondent or Mr Coleman were. This was the gist of what the pair discussed
during their phone calls.
249. Under cross-examination he clarified that he
was a contractor at Toll but had taken time off to look after his children in
He confirmed he did not know the complainant, but did now know that she
was the subject of the complaint against the respondent
that had been made by
Sanity to Toll. He had never been to Sanity with the respondent and he does not
know if the allegations are
true or not. He was questioned whether he was aware
of the term “Juicy Lucy” being used. He stated that he had heard
in conversations about this particular matter, but had not heard the term used
within the workplace or by other drivers from other
companies. He also stated
that he had never heard the respondent refer to any of the workers at Sanity
before this incident.
250. Many of the documents tendered by the complainant have
already been referred to above. The file note of the meeting that occurred
the respondent on 1 September 2017 reads as follows:
Frayne 1/9/17
don’t say anything to them
to take a lie detector test
not touched Lucy at all
only works one day a week
is an Avon customer
like to seek legal action as these are false.
was asked about aligations (sic) and denied
advised that he had previously aligations (sic) against him from Dotti. But
advised that this was untrue and he was the one
propositioned.”
251. The respondent tendered a number of documents on his case.
The first is an email exchange between Simon Apostolas and John Slatter,
the Key Account Manager at Toll. At 10.15 on 1 September 2017, Mr Slatter
emailed Mr Apostolas referring to a phone call
in the following terms:
“Thanks for your call.
As discussed, could you please provide a detailed statement from the claimant,
Lucy, of the events that
occurred with dates and times. This is important so
that we can give the driver specifics.
Our Tasmanian Manager is going to do a preliminary interview today, based on
the information contained in this email trail, it will
be difficult for him to
give specific examples of what occurred and when and determine if the driver was
at the location at those
times. If you have any CCTV that would also be helpful
or consignment ref numbers relative to delivery date of incident.
We will investigate this thoroughly but we cannot promise a timeline, as any
outcomes need to be approved appropriately, and this
won’t be finalised by
Monday as has been requested. The driver will not be going to that site in the
foreseeable future.”
252. Mr Apostolas responded to Mr Slatter, Ms Gilchrist and
other staff at Sanity and Toll including Mr Menzies. His response was
“Good afternoon Kelly
a per conversation
If you work with our team to provide more information on specific dates and
instance in order for the Toll team to take appropriate
Good afternoon John
We don’t have CCTV in our stores however there are a few team members
that have witness (sic.) the driver’s
behaviour.”
253. The email message earlier referred to authored by Ashlee
Wood and sent to Kelly Gilchrist was also attached to that response.
respondent also tendered his phone records, demonstrating the time of the
various phone calls that he made and received between
1 September and 4
Findings of Fact: Parties’ Submissions
255. Submissions filed on behalf of the complainant submitted
that the complainant gave evidence in a straightforward, consistent
and decisive
manner characteristic of a witness of the truth. It was submitted that the
complainant was clearly distressed by being
cross-examined directly by the
respondent “over several hours”. Reference was made to Mrs
Higgins’ alleged misbehaviour
during the course of the complainant giving
evidence. It was submitted that the complainant had at all times behaved with
during her evidence and that her credibility was not shaken.
256. The complainant also submitted that the respondent failed to put to the
complainant assertions he made during the course of his
evidence when
cross-examining her. In particular, he never put to her that she was lying
misbehaviour, nor was it put
to her that she was somehow in league with people at Toll and Sanity to have the
respondent’s
employment terminated.
257. It was noted that the
complainant’s evidence was corroborated by the observations of her work
colleagues who saw and heard
the respondent behave in a manner consistent with
that alleged by the complainant, contemporaneous complaints made by the
complainant
to her work colleagues and her partner, and the evidence of the
complainant’s general practitioner. The complainant submitted
respondent gave his evidence in a manner that demonstrated he was completely
preoccupied with the loss of his employment
with Toll. It was noted that he
referred to his own victimisation, but failed to specifically address any of the
complainant’s
complaints in his evidence in chief, preferring instead to
focus on detail of his own distress in receiving the complaint, the nature
the investigation of the complaint and grievances about the manner and
circumstances in which he was ultimately dismissed from
Toll. It was submitted
that under cross-examination and when forced to confront the allegations, his
answers were often “clearly
nonsense and characterised by dishonesty and
self-pity”. It was submitted that the respondent purported to advance
absurd theory that he had been wrongly accused of sexually harassing
[the complainant] in order that senior figures within Sanity
and Toll could
‘get rid’ of him and his ‘run’ given to someone
else”. It was submitted that the respondent
simply and unconvincingly
denied any wrongdoing.
258. It was also submitted that Mrs Higgins had
nothing to say that was relevant to the determination of the complaint. It was
that Mrs Higgins was dishonest in her recollection of the phone call
she made to Sanity which she said had been done in a calm manner.
Likewise, the
other witnesses called by the respondent had nothing to say that was relevant to
the determination of the complaint
as they did not know the complainant and have
never been into the Sanity store with the respondent and did not know if the
behaved inappropriately towards the complainant or not.
was submitted that the Tribunal should make the following specific finding of
During the period of around late 2013 to late 2017 the respondent
subjected the complainant to persistent sexual harassment in connection
employment contrary to s.17(2) and s.22(1) of the Act and persistent prohibited
conduct in connection with her employment
contrary to s.17(1), 16(b) and (e) and
s.22(1)(a) of the Act, and such harassment and offensive conduct was
characterised by:
• persistent “sleazy” and
“favouring” behaviour during the period of around late 2014 to late
• calling the complainant a lewd name “Juicy Lucy” on
at least six occasions contrary to s.17(3)(c) and (d) of the
Act and contrary to
s.17(1) of the Act;
• asking the complainant about her relationship
status on numerous occasions contrary to s.17(3)(c) and (d) of the Act and
to s.17(1) of the Act;
• jumping out from behind shelves at
the Sanity store on numerous occasions in order to intimidate and frighten her
to s.17(1) of the Act;
• stating the words “nice
pants” and then slapping the complainant on the bottom without her consent
contrary to
s.17(3)(a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) of the Act and contrary to s.17(1)
of the Act;
• Intimidating and offending the complainant by telling her
not to tell her “boss” about being slapped on the bottom
contrary to
s.17(1) of the Act;
• taunting the complainant about the bottom
slapping incident by saying “Have you told your boss yet? Have you told
boss yet?” and laughing at her contrary to s.17(1) of the Act;
• intimidating and offending the complainant by threatening to
commence legal action against her after a complaint of sexual
harassment was
made against him contrary to s.17(1) of the Act;
The respondent victimised the complainant by threatening to
commence legal action against her after a complaint of sexual harassment
made against him contrary to s.18(1)(c) of the Act.
respondent’s submissions were directed at pointing out inaccuracies in the
submissions filed on behalf of the complainant.
Exception was taken to the
suggestion that the respondent had cross-examined the complainant for several
hours. It was submitted
that cross-examination had taken place over maybe 1 or
2 hours and that everything asked was relevant to the inquiry. It was submitted
that it was inaccurate to say that the complainant’s work colleagues saw
and heard the respondent behave inappropriately towards
the complainant. It was
submitted that their evidence was to the effect they had not seen him act
inappropriately or in an aggressive
manner towards the complainant at all, and
that all admitted he had been “chatty and friendly”. The respondent
submitted that contemporaneous complaints made to work colleagues were
“hearsay” at best. The respondent submitted that
the evidence given
by the complainant and her witnesses was implausible and inconsistent.
Specifically, the respondent submitted
• the complainant and her witnesses did not state that
the respondent was sleazy or aggressive;
• there were differences in
the evidence given about the respondent asking questions concerning the
complainant’s boyfriend.
On the one hand, the complainant gave evidence
that the respondent asked her “how’s your boyfriend” and this
from the evidence given by other witnesses;
• the consistency
of the evidence concerning the number of times the complainant had been called
“Juicy Lucy” (five
to six occasions) was implausible, unbelievable
and rehearsed;
• there were inconsistencies between the witnesses as to
who made the phone call to the complainant to advise her that the legal
letter had arrived at the store;
• the complainant gave inconsistent
evidence as to whether she continued to see a
counsellor/psychologist;
• the suggestion that the respondent had told
the complainant not to tell her boss about being slapped on the bottom and the
allegation that the respondent had actually raised the issue the next day,
asking the complainant “have you told your boss
contradictory, and did not make sense as neither of those things
• no other witness corroborated the complainant’s
evidence that the respondent would sometimes attend the store in an
aggressive mood;
• the complainant’s evidence that the respondent
was also chatty to Ms Cole was inconsistent with her other evidence that
respondent favoured her;
• in respect of the allegations of hiding
behind the racks and popping up to scare the complainant, the respondent pointed
that if the complainant was behind the racks working, he would not have
known that she was there himself;
• there were too many variations of
accounts as to when the respondent was alleged to have called the complainant
Lucy”. Some of the witnesses said it stopped prior to the
alleged slap in 2014 and others said that it continued after;
were divergent accounts of the allegation concerning the respondent making
physical contact with the complainant’s
buttocks. On the one hand, the
complainant alleged that she was slapped on the bottom and that this occurred
when she walked past
and bent over in front of the respondent. Mr Addicoat said
that the respondent slapped the complainant as she walked past. The
apparently given to Dr Baird and referred to in her report was that the
respondent had grabbed the complainant on the buttocks.
Ms Wood stated that she
was told that the respondent slapped the complainant on the bottom as she walked
behind the counter;
• the complainant’s evidence that she
purchased Avon from the respondent was not behaviour consistent with a person
was intimidated or frightened by the respondent;
• there were
inconsistent accounts as to when the complainant said that she googled the phone
number and found that it belonged
to the respondent and/or his wife;
• the complainant gave inaccurate evidence as to when she first
attended the doctor following her receipt of the defamation
• the history taken from the complainant as reported in Dr
Baird’s report of 2018 made no reference to being called “Juicy
Lucy” or being slapped;
• Ms Cole’s evidence should not be
accepted because she admitted being unhappy that the respondent had caused the
letter to be sent to the complainant. According to the respondent,
Ms Cole should be regarded as being biased and her evidence dismissed
a vendetta against him;
• Mr Milbourne’s evidence ought not be
accepted because he stated that he was only an acquaintance of the
complainant’s
but when under cross-examination he was confronted with the
statement he had made in a statutory declaration to the effect that he
developed a friendship with the complainant as a result of their employment
together at Sanity;
• that Ms Smith ought not to be accepted as a
witness of the truth because her evidence during the course of the inquiry as
who made the phone call to the complainant advising her of the legal letter
departed from information she provided in her statutory
declaration;
• Ms Vienna-Hallam gave evidence that Ms Cole had
witnessed the alleged slapping incident, but she was not sure who told her
Ms Vienna-Hallam also gave evidence that the matter had been reported to Sanity
• the respondent also focused on the terminology used by Dr
Baird in her 2018 report that the complainant alleged being “grabbed
the buttocks”. The respondent suggested that the difference between using
the terminology “slap” and “grabbed”
was indicative of
the complainant telling different stories to different people and cast doubt on
her allegation.
261. In respect of Ms Wood’s evidence, the respondent
pointed out that the email she sent setting out the allegation differed
evidence given by the complainant. In particular, the email referred to the
slap occurring as the respondent walked behind
the counter (not as the
complainant bent over to check the boxes), and that the respondent regularly
asked her to his house for different
reasons (when the complainant gave evidence
that it had only been invited for Avon parties only). It was also suggested
were inconsistencies between the witnesses as to when Ms Gilchrist
was made aware of the allegation and when it was conveyed to first
the TOLL. It was difficult to understand how those discrepancies were
necessarily relevant to the determination of the
factual matters of this case.
It does not appear to have been contested that, first, Ms Wood did advise Ms
Gilchrist of the allegation
and, secondly, that Ms Gilchrist in turn escalated
the matter to Sanity management.
262. The respondent further pointed out that
the evidence concerning the order of events between 30 August and 1 September
confusing. The Tribunal agrees. It is difficult to reconcile Mr
Menzie’s evidence of the order in which he:
(a) notified the respondent of the
(b) attending the Sanity store to make enquiries;
(c) directed the respondent not to make any contact with the complainant
or Sanity staff.
There is, however, sufficient evidence from other sources,
including email correspondence, to enable the Tribunal to ascertain the
events. Further, the order of those events are not matters determinative of the
principal factual issues to be resolved:
did the respondent engage in the
conduct towards the complainant as alleged.
263. The respondent further
submitted that the complainant’s witnesses with the exception of Dr Baird
have admitted that they
are close friends with her. Their evidence is therefore
not independent and they ought be considered biased. Further, no witness
evidence that they had seen the respondent do anything inappropriate towards the
complainant or any other team member.
264. Finally the respondent submitted
that he felt that the allegation was put into Sanity by someone who had their
own agenda and
says the following:
feel that the allegation was put into Sanity by someone who had their own
agenda. The allegation has still not been given
to me and was not given to the
tribunal in my work records. I say to you who sent that e-mail. Ms Orchard,
may or may not have
known at the stage the allegation went in but she withdrew
the allegation when she found out. Not knowing that the allegation was
by a third party the defamation letter was sent to Ms Orchard. I stated this on
of September 2017 that I was going to seek
legal advice. All Ms Orchard had to do at this stage was to notify my solicitor
it wasn’t her that put the allegation in it would have been dropped.
Whether Ms Orchard knew before or after she saw the only
way out was to go along
with the original allegation to say it was true. This is the only theory that
makes sense to me. But I
am 100% positive I did not slap, smack or grab Ms
Orchard on the bottom, call her “juicy lucy”, jump out from behind
the racks and ask if she had a boyfriend or make any inappropriate
Why would I send a defamation letter to Ms Orchard after she dropped the
allegation if what she said was true. Wouldn’t I just
think I got away
with it and leave it alone.
Ms Orchard and her witnesses cannot claim to be witnesses of the truth since
their accounts vary significantly, especially Ms Woods,
where the original
allegation first came from. On the other hand, my account has not changed since
the allegation went in on the
of September
Consideration
265. The Tribunal found that the complainant gave convincing
evidence of the behaviour that she was subjected to during the course
interactions with the respondent. Her account was largely corroborated by the
evidence given by others during the course
of the inquiry. That evidence
included her complaining of the attention she was receiving from the respondent
and also that she
reported being slapped on the buttocks by the respondent on
the day of the incident and when she next encountered Ms Cole at work.
Tribunal also accepts her evidence and the evidence of Ms Cole regarding the
interaction that occurred with the respondent on
the day following the
complainant being slapped on the buttocks. That evidence was consistent and
completely unshaken during cross-examination.
Although there were some
inconsistencies between the account given by the complainant and the other
witnesses called on her behalf,
they were readily explicable by reason of the
fact that they were giving evidence of conversations that had occurred some six
earlier. Many of those inconsistencies concerned collateral matters not
central to the key factual issues be determined. In particular,
complainant’s account of being called Juicy Lucy, being slapped on the
buttocks and being asked about her boyfriend were
matters raised with a number
of other people over a long course of time. There was no reason to disbelieve
the complainant when she
said that these events had occurred to her. She was
not motivated to cause trouble for the respondent at that time as she did not
escalate her concerns beyond telling her manager. It must also be noted that
her manager was told what had occurred in the context
of the matter being raised
by the respondent himself. The Tribunal accepts that evidence.
contrast, the Tribunal found the respondent’s account of events
unconvincing. The Tribunal did not accept his evidence
that it was another
driver from another company that had called the complainant Juicy Lucy. Nor
does the Tribunal accept that the
allegation was in some way fabricated to cause
trouble for him or to assist Toll in removing him or discontinuing using his
No cogent evidence was given to that effect and certainly there was
no suggestion of any prior relationship between staff at Toll
or staff at Sanity
that would suggest that an opportunity to fabricate such an allegation could
arise. Further, the Tribunal does
not accept that the complainant had to go
along with the allegation to get out of any consequences that may have been
foreshadowed
in the defamation letter. That suggestion simply fails to explain
why it was that the complainant made consistent comments about
respondent’s behaviour towards her to those she worked with and who were
close to her from as early as 2014.
267. Having said that, in light of those
general observations the Tribunal makes the following specific findings:
(a) That the respondent engaged in behaviour towards the
complainant that could properly be regarded as favouring her. The Tribunal
accepts the evidence of the other staff members at Sanity that the respondent
would ask after the complainant when she was not at
the store and enquire when
she was next working. The Tribunal also accepts their evidence that he would
try and engage her to deal
with his deliveries even when other staff were
available to do so;
(b) That the respondent referred to the complainant on up
to 6 occasions as Juicy Lucy. The Tribunal also finds that he ceased that
conduct after he slapped the complainant on the buttocks and was confronted by
Ms Cole about the inappropriate nature of his conduct;
(c) That the
respondent asked the complainant how her boyfriend was on numerous
(d) That sometime in mid-2014, the respondent made comment to the
complainant about her clothing, specifically stating “nice
before slapping her on the bottom without her consent as she bent over to
inspect a box he had delivered;
(e) That the respondent told the complainant
not to tell her boss about being slapped on the bottom shortly after the
incident occurred;
(f) That the following day he approached the complainant
at her workplace and asked her if she had told her boss yet;
(g) That the
complainant then told Ms Cole what had occurred and Ms Cole remonstrated with
the respondent about his behaviour.
268. The Tribunal does not find that the respondent jumped out
from behind shelves at the Sanity store in order to intimidate and
frighten the
complainant or engaged in any other behaviour that could be reasonably
anticipated as capable of leading to that consequence.
The description of the
respondent being generally sleazy was not explained in a way that could allow
the Tribunal to reach that
same view on an objective basis. The evidence was not
such that the Tribunal could reach a comfortable level of satisfaction of those
allegations.
269. The Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the conduct set
out at [267](a)-(d) above constituted sexual harassment contrary to
the Act. The respondent’s slapping of the complainant on the buttocks
clearly constitutes an unsolicited act of
physical contact of a sexual nature
given the part of her body that was touched and in the context of the comments
made about her
clothing. The Tribunal also finds that referring to the
complainant as Juicy Lucy amounted to an unwelcome remark with sexual
connotations.
Questioning the complainant about her boyfriend does not neatly
fit within the definitions of sexual harassment contained in s.17(3).
however, part of the contextual material that enabled the Tribunal to be
comfortably satisfied that the behaviour engaged
in by the respondent towards
the complainant was, in the case of the physical contact, of a sexual nature, or
constituted remarks
with sexual connotations. The Tribunal finds that there was
nothing overtly sexual contained in the statement Juicy Lucy. However,
context in which those comments were made gives them that flavour.
Tribunal is also comfortably satisfied that a reasonable person, having regard
to all the circumstances, including the age
disparity between the complainant
and the respondent, that the complainant had not encouraged the behaviour
engaged in by the respondent
and had asked him to cease calling her Juicy Lucy,
are such that a reasonable person would have anticipated that the complainant
would be offended and/or humiliated by the behaviour.
271. The Tribunal does
not find that the proven conduct constitutes prohibited conduct contrary to
s.17(1). It is not readily apparent
how the conduct complained of was done by
reference to the attributes or age or gender. The only connection identified was
complainant was in fact female and younger than the respondent. This is
not sufficient to establish the necessary connection.
272. In reaching these
conclusions, the Tribunal did not take into account any evidence that was given
of allegations concerning the
respondent’s conduct at other businesses to
which he delivered. No detail of any such incidents was provided. As such they
provided the Tribunal with no assistance in determining how the respondent
conducted himself in the complainant’s presence.
Victimisation
273. The complaint of victimisation concerns the respondent
causing the defamation letter to be sent to the complainant in November
following his reinstatement at Toll and the apparent withdrawal of the complaint
by Sanity. The factual circumstances surrounding
those events are not
contentious. It is clear that:
(a) the complainant mentioned to Ms Wood and Ms
Vienna-Hallam that she found the respondent creepy or sleazy and that he had on
occasion slapped her on the buttocks in the workplace;
disclosure was escalated by Ms Wood to her Victorian and Tasmanian State
Manager, Ms Gilchrist, who in turn escalated the
matter to Sanity’s head
(c) Sanity in turn escalated the matter by reporting it to Toll and
asked them to investigate and take action in respect of the
allegations;
(d) the complainant had not asked for this to occur or been
informed that any of the steps referred to above were being taken by
management;
(e) as a consequence of those matters being raised, action was
taken against the respondent in the form of standing him down and conducting
investigation into his behaviour;
(f) as a consequence of being advised of
the complaint of the allegation and being stood down, the respondent’s
wife attempted
to contact the complainant both at her workplace and on her
private mobile phone;
(g) once the complainant was made aware that this
matter had been escalated and that the respondent and/or his wife had tried to
her, she became concerned and requested that all action discontinue in
respect of the allegations;
(h) as a consequence of her request, the
investigation of the matter was discontinued and the respondent was reinstated,
was no longer permitted to undertake deliveries to Sanity;
respondent was not satisfied with the discontinuance of the investigation and
sought legal advice, causing the defamation
letter to be sent to the
complainant.
274. Section 18 of the Act provides:
person must not victimise another person because that other person
(a) made, or intends to make, a complaint under this Act; or
(b) gave, or intends to give, evidence or information in connection with any
proceedings under this Act; or
(c) alleged, or intends to allege, that any person has committed an act which
would amount to a contravention of this Act; or
(d) refused or intends to refuse to do anything that would amount to a
contravention of this Act; or
(e) has done anything in relation to any person under or by reference to this
(2) Victimisation takes place if a person subjects, or threatens to subject,
another person or an associate of that other person to
detriment.”
275. Section 22 of the Act relevantly provides that the Act
applies to prohibited conduct (in this case victimisation) against a person
engaged in, or undertaking, activity in connection with any of the areas of
activity set out in that section. The area of activity
relevant to this
complaint is employment (s.22(1)(a)).
276. Detriment is further defined in
s.3 of the Act as including humiliation or denigration.
277. In order to
establish that victimisation has occurred, a complainant must show that any
actual or threatened detriment experienced
by them, or an associate of theirs,
was because of one or more of the matters referred to in s.18(1) of the Act.
These matters are
commonly referred to as “protected conduct”. If
such victimisation is as a result of some other matter, it is not prohibited
s.18 of the Act: von Stalheim v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal and
Attorney-General for the State of Tasmania
[2007] TASSC 9
, Evans J at [15].
278. What is required to establish that there is a sufficient causal link
between the protected conduct set out in ss.18(1)(a)-(e)
of the Act and the
detriment that a person says they have been subjected to (or threatened to be
subjected to) has been considered
in the context of like legislation in other
Tasmania. To
establish the relevant causal connection, it must first be shown
that the person who is alleged to have engaged in the victimisation
knows of the
protected conduct: Vidler v Queensland and Williams
[2010] QCAT 579
causal connection will be established where the conduct complained of was a
real, genuine or true reason for subjecting a person
to a detriment: see
discussion in Chi v Technical and Further Education Commission (No. 3)
. Such an approach is consistent with the causal link
required to be established in respect of allegations of direct discrimination
under s.14 of the Act.
279. The ordinary civil standard of proof applies in
respect of the proof of victimisation claims. Proving a causal link can be
and in the absence of direct evidence of that link, a complainant
often has to rely on the drawing of inferences.
280. The question of
whether a person has been subjected to or threatened to be subjected to a
detriment is to be determined objectively
and not subjectively. It is not
sufficient for a complainant to allege they have suffered a consequence they
describe as a detriment:
“the loss, damage or injury suffered by a
complainant must be something which a reasonable person would consider to be a
detriment”:
Sivananthan v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Service
[2001] NSWADT 44
281. In this case, the protected conduct relied
upon by the complainant is pursuant to s.18(1)(c), that is the complainant has
or intends to allege, that any person has committed an act that would
amount to a contravention of this Act. This provision has
not been given
particular attention in this jurisdiction.
282. A similar provision under
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
(NSW) provides that it is unlawful
for a person to subject another person to any detriment in any circumstances on
the ground that
the person victimised has alleged that the discriminator or any
other person has committed an act which, whether or not the allegation
states, would amount to a contravention of this Act. This provision was
considered by the NSW Court of Appeal in Chi v Technical
and Further Education
[2012] NSWCA 421.
Mr Chi was a student at TAFE who made various
complaints concerning his treatment and the teaching he received. He made a
of complaints regarding those issues by letter including complaining of
receiving unfair marks, suffering a long period of discrimination
and harassment
from his teacher and in turn his head teacher. At first, the Appeal Panel held
that Mr Chi was obliged to prove that
he had alleged or in effect intended to
allege a breach of the Act and that his letter fell short of doing so. Mr Chi
appealed. The
Court of Appeal decision focused on the extent to which the
complaint made by Mr Chi identified discrimination on the basis of race.
combined assessment of the language used by Mr Chi in his complaint and the
possibility of the conduct alleged amounting to
discrimination on the basis of
race, the Court of Appeal concluded that the complaints made did not allege acts
of the kind referred
to in s.50(1)(c) of the Act.
283. Mr Chi sought special
leave in the High Court. That application for special leave was refused on the
basis that it did not raise
any question of principle and turns substantially on
what facts were communicated by the applicant in his complaint. The High Court
determined that the email correspondence relied upon did not “overcome the
absence of an allegation of racial discrimination”:
Chi v Technical
Further Education Commission
[2013] HCATrans 146.
284. In Finch v Heat
Group Pty Ltd
[2010] VSCA 256
, the Victorian Court of Appeal considered a claim
made under s.97 of the now repealed
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
(Vic) which
provided as follows:
person victimises another person if the person subjects or threatens to subject
the other person to any detriment because
the other person –
(h) has alleged that any person has contravened a provision of
unless the allegation is false and was not made in good faith...or because the
person believes that the other person...has done or
intends to do any of those
(2) It is sufficient for sub-section (1)(f) if the allegation states the act
or omission that would constitute the contravention without
actually stating
that this Act, or a provision of this Act, has been
contravened.”
285. Ms Finch had complained about her treatment by her
employers in an email, including complaining that she was questioned excessively
She further stated that she felt she was being bullied
and intimidated leading
to stress and anxiety. She referenced that being pregnant was the happiest time
of her life and a reason
to be joyous – “I just wish to be treated
equally, as are others and to continue to perform my role, without being caused
undue stress...”. The Tribunal had held that there was no evidence that
the complainant had alleged or had intended to allege
any contravention of the
Act in her correspondence with her employer. It was argued on appeal that a
fair reading of the email was
that it contained allegations of contraventions of
the Act or statements that show an intention to make such
allegations.
286. Despite the terms of s.97(2), the Court of Appeal endorsed
the reasoning of the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal stating
that it was
arguable that, on a fair reading, this email contains allegations of acts or
omissions constituting contraventions
of the Act. That is to say, it could
perhaps be argued that Ms Finch was alleging that she had been discriminated
against by reason
of her pregnancy. On balance however, we do not think that is
a reasonable construction of the email as a whole.
287. The Court of Appeal did not accept that the Tribunal erred
in law by holding that it was necessary that any allegation of contravention
identified the attribute relied upon: at [18].
288. Section 18(1)(c)
provides that the allegation must concern an act which would amount to a
contravention of the Act. The use
of the term “allege” (claiming
that someone has done something illegal or wrong) suggests that something more
than stating
that someone has engaged in conduct is required before it is open
to find that protected conduct has occurred. The relevant illegality
wrongness for the purposes of s.18(1)(c) is a contravention of the Act. Unless
the allegation asserts some connection between
the act complained of and a
contravention of the Act, the provision is not enlivened. Such an
interpretation is consistent with
the purpose of the prohibition against
victimisation. Section 18 and its analogues are principally concerned with
ensuring that
people who believe they have been the subject of discrimination or
another breach of the Act are not deterred from pursuing their
rights. Such
provisions are directed at preserving the integrity of anti-discrimination laws:
see Rees, Rice and Allen, Australian
anti-discrimination law: Second Edition,
The Federation Press, Sydney, 2014 at p.702.
289. There is no suggestion that
the complainant was attempting to pursue her rights under the Act or
contemplating doing so at the
time that her comment was made to Ms Wood. There
is no suggestion that her statement of what occurred asserted that the conduct
amounted to sexual harassment or some other breach of the Act. Her reference to
the respondent being creepy or sleazy does not sufficiently
engage the Act. She
simply told her work colleagues what the respondent had done to her. The
complainant was also not involved in
the escalation of the matter or aware of
its escalation. Unlike like provisions in other jurisdictions, s.18 does not
protecting a person who is believed to have engaged in protected
290. As a consequence, I am not satisfied that a breach of s.18
has been made out in this case.
Orders – Assessment of compensation
291. The complainant is seeking an order for compensation
pursuant to s.89(1)(d) of the Act. That provision provides that if the
finds after an enquiry that a complaint is substantiated, it may make an order
that the respondent must pay to the complainant,
within a specified period, an
amount the Tribunal thinks appropriate as compensation for any loss or injury
suffered by the complainant
and caused by the respondent’s discrimination
or prohibited conduct.
292. Although some evidence was lead as to the
complainant’s income while she worked at Sanity, no claim for loss of
is pursued. The state of the evidence was such that it was not possible
to identify what, if any, economic loss to the complainant
flowed from the
respondent’s conduct.
293. The term “injury” has been held
to encompass not only physical injury and psychiatric harm that would be
compensable
in tort cases, but also injury to a complainant’s feelings:
see Burton v Houston
[2004] TASSC 57
per Blow J at [27].
294. His Honour
further held:
“29. However,
I do not think s.89(1)(d) should be interpreted in such a way as to prevent the
Tribunal from awarding compensation
in the nature of aggravated damages.
Aggravated damages are awarded in a tort case to compensate a plaintiff for
increased mental
suffering resulting from the manner in which a defendant has
behaved in committing the tort or thereafter: Uren v John Fairfax &
Pty Ltd [supra]; Carson v John Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd
Spencer v Dowling
[1996] VSC 51
[1997] 2 VR 127
, Winneke P, with whom Calloway
JA agreed, considered the basis upon which damages could be awarded under the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
(Vic). At [144] his Honour said:
“Because it is the Act’s intention to
provide a sum of damages to “compensate” the complainant for her
it seems clear to me that the damages have to be compensatory, as distinct
from punitive, in nature.”
His Honour went on to consider the availability of aggravated damages, and
said the following at [144]-[145]:
“Because, however, an award of compensation made under the Act will
often comprehend an award for hurt, humiliation and injured
feelings caused by
the discriminatory conduct of the respondent, there is little doubt that,
contained within the Board’s power,
is the capacity to aggravate such
compensation where the conduct, in committing the discriminatory act, has been
high-handed, malicious
or oppressive....and has been calculated to increase the
hurt suffered by the complainant. However before such an award of aggravated
damages could be made, it would need to be demonstrated by a complainant that
the respondent’s conduct had been attended by
such aggravating
His Honour went on to conclude that there was no basis for an award of
aggravated damages in that case.
Alexander v Home Office
[1988] 2 All ER 118
, the English Court of Appeal
had to consider an award of damages for injury to an appellant's feelings
resulting from unlawful racial
discrimination. At 122 May LJ, with whom Ewbank J
agreed, said the following:
‘As with any other awards of damages, the
objective of an award for unlawful racial discrimination is restitution. Where
discrimination has caused actual pecuniary loss, such as the refusal of a
job, then the damages referable to this can be readily
calculated. For the
injury to feelings, however, for the humiliation, for the insult, it is
impossible to say what is restitution
and the answer must depend on the
experience and good sense of the judge and his assessors. Awards should not be
minimal, because
this would tend to trivialise or diminish respect for the
public policy to which the 1976 Act gives effect. On the other hand, just
because it is impossible to assess the monetary value of injured feelings,
awards should be restrained. To award sums which are generally
excessive does almost as much harm to the policy and the results which it seeks
to achieve as do nominal awards. Further
injury to feelings, which is likely to
be of a relatively short duration, is less serious than physical injury to the
body or the
mind which may persist for months, and in many cases for
Nevertheless damages for this relatively new tort of unlawful racial
discrimination are at large, that is to say that they are not
limited to the
pecuniary loss that can be specifically proved. Further, even where exemplary or
punitive damages are not sought,
nevertheless compensatory damages may and in
some instances should include an element of aggravated damages where, for
example, the
defendant may have behaved in a high-handed, malicious, insulting
or oppressive manner in committing the act of discrimination.’
The court allowed the appeal and awarded the appellant, a prisoner, £500
damages in respect of unlawful discrimination which
resulted in him not being
allowed to work in the prison kitchen because of his
295. Section 89(1)(d) limits the payment of compensation to
loss or injury caused by the respondent’s discrimination or prohibited
conduct. In Commissioner of Police, NSW Police v Mooney (No 3)
NSWADTAP 22
, an Appeal Panel of the NSW Tribunal reviewed a number of decisions
regarding the compensation powers under various anti-discrimination
statutes. In
respect of the issue of causation, adopting the views of Spigelman CJ in
Commissioner of Police v Estate of Russell
[2002] NSWCA 272
at 245-246 and French J in Hall v A & A Sheiban Pty
[1989] FCA 72
(1989) 20 FCR 217
at 264, they held at
law rules concerning the manner in which a court should determine whether
damages claimed by a plaintiff in an action
in tort are attributable to the
conduct of the defendant may guide or assist the Tribunal when determining
whether any loss or damage
claimed by an applicant in a discrimination case was
suffered by reason of the respondent’s conduct, but they are not
controlling.”
296. Rees, Rice and Allen in Australian Anti-Discrimination
Law: Second Edition suggest that the approach taken by the courts to the
of causation when dealing with the commission of other statutory wrongs may be a
useful guide to follow in the context of anti-discrimination
legislation: see
[13.4.7] They refer to the decision of McHugh J in Henville v Walker
(2001) 206 CLR 459
where his Honour, considering the issue of
damages in proceedings under the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth), held
the defendant’s breach has ‘materially contributed’ to the
loss or damage suffered, it will be regarded
as a cause of the loss of damage,
despite other factors or conditions having played an even more significant role
in producing the
loss or damage. As long as the breach materially contributed to
the damage, a causal connection will ordinarily exist even though
without more would not have brought about the damage. In exceptional cases where
an abnormal event intervenes between
the breach and damage, it may be right as a
matter of common sense to hold that the breach was not a cause of damage. But
are exceptional.”
297. In this case, the complainant referred to a decision of
the Tribunal in Power v Bouvy; Bouvy v Power
[2015] TASADT 2
, where $25,000 was
awarded by way of damages following a finding that the complainant had been
subjected to a tirade of homophobic
abuse and threats during the course of a
phone call and that the respondent in that case had rung back at least 18 times
messages that were offensive and humiliating and used abominable and
disgusting language. The conduct was found to constitute discrimination,
offensive behaviour and sexual harassment on the basis of sexual orientation.
298. Reference was also made to the decision of the Full Court of the
Federal Court in Richardson v Oracle Corporation Australia Pty
Ltd [2014] FCFCA
82 where the Court increased an award of compensation from $18,000 to $130,000
on appeal. That case involved a
person who was the victim of sexual harassment
by a co-worker. The conduct occurred over a period of about 7 months and
being subjected to a humiliating series of slurs, alternating with
sexual advances from her co-worker which built into what was described
or less a constant barrage of sexual harassment.
299. The complainant submits
that the facts in Oracle are more similar to those in the present case.
However, the complainant further
submits that the facts surrounding this case
are more aggravating on the basis that the complainant suffered more harassment
offensive conduct over a longer period of time and there was no allegation
of non-consensual and indecent touching in the Oracle
complainant submits that the sexual harassment and offensive conduct in the
current case is aggravated by the following:
• The length of time over which the respondent subjected
the complainant to persistent “sleazy” and “favouring”
behaviour which was estimated to be from around late 2013 to late 2017, a period
of some 4 years;
• The age disparity between the respondent and the
complainant;
• The fact that the harassment and offensive conduct
perpetrated against the complainant commenced when she was very young,
no more than 19 years of age and certainly no older than 20 years of
• The respondent persisted in calling the complainant a lewd name
(Juicy Lucy) on at least 6 occasions in circumstances where
both the complainant
and her manager directed him to stop;
• The respondent inappropriately
asked the complainant about her relationship status on numerous
• The respondent jumped out from behind shelves at the
Sanity store on numerous occasions in order to intimidate and frighten
• The respondent slapped the complainant on the bottom without her
consent, which if the facts of the incident were proved in
a criminal court
would constitute a sexual assault;
• The respondent told the
complainant not to tell her boss about slapping her on the
• The respondent taunted the complainant about his act of
slapping her on the bottom, laughing at her and asking her "Have you
boss yet? Have you told your boss yet?”
• The respondent’s
attitude when confronted with his misconduct was charactistically to treat it as
a joke and/or persist
with the behaviour which is the subject of the
• The respondent’s behaviour has had a significant
negative effect on the complainant (the egg shell scale operates in
• The respondent has never acknowledged or apologised for
his behaviour, as was the case of the perpetrator in Oracle: Oracle
• The complainant left her employment at Sanity in part because
of the respondent’s behaviour;
• The respondent failed to tell
his wife not to contact the complainant in circumstances where he had been told
not to contact
her, and should have reasonably suspected that his wife might
attempt to contact her.
301. It was also submitted that the matter of the defamation
letter must also be factored into any award of damages and that aggravated
damages were warranted in respect of that letter.
302. The aggravating
features flowing from that letter are said to include:
• That the respondent chose to instruct a lawyer to send
a letter on his behalf thus maximising the level of anxiety, distress
intimidation suffered by the complainant;
• It was sent to the
complainant’s workplace, which had the effect of increasing her anxiety
and distress and maximising
the potential for her to be humiliated and
embarrassed;
• That the respondent demanded that the complainant lie in
that letter by requiring a written retraction. Such an act would
have caused
the complainant significant mental suffering and further subjected her to public
humiliation and ridicule. It was also
submitted such conduct could reasonably
be expected to cause the complainant to lose her employment with Sanity and
suffer economic
loss. The Tribunal notes that no evidence in respect of this
possibility was raised during the course of the enquiry;
requirement that the complainant publish a letter of apology to him within 28
days of receiving a letter was also an act
that would have caused significant
mental suffering and subjected the complainant to further public humiliation and
• The letter improperly accused the complainant of injuring
his credit and reputation, causing him to lose his job and allege
economic loss, and damage to his relationships with family and
colleagues;
• The respondent demanded the complainant pay him the
not-insignificant sum of $30,000 in circumstances where because she was
person it could be inferred that she had insufficient means to make such a
• The letter reserved the respondent’s right to issue
legal proceedings for defamation without further notice thereby
causing the
complainant further mental anguish because she believed she was about to be the
subject of court proceedings for defamation;
• The letter caused
significant mental anguish to the complainant when she was already suffering
because of the consequences
of the respondent’s behaviour.
303. It was submitted that the issuing of the defamation letter
“should be considered at the ‘top end’ of behaviour
increases mental suffering ‘as a result of the manner in which the
respondent has behaved in committing the tort or thereafter’”.
was submitted that “it was a matter of significant public interest for the
Tribunal to send a strong and clear message
that perpetrators of sexual
harassment....will be heavily sanctioned by this Tribunal if they attempt to
intimidate and bully victims
into silence by threatening them with an action in
defamation or other court proceedings”.
304. The respondent in his
submissions distinguishes the cases of Power v Bouvy and Oracle. He points out
that the allegations in
Power v Bouvy included threatening home invasion,
threatening to anally rape the complainant in that case, threatening to kill his
dogs and to kill people. He also points out that the case of Oracle involved
the sexual harassment of a person in the workplace
by a co-worker. The comments
that were the subject of the complaint were of a very sexual nature, including
talking directly about
sex and going away for dirty weekends. The claim made by
the complainant in that case was against her employers for the actions
them when she raised her concerns. Her claim was for damages for breach of
contract as she was demoted, she had to continue
to work alongside the
perpetrator after complaining and did not think that her employer handled the
matter properly. The Tribunal
notes that the respondent has misconceived the
basis of the award of damages in the Oracle case as the damages were awarded in
of a breach of the Sex Discrimination Act, not for breach of contract.
305. The respondent says that the complainant showed that she was not afraid
or intimidated of him as she was prepared to walk past
the respondent and bend
over in front of him. He also submitted that reference to the discrepancy in
age between the complainant
and the respondent was an act of age discrimination
306. The respondent’s submissions further disputes various
factual matters raised by the complainant which need not be set out
Tribunal has found against him in respect of those. He did, however, submit
that the evidence fell short of supporting that
the complainant had left her
employment at Sanity in part because of the respondent’s behaviour. The
complainant in fact gave
evidence that shortly after being slapped on the
buttocks by the respondent, she reduced her hours at Sanity because she was not
enjoying it very much. She referred to the respondent’s conduct as
“having a slight effect” and that “it
307. The respondent also says he should not be held
responsible for his wife’s behaviour given than there was no evidence that
he either anticipated or condoned it.
308. As to the defamation letter, the
respondent asserted that he had every right to defend himself including against
false allegations
of sexual assault.
309. The complainant’s written
submissions address a claim for costs that is sought in the event that the
Tribunal finds in
the complainant’s favour. It is unfortunate that those
matters were addressed in the submissions at a stage in proceedings
findings have been made. Those submissions say, amongst other things, that the
respondent needlessly and inappropriately
lengthened the proceedings, including
having been given three opportunities to settle this matter without going to
hearing. Reference
is made to three letters marked “without prejudice
save as to costs” that the complainant would seek to produce if the
is determined in the complainant’s favour.
310. These submissions
have triggered the respondent making a direct reference to an amount of money
said to have been sought by the
complainant’s lawyer to settle the matter
“[b]efore the last letter (just before we went to the
tribunal)”.
311. The Tribunal has determined that it is still possible
for it to consider the matter of compensation in spite of disclosure for
following reasons:
(a) it is referred to as being an amount sought by counsel
for the complainant before the last letter of settlement was sent. It
clear that this was the only offer made by the complainant or that it was in
fact contained in a letter that was conveyed
to the respondent in
(b) the full terms of the offer are not able to be
(c) counsel for the complainant, Mr Mackie, also received the
respondent’s written submissions and, despite having them for
some months,
has not objected to them, not asked for them to be recalled and reference to the
amount removed, nor has the Tribunal
been asked to discontinue proceeding with
the matter;
(d) the Tribunal was in no way influenced by the information as
to settlement negotiations disclosed in the respondent’s
submissions.
Consideration
312. It is clear that the respondent’s conduct did have
an impact on the complainant in 2014. The Tribunal accepts her evidence
effect and the evidence of her partner, Mr Addicoat. Those impacts were
particularly notable following the physical contact
that occurred in 2014. She
was clearly upset by the behaviour on the day. Mr Addicoat stated that it put a
dent in their relationship
and that the complainant appeared emotionally
affected by the incident for some 3-4 months afterwards.
313. The evidence
also supports a finding that the most disturbing aspects of the
respondent’s behaviour, namely the physical
complainant as Juicy Lucy, ceased after that event. The Tribunal accepts that
the complainant continued
to appear uncomfortable in the respondent’s
presence, but it appears those working around her attempted to protect her from
coming into contact with him in the workplace and that she was largely able to
move on from those events.
314. What is also apparent is that the principal
events that significantly and adversely affected the complainant’s
wellbeing flowed from the escalation of the complaint to Toll and the
receipt of the defamation letter in November 2017. The Tribunal
accepts the
evidence of Dr Baird as to the impact she has observed and of the other
witnesses in this respect. The receipt of the
letter induced a great deal of
distress, necessitated leave from work and treatment from a health professional.
Ongoing participation
in these proceedings has had its own contribution to the
complainant’s ability to put the matter behind her.
315. Unlike the
situation in Power v Bouvy, the complainant has required treatment for her
mental health, particularly her symptoms
of depression (described by Dr Baird as
mild) and anxiety. The anxiety symptoms have been particularly evident and
persistent. The
evidence falls short of diagnosing a specific mental health
condition as opposed to indentifying a cluster of symptoms.
Tribunal has not found that sending the defamation letter amounted to an act of
victimisation contrary to the Act. The Tribunal
does, however, regard it as an
aggravating feature that is directly related to the respondent’s behaviour
and aggravates his
misconduct in the way described by Blow J (as he then was) in
Burton. As the respondent himself conceded in cross-examination, it
disgraceful to send a letter to a young woman demanding she retract her
complaint, apologise and pay $30,000 in circumstances
where the allegation was
317. The Tribunal does not accept that the respondent’s 2014
conduct is more aggravating than that referred to in the Oracle
decision. The
respondent’s behaviour in the main ceased after the slap incident and did
not include overt importuning of the
complainant to engage in a sexual
relationship with him. The complainant in the Oracle case was in effect forced
to continue to
work with a person against whom she had made complaints on a
continuous basis. This is not how the Tribunal understands the evidence
case. The Tribunal does accept that the complainant did have subsequent contact
with the respondent but that she was not
subjected to the same sort of behaviour
when that occurred.
318. The evidence presented fell short of establishing
with any degree of clarity that the complainant has suffered any loss of income
as a result of the respondent’s conduct. Dr Baird’s evidence
suggests likely ongoing negative sequelae, with some impact
complainant’s functioning likely for some time.
319. As noted in
Alexander v Home Office
[1988] 2 All ER 118
by May LJ at [22], where
compensation is sought for injury to feelings, humiliation and the like,
“it is impossible to say
what is restitution and the answer must depend on
the experience and good sense of the judge and his assessors”. Awards
not be minimal because this would tend to trivialise or diminish respect
for the public policy to which the Act gives effect. On
the other hand, just
because it is impossible to assess a monetary value of injured feelings, awards
should be restrained.
320. In the Oracle case, the Full Court of the
Federal Court increased the award of general damages on appeal from $18,000 to
In the leading judgment, Kelly J considered damages awards that had
been made in sexual harassment and sex discrimination cases in
the 30 years
since the introduction of human rights’ based legislation, and concluded
at [117]-[118]:
aside comparisons with general damages in negligence, including in connection
with workplace bullying and harassment,
and in other actions, it is clear that
continued adherence in sex discrimination cases, including sexual harassment
cases, to a ‘range’
of damages awards that has not absorbed the
increases evident in awards in other fields of litigation has resulted in an
Ms Richardson’s case that, judged by prevailing community
standards, is disproportionately low having regard to the loss and
suffered. As noted earlier, the general range of general damages in respect of
pain and suffering and loss of enjoyment
of life caused by sex discrimination
has scarcely altered since 2000 and does not reflect the shift in the
community’s estimation
of the value to be placed on these matters. The
range has remained unchanged, notwithstanding that the community has generally
a deeper appreciation of the experience of hurt and humiliation that
victims of sexual harassment experience and the value of loss
of enjoyment of
life occasioned by mental illness or distress caused by such conduct. Indeed the
range has remained fixed despite
changing views of what might be “sums
which are generally felt to be excessive”: Hall v A & A
Sheiban at 256. In
that case, in addition to cautioning against such
excessive sums, Wilcox J (at 256) implored that
... damages for... injury to feelings, distress, humiliation and the
effect on the claimant’s relationships with other people
susceptible of mathematical calculation ... [t]o ignore such items of damage
simply because of the impossibility of demonstrating
the correctness of any
particular figure would be to visit injustice upon a complainant by failing to
grant relief in respect of
a proved item of damage.
I agree. While the sum of $18,000 was not out of step with past awards in
cases of this kind, this amount was nonetheless manifestly
inadequate. It was
out of step with the general standards prevailing in the community regarding the
monetary value of the loss and
damage of the kind Ms Richardson sustained. In my
view the appeal should succeed on this ground and an award of $100,000 general
damages should be substituted for the award of $18,000. The amount of $100,000
includes compensation for the injury that the sexual
harassment caused to Ms
Richardson’s sexual relationship with her then partner, Mr
321. In considering the appropriate amount of compensation to
award in the circumstances, the Tribunal has also reviewed the “Damages
awarded in reported equal opportunity cases” table published by CCH in the
online service Australian Equal Opportunity Commentary
which was current to 31
October 2019 and the cases. The following recent cases are those most relevant
to this matter:
• Evans v Pasadena Foodland and Crugnale
[2019] SAET
where $30,000 was awarded by way of general damages for sexual harassment
constituting increasing familiarity and frequent and inappropriate
and deliberate touching of her body by a fellow worker including pressing up
firmly against her buttocks with his body
and touching her buttocks. Her
complaint had been inadequately investigated by her employer. The complainant
suffered an Adjustment
Disorder with Depressed and Anxious Mood with some
trauma-related symptoms.
• Hill v Hughes
[2019] FCCA 1267
involving a
relentless importuning of a young female solicitor by her employer including
manufacturing opportunities to try and engage
in a sexual relationship with her.
She left that position and found alternative employment. She was diagnosed with
an adjustment
disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood which had largely
resolved by the time of the hearing. General damages of $120,000
were awarded
together with $50,000 of aggravated damages due to the respondent’s
threats to sue the complainant if she pursued
her complaint and his conduct of
the proceedings, including suggesting she encouraged his behaviour. Vasta J
stated, It is the mark
of a bygone era where women, by their mere presence, were
responsible for the reprehensible behaviour of men.
• Kerkofs v
Abdallah (Human Rights)
[2019] VCAT 259
involving sexual harassment of a female
by a fellow employee constituting calling her nicknames, making sexual comments
body and sexual comments generally and unwelcome physical touching.
The complainant developed a psychiatric injury, namely post-traumatic
disorder, and her career was described as having been “stopped in its
tracks”. General damages of $130,000 were
awarded together with $20,000 of
aggravated damages against the employer due to the way in which the defence of
the matter was conducted.
• STU v JKL (Qld) Pty Ltd
[2016] QCAT 505
which involved the complainant’s co-worker climbing into her bed naked and
uninvited and attempting to engage her in sexual
intercourse. They were then
both residing in accommodation provided by their employer. The complainant was
diagnosed with post-traumatic
stress disorder and a depressive illness and
alcohol abuse disorder, described as “severe and prolonged” as a
consequence
of the conduct. General damages of $70,000 were awarded.
322. The worst aspects of the sexual harassment of the
complainant occurred over a period of some months in 2014. Thereafter, there
some continuation of the favouring behaviour and questioning about the
complainant’s boyfriend but no repeat of unwanted
physical conduct or name
calling. The conduct caused distress and humiliation to the complainant, but did
not result in a serious
psychiatric illness or ongoing psychological distress.
The Tribunal awards the sum of $25,000.00 to the complainant as compensation
the injury incurred as a consequence of the respondent’s conduct.
323. The Tribunal, however, finds that it is appropriate to make an award of
compensation in the nature of aggravated damages in this
case. The principal
aggravating feature is the sending of the defamation letter. The impact upon
the complainant of this conduct
was profound. The Tribunal accepts that the
complainant’s mental health suffered, although the medical evidence falls
of diagnosing a mental health disorder. Her relationship with her partner
was adversely impacted and her enjoyment of life has been
affected. The Tribunal
orders that the respondent pay the complainant a further $20,000.00 in
aggravated damages.
324. The Tribunal orders that the respondent, Frayne
Higgins, pay to the complainant, Lucy Orchard, within a period of 30 days of
date of this decision, the amount of $45,000.00 as compensation for injury
suffered by the complainant and caused by the respondent’s
breach of the
Act. Such an award is reflective of the need to advance the public policy
behind the Act and discourage breaches of
its provisions. It also recognises
the extent of the injury incurred by the complainant, particularly as a
consequence of the aggravating
conduct engaged in by the respondent subsequent
to his behaviour being exposed to his employers.
325. The Tribunal orders pursuant to s.89(1)(d) that the
respondent, Frayne Higgins, pay to the complainant, Lucy Orchard, within
period of 30 days of the date of this decision, the amount of $45,000.00 as
compensation for injury suffered by the complainant
and caused by the
respondent’s breach of the Act.
CUTHBERTSON
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (485 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter