URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASRPDComm/2009/36.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:20:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Brighton Planning Scheme 2000 Amendment RZ 2009/02 [2009] TASRPDComm 36 (10 August 2009)
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Planning and Approvals Act 1993
Resource Planning
and Development Commission Act 1997
Decision and Reasons for Decision
PLANNING SCHEME 2000
Draft Amendment 02/09
Permit No SUB 09/06
The applications are to:
- Amend the plans to rezone 12 Mayfield Crescent, Bridgewater (CT 6709/996) from
Recreation to Residential; and
- Grant a permit for a 3 lot subdivision of 12 Mayfield Crescent,
Bridgewater.
meeting on 15 June 2009 and pursuant to Section 8 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission Act 1997
, the Commission
delegated to Mr Robin Nolan:
powers and functions under
sections 40
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
in relation to Draft
Amendment RZ 02/09 to the Brighton Planning Scheme 2000 and Permit Number SUB
connection with the exercise of those powers in performance of those functions,
its powers under Part 3 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Date and Place of Hearing: Thursday 23 July 2009
Brighton Council Chambers,
Tivoli Road, Gagebrook.
Representations
Mr M Taylor and Mrs J Taylor
Attendance at the Hearing
Council and Applicant
: Mr J Drybourgh represented the Brighton Council
as planning authority and applicant.
Representors:
Mr M Taylor and Mrs J Taylor
Issues Raised in the representation
The following issues were raised in the representation.
- Loss of public land designated for recreational purposes.
development facilitated by the draft amendment and permit will result in a loss
of scenic amenity and devalue the representors’
properties.
regarding the potential for consolidation of the proposed lots which may allow
for a multiple dwelling development on the
- Reduction of
habitat for native fauna.
Council’s response to the representations
Council’s report considered the representation in the context of the draft
amendment and permit. Council’s recommendation
was that there is no valid
reason for changing the original decision to rezone the subject land from
Recreation to Residential.
In relation to the permit, Council recommended the inclusion of an additional
condition preventing the consolidation or adherence
of the proposed
Commission’s assessment of the draft amendment
The draft amendment
The draft amendment is to rezone 12 Mayfield Crescent, Bridgewater, from
Recreation to Residential.
Site and Locality
The site is located on the north western banks of the Jordon River overlooking
where it meets the Derwent River at Green Point. From
the site there are
extensive views to the south incorporating Mt Wellington and the eastern and
western shores of the Derwent River.
The site comprises a grassed
irregular shaped block. The site’s
western boundary fronts Mayfield Crescent. Adjacent land to the north is zoned
Residential
and predominantly developed with single detached dwellings. The site
abuts Crown land on its eastern and southern boundaries which
Recreation. The adjacent Crown land forms a network of public open space in the
form of a linear reserve along the foreshore
containing a gravelled surface
bicycle/walking track.
Relevant provisions of the scheme
The scheme objectives for recreation and leisure resources at clause 2.7 are
(a) To promote appropriate sporting and recreation facilities for a changing
population base.
(b) To maximise community access to recreation facilities.
(c) To maintain, conserve and manage areas of recreation land use.
(d) Open space linkages within the urban areas and along the foreshore and
watercourse areas will encourage their longer-term development
and usage for
recreation activity.
(e) Development of prominent
ridgelines and highly visible elevated areas together with locations adjacent
important watercourses
and vegetation habitat are those that are discouraged in
the Scheme.
The purpose of the Recreation zone at clause 6.9.1 is stated as:
(a) To recognise areas for public recreation and open space.
(b) To protect and conserve areas of significance where
appropriate.
The permitted uses in the zone, as listed in the table of use or development at
table 6.9.1, are community services (public park
or playground), natural and
cultural values management and utilities (reticulated services). Discretionary
uses are sports and recreation,
tourist accommodation, tourist operation,
permitted uses not meeting the condition and undefined use or development.
The scheme objectives for residential resources are provided in clause 2.2 and
(a) To encourage and facilitate opportunities for diversity in residential
lifestyle and environment.
(b) To promote Brighton as an independent suburb within the regional
metropolitan context.
(c) To establish residential growth
within existing settlement areas serviced with infrastructure.
(d) To ensure that the future patterns of residential development protect and
enhance the natural and man-made assets of the Municipality.
(e) To encourage infill within the existing townships and suburbs as a
consolidation of services and to provide definable communities
with strong
interconnectivity.
(f) To discourage the loss of existing housing stock by conversion to or
redevelopment for non-residential uses.
(g) Concentration of new residential development remains within the green
field sites of Tivoli Green and Compton and for continued
growth of Old Beach
and Brighton – Pontville. Other areas will concentrate on the infill of
existing developed areas within
the service capabilities of the local
The purpose of the Residential zone at clause 6.2.1 is stated as:
ensure sufficient land is available to meet anticipated demand for residential
use in the next 5 years.
protect residential amenity by reducing the potential for land use conflicts
between residential uses and other uses.
allow for a range of housing types within the zone, subject to meeting
performance guidelines, so as to satisfy different housing
needs within the
restrict non-residential uses to those that are compatible with maintaining
residential amenity and servicing local needs.
broad range of residential options should be accommodated subject to the
maintenance of satisfactory levels of amenity for new and
development.
Permitted use and development as listed in the table of use or development at
clause 6.2.3 are community services (public park or
play ground), natural and
cultural values management, residential (if not more than 2 dwellings) and
utilities (reticulated services).
Discretionary uses include residential (where
not permitted) and tourist accommodation.
The status of subdivision in the Residential zone is as
Subdivision
6.2.5 Subdivision is a Permitted development in accordance with Section 58 of
the Act, where it complies with the following:-
consolidate existing lots, provided such subdivision complies with the zone
adjust boundaries between existing lots, provided such subdivision complies with
the zone purpose, only changes the shared
boundaries between lots and results in
each of the new lots having substantially the same shape, size and orientation
the original lots;
provide for public services and utilities; or
provide for public open space.
6.2.6 Strata division is a Permitted development in accordance with Section
58 of the Act, where carried out as part of a previously
approved use or
development.
6.2.7 Subdivision or strata division that does not comply with Clauses 6.2.5
or 6.2.6 is a Discretionary development in accordance
with Section 57 of the
Subdivision standards for the Residential zone at clause 6.2.8 include:
- minimum lot size of 400m
- average lot size of 550m
where three or more lots
are created;
- minimum frontage of 3.6 metres; and
- building envelope with minimum dimensions of 10m x 15m clear of any easements,
the front boundary setback or any other title restrictions.
Consideration of issues raised by the Representors
Loss of public land designated for recreational purposes.
The representors objected to the loss of the site as public land designated for
recreational purposes. Concerns were also expressed
regarding the cumulative
impact associated with the incremental loss of public land over time.
Council’s submission was that they have undertaken a strategic assessment
of public open space that is owned and maintained
by Council and determined that
the site is surplus to the recreational needs of the community.
Council’s strategic approach to recreation requirements is supported. In
consideration of the scheme and zone objectives for
recreation use they do not
readily support retention of the site for recreation purposes. Whilst the site
fronts the Crown land
riparian area to the Jordan River that is zoned
recreation, the site is not part of the open space network. With Residential
of the site, there remains an extensive frontage of Crown land to
Mayfield Crescent that is in the Recreation zone.
The location and characteristics of the site are consistent with the scheme and
zone objectives for residential use.
Loss of scenic amenity and devaluation of the representors’
properties.
The representors raised objections to the rezoning on the basis that it
facilitates residential development and that would result
in the loss of scenic
amenity which will detrimentally impact the value of their properties.
Submissions made by the representors
were that the site was set aside for the
use and development of a church. The church failed to eventuate and the land was
left vacant,
providing an uninterrupted southerly outlook currently experienced
by the representors which they claim adds value to their properties
Mayfield Crescent.
The zoning history of the site is not entirely clear. It was zoned Residential
but notated as a church site in the 1977 planning
scheme. The recreation zoning
in the current 2000 planning scheme has not been explained but could have been
because of Council
The Commission accepts that future development of the subject land facilitated
by the draft amendment may contribute to a loss of
scenic amenity for
surrounding properties. However, building in the Residential zone must be sited
within the building envelope
as depicted in Figure 6.2.1 of the planning scheme.
The topography of the site, that slopes downhill from the existing dwellings,
will allow development that does not overshadow existing residential sites. The
development standards for the zone (eg 5 metre front
setback, 3 metre side and
rear setback and 8 metre height limit), should provide sufficient vertical
visual separation between the
existing and any future dwelling sited within the
building envelope. Applications involving development outside the building
are considered discretionary thereby subject to statutory public
notification and third party appeal rights. The combination of
development standards should provide suitable amenity protection for surrounding
properties from residential development on
Consolidation of proposed lots allowing for multiple dwelling development on
The representation contended that there was nothing to prevent the lots from
being consolidated and developed for high density residential
Council submitted that land in Bridgewater was experiencing development pressure
and that this was evident by the number of multiple
dwellings currently being
constructed. Council also concurred that the representors’ concern on the
matter was justified considering
subdivision for the purpose of consolidating
existing lots is permitted in the Residential zone.
The development standards in the Residential zone state that the maximum site
coverage permitted for a house is 40% and a consolidated
larger lot is more
likely to attract a multiple dwelling development rather than the smaller lots
restricting future development
to single detached dwellings. However the draft
amendment demonstrates consistency with the planning scheme objectives that
urban infill and consolidation. The rezoning facilitates residential
use and development of the site in accordance with the decision
guidelines and
standards for the Residential zone which require the protection of residential
amenity of neighbours.
Reduction of habitat for native fauna.
The representors contended that future use and development facilitated by the
rezoning will adversely impact on native fauna.
The site has been substantially modified from any natural state and presents as
a grassed area providing limited habitat. The extensive
areas of Crown land
adjacent to the site would adequately accommodate any displaced native fauna
caused by future use and development
associated with the draft
Commission’s assessment of the s.43A permit
The s.43A permit is for a three lot subdivision (2 lots and balance lot) at 12
Mayfield Crescent, Bridgewater. The application fails
to meet the basic
requirements for an application.
The planning scheme sets out the requirements for an application including:
Clause 3.2 specifies the information that must accompany an application.
Clause 3.2.4 allows some variation on the requirements where Council is
satisfied certain information is not relevant to the assessment
of a proposal.
Clause 3.4 identifies the matters that Council must take into consideration in
the assessment of an application.
The reports to Council on the initiation of the draft amendment and assessment
of the permit, and report on the representation at
the close of public
notification showed little regard to complying with the requirements for an
application or Council’s assessment
as specified in the planning scheme.
In particular there was nothing to satisfy clause 3.2.2 or that 3.2.4 had been
exercised to
allow certain information to be omitted. To demonstrate this point
there was nothing to constitute a plan of subdivision that would
reasonable assessment against the requirements of the planning scheme or the
Local Government (Building and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
Application of State Policies
State Coastal Policy 1996
The draft amendment provides for residential development based on an existing
town. The site is adjacent to a Crown land reserve
network along the foreshore
that provides adequate protection for coastal features, aquatic environments and
provides separation
from coastal hazards. The draft amendment is assessed as
being prepared in accordance with the Policy.
State Policy on Water Quality Management 1997
The site is within the sewered area and stormwater can be appropriately managed.
The draft amendment is assessed as being prepared
in accordance with the
The national Environmental Protection Measures are not
applicable to the draft amendment.
Schedule 1 Objectives
promote the sustainable development of natural and physical resources and the
maintenance of ecological processes and genetic
The site has been significantly modified from its original riparian habitat.
The draft amendment is assessed as not a threat to
ecological processes or
genetic diversity.
(b) to provide for the fair, orderly and sustainable use and development of
air, land and water;
The draft amendment represents the fair, orderly and sustainable use and
development of land as it provides for residential consolidation
in an area that
is adequately serviced for that purpose.
(c) to encourage public involvement in resource management and
The draft amendment has included public processes consistent with this
(d) to facilitate economic development in accordance with the objectives set
out in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c);
The draft amendment facilitates economic development in accordance with the
above objectives.
(e) to promote the sharing of responsibility for resource management and
planning between the different spheres of Government, the
community and industry
in the State.
The draft amendment and subsequent use or development will require the sharing
of responsibility consistent with the objective.
Objectives are furthered principally in terms of
objectives,
policies and controls for the use, development and protection of
land and to secure a pleasant living environment.
The draft amendment to rezone land to Residential is assessed as being
consistent with the planning scheme provisions for residential
use. The draft
amendment should be approved.
The permit is deficient in terms of the basic application and assessment
requirements of the planning scheme and should be refused.
The Commission is satisfied that the draft amendment is in order and gives its
approval pursuant to
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act
Pursuant to
Section 43H
(1)(b)(i) of the
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act
the Commission refuses the permit.
Robin Nolan
Resource Planning and development Commission
10 August 2009
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (162 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter