URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASGAB/2020/51.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SBU (Review Guardianship) [2020] TASGAB 51 (8 October 2020)
SBU (Review Guardianship)
[2020] TASGAB 51
HEARING DATE(S):
25 September 2020
DATE OF ORDERS:
25 September 2020
DATE OF STATEMENT OF REASONS:
7 October 2020
Mrs K. Hambly, (Member)
Ms V. Jones, (Member)
Ms M. Pedersen, (Member)
APPLICATION
Review of Order - Guardianship
CATCHWORDS:
Review of Guardianship Order – scope of powers for restricting visits
– acting in persons best interests
LEGISLATION CITED:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication
STATEMENT OF REASONS
25 September 2020, the Guardianship and Administration Board (‘the
Board’) heard two Applications for Review of a Guardianship
Order for Mr
SBU (‘the Applications’). The Applications were filed by Mr BU and
Ms MD, Mr SBU’s son and daughter,
respectively.
initial Guardianship Order was made by the Board at hearing on 8 August 2019
where the Board appointed Ms NQ, Mr SBU’s step-daughter,
as the Guardian
with limited powers to decide where the Mr SBU is to live permanently or
temporarily.
Order was made for a period of 12 months and remained in effect until 7 August
Board reviewed the Guardianship Order on 5 August 2020 following an Application
for Review of Order filed by the Guardian, Ms
Board determined that Ms NQ was to continue as limited Guardian but varied the
Order as follows:
appointed as limited Guardian of SBU with the power to:
visits to SBU to such extent as may be necessary in his best interests and to
prohibit visits by any person or prohibit SBU
being taken outside of the
facility where he is living if the Guardian reasonably believes it would have an
adverse effect on SBU.
medical treatment decisions for SBU.
Order was made for a period of 2 years to in effect until 4 August 2022.
25 September 2020, the Board heard and determined Mr BU’s Application
first. The Board varied the Guardianship Order as follows:
appointed as limited Guardian of SBU with the power to:
where SBU is to live permanently or temporarily; and
medical treatment decisions for SBU.
there was no substantial difference between the two Applications to Review the
Guardianship Order and all relevant matters had
been determined at the hearing
of Mr BU’s Application the Board dismissed Ms MD’s Application.
Board has received a request for a Statement of Reasons from Ms NQ in relation
to the determination of 25 September 2020.
Board heard the Applications on 25 September 2020.
to COVID-19 restrictions, the hearing was held by way of telephone conference.
Those who attended by telephone were:
BU, Applicant 1;
MD, Applicant 2;
NQ, Guardian;
ES, Mr SBU’s step-son and brother of the Guardian;
Anand Kumar, the treating geriatrician at the Royal Hobart Hospital
Hui-Yu Yao, RHH social worker; and
Kylie Hillier, of the Office of the Public Guardian.
Board had before it the following documents:
Guardianship
Order dated 5 August 2020;
Application
for Review dated 20 August 2020 by Mr BU;
Application
for Review dated 20 August 2020 by Ms MD;
4(3) statement dated 20 August 2020 by Mr BU;
4(3) statement dated 20 August 2020 by Ms MD;
Care Professional Report (‘HCPR’) dated 24 May 2020 by Dr John
Power of Attorney dated 6 September 2017 by Mr SBU;
Guardian’s Report dated 10 Jun 2020 by Ms NQ;
dated 9 September 2020 by Ms KT;
dated 10 September 2020 by Ms NQ;
dated 17 September 2020 by Mr BU;
dated 17 September 2020 by Ms MD;
of Reasons dated 8 September 2020 by the Board;
dated 24 September 2020 by Ms KT; and
dated 24 September 2020 by Ms DB, nurse at [the Aged Care
Legislation
to section 68 of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Act’) the Board on a Review of Order Application may vary, continue or
revoke the Order.
the Board assesses an Application for Review of a Guardianship Order it needs to
be satisfied, in accordance with section 20
of the Act, that the proposed
represented person, in this case Mr SBU:
person with a disability;
unable by reason of the disability to make reasonable judgements in respect of
all or any matters relating to her person or circumstances,
in need of a guardian.
Board must also balance the principles in section 6 of the Act, which are:
means which is the least restrictive of the proposed represented person's
freedom of decision and action as is possible in the
circumstances is
best interests of the proposed represented person are promoted;
wishes of the proposed represented person are, if possible, carried into
with a disability:
Board had before it the HCPR by Dr Oxford. Dr Oxford reported that he had known
Mr SBU for nine months and concluded that he had
a diagnosis of advanced
Alzheimer’s dementia which had been evident for several years and was
progressively deteriorating.
parties accepted Mr SBU’s diagnosis of advanced Alzheimer’s
Board was persuaded by the medical evidence of Dr Oxford and satisfied that a
diagnosis of Alzheimer’s dementia fell within
the definition of disability
under the Act and determined that Mr SBU was a person with a
disability.
Ability to make reasonable judgments:
HCPR of Dr Oxford reports that Mr SBU’s disability has produced
significant deficits in his orientation to person, place
or time, impulse
control, capacity for new learning, susceptibility to influence and planning and
reasoning skills.
the hearing, Dr Kumar, Mr SBU’s treating geriatrician at the RHH, gave
evidence that Mr SBU has recently been admitted to
hospital on the background of
behavioural and management issues. Dr Kumar stated Mr SBU displays aggression
and anxiety which initially
required chemical restraint but his condition has
since improved and is now stable.
Kumar stated that Mr SBU needs ongoing 24 hour support, that his baseline is
unlikely to change and that he has a neuro-degenerative
disorder with a life
span of around 7 to 10 years from date of diagnosis. Dr Kumar was of the opinion
that Mr SBU currently sits
somewhere in the middle of this timeframe.
Kumar concurred with Dr Oxford confirming Mr SBU’s deficits in orientation
and short term memory loss. Dr Kumar also gave
evidence that Mr SBU currently
requires support with his personal care and is ‘exit seeking’ which
requires de-escalation
strategies when being redirected.
Kumar gave evidence that there are various types of aggression which fall under
the dementia umbrella and said he was of the opinion
that Mr SBU is
demonstrating one of the more severe types.
parties accepted Dr Kumar’s evidence and he was released from the hearing
so that he could attend to his medical duties.
Board is persuaded by the evidence in relation to longevity of diagnosis,
symptoms and impact on reasoning skills from Dr Oxford
and Dr Kumar and
determines that Mr SBU is unable to make reasonable judgments due to his
disability.
Continuing need for a Guardian
firstly to the issue of accommodation. The evidence at hearing established that
Mr SBU is prone to very aggressive bouts of
behaviour and in one particular
incident he forcefully banged another residents head on a table. Ms KT’s
evidence, on the papers,
has indicated that this behaviour is unmanageable. [the
Aged Care Facility] have attempted to put several management plans in place
just prior to the hearing Mr SBU was re-admitted to the RHH for behavioural
management and [the Aged Care Facility] said that
he would be unable to return
to their facility.
the hearing, Dr Kumar gave evidence ruling out the need for transfer to the Roy
Fagan Centre but has recommended that Mr SBU be
moved to a secure aged care
facility. The timing of this move is unknown and investigations are ongoing,
although the Guardian is
considering [another Aged Care Facility]. Mr SBU does
not appear to be objecting to a move and is settled where he is, however, this
is a short term option and as stated earlier, Mr SBU has been attempting to the
exit the ward and becomes irritable when re-directed.
The move to a secure unit
appears imminent and is supported by all the parties who believe this move will
be in the best interests
Board is informed by the papers and evidence at hearing that Mr BU and Ms MD
live in mainland Australia and are the product of
Mr SBU’s first marriage.
Mr SBU married Ms NQ’s mother, Mrs DNU, when Mr BU and Ms MD were young
teenagers. There appears
to have been family disharmony as a consequence which
resulted in Ms MD being prevented contact with her father by Mrs DNU.
DNU died in October 2019.
BU gave evidence that he visits his father approximately every two years with
follow up phone calls on average once a fortnight.
He also states that his
father had occasionally visited him on the mainland.
NQ disputed this degree of contact on the basis that she has known Mr SBU for
some forty years and not witnessed any regular contact
between Mr SBU and his
son in the thirty years that she lived at home.
BU stated that he last saw his father in December 2019 and stated that further
visits have been thwarted by the COVID travel restrictions.
MD stated that she last saw her father in 2018 at Avoca. This was a difficult
meeting because she was prevented from visiting the
family home and the meeting
was orchestrated by Mrs DNU. Ms MD believed the meeting went well despite Mr SBU
initially not being
able to remember who she was, although this was rectified
when her identity was clarified by her brother. When Mrs DNU died, Ms MD
this was an opportunity to re-connect with her father. Her last phone call with
him was on 5 August 2020.
NQ disputes Ms MD’s account. Ms NQ asserts that there was some contact in
the 1990’s and 2000 and then no contact until
the meeting at Avoca some 18
years later. At this meeting Ms NQ stated it established that Mr SBU did not
recognise Ms MD and that
his daughter did not attempt to contact him again until
a year later in November 2019.
Applicants gave evidence that there had been multiple unsuccessful attempts to
establish telephone contact with Mr SBU at the
[the Aged Care Facility] since
the Guardianship Order was varied on 5 August 2020.
NQ gave evidence of occasions when she had facilitated or attempted to
facilitate telephone contact between the Applicants and
BU’s Application requested that he be considered for appointment either
jointly or in place of Ms NQ as Guardian for his
BU was advised as to section 20(6) of the act which states: ‘two or more
guardians of a person, each with different functions,
may be appointed under one
or more limited guardian order’ and was invited to identify the decisions
he would like to have
power to make.
BU stated that he would like to be involved in decisions about where his father
was to live and who could have contact with him.
Mr BU stated that he had
attended the initial hearing when Ms NQ was appointed Guardian and had accepted
that he would have limited
input in decisions but had expected to be provided
with more information than he currently receives.
BU and Ms MD both gave evidence that they had been attempting to make regular
Aged Care Facility] but
were informed that they needed to seek permission from Ms NQ.
stated in paragraph 5 above, the Order had been varied, authorising Ms NQ to
restrict and prohibit visits to Mr SBU.
NQ had requested the variation following an incident on 12 December 2019 where
Mr BU had visited and decided to take his father
out of [the Aged Care
Facility] for the morning, against the advice of [the Aged Care Facility]
nursing staff despite two requests
not to do so. Mr BU was informed that there
was a gastro-enteritis outbreak which [the Aged Care Facility] was trying to
[the Aged Care Facility] recorded that Mr BU became aggressive and Ms
KT’s written evidence indicated that when she was trying
to dissuade Mr BU
she ‘felt there was a potential threat to me [sic] if I
persisted.’
NQ reported that the [the Aged Care Facility] notes for that date indicated her
father was unsettled when he returned and did not
appear to know who he had been
with or where he had been taken.
Statement of Reasons pertaining to the hearing of the 5 August 2020
The Board heard evidence of Mr SBU being taken out of the
RACF by his son, contrary to the advice of nursing staff. This had an unsettling
impact on Mr SBU, and if repeated would most likely cause a similar response,
particularly given his current behaviours and the fact
he is not orientated to
person, place or time. The Board notes the Applicant has accepted the medical
advice not to take Mr SBU outside
of the RACF. The Board is satisfied that a
guardian should have a power to restrict visits to Mr SBU or restrict him being
outside the RACF.
BU, at hearing spoke with candour regarding this incident and acknowledged that,
in hindsight, he had made the wrong decision and
given a similar set of
circumstances he would not make the same decision again. He denied any
aggressive behaviour and questioned
the term ‘outbreak’ since he had
been informed that there was only one resident diagnosed with the gastro ailment
he asserted did not amount to an ‘outbreak’.
Private Guardian’s Handbook, which is the reference tool for Guardians
appointed in Tasmania, states the following:
An access role is given
to a guardian when there is a need to decide with whom the person with a
disability should have contact.
An access role gives you the authority to:
Decide who can
visit the represented person, and who the represented person can visit.
Decide who the
represented person can have contact with via telephone or other electronic
NQ stated that she had decided to limit telephone contact with her father
following discussions with Mr SBU’s treating team
and [the Aged Care
Facility] staff who suggested that these contacts were distressing for Mr SBU.
Ms NQ reported that her father
struggled to use a telephone and required
direction on every occasion of use. The Board was also informed by Ms NQ and via
in a statement from Ms KT, that advanced Alzheimer’s patients
do not have a mobile phone because this can be distressing. In
circumstances relatives speak to their family members via the [the Aged Care
Facility] phone, which must necessarily be kept
short, in case [the Aged Care
Facility] need to use this phone to provide their staff with directions. Ms KT
stated there was only
one phone available for use by staff which is the same
phone used to facilitate these calls to residents.
NQ asserted that these phone calls act as a trigger to Mr SBU’s aggressive
behaviours although this was not conclusive and
was denied by both Applicants
who described their phone calls with their father as congenial.
Public Guardian was supportive of the need for a Guardian to make accommodation
decisions. The Public Guardian also advised that
since a move to a secure unit
is imminent the Board might be mindful that these specialist units are adept at
controlling the liberty
of the person, which would frustrate attempts by any
party to remove a client from the facility. The Public Guardian was able to
provide further insight into the expertise within these units and indicate they
are highly experienced in managing and assessing
personal and telephone contact,
are very familiar with dealing with complex family dynamics and can monitor and
immediately intervene
when a patient becomes distressed or starts to react in an
adverse manner.
parties were invited to make comment on the Public Guardian’s
observations. Mr BU agreed with the Public Guardian and was
supportive of her
appointment as an independent guardian. Ms MD agreed with the Public Guardian
but accepted that Ms NQ was doing
a good job as the Guardian and stated she just
wanted more contact with her father. Ms NQ stated she was happy to go with
was in her father’s best interests but believed she was the best
person for the appointment based on her close and longstanding
relationship with
Enduring Power of Attorney
SBU executed an Enduring Power of Attorney (EPOA) on 9 October 2017. The EPOA
appointed his wife Mrs DNU as his attorney and Ms
NQ as his substitute attorney
should his wife pre-decease him.
Board was aware that a large part of the evidence was in relation to the lack of
communication between the parties and a difficult
family dynamic; however it is
not the Board’s function to act as a mediator. The Board is only concerned
with the principles
and powers discussed in paragraphs 13 to 15 above.
Board was satisfied by Drs Oxford and Kumar’s evidence that Mr SBU is a
person with a disability and by virtue of that disability
is unable to make
reasonable decisions.
Board was also persuaded by the evidence of Drs Oxford and Kumar that
SBU’s condition continues to deteriorate. The Board
understood from Ms
KT’s evidence that Mr SBU can longer be cared for at the [the Aged Care
Facility] and Dr Kumar’s evidence
indicated that a secure specialist
dementia facility would be a more appropriate fit.
that Mr SBU does not have capacity to make accommodation decisions and is
demonstrating ‘exiting’ behaviours on
the ward it is highly likely
that he may not consent to a move to a new facility, the Board is therefore
satisfied that a substitute
decision maker is necessary for accommodation
decisions. For the same reasons, concomitant with the advanced behavioural
issues which
have been of sufficient seriousness to require hospitalisation for
management, the Board is satisfied that there is a continuing
substitute decision maker for medical treatment decisions.
Board then considered who the appropriate Guardian is.
NQ has been the Guardian for Mr SBU for slightly over 12 months and both
Applicants have indicated that she has largely been doing
a good job as a
Guardian. The contentions seemed to arise once Ms NQ was given the access
powers. These powers were authorised by
the Board in response to a family member
removing Mr SBU from [the Aged Care Facility] against medical and staff advice.
That family
member at this hearing commendably accepted it was a mistake and
gave an undertaking that this would not occur again. The Board also
Mr SBU is to be moved to a secure facility and the Public Guardian was
persuasive in their account that because of the
security measure adopted by
these specialist facilities it is unlikely a family member would be able to
remove Mr SBU from the facility
given similar circumstances. The Board is
therefore persuaded that a need for restrictive access powers is no longer
necessary and
determine it to be removed from the Order.
Board gave both Applicants the opportunity to identify if or where the Guardian
had acted inappropriately or not in the best interests
of Mr SBU. No evidence
was forthcoming. The Applicants asserted that Ms NQ’s actions in
preventing their contact with Mr SBU
were tantamount to not acting in his best
interests but Ms NQ was authorised under the Order to make the decision to
restrict visits
which she did based on medical evidence and has not therefore
breached any duties under the Act.
Board considered Mr BU’s Application to be appointed as Guardian. Mr BU
was unable to identify a different functional need
for a second Guardian which
is necessary if the Board is to appoint two persons. The Board therefore went on
to consider if there
were grounds to remove Ms NQ and appoint Mr BU. Mr BU
failed to establish any grounds beyond the previously mentioned restricted
inconvenience of having to arrange calls through the
Guardian which became the
issue. Ms NQ gave account for her reasons for imposing these restrictions and
she had not acted outside
her powers authorised under the Order.
Board therefore concludes that Ms NQ is a suitable person to continue in the
role of Guardian and did not appoint Mr BU.
Board was persuaded that the move to a secure aged care facility was imminent
and therefore when considering the duration of the
Order was satisfied that 12
months was sufficient to allow this transition and provide Mr SBU the time to
settle and the staff and
family an opportunity to accurately assess his future
that the Applications were filed at the same time, were substantially the same
and neither party was able to identify a point
of difference between the two,
the Board concluded that the determination of the Mr BU’s Application
removed all points for
consideration raised by the second Application and
dismissed this accordingly.
Guardianship Order for SBU made on 5 August 2020 has been reviewed and varied
and from this day the Order is:
appointed as limited Guardian of SBU with the power to:
where SBU is to live whether permanently or temporarily.
medical treatment decisions for SBU.
Order remains in effect to 24 September 2021.
Application for Review of Guardianship Order filed by Applicant MD is dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (164 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter