URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASHPT/2020/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia v Stanley Horne [2020] TASHPT 7 (15 December 2020)
[2020] TASHPT 7
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL
Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia v Stanley
[2020] TASHPT 7
NURSING & MIDWIFERY BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
HORNE, Stanley
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
Written submissions
DELIVERED ON:
15 December 2020
DECISION OF:
Deputy Chairperson Wilkins
CATCHWORDS:
Registered nurse – professional misconduct –
social media posts – racially, culturally and sexually offensive –
reprimand and cancellation of registration.
Kok v Medical Board of Australia
[2020] VCAT 405
Craig v Medical Board of South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
Board of Australia v Xie (Review & Regulation)
[2019] VCAT 1924
DETERMINATION:
The respondent is reprimanded. The respondent’s
registration as a nurse practitioner is cancelled.
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
N Edmondson
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Ogilvie Jennings
[2020] TASHPT 7
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. By an application dated 25 September 2019 the Nursing &
Midwifery Board of Australia (“the Board”) referred to
the Tribunal
the conduct of Mr Stanley Horne, a registered nurse.
2. The referral was made
pursuant to s193(1)(a) of the Health Practitioners Regulation National Law
(“the National Law”).
The Board believed that the conduct of Mr
Horne amounted to professional misconduct under s193(1)(a) of the National
3. The Board referred to the Tribunal allegations in relation to Mr
Horne’s conduct between 10 February 2016 and 26 February
2016 (Allegation
1). This allegation has not been pursued before the Tribunal, but is relevant
because the conduct involved in Allegation
1 was the subject of a decision of
the Immediate Action Committee of the Board on 15 August 2016 to suspend Mr
Horne’s registration,
pursuant to s156 of the National Law. Mr Horne has
continued to be suspended as a result of that immediate action.
4. The second
aspect of Mr Horne’s conduct that was brought before the Tribunal by the
Board’s application concerned public
statements by Mr Horne on social
media between about mid February 2017 and 19 June 2017. The particulars of
those allegations were
set out in the application to the Tribunal, and Mr Horne
has conceded those matters.
5. Particulars of the Board’s allegations
Mr Horne engaged in:
professional misconduct within the meaning of the definition of professional
misconduct in paragraph (c) of section 5 of the National
in that, between about 13 February 2017 and about 19 June 2017, Mr Horne
engaged in conduct that is inconsistent with him being a
fit and proper person
to hold registration as a nurse, in that he posted racially offensive and/or
culturally offensive and/or sexually
offensive and/or vilifying content on
social media.
PARTICULARS
(i) at all material times, Mr Horne was a registered nurse whose registration
was suspended on 15 August 2016 by an Immediate Action
Committee of the
(ii) at all material times, Mr Horne maintained a publicly accessible
Facebook page, listed under his name, 'Stanley James Horne',
which included
material such as comments made by him, and comments made by him in relation to
pictures and/or videos and/or articles
posted by others;
(iii) the material referred to at (ii) above was accessible by any person who
(iv) between about 13 February 2017 and about 19 June 2017, Mr Horne authored
and/or caused to be posted statements on his public-facing
Facebook page, which
include, but are not limited to:
(A) racially offensive and/or culturally offensive and/or sexually offensive
and/or vilifying comments towards women, including:
(I) referring to a female news presenter as:
(1) a 'slack arsed Marxist troll posing as a media slut';
(2) 'well past her prime'; and
(3) a 'shop-steward class warfare shithead';
(II) referring to Cindy Prior (Plaintiff in a racial discrimination case)
(1) 'a disturbed and racist lunatic';
(2) a 'c...t'; and
(3) a 'piece of shit';
(III) stating, in relation to Tori Spelling (actor/celebrity) giving birth to
a baby boy:
(1) 'congrats ..Tori ...you have done something worthwhile in your
(IV) stating, in relation to women wearing hijabs:
(1) 'Happy womens day .. .fuckwits .. .';
(V) stating, in relation to Senator Sarah Hanson-Young:
(1) 'she is such a dumb cunt..hateful,belligerent talent-less, dumb rancid
arsehold ... she would smell....poor hygiene ...';
(VI) stating, in relation to Gillian Triggs (President of the Australian
Human Rights Commission, at the relevant time):
(1) a 'rancid old cunt';
(2) 'piece of leftist filth..needs to ..well just die'; and
(3) 'Hitler Stalin and Goebbels, would have loved this totalitarian piece of
panty waste..dried up old cunt';
(B) racially offensive and/or culturally offensive and/or sexually offensive
and/or vilifying comments towards the Islamic faith and/or
people of Islamic
faith, including:
(I) referring to the Islamic faith and/or people of Islamic faith as
(1) 'fucking idiot terrorists .. .';
(2) 'mohammedan/fakestinian cabals...paedophiles ,and tellers of lies ..
(3) 'mohammedan pigs';
(4) 'ungrateful mohammedan immigrants;'
(5) a 'satanic cult';
(6) 'mohammedan cults which are the killers of women and children and
supports paedophilia and forced marriage from age 6...';
(7·) 'the cults of mohammed are evil and cults of death';
(8) 'fucking mohammedan cults,,the cults of terror..the cults of misogyny
..the cults of stupidity';
(9) 'the mohammedan cults are a cancer';
(10) 'he is sub-human..an offence to humanity ...following a perverted
ideology..of the paedophile "profit" and the pig god...';
(11) 'the mohamedans are the non...people as they are only a small minority
of the world..and shrinking fast..as we kill them ...';
(12) 'in their own states the mohammedans fuck pigs, goats etc.. .the rape
culture is wel documented in mohammedan states ...';
(13) 'these sub-human male mohammedans ned to be castrated..for raping people
other than mohammedan women..who I personally do not
give a toss about
(14) 'most mohammedan so called marriage is rape of children in the name of
allarrghh..and the notorious profit..mohamed the paedophile';
(15) 'mohammedan terrorists do nopt discriminate..they kill Hindus, Buddhist,
Christian,Jews and non faith people ,due to their warped
ideology of hate,based
upobthe coran ,unholy book ...'; and
(16) 'these mohammedans ..are the new facsists of the world..mohamedan
cults..are the new nazis..only force with destroy theri ideology
as with the
(17) 'mohammedans are parasites upon the lands of democracy';
(18) 'they are parasites ,off democracies and Christian states..the political
ideology of mohammedanism is to be a parasite cult';
(19) 'the cults of mohammed are not fit for a democracy'
(20) 'these mohammedans ,are parasites ...living off a democracy, whilst
extolling a fascist political and theological dogma ... stop
the mohammedan
cults from immigrating .. .';
(21) 'totalitarian cults of mohammed, and the totalitarian far left Marxist
(22) 'cults of the paedophile..mohammed.,and the god of pigs ,allarrrgghhh,
as fraudulent and killers of democracy'; and
(23) 'sharia law is not compatible with any democracy .. .it is a criminal
religious system of torture and to enable, the killing
of peoples of other
faiths ... ';
(24) 'mohammed was a pig fucking paedophile';
(25) 'the paedophile known as mohammed ...';
(26) 'it is just medieval ratings of a group of serial paedophiles
(27) the creeping sharia of the coran document ...written by a paedophile and
his fellow pig fuckers....only 1400yrs ago....';
(28) 'sharia law is an abomination ..on the face of humanity..it is a
ridiculous medieval cult of killing those who oppose you.. .the
law of the pig
fuckers......';
(II) making statements to the effect that people of Islamic faith ought be
harmed and/or eliminated from society, including:
(1) Just kill this mohammedan piece of pig fucking shit';
(2) 'may they kill each other ..Shiite killing sunni ,fuckheads';
(3) 'we need the Knights now..to destroy the mohammedan cults..in western
democracies ..and drive them back to their satanic mohammedan
lands....';
(4) 'dirty fucking mohammedan arsehole these devil worshiping mohammedans
need to die.....';
(5) 'dirty fucking mohammedan, pig fucking terrorist..kill this pig fucker
and deport all of his relatives..';
(6) 'mohammedism are a death sentence to others....';
(7) 'do not enable them to breed...';
(8) 'fucking criminals ... deport them..';
(9) just kill these terrorist things as they try to kill us, the majority of
the world that is of decent faiths and peoples...';
(10) 'it is time for all good people to stand against the hate cults of
(11) 'exterminate all daesh fighters and their supporters....it will stop
them breeding....or just castrate all returnees from Syria,
and, and cut off
their hands..should work..no more little jihadis ...lets face it...';
(12) 'we will kill you..and all the mohammedan terrorists...pig fuckers...and
paedophiles ..just like allarrggh and mohammed the paedophile
..best to kill you
first ...';
(13) 'if a mohammedan terrorist cunt, and paedophile says he will blow us
up..lets just kill it..and kill its supporters'; and
(14) 'we are at war with mohamedan ideology and theology.. e will win..as we
are many and we are righteous..mohammedan cults will
fail..as the Nazis
(C) racially offensive and/or culturally offensive and/or vilifying comments
towards the people of North Korea, including:
(I) referring to North Korean people as 'inbred rabids'; and
(II) referring to North Korea as a 'brain diseased nation of thugs [that]
needs to be extinguished';
(D) racially offensive and/or culturally offensive and/or vilifying comments
towards the people of China, including:
(I) 'kill acomunist chinese fucker'; and
(II) stating that flammable cladding manufactured in China:
(1) 'should only [be] use[d] in in communist china..for population
control...';
(E) racially offensive and/or culturally offensive and/or vilifying comments
towards the famine in Somalia, stating:
(I) 'a somalian famine..this tragic mohammedan state is a cancer on the face
of the earth ... these death cults need to die a natural
death..and famine is
very natural ...'”
Characterisation of the practitioner’s conduct
6. Where a National Board reasonably believes, based on a
notification or other reason, that a registered health practitioner has
in a way that constitutes professional misconduct, the Board is required by the
National Law to refer the matter to the Tribunal.
S5 of the National Law
defines professional misconduct as follows:
Professional
, of a registered health practitioner, includes
(a) Unprofessional conduct of the practitioner that amounts to conduct that
is substantially below the standard reasonably expected
of a registered health
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience; and
(b) More than one instance of unprofessional conduct that, when considered
together, amounts to conduct that is substantially below
the standard reasonably
expected of a registered health practitioner of an equivalent level of training
or experience; and
(c) Conduct of the practitioner, whether occurring in connection with the
practice of the health practitioner’s profession or
not, that is
inconsistent with a practitioner being a fit and proper person to hold
registration in the profession.
7. It was agreed between the parties in these proceedings that
the conduct of Mr Horne which is presently before the Tribunal, is
professional
misconduct within the meaning of sub paragraph (c) of the definition of
“Professional Misconduct” in s5
of the National Law.
Tribunal was referred to the Board’s Code of Conduct, the Board’s
social medial policy, and the Board’s Code
of Ethics, all of which were
current at the time of the conduct that has been conceded by Mr Horne. I will
not set out the professional
and ethical standards in their entirety, but note
that they hold nurses to the highest standards of respect, tolerance and
responsibility
in dealing with cultural and community diversity.
noted the concessions made by Mr Horne, and the particulars of his conduct that
are before the Tribunal, I am satisfied
it is appropriate to find that Mr
Horne’s conduct amounts to professional misconduct within the meaning of
s5(c) of the National
Law. The Facebook posts are a multiplicity of comments
that are racially, culturally, and sexually offensive, and would be considered
to be so by the vast majority of members of the public who might view Mr
Horne’s publically accessible Facebook presence.
The comments are at odds
with the standards of behaviour imposed on the nursing profession by the
Board’s Codes of Conduct
and Ethics, and I accept the submission made on
behalf of the Board that Mr Horne’s statements that certain groups should
harmed or killed were fundamentally inconsistent with the values of the
nursing profession, and undermines public confidence in the
profession.
10. The solicitors for the Board referred me to a recent decision
of the Victorian Civil & Administrative Tribunal in relation
to social media
posting by a registered medical practitioner, Kok v Medical Board of Australia
[2020] VCAT 405.
The observations at paragraph 69 apply equally to a member of
the nursing profession as to a member of the medical profession:
are satisfied that such posts have the real potential to undermine public
confidence in the provision of services by health
professionals. There is a
real likelihood that the maintenance of the standards of the medical profession
will be undermined by
such posts, particularly when posted by a registered
medical practitioner. The reputation of the profession is thereby
And paragraphs 92 and 93:
“We consider that both past and present patients may reflect on their
treatment differently if they were to become aware of
the views expressed on
social media by Dr Kok.
We reiterate that it is not to the point that social media inspires and
encourages diatribe or vitriolic comments. Members of the
medical profession
cannot allow their commentary to escalate unchecked without any regard to the
impact or sensibilities of their
code of conduct. They have responsibilities to
current and/or future patients or vulnerable members of the community and the
regarding their posts.”
Appropriate sanction
11. The purposes of orders made in response to findings of
professional misconduct is set out in Craig v Medical Board of South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
, where the South Australian Supreme Court noted at paragraph
purpose of disciplinary proceedings is to protect the public, not to punish a
practitioner in the sense in which punishment
is administered pursuant to the
criminal law. A disciplinary tribunal protects the public by making orders
which will prevent person
who are unfit to practice from practicing, or by
making orders which will secure the maintenance of proper professional
A disciplinary tribunal will also consider the protection of the
public, and of the relevant profession, by making orders which
will ensure the
public that appropriate standards are being maintained within the relevant
profession.”
12. In addition to agreeing that Mr Horne’s conduct ought
to be characterised as professional misconduct within s5(c) of the
National Law,
the parties jointly reached a position as to what the appropriate determination
by way of sanction ought to be and
invited the Tribunal, in accordance with that
joint position, to make the following determination:
(a) That Mr Horne is reprimanded under s196(2)(a) of the
National Law; and
(b) That Mr Horne’s registration as a nurse
practitioner is cancelled under s196(2)(e) of the National Law.
13. An agreement between the parties as to a sanction does not
remove from the Tribunal the ultimate duty to assess and determine
what sanction
is appropriate, but such an agreement is a highly relevant factor to be taken
into account by the Tribunal.
14. The Tribunal has the power to reprimand a
practitioner under s196(2)(a) of the National Law. A reprimand is a serious
“It tells the public, patients and other practitioners that the
standards expected of a practitioner have not been met and
that the practitioner
has been censured” (Medical Board of Australia v Xie (Review &
Regulation)
[2019] VCAT 1924).
I accept that a reprimand is appropriate in the
circumstances. Mr Horne’s conduct took place over an extended period of
on very many occasions. His repugnant comments had the potential to
seriously undermine public confidence in the nursing profession.
15. For the
same reasons, I accept that cancellation of Mr Horne’s registration is
also necessary as both a specific and general
deterrent, and to safeguard the
reputation of the nursing profession.
16. The parties further agreed that,
had Mr Horne’s registration not already been suspended by way of immediate
action for a
period of a number of years as a result of the Board’s
immediate action arising from Allegation 1, then a disqualification
three years pursuant to s196(4)(a) of the National Law may have been
appropriate. The parties agreed that in the context
of the period of
suspension, it was not appropriate that the Tribunal be asked to impose a
disqualification period during which Mr
Horne could not apply for
re-registration. I accept the agreed position reached by the parties, but I
confirm that, had the previous
period of suspension not been in place, a
disqualification period of up to three years is something the Tribunal is likely
considered to be appropriate in addition to the cancellation of Mr
Horne’s registration.
17. The parties further agreed that there should
be no order as to costs in relation to these proceedings. I accept this to be
appropriate,
and will therefore make no formal order in that regard.
18. Having found that Mr Horne has engaged in professional
misconduct within the meaning of s5 and s196(1) of the National Law, and
accepted the submissions as to appropriate sanction as agreed by the parties, I
make the following determination:
(a) Mr Horne is reprimanded.
(b) Mr Horne’s
registration as a nurse practitioner is cancelled under s196(2)(e) of the
National Law.
L. D. WILKINS
Deputy Chairperson
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (135 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter