URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASADT/2021/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Loone v State of Tasmania (Department of Communities - Housing) [2021] TASADT 5 (2 August 2021)
[2021] TASADT 5
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
Loone v State of Tasmania (Department of Communities
[2021] TASADT 5
LOONE, DALE
THE STATE OF TASMANIA (DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITIES – HOUSING)
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
29 July 2021
DELIVERED ON:
2 August 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Chairperson Clues
CATCHWORDS:
Anti-Discrimination – ex parte hearing –
application to dismiss complaint
Anti-Discrimination Act
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
102 CLR 125
, Barwick CJ. at p128;
Rana v University of SA
[2004] FCA 559
Dean Flanagan v State of Tasmania (Department of Police & Emergency
Management) & Anor
[2017] TASADT 2.
DETERMINATION:
(a) The complaint is dismissed pursuant to
on the basis that the complainant did not, without reasonable excuse, comply
with a requirement to attend the directions
conference that was scheduled to
take place on 29 July 2021.
(b) Further or in the alternative, the
complaint is dismissed pursuant to
of the Act on the basis that it
would be just and appropriate to do so.
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant:
Respondent:
[2021] TASADT 5
Chairperson Clues
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. This is an application by the respondent pursuant to
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
(Tas) (the Act) to dismiss the
complaint made by the complainant on 28 June 2020.
2. The complainant alleges
discrimination on the basis of disability in the area of
accommodation.
3. Part of the complaint was accepted by the
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner (ADC) and then in accordance with
Act it was referred to this Tribunal for inquiry.
4. As part of the inquiry
process the complaint was referred to the Registrar of this Tribunal to liaise
with the parties to ascertain
what steps needed to be taken by the parties
before the matter could proceed to conciliation or inquiry.
5. During that
process, the Registrar conducted two teleconferences. The first teleconference
took place on 1 April 2021. Both parties
were legally represented and no
objection was taken pursuant to
of the Act. The representative for the
complainant advised that he had expected the complainant to attend the
teleconference but
he had not arrived. The complainant’s representative
agreed to attend to the following within 6 weeks:
• make discovery of relevant
• provide a list of orders sought;
• provide any
witness statements the complainant intended to rely upon;
• provide a
list of authorities to support the complainant’s complaint.
these matters were attended to.
6. A further teleconference was listed to take place on 19 May
2021. On 18 May 2021, the representative for the complainant advised
Tribunal that he no longer represented the complainant in this matter and
formally withdrew from appearing for him.
7. On 7 June 2021 the Registrar
wrote to the complainant and advised as follows:
matter was listed for a teleconference on Wednesday, 19 May 2021. The Tribunal
received notice on 18 May 2021 that
[the complainant’s legal
representative]
was formally withdrawing from appearing on your
Attempts were made to contact you directly for the teleconference, however
those attempts were unsuccessful.
[the complainant’s legal representative]
difficulty obtaining instructions or contacting you whilst he was acting on your
If you wish to pursue this matter, please advise the Tribunal by telephone or
in writing by close of business on Monday, 21 June 2021.
In the absence of any contact or response from you, the matter will be
referred to a Tribunal Member to consider dismissing the complaint.
If you would like any clarification of this letter, please contact the
Registry...”
8. A copy of that letter was sent to the legal representative
for the respondent.
9. The Tribunal heard nothing from the complainant. The
matter was referred to me as Chairperson of the Tribunal. On 16 July 2021
Tribunal sent a notice of directions conference to the parties. It stated that
the complaint was listed for a directions conference
before the Tribunal on
Thursday, 29 July 2021 at 11:00am. The notice included the following
information:
• That the purpose of the directions conference was to
ensure that the parties are prepared for the inquiry.
• What would
occur at the directions conference and the matters that could be raised and
considered.
• That the parties should allow one hour to attend the
directions conference.
10. A letter dated 16 July 2021 accompanied the notice of
directions conference. The letter included the following:
be advised that
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
provides as
‘(4) The Tribunal, if the complainant does not, without reasonable
excuse, comply with a requirement to attend a directions
conference in respect
of that complaint, may –
(a) dismiss the complaint; and
(b) order the complainant to pay costs to the
respondent.’”
11. That letter, together with the notice of directions
conference was sent by post to the complainant and it was personally served
licensed process server on the complainant. The process server’s
affidavit confirms that both documents were served on
the complainant on 20 July
2021 at the supplied address at 6:53pm.
12. On 29 July 2021 the
representative for the respondent appeared. The complainant was formally called
but did not appear. The
Tribunal determined that it was appropriate for the
directions conference to proceed ex parte. The representative for the
made an application for the complaint before the Tribunal to be
Consideration
13. Taking into account the following matters I
determined to dismiss the complaint pursuant to
(2)(b) of the
14. The terms of
are set out above.
Section 99(2)(b)
Tribunal may dismiss a complaint at any time if it is satisfied that
(b) dismissing the complaint would, for some other reason, be just and
appropriate”
15. The Tribunal is cognisant that this power for summary
dismissal “is to be sparingly employed, and is not to be used except
Tribunal also takes into account that it needs to be particularly cautious in
approaching such applications in the context
of unrepresented
complainants
that there needs to be a balance between the rights of a complainant as against
those of a respondent.
17. With respect to
the Tribunal is satisfied
that the complainant was personally served with a notice to attend a directions
conference on 29 July 2021
at 11:00am. At the same time he was served with a
letter alerting him to the fact that if he did not, without reasonable excuse,
comply with a requirement to attend the directions conference in respect of his
complaint, the Tribunal may dismiss the complaint
and order him to pay costs to
the respondent. The contact details for the Tribunal were on the notice and the
letter. The complainant
did not contact the Tribunal (nor did anyone on his
behalf) at any time between the date he was served with the documents on 20
2021 and the date of the directions conference on 29 July 2021 to provide any
excuse as to why he could not comply with the
requirement to attend the
directions conference. There is no evidence that the complainant would have any
difficulty understanding
the correspondence he received from the
18. With respect to
, the term “just and
appropriate” can cover a wide range of circumstances in which a complaint
may be dismissed. A refusal
to participate in proceedings has been found to
constitute circumstances in which it is just and appropriate to dismiss a
this matter has been referred for inquiry to the Tribunal, the complainant has
not participated in the proceedings nor has
he contacted the Tribunal to explain
his failure to participate. It is apparent from correspondence from the
Tribunal to the complainant
referred to above that at least part of the reason
for the complainant’s legal representative ceasing to act for him was
of the difficulties he had obtaining instructions from and contacting
the complainant.
20. In the reasons for decision of the ADC dated 22 January
2021 she determined that the part of the complaint relating to possible
and indirect discrimination should proceed to inquiry by this
21. At pages 6 and 7 of the ADC’s reasons for decision she
stated that she considered that in this case there was the possibility
discrimination on the basis that the complainant may have been placed in
accommodation on the understanding it was short
term because it did not suit his
needs, only to be required to provide further information to justify the need
for transfer soon
22. At page 7 of her reasons for decision the ADC
stated there was a possibility of indirect discrimination on the basis that the
respondent’s transfer policy provided a discretion to the
respondent’s representatives to take into account factors that
relevant to the complainant’s disability, namely: his rental arrears,
outstanding debt on a prior tenancy, poor tenancy
and legal processes that had
been commenced. She referred to submissions made by the complainant’s
legal representative during
the investigation of the complaint that “the
right to be treated without discrimination cannot be conditional on the tenant
being of good behaviour”.
23. The respondent denies that it either
directly or indirectly discriminated against the complainant. In a detailed
letter to the
ADC dated 11 August 2020 the respondent sets out its defence to
the claims of discrimination. I refer to the following points made:
• The complainant accepted the relevant tenancy property
on the basis that it was suitable to his needs (including his regional
• The property met the complainant’s requirements set
out in his Health Assessment Report apart from the fact that it
did not have a
level entry (it had three stairs to the front of the home and seven to the
• The complainant inspected the property and on 5 April 2021 he
signed a tenancy agreement and an acceptance of property form
in which he
acknowledged that the premises were in a location of his choice and suitable to
• On 23 August 2017 the complainant requested a transfer
from the property on medical grounds. He was advised that he was required
provide supporting documentation from his doctor. That was not provided until
28 March 2019.
• The respondent states that the “tenancy was
problematic from the commencement of the lease and [the complainant] has
difficult to engage and communicate with due to anger and aggression issues on
• The respondent further states:
[the complainant]
had chosen to work with the Department, supports were
available to him in addressing his tenancy breaches and his request to relocate
to a more suitable home. The Department could have referred him to the tenancy
intervention officer for support and referral advice
but again, establishing
difficult.”
24. I accept that the evidence of the respondent outlined above
is untested and therefore cannot be given any significant weight.
However, it
does suggest a pattern of behaviour by the complainant of being difficult to
with. In my view, that
behaviour has been displayed since this complaint has been referred to the
Tribunal for inquiry.
25. I find there is no conduct by the respondent in
this inquiry process that would mitigate against the application to dismiss that
has been made on its behalf. The respondent is entitled to have a complaint
resolved as fairly and as expeditiously as possible.
Determination
26. For the reasons stated above, the Tribunal determines
(a) The complaint is dismissed pursuant to
on the basis that the complainant did not, without reasonable excuse, comply
with a requirement to attend the directions
conference that was scheduled to
take place on 29 July 2021. (The respondent did not seek an order that the
complainant pay its
(b) Further and in the alternative, the complaint
is dismissed pursuant to
of the Act on the basis that it would be just
and appropriate to do so.
CHAIRPERSON
General Steel Industries
Inc v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
(1964) 102 CLR 125
, Barwick CJ. at
Rana v University of
[2004] FCA 559
Dean Flanagan v State of
Tasmania (Department of Police & Emergency Management) & Anor
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (110 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter