URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFPT/2009/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:14:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MJ Kelly v Forest Practices Authority [2009] TASFPT 6 (11 August 2009)
No: 3/09 F D6/2009
MJ Kelly Appellant
Forest Practices Authority Respondent
This was the hearing of an appeal against the decision of the Forest
Practices Authority to refuse certification for Forest Practices
Plan MAC 1434,
at the Kelly property at Bradys Lake.
The appeal was heard at Hobart on
August 2009
F Duncan appeared on behalf of the
Forest Practices Authority.
MJ Kelly appeared in
Application
was made by the Appellant to the Forest Practices Authority, for certification
of Forest Practices Plan FPP No. MAC 1434.
The Appellant’s property on
which the plan area would apply is at Bradys Lake in the Central Highlands. The
area comprised
in the plan consists of 60 hectares of native grassland NFG; 3
hectares of dry
Eucalyptus delecatensis
forest; and 15 hectares of
moorland/sedgeland.
total operational area of 59 hectares would be converted from the native
grassland and dry forest.
reason for refusal to certify the plan, given by the Forest Practices Authority
“The current proposal involves clearance and conversion of
approximately 50ha of a threatened native vegetation community (Highland
grassland) which is listed on Schedule 3A of Tasmania’s
Conservation Act 2002
. Under current legislation, the Authority could only
approve clearance and conversion of a threatened community if it accepts a
for exceptional circumstances, as presented by the Proponent. Such a case has
not been presented to the Authority.”
Tribunal notes that Section 19 of the
Forest Practices Act 1985
subsections (1) and (1AA) read as follows:
“19. Authority to certify or refuse to
certify forest practices plan
Where an application for the
certification of a forest practices plan is made in accordance with
, the Authority may –
certify the plan; or
refuse to certify the plan; or
amend the plan in such manner as it
considers necessary and certify the plan as so amended.
However, the Authority is not to
certify a forest practices plan involving the clearance and conversion of a
threatened native vegetation
community unless the Authority is satisfied of one
or more of the following:
the clearance and conversion is
justified by exceptional circumstances;
the activities authorised by the
forest practices plan are likely to have an overall environmental benefit;
the clearance and conversion is
unlikely to detract substantially from the conservation of the threatened native
vegetation community;
the clearance and conversion is
unlikely to detract substantially from the conservation values in the vicinity
of the threatened
native vegetation community.
seems to the Tribunal that “exceptional circumstances” is not the
only test, and that the Authority may certify a Forest
Practices Plan involving
the clearance and conversion of a threatened native vegetation community, if it
is satisfied of the existence
of any one or more of the matters set out in
subsections (1AA) (a), (b), (c) or (d).
respect to sub subsection (a), the Appellant contended that the clearance and
conversion was justified by exceptional circumstances.
The circumstances relied
upon included the purchase of the property for cattle and sheep grazing and
forestry in order to make a
profit; and that the management of the property in a
plantation would diminish the risk of fire to adjoining properties which
a number of shacks. In addition, the Appellant would lose the income
flowing from the forestry activities the subject of the plan,
if it was refused.
The Tribunal does not consider that any of these circumstances are
“exceptional”, as in general terms
they would apply in many cases of
which the Tribunal is aware.
only relevant criteria was in Section 19(1AA)(c):
the clearance and conversion is unlikely to detract
substantially from the conservation of the threatened native vegetation
community;”
evidence of Mr F Duncan, the Manager (Biodiversity Program) for the Forest
Practices Authority, Botanist, was as follows:
“The Forest Practices Plan is for conversion to
plantation of 56 ha of native grassland and 3 ha of dry
delicatensis
forest. 4 ha of native grassland and 15 ha of
moorland/sedge land are reserved under the FPP.
The FPP would involve clearance and conversion of a threatened native
vegetation community (Highland
Grassland) which is listed on Schedule
3A of Tasmania’s
Nature Conservation Act 2002
Approximately 180 ha to the immediate south of the area covered by FPP MAC
1434 has been logged under a previous timber harvesting
plan/Forest Practices
Plan on this property. Plantations have been established or are proposed over
much of the area under that
There are two distinct types (or facies) of the community in the FPP area,
each consistent with the description of Highland Poa Grassland.
Those types are
vegetation dominated by silver tussock grass (
Poa labillardieri
other ground layer species (other grasses, herbs, sedges, et cetera) abundant
and often diverse; shrubs may also be present
but are usually scattered or
occasional. About 60 to 65 per cent of the grassland in MAC1434 would fall into
this type. The second
generally grassy understorey. The Highland
Grassland in that type
Hakea microcarpa
as a locally prevalent coloniser due to fire and
grazing regimes. About 30 to 35 per cent of the grassland in the plan area
fall into this type.
has been split equally between both facies.
The grassland may have been forested more than 25 years ago but not since.
Native grassland is fairly resilient once it establishes,
being maintained by
combinations of fire, frost and grazing by stock and native animals.
The distribution of Highland
Grassland occupies about 23,870
hectares in Tasmania. It has its stronghold in the 600 to 800 metre altitudinal
band on the Central
Highlands where it is typically associated with Dolerite
substrate on relatively level sites.
The most extensive mapped areas of Highland
Grassland occur some
distance to the north and northwest of the Bradys Lake area, but there are small
patches of the grassland mapped
in the general vicinity of Bradys Lake,
including on Mr Kelly’s property. Highland
Grassland may be
more extensive in Tasmania than indicated on the TASVEG map, particularly in the
Bradys Lake area.
In addition to the criteria in Section 19(1AA) of the
Forest Practices Act
, reliance was placed for the Authority on the Permanent Forest Estate
Policy (February 2007) which is an agreement between the Tasmanian
Australian governments. The relevant paragraphs, 3 and 4, provide for both the
test set out in Section 19(1AA)(c), and paragraph
4 of the Policy:
“4. Exercise of discretion in approving the conversion of native forest
or threatened nonforest vegetation;
4.1 Consideration may be given to a vegetation community’s
contribution, and where converted to plantation, that plantation’s
contribution to biodiversity, ecosystem function and amenity, in the context of
the surrounding landscape;
4.2 Consideration may be given to whether the conversion of native forest or
threatened nonforest can be offset by conditions on that
approval designed to
improve biodiversity, water quality, salinity or other land degradation
Tribunal notes that it is only where it is satisfied of one of the criteria
under Section 19(1AA), that it is entitled to certify
a Forest Practices Plan
involving clearance of the relevant community. It is only then that any
discretion to do so may arise.
Duncan’s evidence was further that if the roughly triangular area of
20 hectares in the proposed harvesting area were reserved,
that would be a
sufficient quantity to mean that the clearance and conversion of the remainder
was unlikely to detract substantially
from the conservation of the threatened
native vegetation community, within the meaning of Section
19(1AA)(c).
was no dispute as to the evidence of Mr Duncan with respect to the nature of the
grassland community either on the site of the
proposed Forest Practices Plan, or
elsewhere in Tasmania, and the Tribunal finds according to that
was however a dispute as to the appropriate outcome of the application and the
appeal, based upon the Appellant’s contention
that, in substance, the
clearance and conversion of the total area proposed would be unlikely to detract
substantially from the conservation
of the relevant community.
Appellant noted that of the total 78 hectares covered under the proposed
FPP, 19 hectares would remain in reserves and 59 hectares
plantable. Much of
those reserves were streamside reserves, wetland not suitable for plantation, a
setback from the Lyell Highway
for scenic values, power line reserves, and an
exclusion zone off the dam wall. That left approximately 20 per cent of the
plan area, in such reserves.
Appellant noted, and Mr Duncan agreed, that a plantation would not eradicate the
Poa grass species within the plantation; and
that there were many plantations
where Poa grass and the trees grew in harmony. That was accepted by Mr Duncan
and is accepted by
the Tribunal. The relevant test is, however, related to the
, not just the
. The evidence, as noted above,
was that the community consists of the whole of the species typically occurring
within such a community,
and not just the grass itself. The evidence did not
establish that any other of the species than the grass itself would be likely
survive within a plantation.
Appellant also relied upon the financial input into the local economy from
establishing a plantation. The Tribunal accepts that
such financial input may
Appellant also relied upon the benefit of reduced fire risk from a managed tree
plantation. The evidence was, and it was not
disputed, that open plains with
community and
combined, allow fire to spread more
readily than in plantation. It depends upon the management of the individual
plantation and
the relative extent of the
infestation; however the
Tribunal assumes for present purposes that the plantation would be well managed,
and that the
would, if not controlled, spread significantly in the
subject area. It is also necessary to note however, that a combination of
grazing and fire control would also be an effective method of control of the
, according to the uncontested evidence of Mr
Appellant also relied upon his own financial circumstances, needing to obtain
the highest possible financial return from his land
investment. He noted the
loss of value of the land if it was not able to be used as a tree plantation.
Tribunal in reaching its decision is also obliged to take into account the
financial effect of its decision, upon the Applicant.
Evidence was provided
that he had family needs, and further that he could obtain a lease of the total
area for a period of 20 years
and a subsequent such period, for a very large,
specified, sum of money. The Tribunal accepts that evidence.
Tribunal also notes that the Applicant is entitled, in the event of a refusal or
partial refusal, to apply for compensation under
and to the extent specified in
Nature Conservation Act 2002
; and in the event that compensation is
not received by him he may be entitled to certification of any uncertified area
of the plan
evidence was further, that with respect to the approximately 20 hectare
northern triangular section which it is proposed to harvest,
the grassland
community therein is a good representative community in respect of both
subtypes; and that taking into account that
area, together with the other areas
already reserved, together with the fact that area is “buffered” by
a stream reserve
from the remainder of the proposed plantation area, it would be
a reasonable and viable reserve for the threatened community.
Tribunal notes the potential existence of that reserve; and the relative area of
the remaining plan area to be harvested; and
the extent of the grassland
community on the Appellant’s property and on the properties in the
surrounding area; and also the
relative areas of that community to be harvested,
as against the total of the extant community in the State. The Tribunal
having regard to all of those matters, together with the financial
factors it is obliged to take into account as specified above,
that it would be
appropriate to reserve that northern 20 hectares in addition to the other
reserved areas, under the Forest Practices
Plan; and to allow conversion and
plantation with respect to the remaining areas.
decision of the Tribunal is that the Forest Practices Plan MAC1434 is amended by
reserving from forestry operations the area of
approximately 20 hectares
lying in the area to the north of the streamside reserve marked with the numeral
plan on folio 8/19 in the Tribunal’s file; and
certifying the plan so amended.
certified plan is to be upon conditions to be set by the Tribunal. If agreement
is reached between the Appellant and the Forest
Practices Authority with respect
to such conditions, and supplied to the Tribunal, the Tribunal will set those
conditions. In default
of agreed conditions being provided to the Tribunal
within 21 days of the date of this decision, the Tribunal will set such
as it determines appropriate, based upon submissions to be made in
writing by the parties within that period of 21 days.
Tribunal will entertain any application for an order for costs in this appeal,
if made to the Tribunal in writing with supporting
submissions within the next
14 days. If requested the Tribunal will reconvene to hear any evidence in
respect of any matter bearing
on an order for costs.
the absence of any such application for an order for costs the order of the
Tribunal is that each party bears its own costs.
Dated this 11th day of August 2009
KAM Pitt QC
Chief Chairman
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (235 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter