URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASHPT/2019/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia v S. [2019] TASHPT 4 (20 May 2019)
[2019] TASHPT 4
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL
Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia v S.
[2019] TASHPT 4
NURSING & MIDWIFERY BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
By joint written submissions dated 29 June 2018
DELIVERED ON:
20 May 2019
DECISION OF:
Deputy Chairperson Wilkins
CATCHWORDS:
Registered nurse – professional misconduct –
Magistrates Court convictions – reprimand and disqualification –
non-identification of practitioner.
Re: a Psychologist
[2009] TASSC 70
Craig v Medical Board
of South Australia
[2011] SASC 169
Health Care Complaint Commission v
[2014] NSWCATOD 127
DETERMINATION:
1. The respondent is reprimanded.
2. The respondent is disqualified from applying for registration as a
registered nurse for a period of four years, backdated to 24
December 2015.
3. The respondent’s name is not to be identified in the
Tribunal’s published decision.
REPRESENTATION:
J Shears, S Taglieri
Respondent:
C Saint (ANMF)
Solicitors:
Australian Health
Practitioner Regulation Agency
Respondent:
[2019] TASHPT 4
REASONS FOR
DETERMINATION
INTRODUCTION
1. By application dated 30 April 2018, the Board referred to
the Tribunal a matter about a registered health practitioner and sought
decision from the Tribunal in accordance with
Health Practitioners
Tribunal Act 2010
(Tas) (“the Act”).
2. The matter was referred
as required by s193(1) of the Health Practitioners Regulations National Law Act
(2010) (“the National
Law”), where the Board alleged that the
respondent had behaved in a way that constituted professional
misconduct.
3. The basis for the Board’s allegation as to the
existence of professional misconduct related to proceedings in the Magistrates
Court of Tasmania, as a result of which, on 19 November 2017 the respondent was
convicted of five offences.
4. Two charges against the respondent were the
subject of guilty pleas. These related to theft of several ampoules of drugs
her employer, a hospital. The drugs involved were morphine, pethidine, and
5. Two other offences related to possession and use of controlled
drugs (morphine, fentanyl and pethidine). The fifth charge was
one of common
assault. The respondent pleaded not guilty in relation to these other offences,
and following a hearing before the
Deputy Chief Magistrate was found guilty of
all charges. The Deputy Chief Magistrate imposed a sentence of imprisonment of
months which was wholly suspended on the condition that the respondent not
commit another offence punishable by imprisonment during
a period of 3
6. In relation to the last charge of common assault, the Deputy Chief
Magistrate was satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the respondent
hospital patient with a needle in the left buttock whilst the patient was
7. The offences took place in the course of the respondent’s
employment as a registered nurse at the hospital where she was
employed on 19
and 20 December 2015.
8. The respondent gave an undertaking to the Board on
21 December 2015 not to practice pending finalisation of the Tasmania Police
investigation, and on 23 December 2015 the Board took immediate action to accept
that undertaking. Although a decision was made
to investigate the subject of
the notification which had been made by the employer in relation to these
matters, the Board’s
investigation was put on hold pending finalisation of
police proceedings.
9. Upon the respondent being convicted of the subject
offences on 9 November 2017, she surrendered her registration effective from
November 2017.
CHARACTERISATION OF THE PRACTITIONER’S CONDUCT
10. The National Law requires that where the Board reasonably
believes, based on a notification or other reason, that a registered
practitioner has behaved in a way that constitutes professional misconduct, the
Board must refer the matter to the Tribunal.
The definition section in the
National Law (s5) defines professional misconduct as
“Professional misconduct, of a registered health
practitioner, includes –
(a) unprofessional conduct of the practitioner that amounts to
conduct that is substantially below the standard reasonably expected
registered health practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience;
(b) more than one instance of unprofessional conduct that, when
considered together, amounts to conduct that is substantially below
the standard
reasonably expected of a registered health practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience; and
(c) conduct of the practitioner, whether
occurring in connection with the practice of the health practitioner’s
profession or
not, that is inconsistent with the practitioner being a fit and
proper person to hold registration in the profession.”
11. For the purposes of considering the terms of s5(b) above,
the same section defines unprofessional conduct as
“Unprofessional conduct, of a registered health practitioner,
means professional conduct that is of a lesser standard than that
which might be
reasonably be expected of the health practitioner by the public or the
practitioner’s professional peers, and
conviction of the practitioner for an offence under another Act, the nature of
which may affect the practitioner’s
suitability to continue to practise
the profession”
12. Professional misconduct by reference to common law
principles was considered by Blow J (as he then was) in Re: a Psychologist
[2009] TASSC 70
, at paragraph 20
“At common law, behaviour on the part
of a member of a profession that would reasonably be regarded as disgraceful or
dishonourable
by members of that profession of good repute and competency
amounts to professional misconduct.”
His Honour went on to cite a
number of relevant authorities. His Honour’s dicta are still relevant and
consistent with decisions
pursuant to health practitioner disciplinary
proceedings since the introduction of the National Law.
13. This Tribunal has
consistently accepted that the definition of professional misconduct in s5 of
the Act is inclusionary, and not
an exhaustive statement, and therefore may
include conduct falling outside the paragraphs of the statutory definition, but
established in accordance with common law principles.
AGREED MATTERS
14. The Tribunal received from the parties joint submissions as
to determination and orders sought. The following were matters of
between the parties:
• The purposes of orders made in response to findings of
professional misconduct is usefully explained in Craig v Medical Board
[2011] SASC 169.
Although referring to medical practitioners, the
principals are equally applicable to the nursing profession. The South
Supreme Court held at paragraph 41
purpose of disciplinary proceedings is to protect the public, not to punish a
practitioner in the sense in which punishment
is administered pursuant to the
criminal law. A disciplinary tribunal protects the public by making orders
which will prevent persons
who are unfit to practise from practising, or by
making orders which will secure the maintenance of proper professional
A disciplinary tribunal will also consider the protection of the
public, and of the relevant profession, by making orders which
will assure the
public that appropriate standards are being maintained within the relevant
profession”.
• In determining what orders should be made, the Tribunal
ought to have regard to the seriousness of the conduct, the risk of
harm to the
patient caused by the respondent’s misuse of controlled drugs, which by
their nature are capable of causing impairment
and may have serious adverse
effects, particularly when not being used under the direction and supervision of
a medical practitioner.
• Although there was no serious harm to the
patient involved in the assault conviction, the conduct did cause significant
was contrary to medical practitioner instruction and had potential to
do serious harm.
• In respect to the other convictions, the evidence
demonstrated that the respondent’s awareness of her actions and what
was doing in performing her duties was seriously compromised. The risk of harm
to the patients under the respondent’s
care at the time was real, and it
was simply good fortune that patients did not suffer harm.
• The orders
made ought to fulfil the objective of maintaining the professional reputation of
nurses, and also act to deter
the type of conduct which occurred, which is quite
unbecoming of the standards and reputation of the profession.
respondent’s concessions with regard to this application and cooperation
with the applicant also are relevant to
the making of consequential orders.
Further, of some effect in mitigation is the fact that the respondent agreed to
undertakings
on 23 December 2015, shortly after the conduct occurred. The terms
of the undertakings were that the respondent would not practice
as a registered
nurse until she had received approval to do so from the Board. That undertaking
served to provide immediate protection
to the public. There is no suggestion
that the undertakings had been breached.
• Also relevant to the
orders to be made by the Tribunal is the prior conduct history of the
respondent, which revealed the
respondent has a pattern of misuse of controlled
drugs, for which she had received less serious sanctions with a view to
her to continue in practice. Although it appeared that she had been
compliant with conditions imposed on her registration twice
in the past (October
2012 and August 2014), she apparently had tended to relapse into the misuse of
drugs and again become the subject
of disciplinary actions.
• While the
orders imposed by the Tribunal ought not to serve to punish the respondent they
do need to operate to deter her
and other nurses, to ensure that the seriousness
of this type of conduct is recognised and hence not undertaken.
orders made ought to be proportionate to sanctions imposed for similar conduct.
15. In regard to the last agreed point, the Tribunal was
Midwifery Board of Australia v Greenwood SAHPT 6198 of 2015 Unreported; Nursing
and Midwifery Board of Australia v Smithson SAHPT
2190 of 2017 Unreported;
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Highet
[2016] SAHPT 11
; Nursing and
Midwifery Board of Australia v Black (Review and Regulation)
[2015] VCAT 1232
and Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Roos
[2016] QCAT
16. Tribunal was invited by the parties to make a determination that the
totality of the conduct referred to in the application amounted
to professional
misconduct on the part of the respondent.
17. By agreement, orders were
sought that;
a. the respondent be reprimanded: and
b. the respondent be
disqualified from applying for registration as a registered nurse for a period
of four years, backdated to 24
December 2015, being the date the respondent
provided an undertaking to the applicant that she would stop
practising.
18. Between the parties, it was agreed that the orders sought
were consistent with the seriousness of the conduct and the paramount
the National Law, to protect the public and the reputation of the profession.
It was agreed that the orders sought were
not excessive, and served valid
objectives of the National Law, rather that punishment.
CONSIDERATION
19. The respondent conceded that the conduct that was the
subject of the application before the Tribunal constituted professional
misconduct within the National Law as adopted in the Act, and further conceded
that the conduct constituted professional misconduct
at common law.
was also conceded that the convictions against the respondent on the proceedings
in the Magistrates Court constituted five
instances of unprofessional conduct
which together amount to professional misconduct as contemplated by the s5
definition of unprofessional
conduct under the National Law in conjunction with
the definition of professional misconduct at paragraph (b) of the same law. It
was further submitted that the convictions reflect conduct which members of good
repute in the nursing profession would regard as
disgraceful and dishonourable,
further constituting professional misconduct at common law.
21. Having noted
the concessions by the respondent, and the matters that are before the Tribunal,
I am satisfied that the respondent’s
conduct as particularised is
sufficient to warrant a finding that the conduct amounts to professional
misconduct.
22. It is well recognised that the primary purpose of the
Tribunal is to protect the public and ensure that the trust and confidence
the public in the various health professions is maintained, and in that regard I
note the comments of the Supreme Court of South
Australia in Craig v Medical
Board of South Australia referred to previously.
23. The Tribunal accepts
that the professional misconduct of the respondent was of a nature such that a
reprimand is appropriate.
The respondent engaged in criminal conduct at a time
where she was supposed to be acting in the course of her profession with her
employer. The actions taken by the respondent which are the subject of this
application were actions of a nature that would undermine
the trust and
confidence of the community within the nursing profession, and had the potential
for serious adverse effect. In particular
the conviction for assault involves
behaviour on the part of the respondent which the Tribunal considers members of
the nursing profession
would particularly regard as disgraceful.
relation to the second order sought, that is a period of disqualification from
applying for registration as a registered nurse,
I note it is to the
respondent’s credit that she provided an undertaking to the Board at an
early time not to practise. She
has effectively been unable to practise for
over three years, and by the orders sought will be prevented from applying for
registration
to practice for a further period.
25. In all the circumstances
the Tribunal is satisfied that the orders sought are appropriate, and ones which
the Tribunal is prepared
to make. These orders are consistent with the
seriousness of the conduct, and the overarching purpose of the National Law to
the public and the reputation of the profession. In the circumstances,
the Tribunal does not consider the orders to be excessive
or punitive.
APPLICATION FOR DE-IDENTIFICATION
26. In addition to the joint submissions as to determination
and orders sought, which were provided by the parties to the Tribunal,
respondent further sought an order that her name be supressed in the publication
of the Tribunal’s decision.
27. The basis upon which the
respondent’s application for suppression was made was as follows:
• She has complied with the undertaking to not practise,
which was made on 24 December 2015.
• She has continued with her
treatment, which included attending an addiction support group for over two
years (which she noted
to have been of great benefit) and regular visits to her
general practitioner and her psychiatrist as recommended by them. In her
assessment, the respondent said she was making excellent
• Tasmania is a small state, with risk to the
respondent’s reputation likely if her name is published. She said she had
been taking necessary steps to rehabilitate herself, and wished to be able to
conditions may be applied
at that time. She indicated those conditions would be able to protect the
public from any perceived risk.
• A facebook page “The Vigilante
News” published a post regarding her appearance in the Magistrates Court.
the post was taken down quickly, colleagues from her job at that time
made derogative comments.
• That incident had a huge impact on the
respondent’s mental health and she was unwell for some time afterwards.
had a devastating effect on her children.
28. In support of her application the respondent provided a
report from her treating psychiatrist dated 9 July 2018. In essence,
respondent’s psychiatrist opined as follows:
“I have consulted
with [the respondent] since 2012. She has suffered a number of mental health
concerns over time including
chronic pain and major depression. Events in 2015
led her to withdraw from her registration in nursing. Since that time [the
respondent]
has struggled to find ongoing employment. She remains at home with
her two children, with her youngest daughter being in her last
matriculation.
[The respondent] has significant embarrassment through this
predicament which has in turn exacerbated her mood disorder. Further
humiliation through reporting of her situation would be potentially
catastrophic. I would fear for her mental health and in turn
the welfare of her
children whom she has the primary care of at this point.
In my opinion
humiliating [the respondent] further given her vulnerabilities would not be an
appropriate deterrent or a matter of
public interest”.
29. The Board,
upon receipt of this report advised the Tribunal that it neither consented or
opposed the suppression application,
and did not wish to make any submissions.
30. S30 of the Act provides as follows:
30. Hearing to be open to the
(1) Except as provided by this section, a hearing of the Tribunal is
to be open to the public.
(2) During any hearing in proceedings the
Tribunal may, on the application of a party to the proceedings or on the
own initiative, do either or both of the following, if it
considers that there are compelling grounds to do so:
a) make an order
excluding any person from the hearing:
b) make an order prohibiting the
reporting or disclosure of all or any part of the proceedings or prohibiting the
reporting or other
disclosure of particular information in respect of the
proceedings.
(3) Without limiting the grounds that may be relevant for the
purposes of subsection (2) the Tribunal may exercise its power under
section if –
a) it is dealing with privileged information that has
been communicated to the National Board or the Tribunal in confidence: or
b) it is dealing with information concerning the personal affairs, finance
or business arrangements of a person; or
c) the disclosure of the
information may be unfairly prejudicial to the reputation to a
31. Further, s51 of the Act provides:
Publication of decisions of Tribunal
The Tribunal may, as it thinks fit, publish in the manner it thinks fit, or
refuse to publish, a decision of the Tribunal in respect
of proceedings under
32. It is clear the Tribunal’s discretion in relation to
the publication of any matters before it, including the identity of
practitioner in question, is a discretion that is unfettered. However, that
discretion ought to be exercised upon consideration
of the interests of justice.
Relevant to that consideration would be the paramount importance of the need to
protect the public and
the good name and standing of the profession in which the
practitioner is involved. In this case however that paramount consideration
need to be balanced against other competing factors particularly relevant to the
respondent.
33. There is a general principle that hearings before the
Tribunal are to be open to the public, and the orders of the Tribunal and
reasons are likely to be similarly available to the public. The question of the
non-disclosure of a practitioner’s name
has been considered in a number of
authorities. The NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal cited the NSW Court of
Appeal decision
of Merrilyn Walton v Alexander Sergevich Manot & Anor (NSW
Court of Appeal 17 April 1997) in Health Care Complaint Commission
NSWCATOD 127:
the Tribunal sits in public the details of proceedings, including the names of
the complainant and the practitioner , may
become known to interested members of
the public and the media, who will be entitled to publish details of the
proceedings including
the name of the practitioner.
This being the prima facie method by which the Tribunal should conduct its
proceedings as laid down by the Act, it follows that something
exceptional or out of the ordinary, must be established before the Tribunal can
make an order avoiding such a result”
34. It is virtually inevitable that a practitioner who is found
to have engaged in conduct which amounts to professional misconduct
will suffer
not only personal embarrassment but damage to his or her professional
reputation. It is likely that a degree of humiliation
or embarrassment would
also flow to those who may be personally close to the practitioner. These
things would not be enough to point
to circumstances peculiar to the
practitioner that would amount to something “special, exceptional or out
of the ordinary.”
35. However, I note in this case the opinion of the
respondent’s treating psychiatrist which was provided to the Tribunal
specifically
in relation to the issue of the publication of the
respondent’s identity, where he identifies a “potentially
catastrophic”
outcome in the event that the respondent’s identity is
reported further following the conclusion of the Tribunal’s proceedings.
The potentially catastrophic effect has been identified not only in relation to
the respondent’s own mental health, but also
upon the welfare of her
36. Based upon this report, I am satisfied that the risk to the
respondent’s mental health and consequent adverse effect on
the welfare of
the respondent’s children is sufficiently exceptional, or out of the
ordinary, to outweigh the interests of
open justice such that it would be
appropriate for the respondent to be de-identified in the Tribunal’s
published decision.
respondent is reprimanded.
(ii) The respondent is disqualified from applying for
registration as a registered nurse for a period of four years, backdated to
December 2015.
(iii) The respondent’s name is not to be
identified in the Tribunal’s published decision.
L D WILKINS
Deputy Chairperson
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (158 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter