URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCCA/2024/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DLS v Tasmania [2024] TASCCA 10 (6 September 2024)
[2024] TASCCA 10
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (COURT OF CRIMINAL
DLS v Tasmania
[2024] TASCCA
STATE OF TASMANIA
CCA 2843/2023
DELIVERED ON:
6 September
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Blow CJ, Martin AJ, Porter AJ
Criminal Law – Appeal and new trial – Verdict unreasonable or
unsupportable having regard to evidence -Appeal dismissed
– Penetrative
sexual abuse of a young person – Whether open to jury to find crimes
committed during period specified
in indictment.
Aust Dig Criminal Law
Cases cited:
Director of Public Prosecutions v Jarvis (a pseudonym)
[2018] VSCA
, 55 VR 543
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
[1932] NZLR 753
(1918) 13 Cr App R 158
[2000] NSWCCA 3
[1993] 2 Qd R 541
R v McDonald
(1995) 65 SASR 322
R v Pfitzner
(1976) 15 SASR
REPRESENTATION
: P Sherriff
Solicitors:
Josh Smith Legal –
Barristers & Solicitors Pty Ltd
Respondent:
Director of Public
Prosecutions
Judgment Number:
[2024] TASCCA 10
paragraphs:
Serial No 10/2024
File No CCA 2843/2023
DLS V STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
September 2024
Orders of the
1 Leave to appeal granted.
2 Appeal dismissed.
Serial No 10/2024
File No CCA 2843/2023
DLS V STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
6 September 2024
is an application for leave to appeal against four convictions for sexual
crimes. The applicant, DLS, was charged on a single
count of persistent sexual
abuse of a young person, contrary to s 125A(2) of the
Criminal Code
stood trial before Jago J and a jury. The Crown contended that he had committed
unlawful sexual acts against a 14-year-old girl
on eight occasions "between on
or about 1 January 2021 and 3 February 2021". The jury found him not guilty of
the crime charged,
but guilty of four crimes of penetrative sexual abuse of a
young person, contrary to s 124(1) of the
Criminal Code
. Those findings
related to occasions described at the trial as "Occasion two" and "Occasion
four". In relation to each of those occasions,
the jury found that the applicant
had penetrated the complainant's vagina with his fingers, and then penetrated
her mouth with his
penis. The learned trial judge sentenced him to 2 years 6
months' imprisonment, with a non-parole period of 15 months. This is an
application for leave to appeal from those convictions. The notice of appeal
contains a single ground, which was amended at the hearing
to assert that the
verdicts of the jury should be set aside on the ground that they cannot be
supported having regard to the evidence.
is an application for leave to appeal, rather than an appeal, because of the
provisions of s 401(1) of the
Criminal Code.
That sub-section reads as
401 Right of appeal
(1) A person convicted before a court of trial
may appeal to the Court –
(a) against his conviction on any ground
which involves a question of law;
(b) with the leave of the Court, or upon the
certificate of the judge of the court of trial that it is a fit case for appeal,
his conviction upon a ground of appeal –
(i) which involves a question of fact
(ii) which involves a mixed question
of fact and law;
(iii) which appears to the Court to
be a sufficient ground of appeal; and
(c) against the sentence passed on his
conviction, unless the sentence is one fixed by law."
the appeal is not based on a pure question of law, the applicant requires the
leave of the Court to successfully impugn his
convictions. In accordance with
this Court's usual practice, the ground of appeal was fully argued.
learned trial judge directed the jury to the effect that they could not find the
applicant guilty of the crime charged unless,
in relation to at least three of
the eight occasions, they were satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that (a) he had
committed at least
one unlawful sexual act in relation to the complainant, and
(b) the act or acts committed on the particular occasion were committed
the period referred to in the indictment.
the start of the trial it was the Crown case that the applicant committed
unlawful sexual acts on eight occasions during the period
specified in the
indictment, namely "between on or about 1 January 2021 and 3 February 2021".
However, after the complainant had
given evidence about the eight occasions, the
prosecutor asked her some questions about the timing of the occasions, and she
evidence that the last occasion was about a week before she gave her first
statement to the police. She gave that statement on 25
evidence about the period of sexual abuse extending until July 2021 was given
during the complainant's evidence-in-chief. No
application to amend the
indictment to extend the charge period was made at that stage. There were only
three witnesses at the trial
– the complainant, her mother and a police
officer. After the Crown case had closed, the applicant elected neither to give
nor adduce evidence, and the learned trial judge began a discussion in the
absence of the jury as to her proposed directions. She
drew attention to the
discrepancy between the period charged in the indictment and the complainant's
evidence as to the timing of
the alleged occasions. That prompted the
prosecutor to apply for leave to amend the indictment by changing the end of the
period from 3 February 2021 to 14 July 2021. That application was
opposed. Defence counsel argued that he had cross-examined the
complainant and
conducted the defence case on the basis that the prosecution were required to
prove unlawful sexual acts during a
period ending in February, not July. At the
conclusion of his submission, the prosecutor agreed with him and withdrew the
application.
Accordingly,
the learned trial judge gave the direction that the jury could not convict the
applicant of the crime charged unless
they were satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that he committed unlawful sexual acts on at least three occasions during
specified in the indictment. The jury began their deliberations on a
Monday, dispersed overnight, and sent the learned trial judge
two written
questions when they returned on the Tuesday morning:
"If we find
three or more offences, either partly within or wholly outside the indictment
period, can he be found guilty of persistent
sexual abuse of a young
"Can we find the
accused guilty of more than two alternate verdicts if they fall outside of the
time period and does the time period
apply to the alternate
Honour told counsel that she proposed to tell the jury that they must find three
occasions within the indictment period to convict
of the crime charged, and that
they could bring in alternative verdicts of guilty of any crime that they found
was committed within
the indictment period, but that they did not have to be
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt as to the particular date. Both counsel
that they did not wish to make any submissions as to those answers, and her
Honour directed the jury accordingly.
a conviction is challenged on the basis that the verdict of the jury cannot be
supported having regard to the evidence, it is
common for a submission to be
made that the evidence lacked probative force to such an extent that the jury
should have had a reasonable
doubt as to the alleged criminal act having
occurred at all. No such submission was made in this case. Counsel for the
submitted that the evidence of the complainant lacked probative force
to such an extent that the jury could not properly have been
satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that the events described in relation to Occasion two and
Occasion four occurred within the periods
specified in the indictment. He did
not argue that the evidence of the complainant was so weak that the jury could
not have been
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that such events occurred at
all. He made it clear that his submission related to the proposition
evidence was not strong enough to support findings of guilt in relation to the
period specified in the indictment.
applicant contends that the evidence as to the timing of the eight alleged
occasions was so inadequate, vague, confused and inconsistent
that it was not
open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the events said to
have occurred on Occasions two and
four occurred during the period referred to
in the indictment.
was uncontroversial evidence at the trial that the 2021 school year began on
Tuesday, 2 February. The period specified in
the indictment reflected the
expectation that the complainant would give evidence of acts of sexual abuse
that occurred in early
2021 during the summer school holidays and not
thereafter.
is necessary to analyse the evidence as to the timing of the alleged unlawful
sexual acts in considerable detail. My summary
of that evidence, with some
comments, is as follows:
The complainant
gave evidence that she first met the applicant when she was in year 8. The
evidence established that she completed
year 10 in or before 2022. When
interviewed by police officers on 25 July 2021 the applicant accepted that he
first met the complainant
around 12 months previously, give or take a couple of
months. Thus there was evidence that the complainant first met the applicant
evidence-in-chief as to Occasion one, the complainant said that the events
happened when it was "still during school holidays".
When asked which holidays
she said, "The big summer sort of one that's there so through Christmas and New
Years." The complainant
gave evidence to the effect that on Occasion one she was
in the applicant's bed with him, and that he first inserted his fingers
vagina and then exposed his penis and inserted it into her mouth.
cross-examination she gave evidence that she told the police in her second
police statement that Occasion one occurred in January
In relation to
Occasion two, the complainant gave evidence to the effect that she and the
applicant went for a drive in his Ford Falcon
utility; that he stopped somewhere
along a particular road and put his fingers into her vagina; that they drove on;
and that she
twice gave him oral sex while he was driving. She was asked whether
the journey in question was before or after the occasion that
became known as
Occasion one. She said that the journey was after that occasion.
As to Occasion
three, the complainant gave evidence to the effect that she was again in the
applicant's bed with him, that he inserted
his fingers into her vagina, that he
then inserted his penis into her mouth, and that he then inserted his penis into
when she was telling him not to do that. She said nothing at that
stage as to the timing of Occasion three.
In relation to
Occasion four, the complainant said that there was a third time when she was in
the applicant's bed with him, and that
it was after the second such occasion
(Occasion three). At first she said she could not remember how much later
Occasion four was
after Occasion three. She proceeded to give evidence that the
applicant inserted his fingers into her vagina and his penis into her
Occasion four. The prosecutor then asked a second time about how long after the
previous occasion this occasion was. The
complainant replied, "Maybe it might
have been a week. Around about that sort of time."
As to Occasion
five, the complainant gave evidence to the effect that she was sitting with the
applicant in his lounge room when he
inserted his fingers into her vagina and
then inserted his penis into her mouth. When asked about the timing of this
incident, she
said, "It was after the third bedroom incident".
As to Occasion
six, the complainant gave evidence to the effect that the applicant inserted his
penis into her mouth in a shed at
his residence. She was not asked about timing
when she gave that evidence.
As to Occasion
seven, the complainant gave evidence to the effect that the applicant had sexual
intercourse with her, inserting his
penis into her vagina from behind, in a
caravan at his residence. The complainant said that the applicant asked her to
babysit for
him on that occasion because he was going out, and that she thought
it was to a football game. Football is not normally played during
As to Occasion
eight, the complainant gave evidence to the effect that the applicant licked her
genitalia and vagina in another vehicle
(not the Falcon utility) in a paddock at
his residence.
Subsequently the
prosecutor asked the complainant some questions about the timing of various
occasions. He asked her about the timing
of the applicant sending her a video
depicting him masturbating. He asked where that fell "into the scheme of
things". The complainant
responded "Sort of in between the second and the third
incident at the bed." Then the prosecutor asked her about the timing of the
incident I have referred to as Occasion two, involving a drive in the Falcon.
The complainant gave an answer that included the words,
"So there was the first
bedroom incident and then the car and then the." It appears that the prosecutor
interrupted her at that point.
He elicited evidence that the video was sent some
time after the second bedroom incident. The evidence that the complainant gave
at this stage was disjointed, but it is of critical importance in relation to
timing of Occasion two. I will set it out in full
later in these reasons.
When asked about
the time difference between the first occasion and the last occasion the
complainant replied, "Um months roughly,
yeah months." When asked about the
timing of the various incidents in relation to school starting for the year she
said, "Um so the
first couple of incidents I can't remember exactly when I went
it was when school started again."
cross-examination, when asked about the timing of events in relation to the
start of the 2021 school year, the complainant
said, "I can't remember the exact
times of when and what happened. School year sort of started around – in
between where the
caravan and the shed sort of incident happened, around about
that time." The caravan incident was Occasion seven. The shed incident
Occasion six.
When asked when
the last incident (Occasion eight) occurred, the complainant said, "Probably
like a bit before the start of –
around about July maybe or around about
that sort of time around July." Then she said, "It was – it would have
been a bit before
July." A little later she said, "It would have been – I
think – sorry, I can't remember exactly cos when I had given
my statement,
it would have been a bit before then. So as it would have been around about a
week before I gave my very first statement
and about a week before then." The
evidence established that she gave her first statement to the police on 25 July
When it is contended that the verdict of a jury cannot be supported having
regard to the evidence, the approach to be taken by the
appellate court is as
stated by Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ in the following passage in
v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
at 494–495:
"In most cases
a doubt experienced by an appellate court will be a doubt which a jury
ought also to have experienced. It is only where
a jury's advantage in seeing
and hearing the evidence is capable of resolving a doubt experienced by a court
of criminal appeal that
the court may conclude that no miscarriage of justice
occurred. That is to say, where the evidence lacks credibility for reasons
are not explained by the manner in which it was given, a reasonable doubt
experienced by the court is a doubt which a reasonable
jury ought to have
experienced. If the evidence, upon the record itself, contains discrepancies,
displays inadequacies, is tainted
or otherwise lacks probative force in such a
way as to lead the court of criminal appeal to conclude that, even making full
for the advantages enjoyed by the jury, there is a significant
possibility that an innocent person has been convicted, then the court
to act and to set aside a verdict based upon that evidence. In doing so,
the court is not substituting trial by a court
of appeal for trial by jury, for
the ultimate question must always be whether the court thinks that upon the
whole of the evidence
it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that the accused was guilty." (Footnotes omitted.)
same principles need to be applied by this Court in evaluating the submissions
made on behalf of the applicant, bearing in mind
that the question here is
whether the conclusions of the jury as to timing in relation to Occasions two
and four can be supported
having regard to the evidence.
The complainant's evidence-in-chief as to Occasion two can be summarised as
follows. The applicant had a number of vehicles including
a Ford Falcon utility.
There was an occasion when she went for a drive with him in that vehicle. He had
just fixed something on that
vehicle and was taking it for a test drive to see
how it went. They travelled on some back roads. They stopped somewhere along the
road. He put his fingers in her vagina. He stopped that. Then, as they were
driving along, she gave him oral sex while he was driving.
They were heading
towards a particular town, arrived there, and then went back to the applicant's
house. There were two separate
seats in the front of the vehicle, not a bench
seat. It was pretty dirty, very old, and had cobwebs through it. It was a manual
The gearshift was between the seats. After the oral sex they stopped
because of roadworks at a place where there were people around.
She resumed
giving the applicant oral sex after they travelled further.
questions and answers relevant to the question of when Occasion two occurred in
relation to Occasion one, according to the transcript,
"Can you give me an example of a picture that he sent you
?..... He'd sent a video of him masturbating and sent it to me.
Okay, this may be difficult but I'll do my best to put the question to you as
clearly as I can. At what point in your time that you
knew [the applicant] do
you think that you got that – just that message or that video that you've
just talked about then? Where
has that – where does that fall into the
scheme of things?..... Sort of in between the second and the third incident at
Okay, now by my memory, correct me if I've got this wrong but do you recall
the second incident that you described this morning as
being an occasion where
you went driving in a car – the Falcon, does that - what you remember as
the second incident?.....As
in – like as in what I mentioned before?
Yes, the - ?..... Sorry, I meant the second incident as in the bedroom. So
there was the first bedroom incident and then the car and
So the video message that you are referring to – you're saying that
happened somewhere between the second bedroom incident –
right?.....Yes.
Okay alright, so sometime after that incident?..... Yeah."
jury had the advantage of seeing and hearing the complainant giving her
evidence. The transcript reveals what she said but not
how she said it. In my
view it was open to the jury, taking the passages that I have quoted as a whole,
to infer that the complainant
was explaining that the incident involving the
Falcon (Occasion two) came after the first bedroom incident (Occasion one) but
the third and fourth bedroom incidents (Occasions three and four).
The complainant's account of events in relation to Occasion four can be
summarised as follows. There were a number of occasions
when sexual activity
occurred between her and the applicant in his bed. This was the third of those
occasions. She had stayed overnight
at his house. His children were visiting
their mother. His partner had gone to work. She got under the covers. For a
while they just
cuddled. Nothing happened until he put his fingers in her
vagina. Then she gave him oral sex and he ejaculated. She did not swallow
semen. She spat it out in the sink.
Her mother gave evidence that she told her that she had performed oral sex on
the applicant on more than one occasion, and that
on one of those occasions he
had ejaculated. The complainant's mother also gave evidence that she told her
in the applicant's bed.
In my view it was open to the jury to infer that Occasion four occurred before
the start of the 2021 school year on the basis of
the evidence from the
complainant suggesting that only the last three or four incidents were when
school had started again.
my view it is possible to discern a rational basis for the jury properly
applying their minds to the evidence and concluding that
they were satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that only the events described in relation to Occasions
two and four occurred during
the indictment period. Counsel for the applicant
did not argue that there was an inconsistency between the verdicts in relation
Occasions two and four and the outcome in relation to the other six occasions
relied upon by the Crown that demonstrated material
error. However I think it
appropriate to make some comments to rebut that proposition.
of all, because of the evidence given by the complainant as to the timing of the
last three or four occasions, the jury may
well have concluded that they were
not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the last four occasions fell within
the period specified
in the indictment.
jury may well have concluded that the complainant's evidence about Occasions one
and three was too unreliable for them to be
satisfied of beyond reasonable doubt
as to the conduct alleged in respect of those occasions.
cross-examination, the complainant admitted to making incorrect statements as to
matters of detail in relation to Occasions
one and three. As to Occasion one,
she agreed with defence counsel that she had told the police in her first
statement that she had
asked the applicant if she and he could "do it". At
trial, she admitted that that was false, and that it was a deliberate
intentional
lie that she told to the police.
her evidence-in-chief concerning Occasion three, the complainant said that the
applicant had used one of his partner's sexual
toys on her. She said that it was
pink, and that he could control the vibration from his phone. She said that the
sex toy was inserted
into her vagina. Under cross-examination, she conceded that
she had not told the police that. In her second police statement she
the applicant had shown her the toy, but not that he had used it. Her mother
gave evidence that the complainant told her
that the applicant got a pink sex
toy from his bedside drawer and wanted to use it on her, but that she refused
the jury may well have regarded the evidence in relation to Occasions two and
four as compelling. The complainant's account
as to Occasion two was detailed
evidence of a memorable and unusual journey in the Falcon utility. Her evidence
in relation to Occasion
four was corroborated by evidence from her mother, who
said she had told her of the applicant ejaculating on one of the occasions
oral sex was performed on him.
is clear that the complainant was an inarticulate witness, and that the evidence
as to the timing of various events was not ideally
presented. However, on the
basis of the passages in the complainant's evidence that I have referred to, I
am satisfied that it was
open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt not just that the events described in relation to Occasions two and four
occurred, but also that they occurred during the period specified in the
indictment, before the start of the 2021 school year. It
follows that in my
view the ground of appeal cannot succeed.
would like to add some observations in relation to the directions of the learned
trial judge concerning the need to be satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that
alleged events occurred during the indictment period.
I have said, the applicant was indicted on a single count asserting that he
committed a crime contrary to s 125A(2) of the
Criminal Code.
125A(3) provides as follows:
"(3) An accused person is guilty of
having committed an offence under subsection (2) if,
when the young person was under the age of 17 years
(a) the accused committed an unlawful
sexual act in relation to the young person on at least 3 occasions; and
(b) the young person was not married to
the accused." (My emphasis.)
it is alleged in an indictment that a crime was committed on or about a
particular date, or within a particular period, as a
general rule it does not
matter if the stated date or period is incorrect or if the date of the
commission of the crime cannot be
clearly identified. In
13 Cr App R 158
, Atkin J (as he then was), delivering the judgment of the Court
of Criminal Appeal, said at 159:
"From time immemorial a date
specified in an indictment has never been a material matter unless it is
actually an essential part of
the alleged offence."
referring to some ancient authorities, his Lordship said at
"Thus, though the date of the offence should be alleged in the
indictment, it has never been necessary that it should be laid according
truth unless time is of the essence of the offence."
has been accepted as the general rule in Australia:
R v McDonald
(1995) 65 SASR 322
considerations of fairness in a particular case may make it necessary for a
trial judge to direct that the prosecution should
be bound by the particulars as
to time or date stated in the indictment:
R v Pfitzner
(1976) 15 SASR
[1932] NZLR 753. That will be the case, for example, when
the accused relies upon an alibi defence in relation to a particular day.
seems to me that, when he abandoned his application to amend the indictment, the
prosecutor accepted that this was a case where
fairness required the Crown to be
bound by the dates particularised in the indictment. In my view it cannot be
said that this case
is authority for the proposition that the reference to "a
particular period" in s 125A(3) of the
Criminal Code
must result in the
Crown always having to prove beyond reasonable doubt on a s 125A charge not just
that unlawful sexual acts were
committed on three or more occasions, but also
that those occasions were during the particular period specified in the charge.
is worth noting that, in relation to comparable but differently worded
legislation in Victoria, that State's Court of Appeal has
held that a reference
to a "specified period" in the relevant legislation did not make proof of timing
Director of Public Prosecutions v Jarvis (a pseudonym)
, 55 VR 543.
the reasons stated, I would grant leave to appeal, but dismiss the
File No CCA 2843/2023
DLS V STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
6 September 2024
agree with the orders proposed by Blow CJ and with his Honour's
File No CCA 2843/2023
DLS V STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
6 September 2024
For the reasons given by the Chief Justice, I agree that leave to appeal should
be granted but the appeal be dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (156 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter