URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASADT/2021/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Chen v Triffett [2021] TASADT 3 (16 June 2021)
[2021] TASADT 3
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
Chen v. Triffett
[2021] TASADT
CHEN, Ti-Jui
TRIFFETT, Tracey
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
5 February 2021
DELIVERED ON:
16 June 2021
DECISION OF:
Tribunal Member A. Mills
CATCHWORDS:
Discrimination and
prohibited conduct –
inquiry – Facebook posts – compensation
Williams v ThreeWiseMonkeys & Durston
[2015] TASADT 4
Gerke & Samjack Pty Ltd
[2007] TASADT 3
Burton v Houston
Lucy Orchard v Frayne Higgins
[2020] TASADT 11.
Anti-Discrimination Act
DETERMINATION:
Complaint of discrimination and prohibited conduct
made by Ti-Jui Chen against Tracey Triffett is upheld. Ms T Triffitt is to pay
to the Complainant Ti-Jui Chen, within a period of 60 days of the date of this
decision, the amount of $5,000 as compensation.
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant:
Respondents:
No appearance
[2021] TASADT 3
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. The Complainant made a complaint to the Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner on 17 April 2020 alleging discrimination on the basis
(b) conduct that is offensive, humiliating,
intimidating, insulting or ridiculing on the basis of race;
(c) incitement to
hatred, serious contempt and/or severe ridicule on the basis of
2. The Anti-Discrimination Commissioner referred the complaint
to the Tribunal on 2 June 2020.
3. The matter was first listed for an inquiry
on 15 December 2020 but neither the Complainant nor the Respondent appeared.
was then listed for hearing on 5 February 2021. The Respondent did
not appear and the Complainant appeared and gave evidence and
4. The respondent was given notice of the hearing for the 5 February
2021 but failed to attend and advised staff at the Anti-Discrimination
that she would not attend any hearing..
5. The Complainant seeks compensation
from the Respondent and an apology from the Respondent.
The Evidence
6. At the Inquiry the Complainant gave evidence and tendered
the following documents:
(a) complaint to the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner dated
17 April 2020;
(b) copy email from the Complainant to the Police Department,
Crime Stoppers and Equal Opportunity Tasmania dated 17 April 2020;
Facebook posts by the Complainant;
(d) copy Facebook posts by the
Respondent;
(e) investigation decision and reasons for decision by
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner dated 19 June 2020;
report by the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner dated 8 July 2020 together with
all related documents forwarded to the Tribunal
including emails between the EOT
and the Respondent, and notes of telephone conversations between the Respondent
and Jason Wright
of the EOT.
7. Mr Chen uses the name Derek as the Australian version of his
Christian name.
8. The Complainant gave evidence that he posted a Facebook
post in search of a roommate for a room for rent in his unit on 16 April
The Facebook post outlined the location of the property and stated it was a
single room for $120/pw, including water and high
speed wifi, sharing the
electricity bill with “other two friendly uni students (approximately
$10/pw)”. The post stated:
is newly furnished with furniture and fully equipped kitchen. We prefer long
term lease (at least six months) and genuine
quiet guy. please contact Derek
via PM for further detail if it interests you.”
[Photos of the room
were included]
9. The Complainant stated that he had posted the post on the
Rental Group section of Facebook, not his private timeline. He stated
were 3000 members all of whom could have seen his post.
10. A short time
after the post had been made by the Complainant he received a number of
responses posted by Tracey Triffett, the
Respondent in this matter. The first
post contained a number of statements as follows:
Off, you already give us F...ing virus we didn’t want and now you’re
trying to rip people off by making them
pay for water you use.
eww, who the F... would want to share a unit with bat eaters, F... off back
to your own country with ya virus.”
11. The Complainant responded to these posts by saying that he
never eats bat and that no-one likes “this annoying virus, everyone
impact, I hope this would reduce your emotion of hate a bit”.
Respondent then posted:
Chen disgusting people the lot of you, rude think your better than everyone else
Bec your education that mummy and daddy
are paying for uni twice the amount so
you bastard get into your course but my children have to miss out because of you
bastard coming
here because you have overpopulated your country;
And all Asians are the same”
13. Another person then posted in support of the Complainant
stating that he was just trying to rent his room and there is no need
14. In response the Respondent posted:
B. F... Off, Asian lover, and he changed the post he was trying to make people
pay for water; and
A. B. this is why the country is F...ed. The world is F...ed. We have let
these bastards into our countries all over the world,
they breed that much that
they can’t live in their own country they come here and take over, Hobart
is starting to look like,
little china town... when these c..ts takeover, lets
see what you say then”, and
They are all paying for what these c..ts brought here and they won’t
the world, they are
sitting back watching the world crumbling, they caused all this and they
won’t help, no because they want
to keep their money to rule the world,
stop putting money into these bastards pockets, don’t buy anything
Australia made, lets not sell to these and let us sit back and
watch them crumble, they all think we are just dumb aussies, f...ing
standing up and looking after our own, what out anzacs went to war for, so we
have a free country, not dictated by these bastards
because they work for
nothing, look at them with ....
15. The Complainant tendered amongst his documents an email
reporting the above posts to the police, Crime Stoppers and Equal Opportunity
Tasmania by email on 17 April 2020. He started in part:
“I posted a rental
advertisement on Facebook looking for a housemate but lady insulted publicly
and replied with discriminatory
comments, I feel extremely uncomfortable to the
language from this aggressive racist, please tell me what to do, I have to take
as I am afraid she will commit further attacks. Please help me please.
Furthermore, Australia is a well-known nation of multicultural
society, this
biased comment or behaviour should be stopped as it can’t represent the
majority of friendly Australian.”
16. The Complainant included copies of the posts with this
17. The Complainant then made a complaint to EOT on 19 April 2020.
That complaint was accepted for investigation on 11 May 2020.
The Respondent
was provided with a copy of the complaint and asked for her response. That
response was provided by email dated
16 June 2020 to the EOT.
Respondent in her response to the EOT of 15 June 2020 stated as follows:
I am responding to this complaint...I messaged about the unit and was told that
no lazy Aussies and had to be working.
I told him to stick it up his arse, I
was told I’m a fat Aussie and to suck his Chinese cock so was very
angry...yes, it was
very wrong of me to say them comments, very sorry for them,
but I deleted the messages and blocked Mr Chen, there is always two sides
story, and that’s one I can’t prove. So can’t defend myself,
but at the end of the day, yes it was wrong
to say those comments, and they was
taken down by me. I have friends from all cultures and do see it was
wrong...let’s move
on, the world’s crazy enough let’s not make
it any more crazy.
Mr Chen, please accept my apology, I hope you can move on from this as I
I am seeing my lawyer tomorrow at 2, I have moved into units and now I have a
stalker, it’s in Facebook rentals, what this man
is doing to me so,
can’t take the call, sorry.
Sent from my iPhone.”
19. The Complainant also gave evidence that he contacted
Facebook to have the posts removed and that this occurred after several
20. The Complainant said that he was willing to attend a mediation at
the EOT with the Respondent, but that she refused to attend.
The Complainant
also stated that when he received the Respondent’s response to his
complaint, he was very distressed and unable
to sleep for several days and that
he did not believe the apology was sincere. He stated that she made further
allegations which
he denied and made him feel hurt a second time. The
Complainant strongly denied the allegations in the Respondent’s email
15 June 2020.
21. The Complainant said that the Facebook posts by the
Respondent in response to his advertisement for a roommate to rent a room
house caused him to be unable to sleep and not able to work properly. His
supervisor was aware that he was not able to work
properly and told him to take
a week off.
22. The Complainant said that after two or three weeks after the
Facebook posts his condition had not improved and so he sought medical
a doctor who told him he was suffering psychological stress and insomnia and
prescribed medication to help him sleep.
The Complainant said his doctor also
suggested that he should not work for a week.
23. The Complainant said that
he also believed that the Facebook comments had an effect on his ability to rent
the room as it would
have made others feel uneasy. The Complainant removed the
post and that caused a further delay of about another month in obtaining
roommate/tenant for the room. In this time he and his flatmate had to pay extra
payments including for water, electricity, internet
and council fees in about
the amount of $800 to $1,000.
24. The Complainant said that because he was
unable to work he lost earnings of approximately $1,000.
25. The Complainant
works as a practice manager for a therapeutic massage clinic. He manages the
reception, the phone and staff rosters.
His position is not as an employee but
as an independent contractor and he is paid a fixed rate plus commission
depending on the
number of clients who attend. Following the events with the
Facebook posts, the Complainant said he found it difficult to deal with
customers and was fearful for his safety.
26. The Complainant’s witness
was Mr Charlie Yi. Mr Yi was a director of the business where the Complainant
worked. He said
that when the Complainant came to work, he told him about the
events that had occurred regarding the Facebook posts the day after
When the Complainant came to work, his hands were shaking and he was very
fearful. It clearly had a psychological effect
on him. He could see that the
Complainant was really affected by this and it was not appropriate for him to
greet customers, that
he was struggling with this and so he told him to take
some time to rest. The Complainant provided a medical certificate for his
off which was provided to Mr Yi. Mr Yi stated that he could really see the
effect that this had had on the Complainant and
was also concerned that this was
not just conduct against the Complainant but against the Asian community and he
too felt offended
by this behaviour.
27. The Complainant provided a copy of
his medical certificate issued by Dr A. Cakra certifying him as unfit for his
usual work on
14 May 2020 and also a statement from his employer stating he did
not work his shifts from 17 April 2020 to 24 April 2020, and again
rostered to work between 14 May 2020 and 22 May 2020. The documents were
tendered as part of the
referral report.
Findings of Fact
28. I accept that the Complainant gave truthful evidence at the
29. The Respondent did not appear, nor give evidence at the
hearing, but in her response which is contained in an email to the EOT
June 2020 admitted that she made the Facebook posts and that it was wrong of her
to say those comments. The Respondent said
she deleted those messages and
blocked the Complainant then asked the Complainant to accept her apology.
However, this apology began
with abusive comments directed towards the
Complainant.
30. I find that the Facebook posts as outlined by the
Complainant were made by the Respondent.
31. I find that the Complainant was
deeply affected by the Respondent’s Facebook posts and that he found those
posts offensive,
intimidating, insulting and ridiculing.
32. I find that the
statements made by the Respondent was because of the Complainant’s race
being Chinese. I find that the
Facebook posts were offensive and intended to
cause humiliation, intimidation and ridicule of the Complainant.
that the Respondent’s conduct in making the Facebook posts had an adverse
effect and caused detriment to the Complainant
in his ability to rent out the
room in his house and this was caused by a delay in being able to continue with
the advertising to
obtain a roommate or tenant.
34. I find that although the
Respondent made what she stated was an apology, this was not a genuine apology
given that it was prefaced
by further abusive comments directed to the
Complainant and the apology was not distributed to all of those persons who
seen her original post.
Discrimination –
Anti-Discrimination Act
35. The Act only prohibits discrimination when a person is
engaged in certain activities. Those activities are set out under s.22
Act and the relevant activity in this matter is s.22(1)(c) provision of
facilities, goods and services, and (d) accommodation.
36. The activity of
the Complainant in advertising a room for rent in his house clearly falls within
these activities and so comes
within the Act.
37. The conduct of the
Respondent in her Facebook posts amounts to unfavourable treatment of the
Complainant on the basis of his race
which is a characteristic covered by the
Act pursuant to s.16(a) of the Act.
38. The Complainant has suffered
detriment in the delay in being able to rent out his room because of the
perceived adverse effect
of the Respondent’s Facebook posts, including the
effect that the posts had on him personally. This amounts to discrimination
under the Act.
39. Section 17 of the Act states:
“A person must not
engage in any conduct which offends, humiliates, intimidates, insults or
ridicules another person on the
basis of an attribute referred to in section
16(a)...in circumstances in which a reasonable person, having regard to all the
circumstances,
would have anticipated that the other person would be offended,
humiliated, intimidated, insulted or
ridiculed.”
40. The attribute in this matter is clearly race which is
covered by s.16(a)
41. Whether the Respondent’s conduct comes within
s.17 is judged by an objective test, namely, that a reasonable person, having
regard to all the circumstances, would have anticipated that the Complainant
would be offended, humiliated, intimidated, insulted
or ridiculed.
regard to the Facebook posts made by the Respondent I find that a reasonable
person would have anticipated that the Complainant
would be offended,
humiliated, intimidated, insulted or ridiculed by the Respondent’s
language used in her Facebook posts.
43. I have already found that the
conduct of the Respondent occurred pursuant to s.22(c) and (d), namely, during
the Complainant engaging
in or undertaking an activity in connection with the
provision of facilities, goods and services and accommodation.
Respondent’s Facebook posts which were published on a site open to the
public and where, on the evidence of the Complainant,
some 3,000 persons could
have seen the posts.
45. I therefore find that the Respondent was in breach
of s.17 of the Act, prohibited conduct.
46. The Complainant has also alleged
that his complaint amounts to incitement to hatred, serious contempt and/or
serious ridicule
on the basis of race in breach of s.19(a) of the Act.
Incitement to Hatred s.19(a)
47. The Complainant must show that the conduct was a public act
which had the capacity to incite other people to feel hatred toward,
contempt or severe ridicule, to the Complainant because of his
48. Section 3 of the Act defines public act as:
act includes –
(a) any form of communication to the public; or
(b) any conduct observable by the public; or
(c) the distribution or dissemination of any matter to the
49. The Respondent’s Facebook posts were posted to a
public site on Facebook and were intended to attract the attention of the
who were looking for places to rent. This clearly satisfies the requirement
that the Respondent’s conduct was a public
act being a form of
communication to the public and conduct which could be observed by the
50. However, not all offensive language will be sufficient to satisfy
the requirements of “incite hatred towards or serious
contempt for or
severe ridicule of the Complainant on the grounds of his race”. Section
19 was considered by the Anti-Discrimination
Tribunal in the case of Williams v
ThreeWiseMonkeys & Durston
[2015] TASADT 4.
The Tribunal there relied on an
earlier decision of Wood v Gerke & Samjack Pty Ltd
[2007] TASADT 3
summarised the principles as to the meaning of the words incite, hatred,
contempt or ridicule. The Tribunal in the Williams
decision set out the
relevant principles at paragraphs 32 to 34 including the following at
... Those principles are summarised as follows:
“incite” should be given its ordinary and plain meaning, namely, to
urge, spur on, stir up, animate, stimulate
or prompt to action;
necessary to prove that there was an intention to “incite” or that
people were actually incited to hatred, serious,
contempt or severe ridicule.
Rather the test is whether the public act was capable of inciting others to feel
hatred or serious
contempt or severe ridicule. Merely engaging in conduct that
conveys hatred or expresses serious contempt or severe ridicule is
determining whether the public act is capable of inciting others to feel hatred,
the question arises as to the characterisation
of the audience. The proper
approach is to consider the impact upon an ordinary, reasonable person. The
range of people captured
by this test includes people who are not immune from
susceptibility to incitement but excludes those who hold prejudiced views or
malevolently inclined.
established that the offending public act must incite hatred towards, serious
contempt for or severe ridicule of a person
or group of persons on the ground of
one of the attributes in sub-paragraphs (a)-(d) of s.19 of the Act. The phrase
ground of” means a ‘significant factor’,
‘a substantially contributing factor’ and ‘a casually
operative effect’ or ‘an operative
51. The effect of these decisions is that the language used in
the posts by the Respondent must be something sufficiently serious
hatred, contempt or ridicule. It is not enough that they are merely abusive or
distasteful. Section 19 requires that
the contempt and ridicule be serious or
52. It is noted that the first reactions to the Respondent’s
posts by a member of the public were supportive of the
Complainant.
53. Having regard to all of the circumstances, I find that
whilst the posts were offensive, insulting and ridiculing, they were not
enough to constitute incitement to hatred, serious contempt and/or severe
ridicule on the basis of race. There is no breach
found of s.19 of the
Remedies and Orders Sought
54. I have found the Respondent has contravened s.16(a) of the
Act being direct discrimination against the Complainant. Further,
Respondent is in breach of s.17 of the Act engaging in conduct towards the
Complainant on the basis of his race which was offensive,
humiliating,
intimidating, insulting and ridiculing.
55. I now consider what orders should
be made by the Tribunal. Section 89 of the Act sets out the orders which are
able to be made
by the Tribunal and the relevant sections are as
(1) If the Tribunal finds that after an Inquiry that a complaint is
substantiated, it may make one or more of the following orders:
(a) an order that the Respondent must not repeat or continue the
discrimination or prohibited conduct;
(b) an order that the Respondent must redress any loss, injury or humiliation
suffered by the Complainant and caused by the Respondent’s
discrimination
or prohibited conduct;
(d) an order that the Respondent must pay to the Complainant, within a
specified period, an amount the Tribunal thinks appropriate
as compensation for
any loss or injury suffered by the Complainant and caused by the
Respondent’s discrimination or prohibited
(e) an order that the Respondent must pay a specified fine not exceeding 20
penalty units;
(h) any other order it thinks
appropriate.”
56. The Complainant gave evidence as to his feelings of
intimidation, humiliation, insult and ridicule following the Respondent’s
conduct in making the Facebook posts. This was serious enough for him to be
unable to work for a short period and for him to attend
a medical practitioner
and receive medication.
57. The Complainant gave evidence that he suffered a
loss of income as a result of not being able to work in the sum of $1,000. This
loss was verified by his employer Mr Yi.
58. The Complainant also gave
evidence that there was a delay of one month in the renting of the room in his
unit which also resulted
in extra payments being made of approximately $800 to
$1,000 shared between him and his other roommate in the unit.
Respondent’s conduct caused serious effects on the Complainant’s
health and for a short period of time impacted
his ability to work and to engage
confidently with the public. The Facebook posts by the Respondent were
objectively offensive,
insulting, humiliating and ridiculing of the Complainant
because of his race.
60. Any award of compensation must be fair and
reasonable having regard to the circumstances. The principles which are
were set out in the decision of Burton v Houston
[2004] TASSC 57
the Anti-Discrimination Tribunal’s decision of Lucy Orchard v Frayne
[2020] TASADT 11.
Although the effect on the Complainant was
significant at the time, there is no evidence that this has
61. Taking into account all these matters, I determine that an
appropriate sum for compensation for the injuries suffered by the Complainant
caused by the Respondent’s conduct, including his loss of income and
expenses, to be $5,000.
62. The Tribunal orders that the Respondent, Tracey
Triffett, pay to the Complaint, Ti-Jui (Derek) Chen, within a period of 60 days
of the date of this decision the amount of $5,000 as compensation for injuries
suffered by the Complainant and caused by the Respondent’s
breach of the
The Tribunal orders pursuant to s.89(1)(d) that the Respondent,
Tracey Triffett, pay to the Complainant, Ti-Jui (Derek) Chen, within
a period of
60 days of the date of this decision, the amount of $5,000 as compensation for
injuries suffered by the Complainant and
caused by the Respondent’s
breaches of the Act.
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (234 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter