URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASRPDComm/2009/32.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:20:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tasman Planning Scheme 1979 Amendment 4/2006 [2009] TASRPDComm 32 (28 July 2009)
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Planning and Approvals Act 1993
Resource Planning
and Development Commission Act 1997
TASMAN PLANNING SCHEME
Draft Amendment 4/2006
Permit Application No 103/2004
Draft Amendment/Combined Permit
The draft Amendment
proposes to rezone land at Wades Road, White Beach from Rural A to Village
The planning permit DA 103/2004 provides for subdivision of the site into
twelve (12) lots accessed from a cul-de-sac to be constructed
on the land. As a
permit condition relevant to the density standard for the Village Infill zone,
Council required that lots must
have a minimum area of
. Other conditions imposed by Council relate to
matters such as documentation, weed management, fire protection, prohibition of
term use by temporary dwellings or caravans, road and access construction
and wastewater management. Condition 17 required the applicant
to contribute to
the upgrading of Wades Road.
meeting on 8 September 2008 and pursuant to Section 8 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission Act 1997
, the Commission
delegated to Mr J Vandenberg, Commissioner Roger Howlett and Ms Carol Hughes,
jointly and severally:
powers and functions under
sections 40
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
in relation to draft
amendment 4/2006 to the Tasman Planning Scheme 1979 and Permit No: DA 103/2004;
connection with the exercise of those powers in performance of those functions,
its powers under Part 3 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Ms Hughes was unable to take part in the hearing and the matter was determined
by Mr Vandenberg and Commissioner Howlett.
The subject land comprises a
7.237ha property (Lot 1 on SP 143813) located on hill slopes on the eastern side
of Cripps Creek and
approximately midway between existing closer settled areas
at White Beach. The site is surrounded on all boundaries by land zoned
and there is a Public Purposes reservation at the south east corner. The only
road frontage is to an access strip which
borders on a Crown Reservation and
Reserved Road, known as Wades Road. There is also a private right of way from
the north eastern
corner of the land across the adjacent title to the north.
The site does not have access to mains water, sewerage or stormwater
The land is moderately steep with a northerly aspect, rising at an average
gradient of approximately 1 in 7 from poorly drained ground
in the north-western
corner to steeper slopes in the south-eastern corner. (See Figure 1 –
Locality Map)
Subject land
Figure 1 Locality Map, Wades Road, White Beach
The natural vegetation is predominantly dry eucalypt forest, but substantial
clearing is reported to have taken place in recent years.
The TASVEG database
classifies the vegetation as ‘Eucalyptus pulchella forest and
woodland’ which is not a threatened
community. A site specific vegetation
survey has not been provided.
Soil profiles are diverse, with nine test pits displaying various combinations
of clayey sands, clays and dolerite boulders overlain
by sands. Slopes range
from 2 to 12 degrees. The site investigations, by Aldanmark Consulting
Engineers, concluded that the potential
for landslip and other geotechnical
risks was low to moderate and the site was suitable for subdivision
construction, subject to
good building practices, maintenance of vegetation and
careful site water management. Septic tank and trench systems were possible
deep well drained sands but the risk of ground water contamination was flagged
if septic tank and trench systems were used on
the low-lying lots. Further
investigation of appropriate waste water treatment systems would be required for
The application was for rezoning and a 12-lot subdivision with lot sizes ranging
certified amendment and the permit are dated 16 October 2006. The permit has not
lapsed because it has not yet come into effect,
pending the Commission’s
decision. The permit required amended plans, complying with a
minimum lot size (the minimum for the Village
Infill zone) to be submitted to Council. The amendment and permit were publicly
no representations were received and the documentation was then
forwarded to the Commission for determination.
The Commission, on 5 March 2007, considered a report from one of its planning
officers and decided to reject the draft amendment
and refuse the permit for the
following reasons: -
Amendment does not further the sustainable development of natural and physical
resources as it has the potential to contribute
to cumulative environmental
impacts on water quality at White Beach (Objective 1(a));
Amendment is not considered to provided for fair, orderly and sustainable use
and development as it seeks to rezone unserviced
rural land without any
strategic context (Objective 1(b));
Amendment perpetuates the ad hoc nature of development in White Beach and does
not represent sound strategic planning (Objective
Amendment is likely to exacerbate the known risks associated with inadequate
wastewater disposal and therefore, does not
secure a pleasant and safe living
and recreational environment (Objectives 2(f) and 2(h)); and
Amendment has not been prepared in accordance with the
Tasmanian State
Coastal Policy 1996.
The landowner appealed to the Supreme Court under the
Judicial Review Act
Mr Justice Blow found that the Commission had acted unfairly in not
giving the applicant an opportunity to comment on two matters
planner’s report prior to making its decision. Those matters related to
‘waste water management and the strategic
basis for the proposed
zoning’. On 8 November 2007, His Honour ordered that the
Commission’s decision be set aside and
referred back to the Commission for
further consideration.
The Commission determined to hold a hearing at which the applicant and the
Council would be given an opportunity to address the outstanding
wastewater management and strategy.
Date and Place of Hearing
The hearing was held on 5
May 2009 at the Commission’s offices, Hobart.
Attendance at the Hearing
Robert Higgins
Sean McElwaine, lawyer
Irene Duckett,
planning consultant, Ireneinc Planning P/L
Sam Walters, consulting engineer,
Aldanmark P/L (by phone)
Documents considered
submission by Ireneinc Planning Pty Ltd, dated May 2005
water treatment report by Aldanmark Pty Ltd, April 2005
and Minutes of Council meeting of 16 October 2006
4/2006, certified by Council 16 October 2006
permit, application no. DA103/204, dated 16 October 2006
and s 43F(6) report advising that no representations were received
from Aldanmark Pty Ltd, 31 January 2008 clarifying earlier report
letter dated 12 December 2007 providing additional comments to the Commission in
relation to waste water management and strategic
basis for amendment
Supplementary
planning submission by Ireneinc Planning Pty Ltd, undated but received by the
Commission on 4 February 2009
Evidence at the Hearing
Mr Higgins advised that the
application had been with Council since 2004 and in the intervening period there
had been several changes
of management and planning officers. He did not possess
a comprehensive history of the application.
The current Tasman planning scheme is old (1979) but various efforts to
modernise the strategic basis for the planning scheme had
not yet resulted in a
new planning scheme. Consultant, Bob Graham, had prepared a strategic background
report some years ago but
its present status was uncertain. Attempts to produce
a draft planning scheme had not progressed to formal certification. Strategic
planning for Tasman and the East Coast more generally is still in flux and the
subject of a current study, the East Coast Sub-regional
Strategy Study.
Mr Higgins also advised that the boundaries of the White Beach settlement(s)
are not formally defined or mapped and that Wades Road
is not a Council road or
maintainable by Council.
Waste Water
Mr Higgins advised that Council was not in a position
to fund a sewerage system for White Beach. Headworks contributions had been
obtained previously from some subdividers but these had had to be reimbursed due
to Council’s inability to progress the project
within the required
timeframe. Prospects for sewerage under the new regional service authority
regime were uncertain but thought
to be at least 2 years away.
Ms Duckett relied on her written reports and advised that the availability of
sewerage did not affect the subdivision of the subject
land, since all lots
could install self-contained systems. However the unavailability of sewerage
would impact on the capacity to
consolidate the White Beach settlement because
the land between the headlands, and north east of the subject land, was
and unable to satisfactorily dispose of waste water. Settlement
expansion will be limited to higher ground.
Planning strategy
In the absence of a more recently adopted strategy, assessment of the
amendment must be based on the provisions of the 1979 Tasman
planning scheme,
supplemented by information made available by Ms Duckett and Council.
In correspondence to the Commission dated 12 December 2007 Council’s
planning manager, Mr Darke, wrote,
White Beach is identified in the Council’s draft planning
scheme as a settlement node. The strategy for this settlement node
consolidation with limited expansion, provided development does not result in
further linear expansion along main roads and
the coast.”
He noted that the permanent population had increased by 22 persons between the
2001 and 2006 Censuses and continued,
“In the White Beach area there are a large number of vacant lots, some
200 or more. Many of these although classified as vacant
are occupied by
caravans or sheds and become temporary residences or campsites over the holiday
period. This brings with it its own
problems including wastewater disposal.
Council is attempting to tackle these problems through policies and by-laws.
Under current
policy it is not possible to construct [a] shed on a vacant
Mr Darke asserted that there were no large tracts of un-subdivided residential
land in the White Beach area and virtually no vacant
residential land for
subdivision. The creation of lots smaller than 2000m
was not encouraged and there were less than 10 vacant lots in the
The basis for these claims (such as a documented assessment of capacity and
realised development potential in each zone) was
not explained. He concluded,
Given that the location of the proposed lots does not extend
development along a main road or the coast and there is a demand for
lots, the proposal can be supported.”
Ms Duckett noted that the relevant planning scheme objectives sought to
concentrate development in existing settlements, encourage
future development to
be in character and scale with existing settlements and the local environment,
discourage sporadic, scattered
or ribbon development and discourage small lot
subdivision where it would adversely affect landscape character, conservation
or maintenance of agricultural production.
Ms Duckett’s supplementary report submitted that the White Beach area
was extensive and consisted of clusters of small residential
) surrounded by
larger lots (~10 ha) that formed a wooded backdrop to the settlement. She
considered that lots of the intermediate
size proposed were nevertheless
responsive to the scale and character of the area and would provide a lot size
that was in demand
but not currently available in White Beach. In her opinion
the proposal did not represent ribbon development, did not affect significant
landscape values and, due to poor sandy soils, would not affect agricultural
production potential.
It was further submitted that future development of other land in the White
Beach area was constrained by poor drainage, heavy vegetation,
or existing
residential, agricultural or marine uses. Therefore it was suggested by Ms
Duckett that the proposed location off Wades
Road was, “
appropriate and best suited location for the next release of residential
At the hearing Ms Duckett sought to qualify some
observations noted in Mr Graham’s report that the subdivision pattern in
areas of the municipality was ad hoc or opportunistic, usually
consisting of a ribbon of lots along many coastal margins. Mr Graham
noted that at Penzance and White Beach there had been a more extensive
subdivision process, with land set back from the
coast being subdivided for
holiday housing. (R. J Graham & Associates, Tasman Municipality, Resource
and Development Issues,
January 2003, pp55-56)
Ms Duckett submitted that the cadastral maps of the area did not give a
complete picture of recent subdivision and development in
the vicinity of the
subject land, such as a multi-dwelling development for holiday homes on the
title immediately to the north.
Reasons for the Decision
The Draft Amendment
The requested zone for the land is Village Infill. The planning scheme sets the
intent of the zone and establishes a minimum lot
size as follows:
“8.3 Village Infill Zone
8.3.1 The intent of
this zone is to consolidate development, that is in scale and character with the
existing settlement and that
retains the natural vegetation cover, so as to
utilise both the physical and social infrastructure.
8.3.2 Each allotment comprising a subdivision intended to be used for the
purposes permitted under this scheme in this, zone shall
have a minimum area of
4000 square metres with a minimum frontage and depth of 40 metres and 60 metres
respectively.”
Waste water
On the engineering advice, it is accepted that the soils on the subject land are
capable of supporting suitably designed, individual
waste water treatment
systems on relatively large residential lots. The absence of a reticulated
sewerage system is not, in itself,
a bar to residential development at the
density allowed by the Village Infill zone.
However, as Ms Duckett acknowledged, the absence of sewerage does impact on a
Council strategy to consolidate the White Beach settlements.
previous attempt to implement a sewerage strategy, funded partly by subdivider
contributions, has failed. The matter
is now out of Council’s hands and
depends on the as yet undetermined infrastructure priorities of a new regional
sewerage authority.
It would seem from Mr Darke’s comments that the land use strategy for
White Beach, as expressed in the current allocation of
zones, is not working.
There are many small vacant lots in the residential zones but for whatever
reason they are not being built
Planning strategy
The statement of intent for the Village Infill zone suggests that there would or
should be other physical or social infrastructure
available. There is no public
infrastructure for the proposed Village Infill zone at Wades Road. There are no
water mains, sewers,
drains, electricity or telecommunications services serving
the land. Wades Road is a narrow gravel road not maintainable by Council.
our inspection, Wades Road crosses Cripps Creek over a rudimentary low level
bridge at which the road level is quite close to
the waterline.
The lack of certainty concerning whose responsibility it is to maintain the only
means of vehicular access to the land raises concerns
of intensifying its use through residential development. The risk of
residents’ isolation in the
event of bridge failure or road flooding
(perhaps as a consequence of sea level rise or storm events) does not seem to
considered.
Also, the concepts of ‘consolidation’ and ‘infill’
suggest to the Delegates that the Village Infill zone,
despite its relatively
low density, should be contiguous with either the Coastal Village or Closed
Residential zones and that it
should be connected in a quite direct manner to
those zones via the public road network. That is not the case here. The adjacent
land is zoned Rural A.
The loosely defined settlement of White Beach is a scattering of holiday home
clusters strung around the coastal fringe of Wedge
Bay in a dumbbell pattern,
with disjointed centres of population located on opposing headlands. An
isolated, low-density residential
subdivision midway between those centres is
not considered to contribute to consolidation.
We are not persuaded by Ms Duckett’s conclusion that the proposed location
off Wades Road is the most appropriate and best
suited location for the next
release of residential land. There would seem to be no urgency for the
‘next release’, given
the number of vacant lots and rate of uptake
for building. No serious examination of alternative locations for this zone
to have been carried out by Council. If small lot size and lack of
sewerage are obstacles to development of the many existing vacant
residential
lots, then the provisions of the Closed Residential, Coastal Village and
Semi-Rural zones should be reassessed before
more of the Rural A zone is
converted to residential and other uses in the Village Infill zone. That remains
as a task to be tackled
in preparations for a replacement planning
On balance, the Delegates consider that the draft amendment is not strategically
justified and that the Village Infill Zone is not
the appropriate zone to apply
to the subject land. This amendment should be refused.
As the decision is to refuse the draft amendment, the permit also must be
Schedule 1 Objectives
(a) to promote the sustainable development of natural and physical resources
and the maintenance of ecological processes and genetic
Comment: The creation of a low density
residential zone with inadequate road connections and minimal infrastructure is
not considered
to promote sustainable development. There was no specific
evidence of adverse effects on ecological processes or biodiversity, however
is reasonable to presume that, in the absence of positive countermeasures,
clearing for human occupation would be accompanied
by loss of natural habitat
and native species.
(b) to provide for the fair, orderly and sustainable use and development of
air, land and water;
Comment: The establishment of a Village Infill zone detached from the remainder
of the developed White Beach settlement nodes is
not considered to represent
orderly and sustainable use of land.
(c) to encourage public involvement in resource management and
Comment: The amendment has been considered through a process that encourages
public involvement.
(d) to facilitate economic development in accordance with the objectives set
out in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c);
Comment: The draft
amendment may superficially appear to facilitate economic development but the
full public costs of supporting
residential use at this location have not been
(e) to promote the sharing of responsibility for resource management and
planning between the different spheres of government, the
community and industry
in the State;
Comment: Strategically sound planning and resource management for the White
Beach settlement will require consultation and commitment
by stakeholders
including State government, the regional servicing authority, Council, land
owners and the affected community. This
has not yet occurred.
It is considered that the draft amendment has not adequately satisfied the
objectives in regard to strategic planning, policy integration and effective
planning instruments based on land capability and infrastructure
Application of State Policies
State Coastal Policy 1996
The subject land is within 1 km of the coastline and the Policy is applicable.
Prior to review of its decision by the Supreme Court,
the Commission had
determined that the amendment had not been prepared in accordance with the
Tasmanian State Coastal Policy 1996.
Justice Blow’s
did not overturn that aspect of the Commission’s
State Policy on Water Quality Management 1997
is applicable but the amendment, of itself, does not direct any outcomes to the
furtherance of the Policy. Achievement
of water quality management objectives is
frequently left to specific permit conditions upon development of land.
The Commission rejects the draft amendment pursuant to
Section 41(b)
Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
) and refuses the permit.
John Vandenberg Roger Howlett
Delegate (Chair) Delegate
28 July 2009
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (4.5 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter