URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCAT/2025/205.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
KI (Review enduring power of attorney) [2025] TASCAT 205 (6 November 2025)
KI (Review enduring power of attorney) [2025] TASCAT 205
Guardianship Stream
HI (Applicant)
KFI (Attorney)
Hearing Date:
8 July 2025
Final written submissions 22 July 2025
Hearing Location:
Date of Orders:
18 August 2025
Date Reasons Issued:
10 November 2025
C Fougere, Senior Member
R Banks, Ordinary Member
D Morris, Ordinary
Orders Made:
The application to Review Enduring Power of Attorney PA [redacted]
registered 21 October 2024 made by the donor [KI] is dismissed.
Catchwords:
Review enduring power of attorney – presumption of mental capacity to
make EPOA – longitudinal assessment of mental capacity
– duties of
Legislation Cited:
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
Tasmanian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2020
Cases Cited:
CX (Federal Jurisdiction Issue)
[2025] TASCAT 158
(Request to Withdraw Application)
[2022] TASCAT 21
Murphy v Doman
[2003] NSWCA 249
(2003) 58 NSWLR 51
Scott v Scott
[2012] NSWSC 1541
(Review Enduring Powers)
[2014] TASGAB 12
Szozda v Szozda
Representation:
KI: E Dalgleish – Tasmania Legal Aid
HI: J Kirkwood, Tierney Law
KFI: R Foon, Douglas & Collins Lawyers
2025/GAB/416
Publication Restriction:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
9 July 2025, we reserved our decision (subject to the provision by the parties
of final written submissions) in respect of an application
made by HI (the
applicant) seeking review of the enduring power of attorney (EPOA) made by his
father, KI (the donor) on 11 October
final written submission was received on 22 July 2025.
18 August 2025, we determined that the application should be dismissed. These
are our reasons for that determination.
donor is a 90-year-old man who has lived in a residential aged care facility in
regional Tasmania since late October 2024. The
donor’s wife of 51 years
passed away in early October 2024 following a fall at their home.
addition to HI, the donor and his late wife have another child, KFI, who was
appointed as attorney under the EPOA (the attorney).
donor was admitted to a public hospital on 1 October 2024, being the same date
of his wife’s accident at the family home.
Tragically, the donor’s
wife passed away on 5 October 2024.
donor was transferred to a private hospital on 4 October. On 11 October 2024,
the donor made the EPOA that appointed KFI as his
EPOA was prepared and witnessed by XK, solicitor. The attorney asserts that she
was asked by her father to arrange for the EPOA
to be prepared and she contacted
XK who was known to her professionally. XK attended with a draft of the EPOA at
the private hospital
on 11 October 2024 and met privately with the donor. A
summary of XK’s evidence about this event is set out later in these
Reasons. Suffice to say as part of this background that XK formed the opinion
that the donor understood the nature and effect of
the EPOA. The donor signed
the document and XK and an employee of his firm witnessed the donor’s
attorney accepted her appointment on the same date. The enduring power of
attorney was registered on 21 October 2024.
on 11 October 2024, the donor made an enduring guardianship appointment that
appointed KFI as his enduring guardian. KFI also
accepted this appointment on
the same date. There was no application before us concerning the enduring
guardianship appointment.
We therefore made no findings about the making or
operation of this appointment other than to note that the applicant expressed
view that he had no reservations about the personal care that his sister had
provided to their father since moving to the regional
city and aged care
facility in which he continues to live.
donor was discharged from hospital on 29 October 2024 and, on the same date, was
transported by the attorney’s partner to
the aged care facility where he
continues to live and which is close to where the attorney and her family live.
From his date of
admission to the end of December 2024, the donor was in respite
care at the aged care facility. In early January 2025, he became
a permanent
the request of the attorney, on 17 January 2025 an assessment of the donor was
undertaken by Dr FS, Consultant Psychiatrist. The
attorney arranged for the
assessment “for the purpose of determining [the donor’s] capacity to
make decisions concerning
his remaining in residential care, the location of the
place of care and the disposal of his residential property...” The
Psychiatrist’s report of his assessment of the donor states
A Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) was administered as a standardised brief
approximate measure of dysmnesia and dementia...
His MMSE score was 16/30.
[The donor] has a general understanding of his right to decide where he is to
live, but appears to have already delegated that decision
and accepted the
status quo. He would prefer a placement in or near [redacted] but that is a
matter of long-term familiarity, and
he recognises the value of proximity to his
daughter in [regional Tasmania]. He does not understand why he cannot
practically return
[The donor] displayed evident difficulties retaining information, perseverating
on issues that had engaged his attention or emerged
saliently from his long-term
memory. He could express general preferences regarding his placement and the
competing advantages and
disadvantages of the alternatives, but he has no strong
emotional commitment to any of the alternatives and could announce no
substantive
decision. He appears to have already delegated the decision.
It is my opinion that his decision-making capacity is substantially impaired and
effectively lacking for the matters under consideration.
His evident incapacity
for decision-making is a product of an undoubted dementia and the lacunar rather
than continuous memory impairment
is consistent with a vascular component or a
recent unrecalled systemic illness with delirium.
attorney engaged the Consultant Psychiatrist again in May 2025 to provide an
updated assessment. In a report dated 22 May 2025,
the Consultant Psychiatrist
noted that the donor scored significantly lower on a MMSE than his score on the
same test in January
2025 (11-12 out of 30 in May 2025 compared with 16/30 in
January 2025). The Consultant Psychiatrist expressed the opinion that by
of dementia, the donor lacks capacity to make decisions concerning his care and
place of residence. He also lacks capacity
to make a decision concerning his
Application for review
1 May 2025, the applicant lodged an application to review the EPOA. The
application challenged both the donor’s capacity
to make the EPOA and also
the manner in which the attorney had exercised her authority as attorney.
orders sought by the applicant include:
A declaration
that the donor did not, at the relevant time, have mental capacity to make a
The appointment
of a new attorney
A determination
understood the applicant’s primary position to be that his father did not
have the capacity to make the EPOA, the EPOA should
be revoked and an
administration order should be made that appoints the applicant as his
father’s administrator. Alternatively,
if the EPOA is not revoked, then
the applicant should replace his sister as attorney.
applicant believes that a review of the EPOA is necessary as all attempts to
discuss the situation as a family have failed. He
believes that he can act in
his father’s best interests and in accordance with his father’s true
wishes and preferences
if given the opportunity to be a decision
Statutory framework – Review of enduring powers of
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
(Tas) (POA Act) contains the
provisions relating to enduring powers of attorney.
degree of understanding a donor requires to create a valid EPOA is set out in s
30 of the POA Act.
30(2)(a) and (3) provide as follows:
(2) A deed or instrument is not effective to create an enduring power of
attorney unless –
(a) the donor understands the nature and effect of the deed or instrument;
(3) For the purposes of
subsection (2)(a)
a donor is taken to understand the nature and effect of a deed or instrument
only if he or she understands the following matters:
(a) that the donor may, in the enduring power of attorney, specify or limit the
power to be given to an attorney and instruct an
attorney about the exercise of
(b) when the power begins;
(c) that, once the power for a matter begins, the attorney has power to make,
and will have full control over, the matter subject
to terms or information
(d) that the donor may revoke the enduring power of attorney at any time when he
or she has the mental capacity to do so;
(e) that the power the donor has given continues even if the donor subsequently
loses his or her mental capacity;
(f) that the donor is unable to oversee the use of the power if he or she
subsequently loses mental capacity.
32 of the POA Act sets out the duties of an attorney:
32. Duties of attorney under enduring power of attorney
(1) An attorney under an enduring power of attorney,
during any period of mental incapacity of the donor –
(a) is taken to be a trustee of the property and
affairs of the donor according to the tenor of the power; and
(b) must exercise his or her powers as attorney to
protect the interests of the donor –
and, if he or she fails to do so, is liable to compensate the donor for any loss
occasioned by the failure.
(1A) An attorney, in so far as doing so will not
conflict with the attorney's duty under subsection (1) to protect the
interests of
the donor, must at all times exercise his or her powers under an
enduring power of attorney as far as is possible and reasonable
circumstances –
(a) in the best interests of the donor; and
(b) in consultation with the donor; and
(c) taking into account –
(i) the wishes of the donor, in so far as
those wishes have been, or can be, ascertained; and
(ii) what would be reasonably likely to be
the wishes of the donor, if he or she were not subject to a mental
incapacity.
(1B) For the purposes of this section, an exercise of
a power under an enduring power of attorney is not to be taken to constitute
failure to protect the interests of the donor, and is to be taken to be in the
best interests of the donor, if –
(a) it is an exercise of a power that the donor
would have been likely to make if he or she were not subject to a mental
incapacity;
(b) the exercise of the power consists of
providing for those persons who the donor would expect to provide for, if he or
not subject to a mental incapacity.
(2) An attorney under an enduring power of attorney is
not competent to appoint another person to perform any functions or exercise
powers in his or her capacity as such.
(3) An attorney under an enduring power of attorney
must keep any property of the donor (apart from property held by the attorney
and the donor as tenants in common or joint tenants) separate from property of
the attorney.
33 of the POA Act sets out the power of the Tribunal to make orders in respect
of enduring powers of attorney:
33. Power of Tribunal to make orders in respect of enduring power of
(1AA) In this section, a reference to an
enduring power of attorney includes a reference to a purported enduring power of
(1) The Tribunal may –
(a) of its own motion; or
(b) on application by an attorney; or
(c) on application by or on behalf of a donor;
(d) on application by any other person who
the Tribunal believes has a proper interest in the matter –
hold a hearing in accordance with the
Tasmanian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2020
to review an enduring power of attorney.
(1A) The Tribunal may dismiss an application for
review if it is of the opinion that the application is frivolous, vexatious or
in substance.
(1B) Without limiting the matters to which the
Tribunal may have regard in relation to a review in respect of a donor, the
may open and read any paper or writing which purports to be, or is
alleged to be, the will of the donor.
(2) On the review, the Tribunal may, by
(a) vary a term of, or a power conferred by, the
enduring power of attorney; or
(b) appoint a substitute attorney; or
(c) appoint an administrator of the estate of the
donor if he or she is over the age of 18 years; or
(d) declare that the donor did or did not
have mental capacity to make a valid enduring power of attorney or to revoke an
power of attorney; or
(e) declare that the enduring power of
attorney or the revocation of it by the donor is invalid if the Tribunal is
satisfied that
(i) the donor did not have the mental capacity
to make the power or the revocation, respectively; or
(ii) the power or the revocation,
respectively, does not comply with the other requirements of this Act; or
(iii) the power or the revocation,
respectively, is invalid because the donor was induced to make it by dishonesty
or undue influence
or invalid for any other reason; or
(f) revoke the enduring power of attorney
and, if the donor is over the age of 18 years and the Tribunal thinks fit,
appoint an administrator
of his or her estate; or
(g) make such other order as to the exercise
of the power, or the construction of its terms, as the Tribunal thinks fit.
relation to the Tribunal’s power under
to revoke an EPOA and
appoint an administrator of the estate,
provides as follows:
(3) An appointment of a person as administrator under
subsection (2)(f)
has the same effect as if it had been made under
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1995
38 of the POA Act is as follows:
38 Saving provision
Except as provided by this Part, nothing in this Part is taken to derogate from
the law relating to powers of attorney.
Donor’s views
Tribunal appointed a separate representative for the donor on 9 May 2025 and
Ms Dalgleish participated in the hearing in this
capacity. Ms Dalgleish
visited the donor on 29 May 2025. She had not informed anyone that she was
coming to visit the donor.
separate representative recounted the conversation she had with the donor during
her visit. Our understanding of the salient parts
of that conversation is
summarised as follows:
The donor has a
close relationship with his daughter and they get on very well
His son does not
like what has happened in terms of the donor being moved to regional
The donor would
go back to the area in which he had lived if he could live at home but does not
want to go to a nursing home in that
“not too bad” where he is living
The donor did
not remember making the EPOA that is the subject of these proceedings. He did
not remember that a lawyer had visited
him in the hospital
In response to
the separate representative asking him who he would appoint as his attorney if
he could appoint someone now, the donor
responded that he would appoint his
The donor said
that “he wished that both [the applicant] and [the attorney] would get on
better but he thought that [the attorney]
would be best to manage his
Prior to the
donor going into hospital, the applicant had been contributing approximately
$80.00 per month to household expenses
In response to
the separate representative asking the donor what would happen if he returned to
live in his home, the donor responded
that the applicant works full time and
when he went to work there would be no-one with the donor; the donor
“wasn’t sure”
if the applicant would do a good job of looking
separate representative noted that based on her discussion with the donor, her
observation was that the donor had no insight into
his dementia nor his need for
care. He was “fairly clear that he was very close to [the attorney] and
she does a lot for him
and he’s close to her and was happy for her to be
doing this”.
separate representative had a subsequent conversation with the donor by
telephone. She called him on the day before the hearing
to ask whether he wished
to attend the hearing. The donor told the separate representative that he did
not wish to take part in the
hearing. During that conversation, he also repeated
that he would prefer to be living in his home but not in a nursing home in the
area in which he had previously lived.
that the donor had told the separate representative that he did not wish to take
part in the hearing, we did not attempt to
of the donor’s family members opposed this course of action. We were
satisfied that we
were able to understand his views as provided to the separate
representative.
Challenge to donor’s capacity to make EPOA
on 11 October 2024
Applicant’s evidence and submissions
the statement attached to his application, the applicant outlined the basis for
his application challenging his father’s
capacity to make the
EPOA was signed when the donor was sick and unwell in hospital
donor had little or no understanding of what a power of attorney even was. This
was based on what the applicant describes as questioning
of his father in early
January 2025. The applicant “was surprised that his father had no
recollection of signing the relevant
legal document and did not even know what a
power of attorney was”
donor had no understanding of what decisions he was delegating to the attorney
donor’s mental capacity was questionable considering that a medical report
prepared by the Consultant Psychiatrist three
months after the EPOA was made
determined that he had lost capacity to make decisions
that the document was signed under undue influence
to the applicant, the Consultant Psychiatrist’s assessment of the donor on
17 January 2025 is relevant to the donor’s
capacity to have made the
EPOA three months earlier as, in the applicant’s words, “I
don’t think dementia appears
overnight ... it’s a
applicant also asserted that the timing and circumstances surrounding his
father’s signing of the EPOA on 11 October 2024
are also questionable
given the donor is an elderly man who had just lost his wife.
the week following the death of the donor’s wife, the donor was
“receiving strong medications due to a urinary tract
infection and
experiencing nightmares due to being witness to his wife’s fall on 1
applicant said that he was at the hospital visiting his father nearly every day
and that his father “was in a pretty bad
way. He just lost his wife of 51
years” and “was in no situation for something as complex as an
EPOA”. According
to the applicant, his father was “never really the
same” after what happened to his wife and he “really went
after that happened.
his oral evidence, the applicant stated that, on 11 October 2024, he arrived
early in the morning to visit his father and left
for 60 to 90 minutes for lunch
and to visit the church not far from the hospital. He was not present when XK
met with his father.
He does not recall seeing his sister at the hospital on
a consequence of reviewing his 2024 text messages and a text he sent to the
attorney on 22 October 2024, the applicant recalled
that, on that date, the
donor underwent a “generic thirty-question Cognitive Screening Test with
an occupational therapist”
at the private hospital. According to the
applicant, who was in the hospital room when the testing took place, his memory
“[the donor] scored poorly and the visiting doctor informed [the
applicant] that [the donor] was showing clear signs of dementia”.
according to the applicant, he sent a text message to his sister on 22 October
to the effect of telling her that their father
had a screening test that day and
that he did not do very well.
a record of the text message to the attorney nor a record of the assessment said
to have been conducted on 22 October 2024
was submitted in evidence before the
to the applicant, when visiting his father at the aged care facility on
15 May 2025, after a brief discussion about the
matter, the donor became
“quite upset when he said he had no recollection of signing the
separate representative questioned the applicant as to whether he had any
concerns about the donor’s capacity prior to the
events that led to the
donor’s hospitalisation. The applicant’s response was that his
father “was forgetful at
the best of times”, he was paying household
bills jointly with his wife, noting “probably mum gave him a little bit of
and there were never “huge concerns”.
The applicant answered in the
negative when asked whether there had ever been a suggestion that the donor see
a GP or geriatrician
because of concerns about his memory or decision-making.
Statement of LX dated 29 June 2025
written, signed but unsworn statement by LX was filed with the Tribunal on 30
June 2025. LX states that she was one of the best
friends of the donor’s
late wife for over 30 years, has known the donor for that same length of
time and, in the 12 months
prior to the death of the donor’s wife, had
visited their home on almost a daily basis. LX states that she had been invited
to make “a late witness statement” at the request of the applicant.
The statement also notes that LX did not wish to
get involved in any family
dispute and did not intend to attend the hearing on 8 July.
statement sets out the visits she made to the donor in hospital and her
observations of his demeanour. She describes a
visit she made with the applicant
on 11 October 2024. LX expressed an opinion about the donor’s
“mental and physical
state” on that date. LX also expressed opinions
his father’s financial needs.
did not participate in the hearing and according to a Registry file note dated 1
July 2025, in a telephone conversation with a
Registry officer asked that her
details be removed from the Tribunal notification system and that she
“does not wish to be
involved at all in this hearing”.
Attorney’s evidence and submissions
attorney explained that her father was hospitalised on 1 October 2024 because
the paramedics who attended at the family home to
transport his wife to hospital
after her accident would not leave him alone at home due to his age and shock.
The donor was reviewed
on arrival and was treated for a urinary tract infection
(UTI). He is at high risk of experiencing UTI’s as he has a supra-pubic
catheter in place as a consequence of chronic renal disease. The donor was
admitted to a medical ward on 2 October 2024. The attorney
was told that the
donor could not return home later in the week as there would not be sufficient
supports in place in relation to
his physical care and that there would need to
be a referral for an ACAT assessment and catheter management assessment. He was
transferred
to a private hospital on 4 October 2024 as he was awaiting a bed in
respite care, and remained there until 29 October 2024.
attorney acknowledged that she did not seek a medical report or assessment of
the donor prior to the signing of the EPOA on 11
October 2024. She stated
“I had several conversations with Dad about this between 3 and 11 October
2024 where he presented
as lucid and was direct in relation to his wishes. The
conversation whereby I be appointed was consistent with discussions over the
last year I had with mum and dad where we discussed the appointment of my mother
and me as the attorney for dad.”
to the attorney, over a period from October 2023 onwards, she had had
discussions with her parents to try and assist them
to each make an EPOA as well
as a will for her mother. In November 2023, according to the attorney, the donor
told her that he wanted
his wife and the attorney appointed as his attorneys.
According to the attorney, her mother put off making arrangements to make the
appointments and they did not eventuate.
attorney stated that at the hospital, “Dad gave me clear instructions
for mum’s funeral and
raised concerns about not being able to get to the bank while in hospital, so he
asked me to investigate
bills such as the home and contents insurance which was
due for payment. Dad also had clear views around my mother’s funeral
sound reasoning for it.”
attorney noted that upon checking, her dad was correct about outstanding bills.
She believed that he understood what needed to
happen for his finances to be
placed in order especially whilst he was unable to leave the hospital.
attorney gave evidence that following a discussion with her father on 3 October
she contacted XK at a law firm as her father had
requested that a power of
attorney be prepared. The attorney contacted this firm as she “was looking
for a reputable firm”
and, had no-one been available to assist then, she
would have contacted another firm. The attorney knew XK as they had had
professional
dealings in the past and her cousin is a good friend of XK. The
attorney thought that that personal relationship “might be
something dad
would be comfortable with”. The attorney advises that, in the initial
telephone conversation between the attorney
and XK, XK asked her whether or not
the donor would have capacity to make the EPOA. The attorney said that she told
him, “based
on my interactions with him I think he does but ultimately
that will be a matter for you”.
attorney told XK what her father’s wishes were for the EPOA. In response
to the Tribunal’s query whether she thought
it might be advisable for
instructions about the content of the EPOA to be given directly by her father,
rather than by her, the
attorney responded that she did not have that discussion
with XK. She told us that “Dad asked me to organise it for him which
did”. The draft EPOA was prepared on the basis of the information provided
by the attorney to XK.
attorney stated that she was aware that concerns were raised around her father
showing signs of dementia over the last couple
of years. When he lived at home
he had support from his wife and the district nurses. Since 2019, he had been in
receipt of a level
3 In Home Care Package. He was seen weekly in relation
to management of his catheter and paid care workers came three times a week
assist the donor with showering. The attorney’s day-to-day functioning was
nevertheless largely unaffected and he was otherwise
independent and active. The
attorney stated that “he still attended all medical appointments without
mum. He’s come up
on the bus to [a regional location] and stayed with me.
He did his own tax return. He was still an active volunteer at St Vincent
attorney said that “I saw and spoke to him on a regular basis. I had no
reason to believe that my father no longer had decision-making
capacity on 11
October 2024.”
donor was discharged from the private hospital on 29 October and was transported
to the regional aged care facility where he continues
to the attorney, her father experienced a decline in his mental state over the
period of November and December 2024. He
experienced delirium over this time
and, at times, was confused and disoriented.
attorney provided an assessment form dated 16 November 2024 setting out the
results of a Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE)
completed by an enrolled nurse
at the regional residential aged care facility. This assessment recorded the
donor scoring 12 out
of a possible 30 which was described in the document as
indicating “moderate cognitive impairment”.
became very unwell on 17 November 2024 and, over the next month, was unwell with
a UTI, sepsis, bladder infection and had a fall.
The donor had four admissions
to a regional hospital during this period.
attorney’s evidence is that she engaged the Consultant Psychiatrist in
December 2024 to undertake an assessment of the donor
when it became clear that
the donor’s high level care needs meant that he could not return home. The
attorney was concerned
as to whether the donor had the capacity to make a fully
informed decision about becoming a permanent resident and with managing
finances. The attorney said that she funded the assessment by the Consultant
Psychiatrist to ensure that she had all of the necessary
information.
summary of the Consultant Psychiatrist’s conclusions based on an
assessment conducted on 17 January 2025 is set out at [12]
above. A further
assessment was carried out by the Consultant Psychiatrist at the request of the
attorney in May 2025. A summary
of his conclusions set out in a report dated 22
May 2025 is set out at [13] above.
Affidavit of XK
gave written evidence in the form of a sworn affidavit dated 4 June 2025 and
oral evidence at the hearing.
evidence can be summarised as follows.
is a Principal and Senior Partner of a law firm. He was admitted to practice in
the Supreme Court of Tasmania in November 1995.
For the vast majority of that
time, his practice has included advising and drawing wills and powers of
11 October 2024, he attended the hospital to visit the donor and to witness him
executing an EPOA in favour of his daughter.
had not previously met the donor but had known the attorney professionally for a
number of years. One of the donor’s nephews
is an old and close friend of
attorney had contacted XK several days before to arrange the appointment. She
had spoken to him about preparing the document and
the donor was expecting XK on
the day of the signing.
was aware when he spoke with the donor that the donor had wanted to appoint an
attorney for some time and that he and his late
wife had previously discussed
signing a power of attorney.
attorney waited outside the room when XK attended the donor.
checked to make sure there was no coercion or undue influence. The donor was
able to explain why he wanted an attorney (because
he was “getting older
and it would help”) and that the attorney was a logical choice as she was
very well organised and
a professional person.
relation to the signing of the EPOA, XK states in his affidavit:
I saw no indication whatsoever that [the donor] did not understand the document
he was signing nor any evidence of cognitive decline.
I understand that he was
in hospital at the time for shock as his wife had very recently died. He was
certainly aware of his surrounds,
who his family was and discussed my friend
[the nephew of the donor] and that his sister had passed away as well not long
our meeting.
I advised him that, prior to signing the document, that it was a General
Enduring Power of Attorney that would allow [the attorney]
to administer his
financial matters, real property and the like. I also advised him the nature of
it being a General Enduring Power
of Attorney, in that it endured beyond him
losing mental capacity but he wished for the Power of Attorney to be registered
immediately.
I advised him that once registered he would not be able to revoke
that if he lost subsequent capacity. He understood that. I know
understood as he was able to explain in his own words what I had said and had
stated what the purpose of the Enduring Power
of Attorney was when I asked him
at the beginning of our meeting. We also discussed limiting powers contained in
the Power of Attorney
and that he wanted to I could redraw the document but he
did not wish to do so and told me that he wanted [the attorney] to do what
He was aware that he had two children but was very clear that he only wished
[the attorney] to be his attorney.
response to the Tribunal’s question as to why he took instructions from
the attorney to prepare the draft EPOA and not from
the donor, XK responded that
it was a matter of convenience and that his understanding was that the
information given by the attorney
was in accordance with the donor’s
instructions. However, “I was not going to sign it unless I went through
it with [the
donor] and asked him whether that was in accordance with the
instructions that have been relayed to me”. XK said that it did
to him to have a telephone conversation with the donor before attending at the
hospital and that “if his instructions
were different from the
instructions that I had received from the phone from [the attorney] at the time
I would go back to my office
and redraft or not sign”.
relation to the issue of the donor’s capacity to make the EPOA, XK said
that he “certainly ... addressed [his] mind
to it”. XK stated:
It’s not my first time going to a hospital to have a will or a power of
attorney signed. And I always address my mind to that
and those in any
circumstance, but in particular those circumstances. That’s why I asked
him at the first (sic) what is it
that you’re signing, what is your
understanding? So he could provide it in his own terms about what he’s
doing. And also
I asked him whether he had considered making anybody else his
attorney or just [the attorney] and he told me in no uncertain terms
wants [the attorney] to be able to sign what he could and be able to make those
decisions and the reason was as put in my
affidavit because she’s a
professional person, that she’s capable of doing it.
went on to note:
If I had any doubts at all, and certainly there have been circumstances where
I’ve been where I’ve gone down to a hospital
or I’ve even seen
people in my office and I’ve said no, we’re not doing this...
I’m very conservative about
it. If people seem even a little bit shaky
then I ask for ... someone to provide me with some sort of medical evidence that
are actually capable but there was nothing that gave me any indication at
all that he couldn’t understand or that he was incapable
or even impaired.
response to questions from the applicant’s legal representative, XK said
that he was in the room alone with the donor (along
with his law clerk) for
necessary on a case-by-case
basis. In the donor’s case, they had had a
conversation about the donor’s broader family and he was “sharp as a
tack” on that. In response to a question as to whether they had a broader
conversation about capacity and why XK was asking
the donor these questions, XK
responded that they did and that the donor told him he wanted to make the EPOA
as he was getting older,
that it was something he had thought about doing for
some time and he wanted somebody to be able to take care of his affairs.
said he did not believe the donor was under any coercion or undue influence. He
said he asked the donor some questions to which
XK already knew the answer, and
the donor answered accurately. In answer to a direct question from the Tribunal
have done had the donor objected to the terms of the EPOA as
drafted, XK said that he would have taken it away to amend and would
discussed it with the attorney.
Law Society of Tasmania– Important considerations for
solicitors preparing an enduring power of attorney
Law Society of Tasmania issued guidelines in 2019 (“Important
considerations for solicitors preparing an enduring power
of attorney”)
intended to assist solicitors in advising clients who wish to draw up an
enduring power of attorney. It sets
out “general points for consideration
which may or may not be relevant according to the individual circumstances of
the donor”.
this document does not reflect legislative changes brought about by the
Tasmanian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2020
(TASCAT Act), its
references to the relevant provisions POA Act remain current.
Relevantly,
the guidelines state:
A solicitor taking instructions for the preparation of an enduring power of
attorney must be satisfied that the client (potential
donor) has the mental
capacity to execute that instrument.
Circumstances that might cause a solicitor to question the potential
donor’s capacity to execute the instrument might be that
the client:
a) is currently a patient in a hospital, aged care facility or supported
accommodation facility (group home or boarding house);
b) is highly supported in interviews by a family member or friend but is not as
competent in giving instructions or understanding
advice in the absence of that
family member or friend;
c) frequently changes his or her instructions;
d) behaves in a highly unusual manner, makes bizarre statements during
interviews or is excessively forgetful and disorganised.
If a solicitor has any doubts about the client’s capacity to understand
the nature and effect of the document, the solicitor
should obtain a report from
a medical practitioner, geriatrician, Occupational Therapist or a psychologist
with relevant professional
experience.
Tribunal’s consideration
were satisfied that, as the son of the donor and someone who is concerned for
his father’s welfare, the applicant had a proper
interest in the matter
pursuant to s 33(1)(d) of the POA Act to make an application to the Tribunal to
hold a hearing to review the
conducting a review of an enduring power of attorney pursuant to s 33(2) of the
POA Act, the Tribunal commences on the basis
of a presumption that the donor
possessed the “mental capacity” to make a valid EPOA. This is
consistent with the wording
of the statute. For example, the Tribunal may
declare under s 33(2)(e)(i) that an EPOA “is invalid if the [Tribunal] is
that ... the donor
did not have
the mental capacity to make
it” (emphasis added)). It also accords with the common law principle that
a person of full age
is capable of managing his or her affairs unless the
presumption is rebutted (
Murphy v Doman
[2003] NSWCA 249
(2003) 58 NSWLR 51
–[36]). More specifically, it is consistent with authorities that
confirm that, in relation to the test for capacity to perform
legally valid
acts, such as making an enduring power of attorney, the starting point is the
“presumption of sanity” (
Szozda v Szozda
[2010] NSWSC 804
term “mental capacity” is not defined in the POA Act but is informed
by the concept of “mental capacity”
under the general law (
[2012] NSWSC 1541
; POA Act, s 38). The Tribunal will
consider evidence as to a donor’s understanding of the “nature and
an EPOA at the time of execution of the deed or instrument.
However, an assessment of “mental capacity” will involve
consideration of broader parameters (
SFKD (Review Enduring Powers)
). There is no rule of general application without regard to
particular facts, and attention must be focussed on all the circumstances
Scott v Scott
particular, an exploration of all of the circumstances of a case:
... will, not uncommonly, call for consideration of events leading up to and
beyond, the time of execution of the disputed power
of attorney, as well as on
the focal point of the time of execution itself. A longitudinal assessment of
mental capacity along a
timeline extending either side of the focal point, may
be necessary, or at least permissible, in order to examine the subject’s
mental capacity in context (
Scott v Scott
first considered the evidence in relation to the period leading up to the making
of the EPOA.
attorney stated that she was “aware that concerns were raised around my
father showing signs of dementia over the last couple
of years” although
no formal assessment had been undertaken by a geriatrician. We note the support
services provided for the
donor since 2019 in relation to catheter management
and assistance with some personal activities of daily living. We also note the
evidence that he was otherwise independent and active.
applicant’s evidence was not inconsistent with these observations. He
stated that, whilst his father could be forgetful
and his mother probably gave
him some help with the payment of household bills, the applicant did not
“recall anything concrete”
and “there were never huge
relation to the donor’s admission to hospital on 1 October 2024, we accept
that he remained in hospital for an extended period
as he was waiting on a bed
in respite care. This was because there were insufficient supports in place in
relation to his physical
care were he to return home.
applicant described his father being in a “pretty bad way” when in
hospital. He was visiting his father nearly every
day. He told us that his
father was receiving medications for a UTI and that he “was in no
situation for something as complex
as an EPOA”.
applicant also relied on the statement of LX to support his contention that his
father lacked the capacity to make the enduring
power of attorney on 11 October.
Whilst proceedings conducted in the Protective Division of the Tribunal,
including under the POA
Act, are inquisitorial and not adversarial in nature
focussed as they are “on the donor and the protection of the donor’s
interests under the instrument” (
CX (Federal Jurisdiction Issue
[2025] TASCAT 158
, [48]), the rules of natural justice still apply (TASCAT
s 10(1)(a)(ii)). We did not place any weight on the matters set out
in LX’s statement. Whilst signed, the statement was not
a sworn statement
and, as LX did not participate in the hearing, her views as a lay witness about
the critical and contested issue
of the donor’s capacity could not be
tested by any of the other parties or the Tribunal.
the donor was being treated for a UTI upon admission to hospital was not in
dispute and no doubt contributed to the effects of
the shock the donor
experienced after witnessing his wife’s accident.
was, however, no documentary evidence given to us of clinical assessments
undertaken of the donor’s cognition either prior
to the making of the EPOA
on 11 October 2024 or at any time during his hospital stay from 1 to 29 October
a preliminary hearing conducted on 9 May 2025, a direction was made that any
party seeking to have a summons issued by the Tribunal
was to file an
application for summons no later than 23 May 2025. This was a mechanism by which
the applicant could have sought to
place such evidence, if it existed, before
the Tribunal. He was legally represented at all relevant times. However, the
did not make any application for the issuing of a summons.
the time leading up to the making of the EPOA, the attorney gave evidence about
discussions between her and her father about the
management of his finances. The
applicant was not privy to these discussions. This was consistent, according to
the attorney’s
evidence, with long-standing family dynamics of the donor
discussing matters relating to financial and legal matters with the attorney
given her professional qualifications. He did not have these conversations with
the applicant. In these discussions, according to
the attorney, the donor wanted
to ensure that his bills were taken care of and that the costs related to his
wife’s funeral
were met. The donor did not have any way of addressing
these matters whilst he was in hospital and, according to the applicant, it
at his instigation that the attorney made contact with a lawyer to prepare an
accept the attorney’s evidence that this was the not the first time the
making of an EPOA had been discussed. Her evidence
was that the making of
enduring powers of attorney had been a matter discussed with both of her parents
over a lengthy period but
this had not eventuated. She described her father as
being “lucid and direct in relation to his wishes”. She did not
consider seeking a medical report concerning her father’s cognition in
respect of his ability to make an enduring power of
attorney because she did not
consider it necessary given the clarity with which he expressed his wishes.
note that, in his final written submissions, the applicant submitted that there
is no evidence to corroborate that the attorney
had any prior conversation with
the donor about being appointed sole attorney. We accept the submission about a
lack of corroborating
evidence about this issue. It did not, however, detract
from the weight we placed on the attorney’s evidence about this issue
which was detailed. Her evidence was given in a clear and cogent manner and her
honesty concerning her recollections of these discussions
was not undermined by
the applicant’s submission. We also note the affidavit evidence of XK,
discussed below, to the effect
that the donor told him that he only wished his
daughter to be his attorney.
weight on the attorney’s evidence about these matters does not mean we
diminish the applicant’s concerns about
his father’s condition in
hospital. Nor does it mean that the trauma and stress of his wife’s
accident and death were
not having an effect on the donor. Nevertheless, we
found the attorney’s evidence concerning her father’s request for
EPOA to be prepared and her observations of the clarity with which he made these
requests to be persuasive.
also considered the evidence given by XK in his sworn statement and oral
evidence. The circumstances in which the EPOA was prepared
by XK and his views
consideration. We note some potentially
concerning aspects of the circumstances
leading up to the making of the EPOA and as put to us by the applicant.
took instructions about the content of the EPOA from the proposed attorney,
rather than directly from the donor. We note that direct
instructions could, for
example, have been obtained by way of a telephone conversation with the donor
prior to XK attending in person
at the hospital. However, we also take account
of XK’s response to this issue that he checked the accuracy of the
information
he had been given directly with the donor. Had anything in the draft
EPOA needed to be changed, then he would have done so.
donor was in hospital at the time. A prudent course in such circumstances may
have been to seek the opinion of the donor’s
treating team as to whether
there were concerns about the donor’s cognition at the relevant time.
Indeed, the Law Society of
Tasmania guidelines issued in 2019 on this topic
explicitly state that a client who is hospitalised at the relevant time
cause a solicitor to question the potential donor’s capacity
to execute the instrument”. The guidelines also state, however,
solicitor “has any doubts about the client’s capacity to understand
the nature and effect of the document,
the solicitor should obtain a
report” from an appropriately qualified health professional. We took
account of XK’s response
to this issue that he did not consider it
necessary to obtain a report from a health professional because he did not have
note in particular the following aspects of XK’s evidence: he saw no
indication of any cognitive decline or that the donor
did not understand the
document; the donor was able to explain in his own words the information XK
provided to him concerning the
nature and effect of the EPOA; after discussing
the ability of the donor to limit the powers of the proposed attorney within the
instrument, the donor responded that he did not wish to do so, wanting the
attorney to do what he could; and that the donor was aware
that he had two
children but was clear that he only wished his daughter to be his attorney.
According to XK, the donor told him he
“wanted to make the EPOA as he was
getting older, that it was something he had thought about doing for some time
and he wanted
someone to be able to take care of his affairs”.
was made in the applicant’s final submissions that XK did not previously
know the donor, that he has a professional
history with the attorney and, on
XK’s evidence, that he spent about 10 minutes in which time he confirmed
the donor’s
capacity and his instructions which matched the pre-drawn
document that XK had taken with him. The applicant’s submission was
XK should have been concerned about the donor’s decision-making capacity
and he should have obtained a medical assessment
before finalising the EPOA
which, if done, is likely to have led to an assessment similar to that of the
Consultant Psychiatrist
three months later.
do not accept the applicant’s submission in this regard. Whilst there may
be concerning aspects of the manner in which instructions
were taken and the
brevity of XK’s meeting with the donor, we have noted XK’s evidence
as to the basis on which he determined,
in his professional view, that he did
not require medical evidence as to the donor’s capacity to make the EPOA.
We had regard
to XK’s longstanding experience in the area of estate
planning involving the drafting of wills and appointments of attorneys
enduring guardians. He gave cogent evidence of the steps he took to satisfy
himself that the donor had the requisite capacity
to make the EPOA and we find
his evidence persuasive.
also considered events beyond the execution of the EPOA on 11 October.
applicant made reference to an assessment of the donor undertaken on 22 October
2024 by a health professional at the private hospital.
According to the
applicant, his father “scored poorly” and according to a
“visiting doctor”, the donor “was
showing clear signs of
dementia”. The attorney stated that the applicant notified her via text on
22 October that the donor
had undergone a cognitive screen. The attorney’s
evidence is that the applicant texted that the screen “did not go well
according to [the applicant] dad did not understand the questions well. [The
applicant] was concerned that the nurse was abrupt
and rushed dad with the
questions”.
previously noted, there was no documentary evidence provided to us concerning
this assessment. While we can accept that an assessment
of some sort took place
on 22 October, and may not have “gone well”, without being
provided any independent evidence
to confirm the type of assessment, the results
of the assessment and conclusions that could be drawn from the results, we place
if any, weight on this matter.
moving to the regional aged care facility on 29 October 2024, the evidence is
that the donor’s health deteriorated. Over
November and December 2024, he
experienced a UTI, sepsis, a bladder infection and delirium. He was admitted to
hospital on four occasions
over this period.
previously noted, an MMSE was conducted on 16 November 2024 in relation to which
he scored 12 out of a possible 30 which was described
in the document as
indicating “moderate cognitive impairment”.
January 2025, the attorney arranged an assessment by the Consultant Psychiatrist
of her father’s decision-making ability
arrangements. The Consultant Psychiatrist concluded that:
It is my opinion that his decision-making capacity is substantially impaired and
effectively lacking for the matters under consideration.
His evident incapacity
for decision-making is a product of undoubted dementia and the lacunar rather
than continuous memory impairment
is consistent with a vascular component or a
recent unrecalled systemic illness with delirium.
Consultant Psychiatrist also noted that his score on a MMSE conduct in January
2025 was 16/20. This indicates a fluctuation in
his cognition over the
his final written submissions, the applicant notes that the MMSE conducted on
16 November was prior to the donor’s major
health issues in late
November. He submitted that it is not plausible to score as low as twelve in a
MMSE test and have the mental
capacity to understand an EPOA only one month
applicant also relies on the Consultant Psychiatrist’s January 2025
assessment to support his contention that the donor
did not have the capacity to
make the EPOA approximately three months prior.
applicant’s submission concerning the implausibility of the donor having
the requisite capacity to make the EPOA in circumstances
where a month later he
scored 12 out of a possible 30 is not the supported by any expert evidence. The
applicant makes a similar
submission in relation to the Consultant
Psychiatrist’s assessment in January 2025. From the point of view of
conducting a
longitudinal assessment of the donor’s mental capacity, the
results of the screening tool a month after the making of the EPOA
and then the
Consultant Psychiatrist’s assessment three months later are not
irrelevant. They clearly indicate that the donor
experienced fluctuations in his
cognitive capacity and a significant decline in his mental and physical state
over this period. The
assessments are certainly relevant to the donor’s
cognitive state at the time that the assessments were conducted. However,
do not seek to comment on the donor’s cognitive state or capacity in
mid-October 2024. As a consequence, we are unable
to place the weight on these
assessments that the applicant asks us to concerning the donor’s capacity
to make the EPOA at
the reasons outlined, having undertaken a longitudinal assessment of the
evidence concerning the donor’s mental capacity
along a timeline both
sides of the making of the EPOA on 11 October 2024, we determined that the
presumption that the donor had the
requisite capacity to make the EPOA had not
been rebutted. Accordingly, we did not make any of the orders sought by the
under s 33(2) of the POA Act in respect of the donor’s mental
capacity to make the power.
Challenge to operation of EPOA
applicant’s challenge to the manner in which his sister has acted in her
role as attorney focused largely on the actions
taken by the attorney in respect
of meeting the costs of the donor’s residential care fees. The applicant
asserted that the
attorney demonstrated serious financial irresponsibility by
entering into an aged care residential agreement on behalf of the donor
doing proper research or consulting specialised Centrelink staff and by not
co-operating with lodging the correct financial
hardship application form with
Centrelink for assessment. According to the applicant, the attorney is not
acting in the donor’s
best interests as she “does not wish to submit
the required Centrelink form as she does not believe that [the applicant] meets
the criteria”.
to the applicant, the attorney is motivated by spite rather than any genuine
concern that the relevant Commonwealth provision
was met for the donor’s
aged care costs to be subsidised by the Commonwealth government.
applicant also asserts that the attorney is unwilling to reach agreement with
the applicant about meeting the costs of the upkeep
of the family home including
house rates, insurance and general maintenance. The applicant has proposed
renting out one of bedrooms
in the house to produce income, but funds are needed
for carpet replacement and painting and no agreement has been reached about
is responsible for maintenance.
attorney entered into a residential accommodation agreement on the donor’s
behalf on 18 February 2025. A Refundable Accommodation
Deposit is payable of
$500,000.00. Until payment is made for that amount, the donor incurs fees of
$115.00 per day on top of his
care and service fees.
attorney advises that the donor’s fees at the residential aged care
facility are up to date. However, there is a shortfall
between the donor’s
pension income and his fees, and the attorney has been meeting this shortfall
from her own funds. The shortfall
exists because Centrelink currently regard the
donor’s home as part of the assets upon which his fees are calculated. The
believes that the donor’s home needs to be sold to address this
of correspondence sent between the solicitors acting on behalf of the applicant
and attorney for the period January to March
2025 were provided to the Tribunal
and indicate that this issue has been the subject of significant contention.
letter dated 28 January 2025 from the attorney’s solicitor, the applicant
was asked whether he wished to purchase the donor’s
property rather than
the property being listed for sale on the open market
letter dated 3 February 2025, the applicant’s solicitor indicated that, in
the applicant’s view, the donor would qualify
for exemption from means
testing and he was compiling the information which is required in support of
such an application. If the
property was exempted from means testing, the
applicant’s preference would be for the property to remain in the
name with the applicant remaining in occupation.
order to make a successful financial hardship application and have the home
exempted from means testing, Centrelink would need
to be satisfied that an
immediate family member has lived in the property for at least 10 years and that
the property is an unrealisable
attorney believes that it is unlikely that a financial hardship application
could successfully be made on her father’s behalf.
She has sought as much
information as possible about the aged care framework including getting advice
from a financial adviser who
specialises in aged care and attending a seminar on
the aged care sector. Her understanding is that, whilst the applicant has lived
in the property for more than 10 years, the property would not qualify as an
unrealisable asset. The donor is the sole registered
proprietor of the property
and there would be no impediment to a sale on this basis. In addition, whilst
the applicant has lived
in the property for the requisite period, he holds a
full-time position with a federal government agency and would not appear to
any entitlement to any Centrelink income support payments
Nevertheless,
the attorney confirmed that in February 2025 she submitted a hardship
application on behalf of her father. She had been
April 2025 asking for a copy of other expenditure and sent that back to the
agency. In May and June 2025,
she requested updates from Centrelink as to the
progress of the application. In May 2025, she was informed that the application
still being processed. She has not yet had a response to the June request
for an update.
correspondence dated 10 February 2025 and 19 March 2025 from the
attorney’s solicitor to the applicant’s solicitor,
the applicant was
requested to provide evidence necessary to support the application.
at the date of the hearing, the applicant had not yet provided to the attorney
or her solicitor the information requested by the
applicant’s solicitor.
The applicant said that he had left some documentation in the donor’s room
at the residential
aged care facility during one of his visits to his father. It
did not appear that the attorney had been informed of this but, in
the applicant had not provided a copy of the documentation to the
attorney’s solicitor.
far as the attorney is concerned, she has provided everything to Centrelink that
she is able to in order to support the application.
Centrelink has not yet
requested additional information in relation to the applicant’s occupancy
of the donor’s property.
correspondence between the solicitors for the attorney and applicant also
indicates that a number of requests have been made for
the applicant to pay for
board and expenses from October 2024. In oral evidence at the hearing, the
applicant said that he had not
paid the requested board as his father’s
pension entitlement and application for financial hardship would be affected if
donor received payments of anything over a minimal amount. The same
difficulty would arise if the donor’s home was sub-let.
The applicant said
that he does lots of things around the house including taking care of pets,
carrying out general maintenance and
paying some bills. We understood from this
evidence that the applicant does not intend to make any payments to the donor
at least until the issue of the donor’s application for
financial hardship is resolved.
the protective nature of the jurisdiction exercised by the Tribunal when
conducting a review of an EPOA, with the focus being
on the donor and the
protection of the donor’s interests, we also undertook a general survey of
the other documentary material
provided by the attorney.
were provided from the donor’s bank account with the Commonwealth Bank for
the period October 2024 to June 2025.
Nothing untoward was evident in the
statements. The attorney has explained she was unable to access the account
until 27 November
2024 and amounts that have been withdrawn were to
reimburse her for payments she had made on donor’s behalf before gaining
access to the account
donor held shares with Wesfarmers, Coles Myer and AMP. The attorney acted in
accordance with the donor’s direction in October
2024 to sell some of his
shares and for $10,000.00 to be set aside to cover funeral costs. The attorney
has engaged TG financial
to assist with this process. The funds from the sale
will go into donor’s account.
the death of her mother, the attorney took steps to transfer all jointly held
property, accounts, health insurances, etc, into
the donor’s name
attorney has also attended to the donor’s other financial needs. For
example, she has arranged for the payment of bills
and will organise preparation
of his 2025 tax return. The cost of clothing and her father’s day-to-day
needs are met personally
by the attorney.
Tribunal’s consideration
attorney is required to act in accordance with the duties set out in s 32 of the
outlined in
JK (Request to Withdraw Application)
[2022] TASCAT 21:
[26] ... when considering whether to exercise the discretion to make an order
under s 33 of the POA Act in relation to the operation
instrument... the Tribunal is examining the evidence to decide whether an
attorney has in any way breached their duty as an
attorney, or has otherwise not
acted, or will not be able to act in future, in a manner which protects the
interests of the donor,
promotes their best interests, and where possible and
appropriate, reflects any known wishes or likely wishes of the donor as codified
in s 32 of the POA Act...
[27] The statutory decree that the attorney is taken to be a trustee of the
property and affairs of the donor also means that the
standard of care
applicable to trustees as defined by general law clearly apply to attorneys
appointed under an enduring power of
attorney: See G Dal Pont,
(3rd ed, 2020, LexisNexis Butterworths) at [8.27].
[28] For example, evidence may lead the Tribunal to conclude that an attorney
has breached their duty by failing to keep property
of the donor separate from
the property of the attorney (s 32(3)), or by engaging in gifting of the
donor’s estate outside
of the parameters permitted by s 31(3), or has
entered into a transaction that results in a conflict of interest (s 32AC), or
failed to keep accurate records of transactions as required by s 32AD. In
addition, the acts of an attorney, or perhaps even a failure
to act (see Dal
Pont, ibid at [8.23]), may amount to a breach of the fiduciary duty owed by the
attorney to the donor.
have set out the matters raised by the applicant that he asserts demonstrate
that the attorney has not performed her duties in
a manner that promotes the
donor’s best interests.
carefully considered the written and oral evidence provided in these
proceedings, there was nothing in that evidence to support
a conclusion that the
attorney had breached her duties as attorney. There was no evidence of any
intermingling of her finances with
those of the donor that might suggest closer
consideration of any conflict of interest under s 32AC of the POA Act is
If anything, the attorney has borne a financial cost as she has met a
number of her father’s financial needs from her own funds.
find that the attorney has taken steps to protect the interests of donor. As
previously noted, after the death of her mother, the
attorney ensured that
jointly held assets were transferred into the donor’s name alone, his
bills were paid, and the donor’s
day-to-day financial needs were met. The
attorney also undertook self-education as to the donor’s liabilities for
residential
aged care in the context of his broader financial situation and
sought independent financial advice about these issues.
reviewed all of the evidence, we are also satisfied that the attorney will act
in a manner that promotes the donor’s
best interests. The donor’s
interests will be met by ensuring that his care and accommodation needs are met
to the highest
possible standard within his financial circumstances. The
security of the donor’s financial future is currently being addressed
the attorney, albeit in the context of a difficult family relationship that is
long standing but appears to have come to a head
as a consequence of the events
since October 2024. We understand from the applicant’s evidence that he
feels excluded from
decision-making about the home in which he has lived his
entire life. He also feels that the professional knowledge he has acquired
long-term employee of a federal government agency has not been acknowledged.
However, we are satisfied that the attorney has
approached decision-making in
respect of the management of her father’s financial affairs in a careful
and measured manner.
Despite the attorney being of the opinion that the
financial hardship application for her father will be unsuccessful, she has
nevertheless
lodged the application with Centrelink and has provided all of the
information she has available to her in respect of this application.
that it is now a matter for the applicant to provide information when requested
to do so by Centrelink. Should this application
be unsuccessful, we were
satisfied that the attorney will take action in her father’s best
interests. This is likely to necessitate
the sale of the donor’s home in a
timely manner as the donor is unable to meet his financial commitments to the
residential
aged care facility. It would clearly not be in his best interests to
continue to accrue a debt to the attorney who is currently meeting
also accept that the attorney has sought to make decisions as attorney in
accordance with her father’s wishes where that
has been possible and he
has been able to articulate those wishes. Less clear are the donor’s
wishes, now that he is subject
to a “mental incapacity” (POA Act, s
32(1A)(c)(ii)), concerning the complex issues around the funding of his care
It seems clear that the donor’s wish had been to return to live in
his home and were that still a realistic option then the
attorney has indicated
she would have acted in accordance with these wishes. The reality of the
donor’s financial situation,
however, is that in order to meet his needs
at this point in his life, decisions will need to be made about how best to
utilise his
major asset. What seems apparent from the material before us is that
it is unlikely that the donor would wish to continue in a situation
where he is
unable to meet his financial commitments and is reliant his daughter to meet
not-insignificant costs in relation to his
aged care fees. Whilst the applicant
has submitted that it is his father’s wish that the applicant continue to
live in the
family home, we do not accept that this would necessarily be the
donor’s wish if it meant that the donor could not meet his
own financial
needs and placed his own welfare at risk.
the conclusions we have reached on each of these matters, we find that there is
no basis for a finding that the attorney has
acted in breach of her duties under
s 32 of the POA Act. Accordingly, we did not make any of the orders sought by
the applicant under
s 33(2) of the POA Act in respect of the manner in which the
attorney has conducted her role as attorney.
application to review the enduring power of attorney registered on 21 October
2024 made by the donor is dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.01 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter