URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCCA/2024/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Davey v Tasmania [2024] TASCCA 11 (20 September 2024)
[2024] TASCCA 11
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (COURT OF CRIMINAL
Davey v Tasmania
[2024] TASCCA
: DAVEY, Matthew John
CCA 3120/2021
DELIVERED ON:
September 2024
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
30 May 2024
JUDGMENT OF:
Blow CJ, Jago J, Martin AJ
Criminal Law – Evidence – Propensity, tendency and co-incidence
– Admissibility and relevancy – Tendency and
co-incidence evidence
under uniform evidence law – Other cases – Attempted murder of
partner – Evidence of tendencies
during relationship.
Aust Dig Criminal Law [2782]
Criminal Law – Appeal and new trial – Verdict unreasonable or
unsupportable having regard to evidence – Appeal dismissed
Attempted murder – Complainant covered in petrol and set on fire –
Self-harm defence – Asserted weaknesses
in complainant's evidence –
Verdict unimpeachable.
Aust Dig Criminal Law [3476]
Criminal Law – Appeal and new trial – Particular grounds of
appeal -Conduct of prosecutor or prosecution – Unfair
cross-examination of
accused – Minor issues – Appropriate directions by judge – No
miscarriage of justice.
Aust Dig Criminal Law [3514]
Criminal Law – Appeal and new trial – Particular grounds of
appeal – Conduct of defence counsel – Whether
incompetent –
Reasons for tactical decisions.
Aust Dig Criminal Law [3515]
Jury – Verdicts and findings – Majority verdict – Charge of
attempting to commit murder – Not a "trial relating
to treason or
Aust Dig Jury [1021]
Legislation:
Cases cited:
Ali v The Queen
[2005] HCA 8
79 ALJR 662
AWK v State of Tasmania
[2024] TASCCA 5
[1993] HCA 71
Browne v Dunn
(1893) 6 R 67
Crampton v The Queen
[2000] HCA 60
206 CLR 161
Braslin v Tasmania
[2022] TASCCA
Diehm v DPP (Nauru)
[2013] HCA 42
Festa v The
[2001] HCA 72
208 CLR 593
Hofer v The Queen
[2021] HCA 36
274 CLR 351
Hughes v The Queen
[2017] HCA 20
263 CLR 338
[2016] HCA 14
257 CLR 300
Kanaan v The Queen
Liberato v The Queen
[1985] HCA 66
(1985) 159 CLR 507
McPhillamy v
[2018] HCA 52
92 ALJR 1045
Mannah v Western Australia
[2016] WASCA 19
Mickelberg v The Queen
[1989] HCA 35
(1989) 167 CLR 259.
Randall v The Queen
[2004] TASSC 42
146 A Crim R 197
Apostilides
[1984] HCA 38
(1984) 154 CLR 563
(1990) 19 NSWLR 677
R v Bauer (a pseudonym)
[2018] HCA 40
R v Manunta
[1989] SASC 1628
(1989) 54 SASR 17
(1980) 23 SASR 563
[2013] NSWCCA 121
, 84 NSWLR 363
Tasmania v S
[2004] TASSC 84
[2022] HCA 35
Tooheys Limited v Commissioner of
Stamp Duties (NSW)
[1961] HCA 35
(1961) 105 CLR 602
Whitehorn v The Queen
[1983] HCA 42
REPRESENTATION
Cangelosi (Grounds 1-4)/In person
: L Mason SC, L
Solicitors:
Respondent:
The Cangelosi
Director of Public Prosecutions
[2024] TASCCA 11
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 11/2024
File No CCA 3120/2021
MATTHEW JOHN DAVEY v THE STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
September 2024
Orders of the
to appeal granted.
Serial No 11/2024
File No CCA 3120/2021
MATTHEW JOHN DAVEY v THE STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
20 September 2024
have read the judgment of Jago J in draft form. I agree with the orders that
she proposes. I agree with the entirety of her Honour's
reasons. I would like
to say a little about the history of these proceedings.
hearing of the appeal commenced on 26 April 2023. It later became necessary to
reconstitute the Court. In the beginning, a hearing
commenced before Jago J,
Marshall AJ and myself. The applicant had been granted legal aid for the purpose
of arguing some of his
grounds of appeal, but not all of them. An arrangement
was made for the grounds for which he had legal aid to be fully argued before
there was any argument relating to the other grounds. On 26 April 2023 Mr
Cangelosi appeared as counsel for the applicant, and four
grounds of appeal were
fully argued.
that stage the applicant did not have legal aid in relation to any grounds of
appeal relating to the conduct of the defence case
by his trial counsel, Mr
Richardson. It became apparent that Mr Richardson would have to give evidence
and be cross-examined in relation
to those grounds. Mr Cangelosi advised the
Court that he considered himself "professionally unable to cross-examine Mr
Richardson".
The Court made an order under s 410 of the
Criminal Code
requiring Tasmania Legal Aid to give the applicant legal assistance to the
extent of providing representation during the giving of
evidence by Mr
Richardson. At the end of the day, Mr Cangelosi was given leave to
next day, 27 April 2023, the applicant appeared unrepresented and the remaining
grounds of appeal, except for those relating
to Mr Richardson, were fully
hearing resumed on 11 October 2023. The applicant was represented by counsel. Mr
Richardson began to give evidence and the applicant's
new counsel began to
cross-examine him. The applicant became unhappy with his counsel's
cross-examination, terminated her instructions,
and completed the
cross-examination himself. It did not finish until the following day. The
hearing did not conclude at that point
because the grounds of appeal had been
amended by adding a ground relating to fresh evidence from a Mr Pickett.
16 November 2023 the hearing resumed. Evidence relating to the fresh evidence
ground was given by the applicant, Mr Pickett,
and a correctional officer. The
Court reserved its decision.
the end of February 2024 it became apparent that Marshall AJ would not be
available to write a judgment. It was proposed that
the Court be reconstituted,
with Martin AJ replacing Marshall AJ. On 18 April 2024 that course was greed to
by the applicant and
the Director of Public Prosecutions. The Court was
reconstituted. The applicant and the Director agreed that the Court, as
reconstituted,
could have regard to the transcript, the exhibits, and the
audio-visual recordings from the hearing of the appeal before the Court
previously constituted. Finally, on 30 May 2024, the applicant and counsel for
the State made final submissions and the Court
reserved its
File No CCA 3120/2021
MATTHEW JOHN DAVEY v THE STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
20 September 2024
Introduction
24 April 2017, the complainant suffered serious burns to 68% of her body. The
injuries were life threatening. The applicant
was charged with attempting to
commit murder. He was also charged with persistent family violence, contrary to
s 170A of the
Criminal Code
. The crime of persistent family violence was
alleged to have been committed between 9 March 2016 and 24 April 2017. On 2
2021, Brett J made an order severing the indictment and a trial proceeded
in respect to the count of attempting to commit murder
(and in the alternative
to that crime, committing an unlawful act intended to cause bodily harm contrary
to s 170 of the
Criminal Code
relating to the crime of persistent family violence was ruled as admissible on
the trial of attempting to commit murder
on the basis that it was relationship
evidence and also tendency evidence. The applicant was found guilty of the
crime of attempted
murder by a majority jury verdict on 18 November 2022. He
subsequently pleaded guilty to count 1 of the indictment, persistent family
violence, on 9 December 2021
applicant now appeals against his conviction for the crime of attempting to
commit murder on 21 various grounds. In respect
to four of those grounds he is
represented by counsel. In respect to the balance 17 grounds, the applicant
appeared self-represented.
There is some overlap between the grounds of the
appeal where he is represented, and those where he is not. For convenience, I
deal with the grounds of appeal where he is represented before turning to
those which the applicant argued without the assistance
of Counsel.
The prosecution case at trial
State's case against the applicant was that he committed the act of attempted
murder on 24 April 2017 by deliberately setting
fire to the complainant, with
whom he had been in a tumultuous relationship, after dousing her in flammable
liquid in a shed on the
applicant's parents' property. The State argued the act
of setting her on fire was intended to kill her in the context of the
complainant
having indicated to the applicant that the relationship was over.
The act of setting fire to her caused burns to in excess of 60%
complainant's body and resulted in critical and life threatening injuries. The
State's case was that the act of setting fire
to the complainant was the
culmination of a course of family violence engaged in by the applicant and
directed to the complainant
during the life of their relationship.
State's case was that the relationship between the applicant and complainant
commenced in late November 2015 and within a short
period of time, became a
toxic and volatile relationship, characterised by frequent arguments and
controlling, possessive and verbally
abusive behaviour. The evidence at trial
suggested that within about three months of the relationship commencing, the
complainant
moved in with the applicant and the applicant quickly became violent
and controlling towards her. On the trial that State led a considerable
evidence directed towards establishing the nature of the relationship and
tendencies on behalf of the applicant to act in
particular ways towards the
complainant.
tendencies relied upon by the State included:
To exercise
control over the relationship;
To act violently
(either verbally or physically) towards the complainant when he was losing
control of the complainant or the relationship;
To act violently
(either verbally or physically) in the complainant's presence when he was losing
control of the complainant or the
relationship; and
To use burning
as a means to threaten, intimidate or harm the complainant.
evidence relevant to proving the alleged tendencies came from the complainant, a
number of other civilian witnesses who gave
evidence of witnessing interactions
between the complainant and the applicant and recorded evidence in the form of
listening device
material, surveillance material and recorded telephone calls.
There was also evidence of electronic messages sent by the complainant
friends and a letter that the complainant wrote and stored away. To the extent
it is relevant to the grounds of appeal, I shall
set out a summary of that
evidence. It is not practical, nor necessary to mention every piece of evidence
given or tendered on the
trial, but I record that I have read the trial
transcript in full and I have listened to and viewed all of the recorded
that was tendered on the trial.
Evidence of the
complainant as to the relationship with the applicant
complainant gave evidence at a special hearing on 16 and 17 March 2020. It was
recorded and played to the jury during the trial
which commenced on 5 October
2021. The complainant gave evidence of the applicant constantly monitoring her
whereabouts, including
by conducting or making her believe that he was
conducting electronic surveillance of her communications and movements. She
gave evidence of the applicant restricting her movements, both by demand
and by sometimes disabling or damaging her motor vehicle
preventing her use of
it. She gave evidence that the applicant controlled her phone use, her social
media, dictated with whom she
could spend time and gave evidence of the
applicant constantly telephoning her if she was away from him, and sometimes
her to video call so as to show him her surroundings to satisfy him
she was alone.
complainant gave evidence that the applicant would constantly tell her that she
was being unfaithful to him and accuse her of
cheating on him. She gave
evidence of the applicant speaking "horribly" about her family saying that they
were "nothing but drug
addicts and as long as they had drugs, they wouldn't care
the relationship and described name calling and derogatory comments as
commonplace within the relationship. She gave evidence
of the applicant
controlling who she could see and with whom she could spend time, including
limiting time she could spend with her
complainant gave evidence of the applicant threatening to kill her, particularly
in the context of her endeavouring to leave
the relationship. She gave evidence
that he would tell her that if she left him, he would kill her. She said he
told her that he
would hang her and make it look like a suicide; that he would
get her to write a letter beforehand, play music and set photos up
complainant described much physical violence and threatening behaviour within
the relationship. She gave evidence of the following
specific acts of
(i) In early 2016, the complainant and applicant were at the house of a man
named Tusson. The complainant wanted to leave. The
applicant did not want her
to leave so took her keys and locked her out of her car. The complainant
smashed the car window in an
endeavour to gain access to the car. She was
unsuccessful in doing so and left the residence on foot. The applicant followed
the car yelling at her to get into it. The applicant got out of the car and
there was a physical fight in which the applicant bit
her hair and pulled some
of it out and then head-butted her. She walked away and later met her mother at
a shopping centre.
(ii) In around February 2016, the complainant challenged the applicant because
he was speaking to an ex-girlfriend on the phone.
When she became upset and
left the property, the applicant followed her up the driveway and slapped her
across the face.
(iii) In March 2016, the complainant and applicant were driving in a car near
Colebrook. There had been arguments throughout the
day with the applicant
accusing the complainant of cheating on him. The applicant was driving the
complainant's car in an erratic
manner. The complainant tried to get out of it.
The applicant stopped her by grabbing her to the arm. Eventually, the
complainant
exited the vehicle and walked along the side of the road. The
applicant followed beside her in the vehicle, asking her to get back
An independent witness observed some of this interaction. She stopped to ask
the complainant if she was okay. The complainant
told her to go away as it
would make things worse if she spoke to her and that the applicant would kill
There was evidence on the trial from this independent witness. She gave
evidence of observing the applicant holding the complainant
by the hair and neck
and striking her with his hand. She confirmed that the complainant told her
that she believed that the applicant
would kill her.
After a period the complainant got back into the car as the driver. They
were later pulled over by police. The complainant did not
say anything to
police as she did not want the applicant to think she was talking with
(iv) The complainant gave evidence of an incident which occurred on Main Road,
Austins Ferry. The complainant was trying to leave
in her vehicle. The
applicant did not want her to leave. He got into her vehicle. She drove along
Main Road. They were arguing.
She parked the car and told him to get out.
Because she refused to return to his house with him, he started to kick the
side door which caused damage. He picked up a large rock and gestured
as though he was going to throw it through the windscreen.
He grabbed a jumper
belonging to the complainant from within the car and put the sleeve of it into
the petrol tank and was trying
to light the bottom of the jumper on fire.
(v) The complainant gave evidence of an incident when the applicant's cousin,
Dillon Davey, was present. They were at the applicant's
argument about drug use. The complainant wanted to leave. The applicant told
her she was not allowed to go anywhere
and accused the complainant of recording
him on her phone. There was a physical fight between them in which the
applicant grabbed
her bag from her shoulder. The applicant told Dillon Davey to
get her phone. The complainant got away through the back door. The
followed her, grabbed her around her mouth and prevented her from screaming.
The complainant ran through the gate in the
back fence and through a paddock
behind the applicant's house. The applicant chased her. The complainant hid
until the applicant
(vi) Tendered on the trial were multiple intercepted telephone calls and text
message exchanges between the complainant and applicant,
as well as surveillance
footage and listening device recordings. Many abusive and derogatory comments,
as well as specific threats
to kill and burn the complainant's house down can be
heard being said by the applicant on such recordings. Also tendered were
where the complainant can be heard telling her mother that she
believes she is going to be killed by the applicant.
(vii) The complainant gave evidence of an occasion when the applicant slapped
her across the face following an argument about an
ICE pipe. She gave evidence
of the applicant throwing a mobile phone at her head and it striking her to the
temple area. She gave
evidence of the applicant throwing a drinking glass at
her and it chipping the tiles in the kitchen. She gave evidence of an occasion
when the applicant threw a small kitchen knife towards her and it lodged in the
window sill.
(viii) The complainant gave evidence of an occasion where she was trying to
leave her house and the applicant would not allow her
to. She eventually left
on foot with the applicant following. The applicant grabbed her from behind
with his arm around her neck,
causing a passer by to ask if the complainant was
okay. Thereafter, the two of them continued to walk along a track towards the
complainant's house. Whilst walking on the track, the applicant picked up a
rock and threw it at her ankle causing it to bruise
and become swollen.
(ix) The complainant gave evidence of an incident involving a Mr Kringle. Mr
Kringle was a friend of the complainant. During a period
of time when the
applicant was in custody between April and November 2016 the complainant and Mr
Kringle maintained their friendship.
The applicant was jealous of the friendship
and accused the complainant of cheating on him with Mr Kringle. Following the
applicant's
release from custody there was an occasion when Mr Kringle was due
to come to the complainant's house. Prior to his arrival the complainant
applying makeup. The applicant threw a phone at her because he was upset she
was applying makeup prior to Mr Kringle's arrival.
When he arrived, the
applicant made Mr Kringle go to the garage. The complainant was present, as was
the complaint's mother and a
man named David Eaton. The applicant questioned
both the complainant and Mr Kringle about the alleged infidelity. The applicant
for Mr Eaton to assault Mr Kringle. The applicant then assaulted Mr
Kringle. The applicant told the complainant she had to end her
friendship with
Mr Kringle.
The letter written by the complainant
complainant gave evidence that during the time the applicant was remanded in
custody between April and November 2016, she maintained
her relationship with
him, predominantly by way of telephone communications. Her evidence was that
they spoke about their relationship
continuing following his release including a
discussion about marriage and having children. They spoke about filling out
forms". The complainant also gave evidence that she was conflicted
"something to
go wrong" so before the applicant was released from custody, she wrote a letter
and hid it in her make-up case. Evidence
established that her mother found this
letter after the events of 24 April 2017, and the letter was tendered in
evidence on the trial.
In the letter the complainant expressed fears for her
life and concerns that she could not escape the control of the applicant.
letter included the following:
"Would he do everything and
anything to ruin my life? YES. And... would he kill me? Absolutely...Am I
scared? Scared isn't the word...I
don't have answers, I can't run, I can't hide,
I can't escape, I can't get away... and I believe if I come to the end of my
it will be at the hands of MATTHEW JOHN DAVEY"
The complainant gave evidence that she did not wish to talk to anyone about
the applicant's behaviour but wrote the letter in case
"anything major"
complainant gave evidence that after the applicant was released from custody the
relationship worsened. The applicant accused
her of being unfaithful whilst he
was in custody. She described him as becoming "more paranoid, angry and
untrusting". His controlling
behaviour escalated. He would often take her car
keys so she could not leave. She gave evidence of locating recording devices in
her room. She gave evidence of occasions when she told the applicant she wanted
to end the relationship, but he would respond by
telling her "she wasn't going
anywhere" and it would be "up to him" if the relationship ended. He told her
that if he could not
have her, no one else could and that if she ever left him,
he would kill her. He told her that if she ran away he would find her
to her family members and forcing them to tell him where she was. She gave
evidence of the applicant making threats to
burn out her father's garage and
saying he could locate her if she left through her bank
Evidence of the complainant as to events of 24 April
complainant gave evidence that she worked night shift on 23 April concluding
had been numerous Facebook
communications between her and the applicant during which there was an argument
which culminated in her
telling the applicant that she wanted to end the
relationship.
the day on 24 April, the applicant arrived at the complainant's home. The
complainant again told the applicant that the
relationship was over. There was
an argument. The applicant spat in her face and threw a can of Coke at her. He
disturbed items
in her bedroom, threw things about her room and caused damage in
her bedroom, including by damaging the door handle of a cupboard.
complainant gave evidence that following this the applicant, her mother and she
had a discussion about the status of their relationship.
The complainant
reiterated that she no longer wanted to be in a relationship with the applicant.
The applicant and the complainant's
mother left the house to obtain drugs. The
complainant described taking a knife from the house and walking up the street.
returned to the house and obtained some elastic exercise bands and
tied them to an antenna in a loop. The complainant's evidence
was that she was
"not certain" what her intentions were, but it was a reasonable inference that
her behaviours were reflective of
suicidal ideation.
complainant gave evidence that the applicant and her mother returned to the
house and they were both affected by drugs. Later
that evening, because the
applicant was subject to a curfew and had no other way of getting home, she gave
the applicant a lift to
his house. The complainant gave evidence that she was
of the view that the relationship had come to an end and was only dropping
applicant back to his residence to comply with his curfew and had no intention
of staying there the night.
complainant gave evidence that upon arrival at the applicant's residence, the
applicant asked her to come into the shed for
a cigarette. The complainant said
the shed was where she and the applicant would go to "hang out and smoke
cigarettes".
complainant also gave evidence that the applicant would use the shed if he was
working on something like a bike or a car and
would, on occasion, solder in the
shed. The complainant said no soldering occurred on the evening of 24 April.
complainant said that when she and the applicant entered the shed, the applicant
closed the roller door and she believed he
locked it. The complainant said
there was a further verbal argument about the status of their relationship. The
argument escalated
to a physical one. They were both hitting each other and
they both ended up on the ground and were "rolling around on top of one
hitting each other". The complainant said that came to an end and they both
stood up. There was a further verbal argument.
The complainant told the
applicant she wanted to leave and wanted to go home. The applicant told her she
"wasn't going anywhere".
complainant said she turned her back on the applicant and then felt a "splash go
over her left side". The complainant said
she knew from the smell of it that it
was petrol. The complainant said her clothes were wet from the petrol. She
turned around
and observed the applicant putting a fuel container down. It was
a large red fuel container. The complainant identified the relevant
container from photographs tendered on the trial.
complainant's evidence was she said to the applicant "What the fuck are you
doing?" There was a further verbal argument. There
was then a further physical
fight in which the complainant and applicant again rolled around on the floor,
fighting with each other.
During this altercation, the complainant hit the
applicant over the head with an object. The complainant gave evidence the
then said to her "What are we doing? This is stupid" and apologised.
complainant gave evidence that after the fight, the applicant was flicking a
cigarette lighter at the carpet on the floor of
the shed. It did not ignite
(other evidence establishes there was a small scorch mark on the carpet).
complainant said she wanted to go home and get changed. The applicant told her
to get changed at his place and wear some of
his clothes. She told him she
wanted to go home and have a shower but the applicant continued to insist she
could go inside his
place and shower. Again the complainant said the discussions
became heated.
complainant gave evidence that she headed towards the door of the garage
intending to walk outside and leave. The applicant
was near the door. As she
was approaching the applicant, and about half a metre from him, he extended his
arm towards her and flicked
his cigarette lighter. She immediately went up in
flames. The complainant gave evidence of the applicant struggling to get the
to the shed open, of her running from the shed and then running around the
backyard calling for help.
complainant gave evidence of next recalling "waking up" to the applicant being
next to her and the flames being put out. She
recalled asking for a hose or to
be put into the shower.
complainant gave evidence of a conversation she had with the applicant whilst
waiting for help. She said the applicant told
her that he was going to go to
gaol for a very long time unless she said it was a soldering accident. She
agreed with him. She
gave evidence of the applicant's father being on the phone
to the ambulance. She gave evidence of the applicant holding the hose
until the ambulance arrived.
complainant gave evidence of the ambulance attendance, of having a limited
memory of spending time in the Royal Hobart Hospital,
of waking from a coma in
the Alfred Hospital at Melbourne and being unable to talk because of a breathing
tube in her throat. The
complainant gave evidence of the extent of her injuries
and the rehabilitation she undertook.
complainant gave evidence of an occasion when she was on day release from her
rehabilitation programme when her mother received
a telephone call. Her mother
gave her the phone. After a short time she recognised the voice of the caller
as being the applicant.
The applicant told her he loved her and said to her
"Why are you doing this. Can you remember?" The applicant told her that she
had "done it to herself".
The cross-examination of the
complainant
cross-examination it was suggested to the complainant that the relationship she
shared with the applicant was a volatile
one and that she too had perpetrated
abusive behaviours – both physical and verbal – upon the applicant.
The complainant
accepted that "to an extent" she had demonstrated jealous,
possessive and controlling behaviours towards the applicant. For example,
agreed that she would check his phone when she had been told about certain
occurrences. She agreed that if she found messages
between the applicant and
other females, there would be arguments. She also agreed that on occasions she
had made threatening comments
to him. She agreed she had punched him "perhaps
six or seven times". The complainant was cross-examined about the applicant's
towards her mother. She denied that the applicant had told her he did
not want her spending time with her mother because of her mother's
shop lifting
and drug habits.
complainant was cross-examined at length about her mental health history. She
agreed she had been diagnosed with severe depression.
She agreed there had been
an occasion where she had been admitted to hospital after taking tablets but
denied that it was a suicide
attempt. She agreed that in 2015 she had seen a
medical professional in respect to suicidal ideation and self-harm incidents.
agreed that she regularly became depressed about a friend, Paris, who had
committed suicide.
complainant denied having made two overdose attempts whilst in a relationship
with the applicant. She also denied that she
had spoken about suicide "all the
time" whilst with the applicant. It was suggested to the complainant that on the
afternoon on 24
April she had wanted to kill herself, hence she had hung the
exercise bands from the antenna. The complaint did not deny hanging
but said she could not recall if she put the bands around her neck and was "not
sure" of her intentions. When it was suggested
to her that she had told police
that she did these acts because she wanted to kill herself, she said she could
not recall the words
she used to police.
was evidence on the trial, in the form of an Agreed Fact, that the applicant had
been in prison between 27 April 2016 and
29 November 2016. The complainant was
asked about her contact with the applicant during that time and agreed that she
to him two to three times per day and had said things like "she could
not live without him". She agreed that she had repeatedly
told him how much she
loved him. She also agreed that she had filled out Intention to Marry forms and
that she and the applicant
had opened a joint bank account together for the
purpose of buying a home.
to the incidents of family violence the complainant had described, it was
suggested to her that she had greatly exaggerated her
accounts. For example, in
respect to the Colebrook incident it was suggested to her the applicant had
simply grabbed hold of her
to prevent her from leaving a moving vehicle. The
complainant agreed the applicant had grabbed her arm to prevent her leaving the
vehicle, although she was not sure as to whether the vehicle had stopped by
then. It was suggested to the complainant that many
of the incidents of family
violence she described had not occurred or had occurred in response to the
complainant punching or striking
the applicant. The complainant generally
complainant was asked about an interview she participated in with police on 8
April 2016, in which she had told police that
no incidents of violence had
occurred between her and the applicant, that she was not scared of the applicant
and that she did not
fear for her safety. The complainant agreed she had said
those things to police but stated they were lies. She agreed that when
police those things the applicant was not present in the room with her.
to the events of 24 April 2017, the complainant said she could not recall
whether she had punched the applicant before he threw
the Coke can at her. She
agreed that at some point in the afternoon she had been laying on the bed
crying. She said she could not
recall whether she had taken a backpack/overnight
bag with her to the applicant's house.
agreed that on the way to the applicant's house, they had picked up a dog from
his sister's residence, and taken it to the applicant's
house. She agreed that
at some point the dog was in the shed with her and the applicant and she were
brushing the dog. She agreed
that she and the applicant entered the shed at
approximately the same time. She said she could not recall the locking
on the shed but did not believe that it required a key.
was asked about the location of personal papers belonging to the applicant.
(Evidence established there were a number of personal
papers found on the shed
floor after the fire incident). She agreed the applicant kept personal papers
in his bedroom or on the
bench in the shed. She agreed that "if he was going
out" he would sometimes have a backpack in which he kept his personal papers.
She denied that it was the applicant's usual practice to keep personal papers in
the backpack within the shed.
complainant said she could not recall going inside the house and speaking with
the applicant's father, Rickie Davey, before
going into the shed. She did
recall telling the applicant's father that the dog was there but denied going
inside the house. She
denied having a conversation with Rickie Davey at any
point that night relating to a crayfish.
complainant agreed she was emotional that evening and that she may have accused
the applicant of being unfaithful. She agreed
there had been an occasion when
she had located a message from a woman named Kristy Graham on the applicant's
iPad but did not believe
it had been that evening.
complainant denied that she had tipped the contents of the applicant's backpack
out onto the floor. When shown items that were
on the shed floor in a photo,
the complainant said she did not recall how those items came to be there.
complainant denied that whilst arguing with the applicant in the shed she had
picked up a fuel drum and had flicked a lighter
and said the words "Do you want
to see me fucking burn?"
denied she had used a cigarette lighter to set fire to a piece of paper from the
backpack which had a female's name upon it
and that that act had caused an area
of carpet to ignite, which she and the applicant had to extinguish by stepping
complainant denied that what happened in the shed was, in effect, a threatened
suicide attempt "gone wrong" in that she had
splashed petrol on herself whilst
holding the fuel drum and saying to the applicant "Do you want to see me fucking
burn" and then
subsequently ignited herself when her and the applicant had
attempted to put out the fire which was burning on the carpet after she
the piece of paper.
complainant agreed the applicant may have helped to extinguish flames on her
once outside. She denied the applicant carried
her from the shed. She said she
believed she walked out.
complainant denied that she had told Rickie Davey that the incident was an
accident. She denied saying to the applicant that
she did not want anyone
thinking she was attempting suicide because she was embarrassed by such
behaviour. She said she could not
recall telling her own father that the
applicant was not responsible for the burns she had suffered.
was suggested to the complainant that her child had been fathered by Dillon
Davey (the applicant's cousin). She denied this.
complainant was cross-examined as to possible motives for suggesting the
applicant was responsible for the burns she had suffered.
She agreed a GoFundMe
page had been opened for her benefit. The complainant was asked whether she
believed people would contribute
to a GoFundMe page if they realised that what
happened was a "suicide threat gone wrong". The complainant responded "I don't
The complainant was asked whether she or her family had received any
financial benefit from television companies. She responded
that "It's in the
process of that ... in the future". She was asked whether she thought there
would be much interest in her story
if it involved a suicide threat that had
"gone badly wrong". The complainant responded "I don't
Additional evidence of the complainant: Video statement
recorded in the Alfred Hospital on 29 June 2017
statement was tendered on the trial and played to the jury following a
successful application to re-establish the credibility
of the complainant during
re-examination. In the video statement, which had been recorded whilst the
complainant was still at the
Alfred Hospital, the complainant described the
incidents of 24 April 2017 in the following terms:
Earlier in the
day of the "day she was burnt", the complainant and applicant had been arguing.
The day had got "worse and worse".
They were arguing even more at her house.
He threw a Coke can at her head when she tried to break up with him. She did
to be with him anymore. He would not accept that.
After he threw
the Coke can, the applicant went for a drive with her mother. She went for a
walk. She wanted to kill herself because
she had "had enough". She came back
to the house before the applicant did. There was a further conversation in
which she told him
she was "sick of him" and he was making her unhappy. He did
not care. He was not listening to her.
She took him
thought she would take him home and leave.
He made her drive up the driveway
and park in front of the shed. She thought "Oh shit, I'm going to be staying
here tonight".
They went to the shed for a cigarette. He put the door down and
locked it. They had a cigarette. They were not talking.
She told him she
was going to leave. He said "No you're not, you're not going anywhere". She
tried to walk around him. He blocked
her. He grabbed her by the face a few
times and said "You're not going anywhere". The argument continued.
He picked up the
petrol tank and threw it at her. She laughed it off. She thought it was just
another way he was trying to make
her scared. It was all over her and it stunk
and she was angry.
She wanted to go
out, she was near the roller door. That is when he set her on fire. He did it
with a lighter. She started screaming
She thought the
applicant had trouble getting the roller door open. She got outside. He put
She remembered
the applicant's father speaking on the phone. The applicant was telling her to
say it was a soldering accident and
she was agreeing with him. She was
screaming "look at me". The applicant was sitting next to her the whole time.
The applicant
demanded that he come in the ambulance with her. He was saying he
She did not
recall anything from the hospital.
container the applicant used was a large one. He picked it up and splashed it
on her and it was all on the ground. He tried
to light the ground also. That
happened just before he lit her.
The applicant
knelt on the floor and was flicking the lighter, trying to set the floor on
fire. He did not set the carpet on fire.
He was bending down to do this. This
made her feel scared of being stuck in the shed and going up in flames.
She thought the
lighter the applicant used to light her on fire was white. He had it in his
right hand.
In the recorded
statement, she also described the relationship generally. She said that if she
had her way, he would have been "long
gone" before the fire. His behaviour was
controlling. She kept excusing his behaviour. She would have to tell him
everything she
did during the day. When he was in gaol, he told her that he had
people watching her.
Before he threw
the Coke can at her on 24 April, she had told him that "we're over, we're done".
He had said "No, we're not". He
had spat in her face. She did not think the
Coke can hit her.
She described
violence before the evening of the fire, including an occasion where the
applicant had headbutted the windscreen of
her car and thrown a phone towards
her. She described another occasion when she was on the phone to another girl
and was leaving
and the applicant followed her up the driveway and hit her,
causing her to fall to the ground. She described the incident in which
Kringle was assaulted.
She said in the
shed there was a rope and chairs and the applicant had pretended that he was
going to tie her to the chair but did
not do it, he just gave her that
impression. She could not recall if that occurred before or after he had thrown
Further evidence on the trial relevant to the
grounds of appeal
Wendy Rodway
Rodway, the complainant's mother, gave evidence. Ms Rodway gave evidence that
there had been an occasion when the complainant
was a teenager, when she had
taken a quantity of Panadol. This was as a consequence of Ms Rodway's then
partner behaving inappropriately
towards the complainant. Ms Rodway had taken
the complainant to a GP and then she was taken to hospital for observation. Ms
confirmed the complainant had become depressed over the death of a friend
and Ms Rodway had taken her to the doctor. Ms Rodway said
she had never
witnessed the complainant self-harming.
Rodway gave evidence that she witnessed arguments between the complainant and
applicant, including occasions when the applicant
had taken the complainant's
phone or laptop. She had heard "two sided bickering and arguing" between them.
She had heard the complainant
calling the applicant names. She said she had not
heard the complainant speak in that manner before she was in the relationship
with the applicant.
had witnessed the applicant verbally threatening the complainant, telling her
"I'll put you in the meat factory". She heard
the applicant threaten to harm
the complainant's father and his dogs, and also threaten to harm the
complainant's boss. She heard
the applicant call the complainant a number of
abusive and derogatory names.
described an incident in which the applicant assaulted her son, Jack. She said
the complainant and Jack were in the house.
The applicant turned up "making a
scene". Ms Rodway said she heard a scuffle. She heard the complainant screaming
at the applicant
during the altercation and heard items being knocked around.
She called police. When she returned inside, she observed Jack to have
lumps on his forehead. Police came. She was standing in the driveway with them
when she received a text message from the applicant
which said "Don't be stupid
now Wendy".
Rodway described a number of occasions when the complainant told her about
incidents which had occurred between her and the applicant,
and other occasions
when she had observed injury to the complainant. She recalled an occasion when
the complainant told her the
applicant had damaged her motor vehicle. She
recalled an occasion when she observed the complainant with hair missing from
and lumps on her forehead. She recalled an occasion when the
complainant had attended her residence and she observed damage to her
and injuries to the complainant.
Rodway gave evidence that the complainant told her about a number of incidents
of family violence, including the following:
An occasion when
the applicant tried to put her jumper into the fuel tank of her car and had
thrown a rock at the car.
Occasions when
the applicant had disabled the complainant's car and the complainant would call
and request her mother collect her.
An occasion when
the applicant had bitten the complainant's hair and pulled it out. Ms Rodway
subsequently met with the complainant
and observed a chunk of her hair
An occasion when
Ms Rodway collected the complainant from Main Road, Austins Ferry. The
complainant was running from the house, wearing
only a top and underpants and
had no shoes. She was very distressed.
Rodway gave evidence of discussions she had with the complainant in which the
complainant would tell her she could not leave
the relationship with the
applicant because of threats he had made against her and her family. She said
the complainant told her
before the 24 April 2017 that she wanted to leave the
relationship and was "sick and tired of feeling worthless, threatened and
Rodway gave evidence that after the applicant was released from gaol, the
relationship between the complainant and applicant
became worse, and the
arguments appeared more frequent and more serious. The complainant became
withdrawn and ceased her studies.
Ms Rodway observed the applicant to take the
complainant's phone and laptop.
Rodway gave evidence of hearing the applicant make comments about knowing the
whereabouts and movements of the complainant and
Ms Rodway. Ms Rodway also gave
evidence of the applicant expressing a belief that the complainant had been
unfaithful to him with
Jarrod Kringle. She described the incident involving Mr
Kringle. She said that the applicant referred to that day as "judgment
She said prior to Mr Kringle arriving and whilst the complainant was doing her
hair and makeup, the applicant threw a phone
at the complainant. The phone hit
the complainant to the head. Ms Rodway said after Mr Kringle arrived, the
applicant questioned
him and the complainant and then directed Mr Eaton to
assault Mr Kringle. The applicant then assaulted Mr Kringle. She said the
applicant prevented the complainant from leaving the shed whilst this was
occurring and told her she needed to watch what was occurring.
to the events of 24 April 2017, Ms Rodway said at one point she heard arguing
and scuffling noises coming from the complainant's
bedroom. She entered and
found the applicant standing over the complainant. She observed a hole in the
wall. The complainant's
hair was in disarray and she appeared flustered. The
complainant tried to push the applicant from the room. He threw a can of Coke
and it sprayed over the bedroom. The can of Coke hit the complainant near the
temple. The applicant and Ms Rodway left the home
and went to a house in
Chigwell, and then to the applicant's parent's home. They then returned to her
on her bed crying. She told Ms Rodway she wanted the
relationship with the applicant to be over. She heard the complainant tell
applicant that she did not love him anymore, and for him to "let her go". The
applicant responded by saying it was not over,
"It will be over when I say it's
the complainant and applicant left the residence, the complainant had a backpack
with her. She said "I'm going to pay dearly
for this". She also said that she
would be back soon. Before they left, the applicant said they were going to
make a video with
his dog on it because "that was the only loyal thing". He
said he was going to show the complainant the video because he had "plans
Rodway also gave evidence of police attending her house after the complainant
had been burnt. She gave evidence about finding
the letter the complainant had
written. She gave evidence of receiving a phone call on 8 August 2017 and
passing the phone to the
complainant. After receiving the phone call she heard
the complainant say "Why are doing this? I'm going to breach you". The
complainant
was visibly upset and shaking after the call.
Cross-examination of Ms Rodway
following matters were canvassed in cross-examination:
complainant's contact with other witnesses after she had been burnt and whilst
she was in hospital and Ms Rodway's knowledge of
any such communications.
complainant's mental health prior to her relationship with the applicant. Ms
Rodway agreed she had sought medical advice and assistance
in respect to the
complainant's mental health. She denied she had told the applicant that the
complainant had tried to hang herself
on 24 April 2017 and to "be careful, she's
very fragile".
The nature of
the relationship between the complainant and applicant. Ms Rodway accepted that
the complainant was also controlling
of the applicant and had expressed jealousy
Ms Rodway gave
evidence of marriage forms being filled out by the applicant and
complainant.
Ms Rodway was
cross-examined about her shoplifting clothing items and stealing meat items to
support a drug addiction. She admitted
she had done so. She agreed that on
occasion the complainant had delivered stolen meat for her, but denied the
complainant had ever
collected drugs for her. Ms Rodway did not agree that the
applicant had regularly complained to her about these habits and her exposure
the complainant to these behaviours.
Ms Rodway agreed
that she and others had taken items of jewellery and other personal possessions
belonging to the applicant. She disagreed,
however, that the taking of those
items had led to the incident involving Mr Kringle.
Ms Rodway said
she did not hear the name Kristy Graham (or Dee) mentioned as part of the
argument she had overhead between the applicant
and complainant on 24 April
Evidence relevant to the nature of the
relationship and proof of the alleged tendencies
relating to the nature of the relationship between the applicant and
complainant, and some specific incidents of family
violence, were led at the
trial by way of evidence of intercepted telephone calls and messages (P2);
listening device material (P11)
and surveillance recordings from 2016 (P10).
Additionally, there were Arunta calls (calls recorded via the Risdon Prison
system) between the applicant and complainant, between April and
November 2016 (P20). This evidence was largely supportive of the
evidence of
the complainant as to the nature of the relationship. It was also relevant to
establish the asserted tendencies of the
applicant to act in a particular way
towards the complainant.
was evidence of an independent witness, Jayne McLean, pertaining to the driving
incident near Colebrook. This witness described
driving past the vehicle driven
by the applicant and observing the applicant holding the complainant by the hair
and neck and striking
her with his hand. She later saw the complainant out of
the vehicle and spoke with her. She appeared very distressed and said "I
talk to you ... you have to go ... he can't see you talking to me ...he's crazy
and he will fucking kill me". Ms McLean phoned
police and reported her
observations. A police officer, Angela Lang, subsequently intercepted the
vehicle. She spoke to the complainant.
She appeared to have been crying. She
removed the complainant from the vehicle so she could speak privately with her.
The complainant
expressed concern that the applicant could not hear their
conversation and asked Ms Lang to show the applicant what she had recorded
her police notebook.
was a body of evidence by way of surveillance footage and listening device
recordings relevant to 8 April 2017, which was
the date the incident at Nick
Tusson's house and an incident at Main Road, Austins Ferry were alleged to have
occurred. On these
recordings the applicant can be heard threatening to kill
the complainant and burn her house down; video surveillance footage shows
applicant going backwards and forwards to the complainant's car and appearing to
disable it; telephone calls between the complainant
and her mother record the
complainant saying "I've been told I'm going to die today" and "he pulled the
plugs out of my car"; surveillance
footage shows the complainant leaving her
vehicle on foot and being followed by the applicant; a telephone call between
the complainant
and her mother in which she tells her mother the applicant
chased her, bit her hair out, poked her in the eye and threatened to kill
surveillance footage showing the complainant's car parked outside 175 Main Road,
Austins Ferry and the applicant can be seen
kicking and pushing the outside of
the driver's door before opening it and leaning in.
witnesses also gave evidence of seeing this incident, including observing the
applicant kick the driver's door of the complainant's
vehicle. They stopped and
checked on the complainant. They described her as appearing scared and said that
she kept her head down
and would not look at them.
Additionally,
there was listening device material relevant to the incident on 23 April 2016
involving Dillon Davey. On that recording,
the applicant can be heard demanding
the complainant's bag, and telling Dillon Davey to take the phone from her. The
complainant
can be heard screaming "Let me fucking go". The applicant responds
that she is "a hostage now". He comments that if police attend,
the complainant
was "fucked". Surveillance footage shows a small figure, consistent with the
complainant, running out the back gate
of 175 Main Road Austins Ferry, followed
by a larger figure. A telephone call between the complainant and her mother
records the
complainant sounding distressed and asking her mother to pick her
Davey also gave evidence about this incident. He said he was at the applicant's
methyl amphetamine. He said the
applicant left the shed and then returned and said "This dog is fucking
recording us. Get up here
now". He went into the house. The applicant accused
the complainant of recording them, she appeared scared, and the applicant
the complainant up the hallway of the house. The applicant told him
to take the complainant's bag and "check it". He did that then
went back to the
shed. He later heard a woman's scream. He said afterwards the applicant told
him "She bashed me so I slapped her".
was given by Alan Gough, the employer of the complainant. He gave evidence of
the complainant being late for work and telling
him it was because her car was
"unusable" because of things the applicant had done to it. Evidence was also
given by Daniel Hill,
the neighbour of Wendy Rodway and the complainant. He gave
evidence of an occasion when the applicant approached him and told him
not to talk to the complainant. He also gave evidence of hearing a male voice at
Ms Rodway's "yelling and swearing".
was given by Sergeant Garth Hossak. He said he received information relating to
the complainant and applicant which warranted
investigation so he spoke to the
complainant on 8 April 2016. He recorded that statement. During the statement
the complainant denied
there had been any occurrences of family violence between
her and the applicant and said she was not scared of the applicant. He
nevertheless made application for a family violence order.
edited copy of a record of interview the applicant participated in with police
on 25 April 2016 was tendered on the trial. During
that interview the applicant
was asked about incidents of family violence that had allegedly occurred between
him and the complainant.
The applicant generally denied any violence and when
asked about specific incidents responded by telling police they would "need
ask the complainant" what had occurred. During the interview the applicant said
the complainant had not wanted the Interim Family
Violence Order. When played
portions of listening device recordings from 23 April 2016, the applicant
indicated he had no memory
of the incident and could not recognise any of the
voices. He suggested police would need to speak to the complainant about whether
she was at his house in breach of the interim family violence order.
interview was tendered on the State's case, over an objection from defence and
following legal argument, to support the argument
that the applicant believed he
was in control of the relationship and that the complainant would remain loyal
to him and not report
any incidents of family violence that had occurred.
was also evidence tendered on the trial of Facebook communications said to be
between the complainant and applicant on 23
and 24 April 2017. There was
evidence that the applicant used a Facebook account in the name of "Andrew
Smith". A police officer
gave evidence of the complainant providing her with her
Facebook account details and locating these messages. The messages demonstrated
an argument between the complainant and applicant overnight on 23 April whilst
the complainant was at work.
Further evidence relevant to the
fire incident on 24 April 2017
000 call – Rickie Davey
on the trial was a 000 recording of a call made by Rickie Davey, the father of
the applicant, at 9.44pm on 24 April 2017.
that call Mr Davey indicated, inter alia –
A woman has been
"caught alight or something... I think a drum of something caught alight".
Mr Davey was
asked whether anything was still burning and he said no.
In response to a
question as to whether the petrol had caught on fire and burnt the complainant,
Mr Davey said "I was inside and heard
the scream". In the background of the
call the applicant could be heard to say, "There was a drum of petrol on the
When asked about
the presence of animals Mr Davey said, "I've got the dog tied up here".
whether anything else was on fire Mr Davey said no. At no point did Mr Davey
suggest he had seen or put out a fire within
At one point
during the call Mr Davey could be heard to mutter "You fucking
Rickie Davey's evidence at trial
evidence from Mr Davey at trial was that he lived at 49 Corranga Drive,
Chigwell. There was a large shed on that property.
It was visible from his
kitchen and a side bedroom of the house. He kept items pertaining to his
employment as a floor sander in
the shed. The shed was messy as at 24 April
of that date the applicant was living at his house. He had a 9pm curfew.
the evening of 24 April 2017 he was at his residence. A car pulled up the
driveway at approximately 8.50pm. The complainant
then came inside. She poked
her head in the doorway and spoke to him. She said the applicant was in the
shed and they had the dog
with them. She took a bag to the bedroom, put the
kettle on and made hot drinks. She took the hot drinks to the shed. She
"quite normal".
after, Mr Davey went to the shed. The roller door was about a third of the way
down. He ducked underneath it. He told
the applicant and complainant that
there was a crayfish in the back fridge to be eaten. The complainant was
sitting in a chair,
There were papers on the floor where she was sitting.
or ten minutes later he heard a crash. He looked up and saw the applicant
carrying the complainant out of the shed in his
arms. They fell over near the
barbecue. The applicant was rolling the complainant on the ground. He heard
yelling and screaming.
The applicant was screaming "Help. Get the hose. Ring
triple zero". He raced outside and got the hose. It got caught. He turned
on and then took it over to the applicant and the complainant. He went back
inside and rang triple zero. At some point, he went
into the shed because there
were "flames on the floor, papers and that" and the dog was hooked on the chair
and was barking. Initially,
he said could not remember whether he went into the
shed first or went to get the phone first, but later said there was "no fire"
the time he called the triple 0 operator.
flames he saw in the shed were six or eight inches in height. The papers were
"half burnt". They were on fire "right at the
bottom of the chair where [the
complainant] was sitting previously". He could smell dog hair smouldering. He
told the triple zero
operator that he had stamped the fire in the shed out with
one point, he screamed at the applicant and the complainant to tell him what had
happened. The complainant said "No, no Rick,
it was an accident".
Davey agreed when cross-examined by the Prosecution pursuant to a grant of leave
Evidence Act
that he had not told police about
going into the shed and putting a fire out when he initially spoke to them. He
said he did not
think he had been asked the question.
also agreed he did not tell police or the triple zero operator that the
complainant had indicated to him that the fire was an
Davey denied completing a statutory declaration on 24 April 2017 when police
attended. He agreed he spoke with police but said
police officers only took
notes on an iPad but no formal statutory declaration was completed.
Melanie Long gave evidence of having taken a handwritten statutory declaration
from Rickie Davey on 24 April 2017 at his
the trial and published to the jury. The statement made no mention of a fire in
the shed. It
did not suggest the complainant had said the fire was an
tendered on the trial was the evidence Mr Davey gave during a preliminary
proceedings hearing. That evidence demonstrated
that Mr Davey had not, despite
making other corrections to his statutory declaration dated 24 April 2017 before
it was tendered,
made any mention of seeing any fire inside the shed on 24 April
2017 during his evidence.
were, therefore, a number of sources of Mr Davey's evidence available for the
jury's consideration: the triple zero call,
the statutory declaration made on 24
April 2017, the evidence given by Mr Davey at preliminary proceedings and his
evidence on the
was open for the jury to conclude there were a number of variations and/or
inconsistencies within those accounts. The prosecution
argued this reflected
adversely on the reliability and credibility of Rickie Davey. The defence
suggested given the trauma of the
evening and the enormity of the situation
which confronted Rickie Davey, such inconsistencies were understandable, and
with the benefit
of calm reflection it was entirely viable that Rickie Davey had
come to recall further detail.
Forensic evidence/crime scene investigation
aspects of the forensic examination included that there was a red brown drip
staining pattern on the floor of the shed.
This contained human blood with a
DNA profile consistent with it having come from the complainant. Further red
brown staining was
found on the complainant's car bonnet, which again was human
blood with a DNA profile consistent with the complainant.
Flonta of Forensic Science, Service Tasmania identified the red brown drip
staining pattern near the door as having a directionality
which travelled from
within the shed to outside of the shed. Her evidence was that the blood stains
present on the car bonnet depicted
an expirated pattern, consistent with blood
having accumulated in the airways and then been coughed or sneezed out. Her
was that, in her opinion, the expirated event most likely followed the
drip stain event.
of Dr Manthey established there was fuel present on the complainant's clothing.
This fuel was a mixture of petrol and
diesel. This was compared to samples
taken from various fuel containers within the shed. Fuel that was within a 20
litre red fuel
container found in the shed matched the fuel mix found on the
complainant's clothes. This 20 litre red fuel container was subject
fingerprinting and DNA analysis. This fuel container was tendered on the trial
(P63) and was the fuel container the applicant
used to conduct a demonstration
during his evidence.
testing of this fuel container showed a DNA profile consistent with that of the
applicant on the following areas:
On the yellow
cap and cap strap;
On the handle;
On an area of
possible fingerprint smudges on the upper bevelled corner of the container.
There was no DNA
matching the complainant found on this fuel container.
evidence of Dr Rita Westbury was that DNA, being water soluble, would not be
damaged by the presence of petrol on an item.
20 litre red fuel container was also subject to a fingerprint analysis. Four
areas of possible fingerprints were located.
Only one was suitable for
analysis. Ian Fleming gave evidence that a fingerprint lifted from the base of
the fuel container was
a match to the right ring finger of the applicant.
O'Donnell from Tasmania Fire Service conducted a fire scene examination of the
shed. He did not locate any signs of fire,
flame or heat damage in the shed
aside from a mark on a piece of carpet in the rear of the shed. This piece of
carpet was examined
by Dr Manthey. His examination disclosed the mark was
comprised of two different types of melted plastic and the carpet fibres
the surface were heat affected.
O'Donnell gave evidence that there was no other evidence of a fire event in the
region of this piece of carpet. He gave evidence
that in his opinion the fire
event had commenced at the entrance to the shed.
was toxicology testing undertaken in respect to the applicant's blood, which was
taken following his arrest. That testing
showed concentrations of methyl
amphetamine, amphetamine and THC in the applicant's blood. Mr McLachlan-Troop
gave evidence as to
the range of effects the ingestion of methyl amphetamine can
have upon an individual, including extreme confidence and increased
through to paranoia and unpredictable and violent behaviour. He accepted that
the impact of the consumption of methyl amphetamine
can vary considerably
between individuals, and may also be affected by the manner in which the drug is
Evidence of injuries to the complainant
complainant suffered burns to 68% of her total body surface. She was most
severely burnt on her front and left side. Dr Andrew
Castley, Director of
Tasmanian Burns Services at the Royal Hobart Hospital, gave evidence that in his
opinion the burn injury started
on the complainant's left hand side and
travelled up and across to the right. He was of the view that the burns were
with accelerant being applied to the complainant's left hand side.
He considered it more likely, based on the injuries, that the
ignition source
was introduced at the mid-rift area. He indicated that if the ignition source
had come from below that point, he
would have expected the injuries to the
complainant's lower legs to have been deeper and more severe upon presentation.
a circumferential burn on the complainant's right ankle and considered
that was consistent with the complainant wearing an anklet
or the top of a sock
being wet with accelerant and catching fire.
Castley also gave evidence that partial thickness burns to each of the
applicant's hands were consistent with him having patted
out flames on the
complainant. He was of the opinion that if the applicant had carried the
complainant from the shed, he would have
anticipated more burn injuries to the
applicant, for example, to his forearms and face.
Post offence
conduct and lies
State relied upon a number of statements made by the applicant following the
incident on 24 April 2017 to suggest that the applicant
was not telling the
truth as to what had occurred. In particular, the State relied upon what the
applicant could be heard saying
in the background of the triple 0 call, namely
that a drum of petrol had caught alight. Further, the State relied upon a
of statements the applicant made to Tasmania Fire Service personnel when
they arrived at the scene. Andrew Lem gave evidence that
he asked the applicant
whether the drum of fuel was still on fire. The applicant told him he was not
sure and then appeared to leave
in the direction of the shed. Mr Lem
subsequently heard the applicant tell his mother that he was doing some
soldering in the shed
above some fuel drums and there was an explosion.
Gordon from Tasmania Fire Service gave evidence that he asked the applicant what
had happened and he told him that he was
soldering at the workshop bench above
some fuel drums when they exploded. He also said the applicant told him his
father had put
them both out with a hose, and if it wasn't for him "they would
both be dead".
Coad from Tasmania Fire Service gave evidence that the applicant showed him
where he was soldering and pointed out a container
which "caused the explosion".
Mr Coad gave evidence that the applicant retrieved a fuel container (a smaller
red and yellow canister
tendered as P62) and suggested that was the container
which had caused the fire. Mr Coad inspected the container and saw no signs
explosion or fire.
officers attending the scene gave evidence that the applicant had been very
determined to travel in the back of the ambulance
with the complainant. He was
not permitted to do so and was directed to sit in the front. At the hospital,
the applicant was determined
to go with the complainant, and became agitated
when he was not permitted to do so. He was permitted to say goodbye to her. The
State relied upon this evidence as reflective of the applicant's desire to be
with the complainant so that he could control what
she might say. The defence
legitimately noted the behaviour was equally consistent with the applicant being
genuinely concerned for
the complainant's well-being.
officer Aimee Turner gave evidence that whilst in the ambulance on the way to
the hospital, she asked the applicant what
had happened. The applicant told her
that they were "in the shed together, that he was using a soldering iron next to
an open, but
empty, petrol barrel. The soldering iron sparked, a spark went
into the petrol barrel and created the flame that then burnt the
complainant".
doctor working at the Royal Hobart Hospital, Dr Losch, gave evidence that when
she was treating the applicant in the early hours
on 25 April 2017, he told her
that he had been "working in his shop that evening blowing glass...that a spark
then hit the ground
which was near an open fuel cannister. He kicked the fuel
cannister to get it out of the shed and by doing that, the long sweater
partner caught alight and the burns on his hands were from trying to take the
sweater off". The doctor described that the
applicant had circumferential
injuries to his hands but she observed no other injuries to him. A police
officer also gave evidence
that he heard the applicant say this to the
Constable Paul Smith arrested the applicant at the Royal Hobart Hospital. The
applicant said to him "You're fucking joking.
If it wasn't for me, she'd be
dead. I saved her life ... I was in the shed welding a motor bike ignition at
the time and there
was an explosion".
Constable Smith also gave evidence that the applicant's clothing smelt strongly
of fuel when he collected it.
tendered on the trial was a recording of a telephone call made by the applicant
to the complainant whilst he was in custody
on 6 August 2017. The phone call
was made via the prison Arunta system which records all calls. In that call,
the applicant, inter
alia, said to the complainant "Can you just tell the
truth". The complainant said "About what?" The applicant said "How it happened
... Babe, I did not do that". The complainant replied "What do you mean you
didn't do it?" There was further discussion. The applicant
then said "Why do
you say I did it though?" to which the complainant responded "Because you did,
why are you saying you didn't?"
The applicant's evidence at
applicant gave evidence as to the nature of the relationship between him and the
complainant. He said from the night after they
met, he and the complainant began
staying together. He said the relationship was very good to begin with but
after a period of time,
deteriorated. He described it as "controlling,
possessive, jealousy both ways". He suggested the complainant tried to control
Facebook profile by deleting and blocking female contacts. He said there
were lots of verbal arguments in the relationship. He
said both he and the
complainant were verbally abusive to each other. He said he had slapped the
complainant once, but had never
hit her with a closed fist. He said the
complainant had struck him "many times". He said there were many breakups
within the relationship
but they would quickly "make-up" again. As to the
suggestion he endeavoured to limit the time the complainant spent with her
he agreed he did not wish for the complainant to spend time with Ms
Rodway because he considered Ms Rodway exposed the complainant
to criminal
applicant gave evidence as to the complainant's mental health during the
relationship. He said the complainant often spoke to
him about her mental health
and difficulties she was having. She spoke about how the death of her friend,
and sexual abuse at the
hands of family members had negatively impacted her. He
said the complainant tried to self-harm many times during their relationship.
He gave examples of the complainant trying to self-harm in his sister's shed
with a handbag strap. He also gave evidence of an
occasion she had tried to
self-harm by taking pills and him having observed an empty pill bottle.
said that during the time he was in custody, he and the complainant would have
daily contact and that they were both intent on
the relationship continuing.
They had filled out Intention to Marry forms.
response to a number of the telephone calls that were recorded, and tendered on
the trial, he acknowledged they were "disgusting,
appalling". He said, however,
that the calls which had been tendered were only a small portion of their
communications and there
were many loving phone calls that had not been played
said after his release from custody in November 2016 he and the complainant
immediately resumed their relationship. She stayed
with him every night save for
a single night in March 2017 when she stayed away. That night they had a video
call. At 6.00am the
following morning, when his curfew ended, he had his father
take him to the complainant's home. He observed a car in the driveway
did not recognise. When he saw the complainant, she tried to rush him out of
the house in a panic saying she was late for
work. She dropped him back at his
mother's house. A few days later he was told by Jarrod Kringle that he had been
at the house
that morning and had been there regularly whilst the applicant had
been in prison.
respect to the specific incidents of family violence, which allegedly occurred
prior to April 2017, the applicant said there
was an occasion where he and the
complainant were driving in the Colebrook area. The complainant tried to jump
from the car when
it was moving at 60 to 80 kilometres per hour. He reacted by
"scruffing her" by the arm to prevent her jumping out. He subsequently
over and she exited the car. He threw her bag out whilst she was walking past
the shop. He followed the complainant slowly
in the car, trying to encourage
her to get back into it. He saw a lady pull up but did not hear what was said.
The complainant
told him the only way she would get back into the car was if she
drove. She did this and drove away. He fell asleep. He woke to
police at the
denied ever having thrown a glass at her which chipped kitchen tiles at
Abbotsfield Road. As to the argument on the bike track,
he said there had been
an argument in which he had locked the complainant out of the car. The
complainant had punched the window
of the car whilst he was in the driver's seat
and then walked off. He had followed her, telling her to get into the vehicle.
had refused to do so. He then drove the car to his parents' house. He met
the complainant near the Chigwell shop. They walked
off together, arguing. He
denied a head butt. He did not dispute biting her hair, but said he could not
said there was an occasion where he had picked up a rock and made out as if he
was going to throw it at her in the vehicle.
This was when they were having an
argument at the front of his sister's residence. He did not throw the rock.
She drove off and
left. He did not put her jumper in the fuel tank.
to the incident where Dillon Davey was present, the applicant said that he had a
verbal argument with the complainant and "a
bit of a wrestle" in the bedroom.
He did accuse her of recording him on her phone. He agreed the banging that
could be heard in
the recording was the bedroom door and maybe some things being
thrown around. He did not recall details of the incident beyond that.
to the incident involving Jarrod Kringle, he said Mr Kringle had "offered to
come to the house". He and Mr Kringle spent time
talking in the shed. The
complainant came to the shed. He asked questions of both the complainant and Mr
Kringle whilst they sat
on chairs in the shed. There was a discussion about
jewellery. The applicant knew some of his jewellery had gone missing and had
been told Mr Kringle had taken it and sold it. He agreed Mr Kringle was
assaulted that day by both him and Davis Eaton. Later that
same day the
applicant went to Mr Kringle's house and apologised and thanked Mr Kringle for
"owning up to it".
general terms, the applicant agreed the relationship with the complainant was
volatile and that they both spoke to each other
in a verbally abusive and
derogatory manner at times, but he denied any significant episodes of physical
to 24 April 2017, he said the complainant stayed with him the preceding night
and "woke in a bad mood". Throughout the day,
there were arguments about the
applicant cheating on the complainant with another female by the name of Kristy
Graham, also known
as Dee. The complainant wanted him to be tested for sexually
transmitted diseases. He agreed to do so and an appointment was arranged
Aboriginal Health Centre. He undertook blood and urine tests. Later that
afternoon they went shopping. The complainant
asked him when the test results
would be available. He had been told it would be at around 4.30/5.00pm. When
they returned home
to Abbotsfield Road, he made a call to the health centre. He
put the call on speaker. The complainant was present. The results
negative. The complainant continued to accuse him of sleeping with Kristy
was an argument. He was in the doorway of the bedroom and she was in the room,
folding clothes. The complainant rushed at
him and punched him to the head two
or three times. Wendy Rodway screamed at her to stop. The applicant had a can
of Coke in his
hand and he shook the contents around the room, squashed the can
and threw it onto the bed. He did not throw the can at the complainant.
took him out of the house saying, "Time to cool down". They went to a house in
Chigwell and obtained drugs. He did not consume
any drugs at that point but had
consumed methyl amphetamine earlier that morning. He then went to his parents'
house to do a "small
soldering job".
returned to Abbotsfield Road. He found the complainant in her room, lying on the
bed, face down and crying, with a knife beside
her. He removed the knife and
laid with her for about half an hour. They cuddled and spoke and sorted out the
complainant went to have a shower and get ready to go to his house. He went
outside to the shed area. Whilst he was outside,
Wendy Rodway came to talk to
him and she told him that whilst they had been out for the afternoon, the
complainant had gone to a
nearby construction site and tried to hang herself and
had also tried to hang herself out the back of the house by tying a yoga rope
around an aerial pole. Wendy Rodway told him that the complainant was very
fragile. He and the complainant left the home. They
went to his sister's house
to collect the dog. He was going to make a video with the dog to send to his
children on social media.
they arrived at his house, the complainant went inside the house with her bag.
He took the dog to the shed and made a dog
run with some white rope. He then
retrieved his soldering equipment and took it into the shed. He soldered a bike
ignition. The
complainant came into the shed with an iPad and a cup of tea.
The complainant was sitting on a chair, brushing the dog and flicking
the iPad. His backpack was on the back of the chair and the complainant began
to go through the backpack.
father came out and stuck his head under the garage door and said there was a
crayfish in the fridge. At no point was the roller
door locked. It cannot be
locked from the inside. He was tinkering around at the bench. The complainant
was looking at the iPad.
She started crying and screaming at him. She read a
message off the iPad from Kristy Graham saying the words, "I've always loved
and stuff like that". He told the complainant to show him the iPad. He went to
grab it from her. They fought over the iPad
and it ended up on the ground. He
got hold of the iPad with two hands and "snapped it, bent it".
complainant was screaming at him that he had cheated. There was a 20 litre drum
of fuel in the shed. The applicant identified
P63 as the fuel drum. He used the
fuel drum to demonstrate what the complainant then did. He said the complainant
took the lid off
it and picked it up with her right hand on top of it and her
left hand underneath the bottom of it. It was too heavy for her. She
to about waist height. She shook it and said, "You want to see me fucking burn".
As she shook the drum, fuel came out of
it and went onto her, none went on him.
As she was doing this, she picked up a cigarette lighter off the bench and held
out and flicked it. He took the lighter off her and sat it on the
bench. He took the fuel drum off her and sat it down on the floor
of the shed.
He put the lid back on it.
record that given the demonstration the applicant made using the fuel drum, both
during his evidence-in-chief and cross-examination
is relevant to some of the
grounds of appeal, and it cannot be fully appreciated by a reading of the trial
transcript, I have accessed
the Court's visual and audio recording of this
aspect of the applicants evidence and watched it.
applicant said that once the fuel was on her, he told the complainant to go and
have a shower and get changed and put fresh
clothes on. He repeatedly told her
to do this but she would not. She then picked up another backpack (a green one
tendered in evidence
as P43), undid the zip and shook the contents out. The
contents went all over the ground, in the same area where the fuel had spilled.
She started going through the papers. She found a piece of paper that had an
email address and the name Kristy Graham on it. She
got a lighter out of her
pocket and went to light this piece of paper. This ignited some fuel that had
spilt on the ground. The
ground caught alight. They were both trying to stamp
the fire out and that is "when she ignited". He reacted by grabbing the coat
she had on. He grabbed hold of the sleeve and tried to pull it off her. This
pulled her halfway across the shed and then he fell
on top of her. He tried to
pick her up from the ground and ran/walked outside. He carried her outside and
then tripped over and
fell near the barbecue area, ending up on the grass. He
wrapped his arms around her to smother the fire and tried to pat the flames
He screamed out to his Dad for help. His father got the hose. He put himself
out at the front where he was on fire. He told
his father there was a fire in
the shed and the dog was still in there. His father went to the shed and then
came back out. He
yelled at him to call triple zero. He went inside, got the
phone and came out and called the ambulance.
some point, the complainant told him she did not want anyone to know what had
happened so he suggested to her that she say it
was a soldering accident. It
was the first thing he thought of as he had been doing that through the
the "very start" when his father came out he said, "What the fuck have you
done?" The complainant said, "No Rick. It was an
applicant gave evidence that he vaguely recalled police, ambulance and fire
attending the house but had no clear memory of this.
He had no memory of trying
to get into the back of the ambulance, before being directed to the front. At
the hospital he was told
the complainant was asking to see him. He spoke to
her. She said she was sorry and that she loved him and to make sure she did
have any visitors.
photographs of the scene, the applicant identified where his hat had fallen off
when he had fallen with the complainant in
the shed. He identified the portion
of the carpet that had caught on fire. He identified the papers and small
electronic items
on the ground as items that had come out of the backpack when
the complainant shook it. He identified the broken iPad. He identified
backpack that the complainant had brought to his house that evening in his
Cross-examination of the applicant
applicant was cross-examined as to the nature of the relationship he shared with
the complainant. In general terms, he agreed
that loyalty was very important to
him and that there were rules within the relationship about with whom the
complainant could talk.
He also agreed that he would have impressed upon the
complainant that she was not to speak to police. He agreed that he would
the complainant about her loyalty towards him and that he wanted to
know where the complainant was during the course of the relationship.
that he had tampered with the complainant's car "once or twice". In respect to
the recordings of the various phone calls
that were tendered on the trial, the
applicant agreed it was him but suggested he could not recall the particular
arguments or what
they were about. He agreed he had told the complainant that
he had her under surveillance. He said he wanted her to believe that
not, in fact, the case. The applicant denied that it was him who exerted the
main of the control in the relationship.
He said it went "both ways". He denied
that he would act in ways that "forced the complainant" to stay in the
relationship. He agreed
it was possible that he told the complainant "If anyone
was going to end it" it would be him.
to the occasion when he slapped the complainant, he said he did it after she had
punched him three times to the face. He said
he apologised to her the following
day. He agreed that he would frequently verbally abuse the complainant. He
said, "That was my
way of getting to her, verbally, every word I could think
of". He agreed he had threatened to burn her house on 8 April 2016. He
was a "figure of speech" and he did not intend to do it. He agreed that if the
complainant challenged him about the nature
of their relationship, he would
"possibly threaten to kill her" but again, it was simply a "figure of
said after his release from custody he did not believe the arguments were as
bad. He agreed that on one occasion he told the
complainant that he would kill
her if she left him but indicated it was a "figure of speech". He agreed that
after his release from
custody, it "was possible" that the complainant had
indicated to him that she was distressed about the impact the relationship was
having on her, but he denied that the complainant was forced to stay with him.
He said he could not recall telling the complainant
"if he couldn't have her, no
one could" but did not deny he may have said it.
applicant denied that the reason he did not like the complainant spending time
with her mother was because the complainant would
tell her mother about his
behaviour and Ms Rodway would then challenge him about his behaviours.
applicant was asked about his drug use. He agreed that on occasion when coming
down from drugs he would become paranoid, he
agreed that it was "possible" he
would become irrational on drugs. He agreed the complainant may have raised with
him that his behaviour
was aggressive and irrational when he was on drugs. He
said he believed he had control of his drug use.
to the evening preceding 24 April, the applicant was challenged as to his
evidence that the complainant had stayed the night
with him. The Facebook
messages were put to him. He accepted he used the Facebook account "Andrew
Smith". He said he could not recall
sending the messages, but agreed they
sounded "like my words". When it was suggested the messages were sent overnight
23-24 April
whilst the complainant was at work, the applicant queried the date
on the document and queried whether the messages were from 2017.
Ultimately, the
applicant said he recalled the complainant coming to his house after nightshift
and getting into bed for a couple
of hours, before returning to Abbotsfield
to 24 April, the applicant admitted that during the argument at Abbotsfield Road
he had spat in the complainant's face when she
told him the relationship was
over. He said it was a stupid reaction and he was ashamed of it. The applicant
agreed the complainant
was crying, but denied that she did not want to return to
his house with him. He agreed the complainant may have told him the relationship
was over but said that happened often, and it was just their "normal
applicant denied that he had locked the roller door, or pretended to do so, when
he and the complainant entered the shed. He
said he could not recall whether
there were any papers on the shed floor when his father entered the shed.
applicant was challenged as to why he had not removed the red fuel container
from the complainant at an earlier point in time,
such as when she was removing
the lid or lifting it up. He was challenged about why if she had hold of a
lighter and was flicking
it, he had taken it and placed it on a nearby bench
rather than out of her reach. The applicant's response to such critiques was
the effect that it was a fast moving event. He was also asked to demonstrate
during cross-examination how he had removed the
fuel container from the
complainant. It was part of the State's case that the manner in which he
demonstrated he removed it from
her was inherently unlikely and unnatural and a
contrived account to explain forensic evidence found on the red fuel
challenged about why contents within the green backpack had stayed within it,
despite his evidence that the complainant had
vigorously shaken it, the
applicant suggested that the contents of the backpack that were tendered on the
trial were not the same
contents as had been it in the shed. He suggested
additional items had been placed into the green backpack following its
from the scene. The applicant suggested that he could not recall
specifically how he had picked the complainant up and carried her
outside the
shed. He also said he could not recall what parts of the complainant were
to the various versions of events he gave to others following the incident, the
applicant said he did not recall much of what
had occurred after the fire. He
said he was "in a bad state".
REPRESENTED APPEAL
Represented ground 1 – majority verdict of guilty of
attempted murder not lawful
this appeal ground the applicant contends that the trial judge was in error by
accepting a majority verdict of guilty in respect
to the charge of attempted
43 Failure to reach
unanimous verdict in criminal trials
(1) If, after deliberating for at least 2 hours, a
jury in a criminal trial, other than one relating to treason or murder, has not
reached a unanimous verdict, the court is to take a majority verdict as the
verdict of the jury.
(2) If, after deliberating for at least 6 hours, a
jury in a criminal trial relating to treason or murder has not reached a
verdict, the court is to take a majority verdict of not guilty as the
verdict of the jury.
(3) A verdict that the accused is guilty of murder
or treason is to be unanimous.
(4) If in a criminal trial, after deliberating for
the period referred to in subsection (1) or (2) as appropriate, a jury has not
reached a unanimous verdict and there is no majority verdict, the court may
discharge the jury unless the court considers further
deliberation is
(5) In a criminal trial, a majority verdict on an
alternative crime may be taken as the verdict of the jury if –
(a) it is possible for the jury to return a
verdict of not guilty of the crime charged but guilty of another crime with
accused has not been charged; and
(b) the jury reaches a verdict, unanimously or by
majority verdict, that the accused is not guilty of the crime charged; and
(c) the jury is unable to agree on its verdict on
the alternative crime after a cumulative total of at least –
(i) 2 hours deliberation on both crimes in the
case of a criminal trial referred to in subsection (1); or
(ii) 6 hours deliberation on both crimes in
the case of a crime referred to in subsection (2)."
applicant submits that a criminal trial in which an accused is charged with
attempted murder is "a criminal trial relating to
... murder" and therefore
does not operate to permit the taking of a
majority verdict.
applicant contends the natural and ordinary meaning of the phrase "in a criminal
trial relating to murder" must include trials
in respect to charges of attempted
murder, and if Parliament intended that majority verdicts operated in respect to
the crime of
attempting to commit murder then the exception provided for in that
section could readily have been enunciated in very clear terms;
for example by
specifying "In a criminal trial where an accused is charged with the crime of
treason or murder...". The applicant
contends the broader interpretation he
argues for is supported by the fact the crime of attempting to commit murder is
charged contrary
to s 299 and s 158 of the
Criminal Code
being, of course, the section which creates the crime of murder.
term "relating to" is an expression which has been described as "extremely wide
but ... also vague and indefinite". In
Tooheys Limited v Commissioner of
Stamp Duties (NSW)
[1961] HCA 35
(1961) 105 CLR 602
, Kitto J at 618 noted:
is, I apprehend, in accordance with the general rule of construction in every
case, that you are not only to look at the words,
but you are to look at the
context, the collocation, and the object of such words relating to such a
matter, and interpret the meaning
according to what would appear to be the
meaning intended to by conveyed by the use of the words under such
circumstances. The same
words might mean a very different thing, when put in to
impose a tax, from what they would mean when exempting from a tax".
at 620, Taylor J noted:
"There can be no doubt that the expression
'relating to' can be extremely wide but it is also vague and indefinite.
Clearly enough
it predicates the existence of some kind of relationship but it
leaves unspecified the plane upon which the relationship is to be
identified. That being so all that a court can do is to endeavour to seek some
precision in the context in which the
expression is used."
circumstances where there is ambiguity in the interpretation of legislation,
reference is often had as to the context of the
legislation, including its
legislative history.
Acts Interpretation Act
(Tas) provides:
8B Use of extrinsic material in
interpretation
(1) Subject to subsection (2), in the
interpretation of a provision of an Act, consideration may be given to extrinsic
material capable
of assisting in the interpretation –
(a) if the provision is ambiguous or obscure, to
provide an interpretation of it; or
(b) if the ordinary meaning of the provision leads
to a result that is manifestly absurd or is unreasonable, to provide an
interpretation
that avoids such a result; or
(c) in any other case, to confirm the
interpretation conveyed by the ordinary meaning of the provision.
(2) In determining whether consideration should be
given to extrinsic material, and in determining the weight to be given to
material, regard is to be given to –
(a) the desirability of a provision being
interpreted as having its ordinary meaning; and
(b) the undesirability of prolonging legal or
other proceedings without compensating advantage; and
(c) other relevant matters.
(3) In this section –
extrinsic material
in relation to a provision of an Act, means
material not forming part of the Act, including –
(a) material that is set out in the document
containing the text of the Act as printed by the Government Printer; and
(b) a relevant report of a Royal Commission,
Law Reform Commission or Commissioner, board or committee of inquiry, or a
similar body,
that was laid before either House of Parliament before the
provision concerned was enacted; and
(c) a relevant report of a committee of
Parliament or of either House of Parliament that was made to Parliament or that
House of Parliament
before the provision was enacted; and
(d) a treaty or other international agreement
that is mentioned in the Act; and
(e) any explanatory note, clause note or
memorandum relating to the Bill that contained the provision, or any other
relevant document,
that was laid before, or given or otherwise made available to
the members of, either House of Parliament by the member bringing in
before the provision was enacted; and
(f) the speech made to a House of Parliament
by a member of the House in moving a motion that the Bill be read a second time;
(g) relevant material in the Votes and
Proceedings of either House of Parliament or in any official record of debates
in Parliament
or either House of Parliament; and
(h) a document that is declared by an Act to
be a relevant document for the purposes of this section;
ordinary meaning
means the ordinary meaning conveyed by a
provision having regard to its context in the Act and to the purpose or object
of the Act."
applicant contends this Court should not have regard to any extrinsic material
contains no ambiguity or obscurity which
warrants reference to such material. The words, the applicant contends are
obvious on their
face. In my view, the very argument the applicant contends for
highlights the ambiguity. Do the words "a criminal trial relating
to ... murder"
mean only a criminal trial in which the accused is charged with the crime of
murder, or do they extend to include
criminal trials where the charge alleged
has a connection to, or a relationship with, the crime of murder such as
attempting to commit
murder or being an accessory after the fact of murder?
Moreover, if it is the later, why is
its scope to two specific crimes – treason and murder. In my view,
ambiguity exists and it is appropriate to have
regard to extrinsic materials.
Extrinsic material may include the speech made to a House of Parliament by a
Member of the House in
moving a motion that a Bill can be read a second time:
Acts Interpretation Act
second reading speech of the
Juries Bill
2003 occurred on 19 August 2003.
The then Minister for Justice and Industrial Relations introduced the Bill and
"A majority verdict of ten may be given in all criminal
trials except a trial for treason or murder. A verdict that an accused is
guilty of treason or murder must be unanimous".
is apparent from such comments that the intention was that a unanimous verdict
was required in relation to treason or murder
trials, but majority verdicts
could be accepted in "all other criminal trials".
interpretation is also consistent with
verdict in respect to the crime of attempting to commit murder was also intended
to be unanimous, one would expect it to have
been included in this sub-section.
Its absence from this section strongly supports the contention that a majority
verdict can be
accepted for the crime of attempting to commit murder, provided
the other requirements pertaining to the passage of time are satisfied.
legislative history of majority verdicts is also consistent with that
interpretation.
verdicts were introduced in Tasmania with effect from 10 August 1936 by the
Statute Law Revision Act
. At that time, ss 56 and 151 of the
Criminal Code
required any person convicted of treason or murder to be
sentenced to death, subject to an exception for persons under the age of
years pursuant to s 389. The 1934 Act amended the
introduced a new s 48(2) which provided for majority verdicts of ten jurors "on
the trial of any criminal issue, other
than a charge of a crime punishable with
death". It also introduced a new s 48(3), permitting majority verdicts of ten
jurors after
six hours to be accepted as verdicts that the accused was not
guilty, or not guilty of murder but guilty of manslaughter, on the
trial of any
criminal issue on a charge of a crime punishable with death.
sub-sections were repealed and replaced by the
affecting any substantial change. The new s 48(2) provided for majority
verdicts of ten jurors after "a jury has remained
in deliberation for the
necessary period". However, the new s 48(3) provided as
"Sub-section 2 of this section does not apply to a verdict
that the accused is guilty of a crime punishable by death or any special
upon which the accused would be convicted of such a crime".
death penalty for treason and murder was abolished in Tasmania by the
Criminal Code Act
1968. Sections 56 and 158 of the
Criminal Code
were amended to provide for mandatory sentences of life imprisonment.
Section 48(3) of the
1899 was amended to apply in relation to "a
verdict that the accused is guilty of treason, murder, or of a crime punishable
or any special finding upon which the accused would be convicted of
such a crime".
48 remained in that form until the
1899 was repealed and
replaced by the
. There was nothing in the 1899 Act that
could be interpreted as exempting a verdict on a charge of attempting to commit
murder from
the majority verdict provisions in s 48(2).
already noted, the 2003 Act provides for majority verdicts in s 43. The words
"relating to" in ss 43(1) and (2) were not used
in any earlier Tasmanian
legislation relating to majority verdicts. If it had been the intention of
Parliament to extend the exception
from the majority verdict legislation to
charges of attempting to commit murder, or being an accessory after the fact to
under ss 299 or 300 of the Code, so that unanimity was always required
for a guilty verdict on any such charge, one would expect
that change to be
mentioned in the relevant second reading speech. Nothing was said about any
such intended change.
Michael Hodgman, Member for Denison, said the following:
raising it to reaffirm how absolutely vital it is that we retain the unanimous
verdict in what used to be called capital crimes
but today are referred to
specifically as the crimes of murder and treason. It is very, very important
that on conviction for murder
or treason, which in the old days carried the
death penalty, the verdict had to be unanimous".
acceptance of majority verdicts in cases of attempting to commit murder is also
consistent with the applicable sentencing regime.
That is, where a crime
carries a maximum penalty of life imprisonment, the
requirement for a unanimous guilty verdict, but for all other crimes to which
the maximum penalty of 21 years imprisonment
applies, the
permits the return of a majority verdict of guilty.
my view, this ground is without merit.
Represented ground 2
– the admission of tendency evidence
this ground, the applicant contends the trial judge erred in admitting evidence
of the applicant and complainant's previous relationship
to prove tendencies on
the part of the applicant. The applicant does not contend the evidence as to the
nature of the relationship
was entirely inadmissible on the trial. It is
accepted that the State were entitled to adduce evidence of the nature of the
relationship
to provide context and background to the events of 24 April 2017,
and that such evidence could be used by the jury in a circumstantial
consider the state of mind of the applicant at the relevant time. The error, the
applicant contends, was to permit the
jury to use the evidence as evidence
which, if accepted, established that the applicant had a tendency to behave in
particular ways
towards the complainant, and within the relationship.
State asserted, in a notice of tendency dated 23 July 2021, that the applicant
had a tendency to assert control and dominance
over the complainant and in
particular he would:
(a) exercise control over the relationship;
(b) act violently (either verbally or physically) towards the complainant when
he was losing control of the complainant or the relationship;
(c) act violently (either verbally or physically) in the complainant's presence
when he was losing control of the complainant or
the relationship; and
(d) use burning as a means to threaten, intimidate or harm the complainant.
the State asserted the applicant would attempt to exercise control over the
relationship by doing various things including:
(a) keeping her under surveillance by checking her whereabouts, taking and or
checking her phone and by contacting her constantly;
(b) limiting the persons she could socialise with including members of her
family, friends and associates;
(c) obstructing her ability to remove herself from him by disabling her car,
physically restraining her, preventing her from leaving
the room and/or her
(d) threatening to kill or harm her or her family if she left the
relationship;
(e) directing verbal abuse towards her including making derogatory, belittling
and/or demeaning comments towards the complainant
and/or her family;
(f) directing physical violence towards her including striking her, and throwing
objects at her;
(g) threatening to physically harm her in words or by gestures; and
(h) directing physical harm at property in her presence including her car and
background to the admission of tendency evidence was that the applicant was
originally charged on indictment with a first count
alleging persistent family
violence and a second count alleging attempting to commit murder, or in the
alternative committing an
unlawful act intended to cause bodily harm.
applicant, through his counsel, applied for severance of count 1 from the
balance of the indictment on the basis of s 311(2)
Criminal Code
The trial judge severed count 1 but determined that
"the general evidence of
the relationship, evidence of the specific acts that were said to relate to
Count 1 – violent acts,
evidence of the recorded conversations that we
heard during the pre-recorded evidence, I am satisfied that all of that evidence
relevant and logically probative in relation to the proof of Count
the learned trial judge was satisfied that the evidence was admissible as
tendency evidence. He noted
"all of the evidence of the history of the
relationship that is identified in the tendency evidence notice ... including
the historical
description of relevant events by the complainant, including as
to the specific acts which would have been relevant to Count 1 ...
supports the
proof of those tendencies"
: (AB Vol 2 Pt A pg 330-332).
the learned trial judge noted
"the second question, that is, the extent to
which those tendencies, if established, may make more likely the facts in issue,
are particularly pertinent, in my view, to the question of whether it was
he who threw the petrol, as alleged by the complainant,
whether it was he who
set it alight, and they also impact to some extent on his intent, although I
think really the probative value
is in relation to whether he has committed
those acts ... demonstrating the tendencies will directly and significantly
assessment of the probability of the truth of the asserted facts in
: (AB Vol 2 Pt A pg 330-332).
to the question of unfair prejudice, the learned trial judge noted
circumstances of this case, I think that the prejudice arises, as Mr Richardson
submitted, from the quite raw and relatively
confronting evidence of the
recorded conversations, the risk of, or the potential for, emotional reaction to
that evidence by the
jury and the risk that they will place too much weight on
that emotional reaction and be diverted by that emotional reaction in relation
to the consideration of the facts in issue ... I acknowledge that those risks
exist. I am satisfied that the risk can be substantially
obviated by
appropriate directions. My judgment is that the probative value of the evidence
is significant and high and does substantially
outweigh the prejudicial effect
of the evidence"
: (AB Vol 2 Pt A pg 330-332).
The principles
relating to the admissibility of tendency evidence
evidence is governed by
Evidence Act
. Such evidence
is admissible only if the Court considers that the evidence, either by itself or
having regard to other evidence,
will have "significant probative value". The
evidence is not admissible unless the probative value substantially outweighs
any prejudicial
effect upon the accused.
Determination
of the admissibility of such evidence involves an evaluative judgment and
therefore the question for any appeal court
considering a ground of appeal of
this nature is to determine whether any miscarriage of justice has been
occasioned by the admission
of the tendency evidence. The determination of
whether the trial miscarried in consequence of the admission of the tendency
is concerned with the use made of the evidence at the trial
irrespective of the trial judge's determination to admit it.
is for this Court to determine for itself whether the evidence was of
significant probative value, as opposed to deciding whether
it was open to the
trial judge to conclude that it was. In
McPhillamy v The Queen
92 ALJR 1045
, citing Bauer at [61], the Court
"Regardless of the reasons that informed the trial judge's
decision to admit the tendency evidence, the determination of whether the
miscarried in consequence of its admission is concerned with the use made of the
evidence at the trial".
be of significant probative value, evidence must assessed to make more likely,
to a significant extent, a fact in issue in the
proceedings:
Hughes v The
[2017] HCA 20
263 CLR 338
. More recently, in
[2022] HCA 35
, the High Court summarised the principles at
"28 Assessment of the probative value of evidence requires
that the possible use to which the evidence might be put be taken at its
highest. Taking evidence at its highest assumes that the evidence is reliable
and credible. This assumption will only be displaced
where the evidence could
not be accepted by a rational jury. To be admissible under
, the court
must think that the evidence will have significant probative value, based on an
assessment of the evidence both by itself
and 'having regard to other evidence
adduced or to be adduced by the party seeking to adduce the evidence'. For
evidence to have
'significant probative value', it 'should make more likely, to
a significant extent, the facts that make up the elements of the offence
charged'; in other words, the evidence must be 'important' or 'of consequence'
to the assessment of the probability of the existence
of a fact in issue. It is
sufficient if the disputed evidence together with other
makes significantly more likely any facts making up the
elements of the offence charged." (Citations removed.)
assessing the question of unfair prejudice, it must be borne in mind that
evidence is not unfairly prejudicial because it strengthens
the prosecution
case. It is unfairly prejudicial only when the jury is likely to give the
evidence more weight than it deserves,
or when the nature or content of the
evidence may improperly influence the jury or divert the jurors from their task:
Festa V The Queen
[2001] HCA 72
208 CLR 593
per McHugh J. In
determining whether a danger of unfair prejudice has been established it is
appropriate to have regard to directions
that can be given to circumvent any
potential misuse of the evidence:
[2013] NSWCCA 121
; 84 NSWLR 363
applying those principles, and assessing the capacity of the evidence to be of
importance to a rational assessment of a fact
in issue, it is necessary to
evaluate the evidence in the context of the whole circumstances of the case.
Here, a fundamental fact
in issue was how the complainant came to be set alight.
The complainant's account was that earlier in the afternoon she had told
applicant the relationship was over and she did not intend to stay with him at
the house. The act of the applicant splashing
petrol on her occurred on her
account after a verbal argument in which she told the applicant she wanted to
leave and wanted to go
and threw petrol on her. On the complainant's account, this was followed
applicant telling her she should stay at his residence and have a shower and
change into his clothes. It was upon her refusal
to do so, and against her
continued insistence that she was leaving, that the applicant, as the
complainant walked towards the door
to exit the shed, extended his arm and
flicked the cigarette lighter causing her to be set alight. Her account, if
accepted, suggested
the applicant's behaviour was controlling in two distinct
aspects. Firstly, the splashing of petrol upon her which provided the
opportunity
for the applicant to then encourage her to stay at his house; and
secondly, when this endeavour appeared to be unsuccessful and the
complainant
insisted on leaving, a more extreme act of control was, arguably, embarked upon.
applicant's version of events was that whilst in the shed the complainant was
very emotional and fragile and displaying jealous
behaviours. She had an extreme
reaction to seeing a message on an iPad suggesting the applicant had been
unfaithful. She splashed
petrol over herself and threatened to ignite herself
by flicking a cigarette lighter. Subsequently, upon finding a piece of paper
with an email address on it she had another emotional and jealous reaction and
set fire to the piece of paper which in turn set fire
to a piece of carpet, and
in the process of trying to stamp that fire out, she caught herself alight.
issue of whether the complainant had been set alight as a consequence of
controlling acts or an inadvertent error, against a
background of emotional
distress and jealous reaction, was central to the trial. Therefore, assessing
the likelihood of the applicant
engaging in such controlling behaviour,
considering whether he had done so previously, and considering whether he had a
to engage in controlling behaviour generally, was highly relevant to
the question of how the complainant was set on fire. The applicant
contends that
evidence of controlling behaviour simpliciter was of little probative value in
considering whether the applicant committed
the more extreme, potentially lethal
act, of setting the complainant alight. The submission is made that whilst the
evidence as to
how the applicant behaved towards the complainant previously in
the relationship may be capable of establishing "a tendency to try
the complainant by way of violence of some form, by way of, for instance,
screaming at the complainant,
'no you're going to stay here'
... But they
would not have been significantly probative of the use of extreme and
potentially lethal violence". I do not accept
that submission. Firstly, the
evidence was directed at establishing the applicant had a tendency to exert
control and dominance over
the complainant. The jury were entitled to consider
that the mechanism by which he did that varied on occasions, and involved
degrees of intensity. The evidence suggested that sometimes the
applicant would be physically abusive, other times verbally abusive,
threatening including serious threats to burn her and/or her property or kill
her, sometimes deprive her of the means to
leave, on occasions seek to control
her behaviour by demonstrating he would cause harm to others if she did not
comply, and sometimes
he would be intimidating or seek to overawe the
complainant by suggesting he was constantly watching her or had others doing it
him. The evidence, if accepted, suggested there was a myriad of ways in
which the applicant would seek to dominate and control the
complainant.
was not necessary for the tendency evidence to be strikingly similar or have
precisely the same characteristics to the nature
of the fact in issue at trial;
The Queen v Bauer (a pseudonym)
[2018] HCA 40
The significant probative value of the tendency evidence was that it
demonstrated a want to exercise control and dominance within
the relationship
and a preparedness to use various means to achieve that. If the jury was of the
view that the applicant possessed
a tendency to act in that way, that is, use
various means of violence toward the complainant when he was losing control of
the relationship, then it was highly probative of the question of how the
complainant came to be set alight. Was it at the hands
of the applicant in
circumstances where the complainant was showing resistance to him and about to
walk away, or was it reasonably
possible that it was an inadvertent error
committed when the complainant was highly emotional?
my view, it was because the tendency evidence was so confronting, and suggestive
of the applicant being a very controlling, cruel
and unpleasant individual
within the relationship, that it had such a high probative value. Throwing
petrol on a person and subsequently
setting a person alight are extreme acts.
Logic and human experience would suggest that a person who is not prone to
extreme behaviours
may well not engage in such an act. If the tendency evidence
had simply suggested that on occasion the applicant had called the
complainant
some abusive or derogatory names, then its probative value would have been far
less. But the tendency evidence, if accepted,
went far beyond that. Within the
evidence there were examples of the applicant using fire and burning as a
threat, including threatening
to light the complainant's jumper by placing it in
a fuel tank and threats to burn her car and her house. The fact of such threats,
if accepted, made it inherently more likely that in the shed, in an endeavour to
control the complainant's behaviour, the applicant
threw fuel on her.
the tendency evidence, if accepted, demonstrated a considerable power imbalance
within the relationship; it was evidence
of extreme threats – including
threats to kill being made; it was evidence of the applicant seeking to control
and dominate
the complainant and compel loyalty by various means; it was
evidence of very volatile, abusive, demeaning and derogatory behaviour
applicant towards the complainant; it was evidence of the applicant being
prepared to say and do quite extreme things to ensure
he maintained control of
the complainant and the relationship. So whilst I agree with the applicant's
submission that it is difficult
to listen to all the recorded evidence and not
form the view that the applicant was a "really unpleasant" person in the context
the relationship, it is the offensive nature of the material that gives it
such a high probative value. Absent the evidence of the
volatile, cruel and
abusive manner in which the applicant treated the complainant during the
relationship, it may be difficult for
a jury to accept that an individual could
act in such a cruel and extreme way towards a person with whom he shared a
relationship.
the value of the evidence in assessing the mechanism by which the complainant
came to be set alight, the tendency evidence
also had probative value in other
important ways. The evidence suggested that the applicant had a tendency to
demand loyalty from
the complainant, and also suggested the complainant was
fearful of leaving the relationship because of threats made by the applicant
her and family members. This was relevant to the jury assessing why the
complainant went to the applicant's home on the evening
of 24 April 2017, and in
particular, whether she remained minded that the relationship was at an end.
Her state of mind as to whether
the relationship was at an end was relevant to
the assessment of the applicant's claim that she was reacting jealously towards
and splashed the fuel on herself and threatened to burn herself.
evidence was also relevant, although in my view to a lesser extent, to an
assessment of the applicant's state of mind, if the
jury were satisfied that the
applicant was responsible for the physical act of setting the complainant
alight. The tendency evidence
included several examples of previous threats to
kill in the context of the complainant wishing to end the relationship. The jury
were entitled to consider that the complainant's behaviour in the shed strongly
suggested she was definitively ending the relationship,
and that the applicant's
endeavours to dictate otherwise were, perhaps for the first time, proving
unsuccessful. He had thrown petrol
on her, he had told her to stay and shower at
his house, but the complainant continued to insist she was leaving. When the
complainant
moved towards the door to leave, the applicant set fire to the
complainant. They were entitled to consider whether at that point
intention to kill in the context of how he had behaved towards the complainant
at previous times in the relationship when
she had tried to end it.
I have noted, I have listened to the recordings that were tendered on the trial.
There is no question the recordings are confronting
and capable of invoking an
emotional response. There was also a considerable amount of tendency evidence
introducing the risk that
too much weight is placed upon it. It would be naive
to consider that the material was not prejudicial to the applicant. But the
question of admissibility rests upon an evaluation of the probative value of the
evidence substantially outweighing the prejudicial
effect. As I have indicated,
the probative value of the evidence was very high. The prejudicial effect of the
evidence existed but
it was substantially ameliorated by the detailed directions
the trial judge gave the jury as to the approach they should take to
evidence, and the manner in which they were permitted to use the evidence. No
complaint is made by the applicant in respect of
the directions.
trail judge emphasised to the jury that they should take great care to ensure
they did not allow any emotional reaction to influence
their deliberations and
to limit their use of the evidence to the specific purposes for which it had
been admitted. The trial judge
"The point I want to make at
this time is any previous conduct is not the subject of the charges before you.
You would not usually
hear about such conduct or any other wrongdoing because
the fact that somebody did something on another occasion or is a person of
particular character or a person who engages in certain types of discreditable
conduct is, as a matter of logic, not relevant to
whether someone did a specific
act on the occasion in question. I am sure that must be obvious to you.
In this case, that evidence has been admitted. It normally wouldn't be
admitted. In this case it has been admitted and it has been
admitted for a very
specific purpose which I will discuss with you in a moment. You must take great
care to use the evidence for
those purposes. I'm emphasising this because it is
a very significant feature of the case. You couldn't sit for weeks listening
all of that evidence without having some form of reaction to it. And the
accused himself said that he was disgusted by what he
had heard on the
You have to be very careful with how you use the evidence that bears on the
relevant and, I repeat, bear in mind that he's not charged
with any crime except
that arising from what happened in the shed. There can be a natural reaction to
evidence you've heard. To
simply say he is a terrible person whose acted
wrongly or discreditably on other occasions, to say that because of what he's
or how's he appeared in respect of the relationship, a natural emotional
reaction can be to want to punish him.
That of course would not be logical or correct and you must not use the
evidence in that way. And particularly you must not use it
to form a view about
his character to reason that he is the kind of person who must have committed a
crime of the nature of which
he's charged. You must be careful to avoid any
emotional reaction you may have to the evidence to colour your logical
application
of the evidence to the issues in this case. And I remind you to
approach the proof of the alleged crimes in a dispassionate and
logical way. ...
In particular, finalising my warning, you must exercise great care to avoid and
put to one side any desire to punish
the accused for any other conduct of which
you may disapprove. That's not what you are here to do." (Trial transcript
trial judge went on to provide the jury with conventional directions in respect
to the use of tendency evidence. There is no
reason to consider the jury failed
to comply with such directions. His Honour also took care to highlight to the
jury the argument
the defence advanced in respect of the tendency evidence. The
trial judge said:
"Now of course the defence has a point about the
relationship history as well. Mr Richardson is saying that this works both
and [the complainant] also has a tendency to act in a particular way in
respect of this relationship. Mr Richardson has pointed
to evidence that he
says would establish – and it's a question for you as to whether you think
the evidence does – or
your assessment of the evidence around this
question. But Mr Richardson would submit to you that the evidence would suggest
when emotional and confronted in the relationship, [the complainant] would
engage in acts of self-harm or attempted self-harm. And
of course that feeds
directly into the accused's version of what he says happened in the shed. ...
The other point the defence makes
of course is that even if you think he had
acted in a controlling and possessive and jealous way in the past, even if you
had made threats of harm against [the complainant] in the past, he had
not acted on them, at least in respect of by the use of conducts
such as what's
alleged in this case. In other words, the point is made that he didn't have
– that his tendency was actually
to be threatening, be controlling, be
aggressive, but not to actually go through with all the threats that he was
assessing how the tendency evidence was used at trial and determining whether
the trial miscarried in consequence of its admission,
it is relevant to consider
the use made of the evidence by the applicant in the presentation of his case.
As highlighted by the
passage from the trial judge's summing-up, the defence
relied upon aspects of the relationship and tendency evidence which suggested
the complainant was prone to acts of self-harm or attempted self harm when
confronted by difficulties within the relationship. The
defence also pointed
out evidence of her displaying jealous behaviour, such as controlling the
applicant's Facebook account and blocking
his contact with other females –
behaviours which were consistent with what the applicant said had happened in
my view, the evidence was of significant probative value and strongly supported
the asserted tendencies. The existence of those
tendencies, or otherwise, as at
24 April 2017 was highly probative of the truth of the evidence of the
complainant that the applicant
had set her alight. In my view, the risk of the
jury improperly using the evidence, or giving the evidence disproportionate
was limited and satisfactorily ameliorated by the directions given by
the trial judge. The evidence was properly admitted and the
trial did not
Represented ground 3 – admission of letter
written by the complainant
this ground the applicant contends the trial judge erred in admitting evidence
of a letter written by the complainant on 16 October
2016. At trial, defence
objected to the letter being tendered, and submitted it ought to be excluded in
accordance with
Evidence Act
. The objection was subject to
a ruling. The trial judge was satisfied the probative value of the evidence was
outweighed by the
danger of unfair prejudice.
contents of the letter was as follows:
"My name is
complainant]
. I am 19 years of age and I was born on 13 January 1997. My
story over the past 12 months has done a complete 360 degrees. I used
happiest girl, my laugh and smile was infectious. I loved my life and I'd never
complain or ask anything of anyone. I
had friends from all walks of life.
Criminals, lawyers, nurses, drug addicts, homeless people, teachers, aged carers
and many more...I
never judged anybody, I was happy to be friends with anybody
and I unfortunately welcomed everybody into my life. I never wanted
on anyone and my weakness was believing everyone had a good side to them...No
one really caused me great drama or trouble,
I believed in doing good by people,
being a loyal, honest, trustworthy person couldn't bring me too much drama and
Until I met one person, one person I regret meeting, one person I wish
never ever entered my life. But sadly he did. There was absolutely
could do in my power to erase him from my life. Leaving him? No. Escaping? No.
Running away? No. Where would I go, who
would I tell, how would I live, where
could I run, would he find me? Yes. Would he have people looking for me?
Definitely. Would
he do everything and anything to ruin my life? YES. And
would he kill me? Absolutely. Am I scared? Scared isn't the word. I don't
answers. I can't run. I can't hide. I can't escape. I can't get away...and I
believe if I come to the end of my life it
will be at the hands of MATTHEW JOHN
DAVEY. This is a letter by me,
[the complainant]
. Expressing why my
life would come to can end, in a horrible way much sooner than I've ever
planned. To whoever finds this, if
anyone does, I thank you from the bottom of
my heart that this monster will be exposed. Thank you. 16/10/16"
on the trial established that the letter was written shortly before the accused
was released from prison in November 2016.
The trial judge assessed that the
evidence had high probative value because it was relevant to the complainant's
then state of mind
and, in particular, her fear of the applicant and her
reluctance and concern about leaving the relationship. Assessed in the context
of the issues at trial, which fundamentally involved an assessment of whether
the applicant flicked the lighter at the complainant
as she was endeavouring to
leave the shed, which on the State's case was an extension of the controlling,
possessive and violent
behaviour he had displayed throughout the course of the
relationship, the letter was important, particularly given its timing.
evidence established that whilst the applicant was in prison between April and
November 2016 the complainant maintained regular
telephone contact with the
applicant, expressed her love for the applicant, discussed sharing finances and
purchasing a house with
the applicant and discussed marriage and children into
the future, including by completing Intention to Marry forms. There was also
evidence about the nature of the relationship before April 2016, and evidence
which suggested the complainant was fearful of the
applicant and had a desire to
leave the relationship. Her genuine state of mind was an important consideration
as it was relevant
to an assessment of the veracity of much of the tendency
evidence. That is, was the applicant someone who displayed violence to keep
in the relationship and to keep control of the relationship or was her account
of his behaviours exaggerated, as suggested by
the defence.
trial judge recognised that when he said (AB vol 2 part A
"I think that, provided the fact of fear and associated
feelings is relevant to the facts in issue, then under the
Evidence Act
the evidence is admissible under
and probably is also admissible under
because the person who wrote the letter has been called as a witness. ....So
the relevance of the complainant's state of mind at
the time that the letter was
written; it was written shortly after(sic) the accused was released from prison
...it's relevance, in
my view, that is her fear and attitude to the relationship
is relevant to the nature of that relationship and her attitude to it.
The letter, in particular, discusses her fears and supports contemporaneously
her experience of the tendency that is asserted to control
her. Which included,
according to her evidence, threats of violence if she left the relationship.
The letter is particularly pertinent,
I think, in respect of that aspect of the
asserted tendency. That aspect of tendency is particularly relevant to the
jury's assessment
of the probability of the accuracy of the complainant's
version of events which directly surround the acts and presence – reasons
for the presence of the parties and their actions in the shed immediately before
and at the time of the complainant's clothing catching
...again, the question of prejudice is raised. ...the prejudice again arises
from the risk of misuse, speculation by the jury, and
I think in the case of the
letter, to be fair, there is also asserted to be the potential for emotional
reaction to the wording that
is used in the letter and to the language which the
complainant used. ...in my judgment, the risk of misuse of the letter is low,
provided that there are appropriate directions. I think that the entire letter
needs to go to the jury because I think they are
entitled to assess the whole
statement which was her contemporaneous statement at the time well before the
alleged commission of
this crime, and that it would be artificial and
unnecessary to provide the jury with an edited version".
Evidence Act
provides the Court must refuse to admit evidence
adduced by the prosecutor if its probative value is outweighed by the danger of
unfair prejudice to the defendant. Probative value is a defined expression. It
means the extent to which the evidence could rationally
affect the assessment of
the probability of the existence of a fact in issue:
Evidence Act
The assessment of the probative value of the evidence must be made in the
context of the issues at trial and all the other evidence
adduced in the trial.
IMM v The Queen
[2016] HCA 14
257 CLR 300
the majority explains the
assessment of probative value as follows:
"42 As mentioned, the
Dictionary definition of the 'probative value' of evidence describes evidence
which is probative in the same
terms as how relevant evidence is described in
, namely evidence which 'could rationally affect [...[33]] the assessment of
the probability of the existence of a fact in issue'.
enquiry for the purposes of
is whether the evidence is capable of the
effect described at all. The enquiry for the purposes of determining the
probative value
of evidence is as to the extent of that possible effect. But the
point is that in both cases the enquiry is essentially the same;
it is as to how
the evidence might affect findings of fact. An assessment of the extent of the
probative value of the evidence takes
that enquiry further, but it remains an
enquiry as to the probative nature of the evidence.
assessment of 'the extent to which the evidence could rationally affect the
assessment of the probability of the existence of
a fact in issue' requires that
the possible use to which the evidence might be put, which is to say how it
might be used, be taken
at its highest. The definition must be read in the
context of the provision to which it is applied. For the purposes of
the enquiry is whether the probative value of the evidence may be regarded as
'significant'.
use of the term 'probative value' and the word 'extent' in its definition rest
upon the premise that relevant evidence can rationally
affect the assessment of
the probability of the existence of a fact in issue to different degrees. Taken
by itself, the evidence
may, if accepted, support an inference to a high degree
of probability that the fact in issue exists. On the other hand, it may only,
in the case of circumstantial evidence, strengthen that inference, when
considered in conjunction with other evidence. The evidence,
if accepted, may
establish a sufficient condition for the existence of the fact in issue or only
a necessary condition. The ways
in which evidence, if accepted, could affect the
assessment of the probability of the existence of a fact in issue are
to the concept of unfair prejudice, it is well established that evidence is not
unfairly prejudicial to a defendant merely because
it makes it more likely that
the defendant will be convicted. In
(2018) 266 CLR 56
, the High Court observed at [73]:
"Despite textual
differences between the expressions 'prejudicial' effect in
, 'unfairly
prejudicial' in s 735 and 'unfair prejudice' in
, each conveys essentially
the same idea of harm to the interests of the accused by reason of a risk that
the jury will use the evidence
improperly in some unfair way. Again, in
assessing any danger of unfair prejudice the Court must take into account other
that has been, or will be, admitted in the proceeding as well as any
explanation or directions about the evidence that will be given
to the jury. If
there is no real possibility that the evidence will be used by the jury in an
improper or unfair way, then no danger
of unfair prejudice arises".
trial the prosecution relied upon the evidence as being probative of the
complainant's view of the relationship as at 16 October
2016, and as being
corroborative of her evidence that up until that point in time, the relationship
with the applicant had been characterised
by violent and threatening behaviour.
To that extent, the prosecution submitted the letter was corroborative of a
considerable portion
of the relationship and tendency evidence. Additionally,
the prosecution submitted it was relevant to explain why N may have continued
with the relationship after the applicant had been released from custody when,
on the face of it, his remand in custody gave her
an opportunity to leave the
relationship. It was also relevant to the jury's assessment of the evidence
which suggested the complainant
was content and happy in the relationship and
had a desire to marry the applicant – was this a genuinely held state of
or was her behaviour directed at placating the applicant and protecting
herself from adverse consequences if she did leave the relationship.
my view, the letter was strongly probative for all these reasons. It spoke, in
the complainant's own words, to the nature of
the relationship and her feelings
context to explain
why the complainant may have acted in seemingly contradictory
ways both up to, and after the time of the letter. It provided the
accepted, with an understanding of why the complainant may have feared leaving
the relationship, which fed directly into
an aspect of the events of 24 April
2017, namely why she took the applicant back to his house on that evening and
then entered the
shed with him. The letter was probative of the jury assessing
the complainant's response to the relationship and the conflict between
staying in the relationship in circumstances where the jury may consider she had
the opportunity to leave it, whilst simultaneously
harbouring fears about the
applicant's controlling and violent behaviour.
On this appeal, the applicant concedes the letter had some probative value in
that it was relevant to explain why the complainant
may have stayed in the
relationship with the applicant despite his controlling behaviours, but submits
the risk of unfair prejudice
outweighs the probative value. The unfair
prejudice identified by the applicant is that the letter espouses a hypothetical
that the applicant would ultimately kill the complainant, and in a trial
where the very issue was whether the applicant intended
to kill the complainant
on 24 April 2017, there was a very real risk the jury may misuse the evidence
and be swayed by its "apparent
prediction". The applicant submits "the risk it
presented...was that a jury would reason,
'She was in the relationship, she
knew what he was like. She's the person best placed to judge his psychology and
what he might do.
And she's predicted it'
. There is a natural human
attraction to an early prediction of behaviour that is on the State's case,
borne out to be true".
do not accept the applicant's contentions. I do not consider that the jury would
place any weight on the prediction espoused in
the letter. There is no reason to
consider the jury would not simply adopt a common sense, logical approach to the
letter and reason
the complainant had no capacity to foresee the future or
predict future outcomes and the letter was nothing more than an expression
her thoughts and fears at the time. There was other evidence on the trial where
the complainant had expressed a fear that the
applicant would kill her. In one
of the intercepted telephone calls she told her mother she feared the applicant
would kill her.
In a Facebook exchange with a friend, Shannon Jones, she
expressed concern that the applicant may kill her. There is no reason to
consider that the jury would elevate comments made by the complainant about her
fear of the applicant to evidence that he in fact
did something on the night of
24 April 2017 in the shed. To suggest the jury would somehow misuse the evidence
and treat it as evidence
that made it more likely that the applicant did an act
or held a particular state of mind in the shed on 24 April, is to suggest
jury were incapable of exercising common sense and sound judgment. There is no
basis upon which such a conclusion could be drawn.
any event, the trial judge dealt with the concern raised by the applicant that
the jury would attach additional weight to the
evidence because of its
predictive nature. He said this:
"However, you need to be careful
hands', in a letter
is something that could produce a dramatic reaction in a
case like this where it is found the morning after the fire where she almost
does die ... she was injured at the hands of the accused but what I would say to
you as a matter of logic, no weight should be put
on her prediction – the
predictions contained particularly in that letter – when you are assessing
what actually did
happen on 24 April 2017. [The complainant] is no different to
any of us. She has no predictive powers. It is simply something
to express how
she was feeling at the time, but it does not have any logical bearing on whether
or not the accused did what is asserted
against him on 24 April.....It doesn't
prove what was in the accused's mind at the time of the fire. It is relevant of
some evidence
of how she was feeling at the time...and you should avoid any
emotional or dramatic reaction to that evidence...In any event, the
accused says
to you, 'Well look, that letter does not truly reflect her state of mind about
the relationship'. He offered you a
theory as to why she might have written
that letter. You do not have to decide that. But he says it is inconsistent
with what she
was actually saying to the accused in the telephone calls and you
should put the letter to one side because of that reason. That
is his argument
to you." (Summing up pg 38-39)
the extent there was any risk of the jury misusing the evidence, and in my view,
that risk was minimal, the direction given to
the jury ameliorated any potential
risk even further. It was made clear to the jury that the evidence was to be
used in assessing
the complainant's state of mind and had no evidentiary value
in terms of it being a prophecy or insight into any future intention
probative value of the evidence, when assessed in the context of the issues to
be determined by the jury, was high. The probative
value was not outweighed by
the risk of unfair prejudice. I do not consider there was any error in
admitting the letter and no miscarriage
of justice has been
Represented ground of appeal 4 – unsafe and
unsatisfactory
ground of appeal reflects the terms of s 402(1) of the
Criminal Code
which provides that the Court may allow an appeal if the verdict was
unreasonable or was incapable of being supported by the evidence.
The law as to
an appeal ground of this nature was recently discussed by Wood J in
State of Tasmania
[2024] TASCCA 5
"8 The first ground of
appeal reflects the terms of s 402(1) of the Code which provide that the Court
may allow an appeal if the verdict
was unreasonable or was incapable of being
supported by the evidence. In
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
181 CLR 487
493-495 the joint judgement of Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ
authoritatively stated the approach that must be taken when
courts of criminal
appeal are considering an appeal on that ground.
ultimate question is 'whether the court thinks that upon the whole of the
evidence it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that
the accused was guilty':
M v The Queen
at 494-495.
question is one of fact 'which the court must decide by making its own
independent assessment of the evidence':
M v The Queen
answering the question, the 'court must not disregard or discount either the
consideration that the jury is the body entrusted
with the primary
responsibility of determining guilt or innocence, or the consideration that the
jury has had the benefit of having
seen and heard the witnesses':
deciding whether the jury ought to have entertained a reasonable doubt, the
joint judgment explained at 494:
'In most cases a doubt experienced
by the appellate court will be a doubt which the jury ought also to have
experienced. It is only
where a jury's advantage in seeing and hearing the
evidence is capable of resolving a doubt experienced by a court of criminal
that the court may conclude that no miscarriage of justice occurred. That
is to say, where the evidence lacks credibility for reasons
which are not
explained by the manner in which it was given, a reasonable doubt experienced by
the court is a doubt which a reasonable
jury ought to have experienced.'
passage in the judgment continued at 494 providing examples of evidence that may
give rise to a conclusion that a reasonable jury
ought to have experienced a
reasonable doubt:
'If the evidence, upon the record itself, contains
discrepancies, displays inadequacies, is tainted or otherwise lacks probative
in such a way as to lead the court of criminal appeal to conclude that,
even making full allowance for the advantages enjoyed by
the jury, there is a
significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted, then the
court is bound to act and to set
aside a verdict based upon that evidence.'
Dansie v The Queen
[2022] HCA 25
274 CLR 651
, the High Court stated that
the authoritative guidance to be gained from the joint judgment in
not diminished with time. In
the High Court was
considering a verdict of guilty after a trial by judge alone. It was said that
the function to be performed by
the Court of Criminal Appeal when determining an
appeal on the unreasonable verdict ground is not to determine whether there was
error in the factual findings on which the trial judge relied in ultimately
finding the accused guilty of the offence tried. The
judgment stated at [7]
'The function to be performed by the Court of Criminal Appeal
is to determine for itself whether the evidence was sufficient in nature
quality to eliminate any reasonable doubt that the accused is guilty of that
, it was noted by the court that the advantage that a trial judge
(in a case of trial by judge alone) might have had over the court
of criminal
appeal by reason of having seen and heard the evidence at trial will vary from
case to case depending on the form in
which the evidence was adduced and on the
nature of the issues that arose at the trial. In that instance, the prosecution
circumstantial, the evidence adduced by the prosecution was largely
uncontested, and the advantage was described as slight.
[2020] HCA 12
, 268 CLR 125 at
the High Court
considered a case where the jury was required to make an assessment of the
credibility of the witnesses, including
the evidence of the complainant, and was
dependent upon the evaluation of the witnesses in the witness box. In that case,
inconsistencies with other unchallenged evidence. The judgment of
Keifel CJ, Bell, Gageler, Keane, Nettle, Gordon and Edelman JJ
described the
assessment of the weight to be accorded to a witness' evidence by reference to
the manner in which it was given by
the witness as having always been, and which
remains, the province of the jury as representative of the community:
judgment considered the function of the court of criminal appeal in such a case
when determining a ground that contends that the
verdict of the jury is
unreasonable or cannot be supported having regard to the
'[The court of criminal appeal] proceeds upon the
assumption that the evidence of the complainant was assessed by the jury to be
and reliable. The court examines the record to see whether,
notwithstanding that assessment – either by reason of inconsistencies,
discrepancies, or other inadequacy; or in light of other evidence – the
court is satisfied that the jury, acting rationally,
ought nonetheless to have
entertained a reasonable doubt as to proof of guilt.'"
is necessary then to independently assess the nature and quality of the evidence
to determine whether upon the whole of the evidence
it was open to the jury to
be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the applicant was guilty, or whether
the jury acting rationally
ought to have entertained a reasonable doubt. This
is a question to be determined, bearing in mind the jury has the benefit of
seeing and evaluating the witnesses at trial.
for the applicant submits that when all of the evidence is considered as a
whole, the jury should have entertained a reasonable
doubt as to the applicant's
guilt for the following reasons:
On an objective
analysis of the evidence, the applicant's evidence as to the means of ignition
was not capable of being excluded as
a reasonably open possibility. The only
evidence by which it was possible to exclude the hypothesis advanced in the
defence case,
was that of the complainant.
complainant's evidence as to the events immediately approximate to ignition,
including the journey to the applicant's home, the
occurrence of arguments, her
intention of staying overnight, her packing of an overnight bag and where she
had left it prior to entering
the shed, was unsatisfactory, either because it
was vague and imprecise or objectively shown to be wrong.
complainant's account of where the fuel landed on her was not consistent with
the burn marks she suffered.
complainant's inability to explain a burn mark on the carpet in the rear of the
shed was a significant deficiency which raised
doubt about her account.
The complainant
was an essential Crown witness and it was not open for the jury to return a
verdict of guilty unless it was satisfied
as to her honesty and reliability.
The testimony of the applicant need only have left an exculpatory hypothesis
that was open as
a matter of reasonable doubt for the jury to have been bound to
acquit him, and it was not possible for the jury (and therefore not
possible for
this Court) to have been satisfied of the honesty and reliability of the
complainant beyond reasonable doubt because
the defence hypothesis was incapable
of being excluded beyond reasonable doubt.
is no question the complainant's evidence was crucial at the trial and the jury
was directed that they should scrutinise her
evidence with care, and that they
would need to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that she had given a truthful
and accurate version
of the critical events leading up to her being set on fire.
The jury was told that they would have to be satisfied beyond reasonable
on the basis of her evidence that the applicant had set her on fire. The jury
were told that the verdict must "stand or fall
on the basis of her evidence
also told that if after
appropriate and careful scrutiny, they were satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that N had given a truthful and accurate account of
those events, then they were entitled to accept her evidence and act upon
jury were also given a direction in accordance with
Liberato v The Queen
[1985] HCA 66
(1985) 159 CLR 507.
The jury were told the following:
have already made the point to you that its – all the supporting evidence
is very important, but ultimately, it is going
to come down to you being
satisfied that N has given you an honest and accurate account of what happened
in the shed. Now, there's
conflict between her and the accused about that.
It's very important that you bear in mind that the resolution of the case will
not come down to simply choosing which witness you prefer because it's not
weighing one up against the other. You have to be satisfied
of guilt beyond
reasonable doubt.
Of course, if you positively believe the accused....then you will determine
the case in accordance with that evidence and on that
basis, he's not guilty of
anything. However, even if you have difficulty accepting his evidence, if upon
having considered all of
the evidence, you cannot exclude as a reasonable
possibility his version of events or his innocence generally, then you must
the case on that basis and find him not guilty. Finally, even if you
positively disbelieve him, even if you think he was lying to
you in evidence,
you do not, as a result, immediately assume guilt. You put his evidence to one
side, you consider the evidence
you do accept, and on that basis ask yourself
the question am I satisfied of guilt beyond reasonable doubt".
have already set out in these reasons the applicant's primary contentions at
trial, and the complainant's contrary account. I
shall turn to deal with the
specific points raised by the applicant in this ground of appeal. Firstly, he
submits the evidence which
suggests the complainant had taken a backpack to the
house and placed it in the applicant's bedroom was inconsistent with her account
that she was not intending to stay the night at the applicant's home, considered
the relationship to be at an end and was only dropping
him off to meet his
curfew obligations. Evidence, independent of the complainant or applicant, and
relevant to the issue of the
backpack came from Wendy Rodway, who said the
complainant left Abbotsfield Road with a backpack, but also told her that she
be "back soon"; Rickie Davey who said the complainant entered the house,
went to the applicant's bedroom and made hot drinks before
going to the shed,
and photographic evidence of a backpack identified as the complainant's, which
was in the applicant's bedroom.
The complainant said she could not recall
whether she had taken a backpack with her to the applicant's home and could not
taking it into the house. In my view, the fact the complainant was unable
to recall whether she took a backpack or otherwise was
hardly surprising.
However it occurred, the complainant had endured a significantly traumatic
event. Lapses in memory were readily
explained by the stress of the situation
and were not necessarily reflective of unreliability or fabrication. Moreover,
in my view,
even if the complainant had taken a backpack to the applicant's home
it did not mean she intended to stay or that her evidence of
her desire to end
the relationship was untrue. There was a considerable body of evidence which
suggested the complainant was very
conflicted within the relationship – at
times expressing to the applicant and others a desire to continue in the
relationship
whilst simultaneously expressing fear of the applicant and a wish
to extricate herself from the relationship. Such a conflict in
emotions is
commonplace in complicated domestic relationships. The taking of the backpack
may have reasonably been considered by
the jury as a reflection of her confusion
and uncertainty about what may occur that evening, or act as directed at
appeasing the
applicant. There had been a heated argument immediately prior to
departure, taking the backpack may simply be a means to avoid further
with the applicant. On my assessment of the evidence, it is likely the
complainant took the backpack with her, but there
are logical reasons as to why
she may have done so which do not detract from a finding that she was an honest
and reliable witness
in the critical aspects of her evidence.
second area of evidence the applicant contends must raise a reasonable doubt is
the evidence the complainant gave as to where
the fuel was splashed upon her,
and the evidence as to the burn pattern she sustained. Counsel made the
submission that the "fuel
was splashed on what she (the complainant) called the
". The evidence-in-chief of the complainant as to where the
fuel landed on her was as follows:
So then what happened?...And
then we had – yep, just kept talking to one another. I turned my back to
Matthew, and I felt a
splash go over mostly my left side of what I knew was
petrol because of the smell.
Okay. And when you said it splashed, was it just a little drop of petrol,
or a lot of petrol, or what's the situation?...No, it was
a fair amount.
And what did it do to your clothes?...My clothes were wet from being
covered in petrol.
And where – when you say your clothes, how much of your clothes were
wet from being covered in petrol?...Majority of it because
all of the petrol had
fallen downwards.
And when this happened did you see Matthew Davey at all ?...I had my back
to him but when I turned around he was putting the fuel
In cross-examination the following exchange occurred:
Again, my note is that you felt, rather than saw, fuel splashed from
behind and to the left, is that your evidence, or was that your
evidence?......Yeah
evidence of where the burns on the complainant were situated came from Dr
Castley. His evidence was as follows (AB vol 2 part
1306-1307):
You've indicated – perhaps if you can
illustrate to the jury and – if – if it assists in explaining it to
can you indicate to the jury where the greater in – burn injury was
[the complainant's]
body, and – that is, the greater area of
thick burning or full-thickness burning?........So the areas that are more
burnt is sort of the front and the left, so her left upper limb was
severely burnt, as was her left flank left/left thigh and her
abdomen. There's
less significant burns on her right buttock and lateral aspect of her right
thigh, so it's like the burn injury
and the flame injury has started on the
left-hand side and then come up and across to the right, and so you're seeing
the burns to
her right arm, from the flames going that way, but they're –
and there's more on the front than on the back.
I want to assume, for present purposes, that an accelerant was introduced
[the complainant's]
body. It doesn't matter how, for these purposes,
or – but – would you – were the burns that you've just
are they more consistent with an accelerant being applied to the
left-hand side, as opposed to any other area ?.....Correct.
Why is that?...Because that is the side where you've got the greatest
degree of burns and the most intense injury.
You indicated earlier that the burns to the face are consistent with the
heat move – moving up – or funnelling up –
described the burn pattern moving from left to right and up and –
trajectory upwards. Is that, in your experience,
how you often see burn pattern
injury that is going from a lower source upwards?...It depends on the mechanism
of the injury to be
brutally honest. With – a lot of accelerant-type
injuries tend to be accidental, young men working on their cars or in the
workplace get a little bit of methylated spirits or something onto their shirt
and then everything ignites. So you get a specific
distribution of, like, the
T-shirt pattern. With – what I'm happy to say in this case is that most of
the burn has been on
that left side and it's – that's where the intensity
And, obviously, there has to be an ignition source for the burn event to
occur. Are you able to provide an opinion as to the most
likely location of that
ignition source?....It is difficult to say. The – if it was introduced at
the level of her lower flank,
that would be consistent with a burn pattern that
we see, just to do with the intensity of the flame in that area. The surrounding
areas, such as the left lower leg, seems to be more radiant heat rather than it
coming up from below, but I can't exclude that that's
what happened also.
So is there a more likely scenario to you or what are you able to say, in
your opinion? Is it – ?.......In my opinion, I think
it's more likely that
it was introduced at the midriff area, but I can't be certain in that
In cross-examination the following exchange occurred (AB vol 2 part B
Could you go to par 6 of the opinions expressed, and I'll simply ask you
whether the opinion that you formed and reported about on
the 30th of May 2017
can be expressed in these terms: The burn patterns noted were consistent with
clothing catching alight with
more intense heat anteriorly and on the left side
of her body. ?...Correct.
And that's front left?....Correct.
applicant submits it is very difficult to reconcile the evidence of Dr Castley
with the account given by the complainant. I
do not accept that submission. The
complainant's evidence was that the fuel had been thrown on her from behind but
"mostly on my left side".
After the fuel had been thrown her
clothing was wet. She moved about the shed and was involved in a further
altercation with the applicant
which saw her rolling around on the floor. It is
reasonable to infer such movement may have resulted in the original deposit of
being transferred to other parts of the complainant's clothing. The
evidence of Dr Manthey is also important in this respect. His
evidence was that
after fuel lands on clothing it is absorbed, but then begins to evaporate. The
rate of evaporation can be affected
by many things including the type of
clothing, the ambient temperature, the amount of movement, the amount of fuel
deposited and
the type of fuel deposited. He also gave evidence that it is the
vapour of the fuel that ignites and not the liquid itself (AB vol
1522-1523). The applicant's submission rested upon the proposition that the fuel
must have landed upon the complainant's
back because it was thrown from behind
her, and the burning would inevitably occur at the exact location where the fuel
landed. Such
a proposition is not supported by the evidence.
considering whether the evidence contains "discrepancies, displays inadequacies,
is tainted or otherwise lacks probative force"
it is important to consider the
evidence in the context of all of the evidence adduced at trial. When one looks
at the whole of the
evidence there is nothing so inherently inconsistent about
the complainant's account and Dr Castley's evidence to suggest there is
"significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted". Indeed, in
the main the forensic, scientific and medical
evidence was more consistent with
the complainant's account than it was with the applicant's account. For example,
the fire investigator's
evidence that the only evidence of a fire event was at
the front of the shed; there was no evidence of a fire event involving papers
carpet catching alight such that it would need stamping out. Anna Flonta's
evidence as to the blood trail was also consistent
with the fire event having
occurred at the front of the shed near the door. Dr Manthey's evidence that
there was a 4mm x 4mm heat
affected area of carpet was more consistent with the
complainant's account of the applicant holding a lighter to the carpet
"pretending"
he was going to set fire to the shed than it was with the
applicant's claim that the carpet caught fire to the extent both he and
complainant had to try to stamp it out. There was no DNA or forensic evidence
linking the complainant to the 20 litre fuel drum
(which contained the mix of
petrol and diesel which was found on the complainant's clothing); and the
evidence of Dr Castley was
that the main of the complainant's burns were on the
left hand side which was where she said she felt
"most of the fuel"
His opinion that the ignition point had most likely been introduced at the
midriff area was also consistent with the complainant's
account. Dr Castley also
gave evidence of the injuries to the applicant (par [98] above) and opined that
he did not consider the
injuries to be consistent with the applicant having
carried the complainant from the shed, again evidence consistent with the
complainant's
account and inconsistent with the applicant's account.
third area of evidence which the applicant contends raises doubt as to guilt is
the complainant's evidence that the roller door
was down when the fire event
occurred. The evidence of the fire investigator, Mark O'Donnell was to the
effect that in his opinion
the fire event occurred near the door of the shed but
the patterning of the soot deposits was not consistent with the roller door
being down at the time (AB vol 2 part B 736). The first point to be made is
that in re-examination on 7 September 2021, after having
been cross-examined
roller door, the complainant said
she did not have a clear memory as to the
state of the roller door. I have already commented that the complainant being
recall certain aspects of the event given the injuries she sustained
is unsurprising. Beyond the conflict in the complainant's evidence
state of the roller door there was other conflicting evidence. Rickie Davey said
when he went to the shed to tell the applicant
door was partly down, and he had to "duck under it". Mr O'Donnell was not asked
whether the soot deposit
patterning was consistent or otherwise with the roller
door being partly down. In my view, given the state of the evidence it is
difficult to conclude with certainty what the state of the roller door was, but
it is not a matter which a reasonable jury should
have regarded as reflecting
adversely on the nature and quality of the complainant's evidence when viewed as
was nothing inherently implausible or illogical in the complainant's account.
The jury, after carefully scrutinising it,
were entitled to act upon it. There
was considerable evidence admitted on the trial that was supportive of the
complainant's credibility.
Her accounts of earlier incidents of family violence
were supported by independent evidence, including evidence of other witnesses
and the telephone intercept and listening device material.
Discrepancies
within the complainant's accounts, such as whether she had taken an overnight
bag to the applicant's home, the state
of the roller door, whether she could
recall how papers came to be on the shed floor were properly assessed as
relatively insignificant
inconsistencies or lapses in memory, particularly given
the dramatic events of 24 April and the horrific nature of her injuries and
subsequent prolonged medical treatment.
relationship and tendency evidence was compelling. As I have already noted, the
tendency evidence was highly probative and
entirely consistent with the
complainant's version of events. That is, when she indicated a want to depart
the shed, bringing to
an end the relationship with the applicant, he firstly
tried to scare her into compliance by throwing fuel on her. When that did
work and she became angry and fought back, he escalated his possessive and
controlling behaviours by setting her on fire. Whilst
the jury were required to
draw an inference as to the appellant's state of mind at the time, the very
nature of the physical acts
of the crime, that is, igniting a cigarette lighter
in very close proximity to a person one had just doused in fuel, was highly
of the applicant's intent to kill. This state of mind was also
supported by the tendency evidence, in particular, the evidence that
in the past
the applicant had made threats to kill the complainant when she had threatened
to leave the relationship.
evidence of the applicant's post offence lies and conduct was also telling. The
jury were entitled to regard the various accounts
the applicant gave to the
fire, ambulance and medical personnel, as to how the fire started, as evidence
of a consciousness of guilt
relevant to having tried to kill the complainant and
not some lesser act, particularly given the applicant's evidence, which if the
jury could not reject, would have been exculpatory. The telling of lies as to
the cause of the fire, and contacting the complainant
whilst she was in
hospital, in a manner in which the jury could reasonably have found was directed
at trying to dissuade her from
implicating him, was strong evidence that he was
conscious the truth would reveal his guilt for the crime of attempted murder.
applicant argues the evidence that he tried to persuade the complainant to
change her clothes and shower once the fuel was on
her, and tried to help her
once outside the shed by patting flames out, putting the hose on her and
directing his father to call
for the ambulance was all evidence that was
inconsistent with an intent to kill. Again, in my view, such submissions are
merit. The jury only needed to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt the
applicant intended to kill the complainant at the point he
ignited the cigarette
lighter as she walked towards him, having been splashed with fuel. It was never
the State's case that he had
an intent to kill her when he splashed the fuel on
her. Indeed, the State argued this was an act of trying to scare and control
His act of trying to persuade her to change clothes and shower, at his
place, was again directed at keeping her there, controlling
the situation and
preventing her from leaving the relationship. It was most reasonable for the
jury to consider this evidence in
this light. As to the behaviour of the
applicant after the complainant had left the shed, a reasonable jury may well
have regarded
this evidence as indicative of regret for a stupid and callous
act, without it detracting from satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt
that at the
point he ignited the cigarette lighter, he had an intent to kill the
complainant.
jury were entitled to reject the applicant's evidence and assess his account as
inherently unlikely. As noted, to a large extent
it was not supported by the
forensic evidence. The jury had the benefit of seeing and hearing the applicant
give evidence. Issues
of credibility were important on the trial. The jury were
entitled to reject his evidence, and they were entitled to accept the
complainant's
evidence beyond reasonable doubt. I have carefully reviewed all
of the evidence presented at trial. I do not consider that any of
raised by the applicant are indicative of the complainant's account being
improbable. Indeed, to the contrary. In my view,
the cogency of the tendency
evidence and the link between the gravity of the behaviour the applicant
demonstrated towards the complainant
throughout the relationship (as evidenced
by the telephone and listening device recordings) and the extreme nature of the
act itself;
the forensic evidence; the evidence of the post offence lies and the
cogency of the complainant's account, left me with no reasonable
doubt as to the
complainant's honesty and reliability in all critical aspects.
Unrepresented grounds of appeal
applicant has argued 17 grounds of appeal self-represented and without the
assistance of counsel. These grounds of appeal fall
into four broad categories.
Firstly, he alleges that there has been a miscarriage of justice due to the
incompetence of his trial
counsel. Secondly, he alleges errors on the part of
the learned trial judge, which led to evidence being admitted erroneously and/or
the jury not being discharged in circumstances where it was warranted. Thirdly,
he alleges that there has been a miscarriage of
justice as a consequence of the
misconduct of the Crown prosecutor at trial. The fourth broad ground arises from
a contention that
there is fresh evidence which gives rise to his conviction
being a miscarriage of justice. There is some overlap in the various
appeal, and overlap with the grounds argued by counsel on his behalf. In an
endeavour to avoid too much repetition where
the point raised has already been
dealt with in my reasons, I shall not repeat my conclusions in any
Incompetence of counsel grounds
principles to be applied to a ground of appeal of this nature are well
understood. In
Braslin v Tasmania
[2022] TASCCA 8
, I noted them as
"10 The proper approach to cases in which a miscarriage of
justice is alleged to have arisen from the incompetence of counsel involves
objective inquiry (
Nudd v The Queen
[2006] HCA 9
80 ALJR 614
and Hayne JJ at [27]). The inquiry must be directed to whether there was a
miscarriage of justice as referred to in s
402(1) of the
Criminal Code.
It is for the applicant to establish that the course taken by counsel was
not the result of an informed and deliberate decision. The
question is whether
the course taken by counsel was capable of rational justification or explanation
TKWJ v The Queen
[2002] HCA 46
212 CLR 124).
principles relevant to an appeal such as the present were recently summarised by
Porter AJ in
JAGD v Tasmania
[2021] TASCCA 16
'[63] The proper approach to cases in which a miscarriage of
justice is alleged to have arisen from the incompetence of counsel has
explained by the High Court in
TKWJ v The Queen
212 CLR 124
Nudd v The Queen
80 ALJR 614.
[64] The following propositions emerge:
Incompetence of
counsel is not of itself a ground of appeal, the relevant ground is whether
there was a miscarriage of justice as
referred to in s 402(1) of
Criminal Code
per Gleeson CJ at [2].
The concept of a
miscarriage of justice has two relevant aspects; outcome and process –
different but related in the sense that
due process is to secure a just result.
A failure of process that departs from the essential requirements of a fair
trial is a miscarriage
of justice:
per McHugh J at
at [3]-[7] per Gleeson CJ.
If there has not
been a fair trial according to law, that will give rise to a miscarriage of
justice without regard to whether counsel's
conduct might have affected the
per McHugh J at [76];
[3]-[7] per Gleeson CJ.
In other cases
– perhaps the majority – irregular conduct of counsel will not
deprive a person of a fair trial. In such
circumstances, the ultimate question
of whether a miscarriage of justice has occurred raises two issues; did
counsel's conduct result
in a material irregularity in the trial, and is there a
significant possibility the irregularity affected the
per McHugh J at [79];
Gummow and Hayne JJ at [24].
In a case of
that kind, the enquiry is an objective one; the question is whether so viewed,
the course taken by counsel was capable
of rational justification or
explanation:
per Gleeson CJ at [16], Gaudron J at
[26]-[27], McHugh J at [95], Hayne J at [107];
per Gleeson
CJ at [9], [16], per Callinan and Heydon JJ at [158].
applicant contends that the conduct of counsel has caused a criminal trial to
miscarry, he or she carries a heavy burden:
per McHugh J
at [74]. As a general rule, counsels' decisions bind the client; the party
is held to the way in which counsel presented
per McHugh J at [79];
Gleeson CJ at [9]. This is so even if decisions were made without or contrary to
instructions, or involve errors of judgment
negligence:
per McHugh J at [79]
Describing trial
counsel's conduct as "incompetent" – with or without some emphatic term
like "flagrantly" – must not
distract attention from the question of
whether there was a miscarriage of justice. That requires a consideration of
what did or
did not occur at the trial, not why that situation came about. The
question does not turn on adjectival classifications of
competence.
per Gaudron J at [31], per McHugh J at [75],
per Hayne J (with whom Gummow J agreed) at [103];
Gleeson CJ at [8], per Gummow and Hayne JJ at [24]-[27].
however, a decision about whether a miscarriage of justice has occurred requires
an understanding of the circumstances;
this may involve an understanding about
why something happened:
per Gleeson CJ at [9].' (Footnotes
can be seen then that the focus must remain on what was done or not done without
emphasis upon a consideration of why that situation
came about. It involves an
objective enquiry. It is for the applicant to demonstrate that the course taken
by counsel was not the
result of an informed and deliberate decision, and that
the consequence of the course taken was the loss of a significant possibility
acquittal."
process involves an objective enquiry directed at determining the ultimate
issue, of whether there has been a miscarriage of
justice. It is not a matter
of engaging in a minute examination of every decision made by trial counsel and
the thought processes
behind such decision. If decisions can be viewed
objectively as having been made for a proper forensic purpose, then no
miscarriage
of justice arises. As was noted by Gleeson CJ in
Ali v The Queen
[2005] HCA 8
79 ALJR 662
"It is not a mark of competent
advocacy to pursue at trial every line or argument that can be imagined,
regardless of its consistency
with other arguments, and regardless of its
prospects of success. On the contrary, such an approach is the hallmark of
incompetence."
if it can be objectively concluded that counsel made a legitimate, rational and
understandable forensic decision, then
absent it being shown that the course
adopted at trial has resulted in the applicant being deprived of a chance of
acquittal that
was fairly open to him, the applicant will be bound by the
conduct of their counsel (see
Crampton v The Queen
[2000] HCA 60
applicant contends his trial counsel was incompetent for a number of reasons,
including:-
He failed to
adduce evidence;
He failed to
cross-examine the complainant about specific matters;
He failed to
object to the omission of evidence or limit the use to which such evidence could
He failed to
object to inappropriate and unfair attacks on himself during his giving of
He failed to
object to inappropriate and unfair attacks made upon the witness, Rickie
He failed to
make submissions in closing argument about particular pieces of evidence;
He failed to
seek directions from the trial judge about the use which could be made of
particular pieces of evidence; and
cross-examined contrary to instructions and he signed Agreed Facts contrary to
instructions.
will deal with each asserted aspect of incompetency by reference to the
unrepresented grounds of appeal.
Unrepresented grounds of appeal
2 and 16 – cross-examination of the complainant
I understand the applicant's contentions, he asserts that:
(i) his trial counsel failed to fully and properly cross-examine the complainant
by failing to cross-examine her as to a "substantial
amount of inconsistencies
in her different versions of accounts";
(ii) failed to act on instructions given to him by the applicant as to the
manner in which the complainant should be cross-examined;
(iii) failed to "object to limit the use under s 136 of a prejudicial police
interview of the complainant, dated 29 June 2017. Such
interview having been
admitted pursuant to
Evidence Act
as a prior consistent
statement".
applicant contends that he gave his trial counsel a detailed affidavit of the
evidence that he would give in trial and additionally
referred his trial counsel
to a number of inconsistencies, which he asserted existed within the different
accounts that had been
given by the complainant. He submits that he instructed
his counsel that he wished to discredit the complainant by reference to
inconsistencies within her different accounts. He submits that trial counsel
failed to elicit these inconsistencies during cross-examination.
this failure was critical given prosecution's case relied predominately upon the
evidence of the complainant.
Inconsistencies
that the applicant contended existed included:
in a statement
provided to police at the Alfred Hospital on 29 June 2017, the complainant said
that after they had entered the shed
at the applicant's home there was an
argument and she sought to leave. That she tried "a few times to walk around
him and get out
the shed door and he would block me off every time". That he
grabbed her by the face and said "You're not going anywhere. You're
here"; "the argument went on for a while and then he picked up the petrol tank
and threw it on me... I was getting annoyed
because I wanted another cigarette
and I wasn't going to light it. I was so stressed out. It was all over me and
it stunk and I
was just angry. I then wanted to go out again and this is when
he set me on fire near the roller door... I'm not sure but I think
Matthew had a
bit of trouble getting the roller door open 'cos he locked it and he may have
forgotten he'd locked it and he was trying
to get it open".
recorded statement to police on 10 July 2017, so some 11 days later, the
complainant said this:
"So I went to the shed...we had a
cigarette...we started arguing. I wanted to go. I wasn't allowed to go
anywhere and every time
I tried he pulled the roller door down and locked
it...every time I walked towards the door he would block me and lead me back up
... he actually grabbed me on my face and was checking it, squeezing it ... we
wrestled on the ground ... I sat back in the chair,
he didn't actually tie me in
the chair, that was like when I was like no, I'm leaving and the roller door was
open and I walked back
into the shed. I don't remember if I was (inaudible) or
something and he splashed me with petrol from behind. That's when I walked
well tried to walk off and I was near the entry of the shed and he was standing
in front of me and it all happened really quickly
and he flicked his lighter and
I went up in a ball of flames and then I ran outside and I just started
screaming for help."
supplemental proof filed before trial, the complainant said the
"When we got there that night Matthew shut the roller
door. I think I had a cigarette. ... He started on again about me wanting to
leave him. We ended up getting into a verbal fight. We were right in each
other's face screaming at each other. I wanted to leave
and he wasn't allowing
me to leave and I was saying I had to go, to get out of the way. He was saying
I couldn't go, you're not
going anywhere ... I was walking towards the door and
he kept walking in front of me, pushing me back. I got close to the roller
door, just not close enough to lift it up and walk out before he pushed me
backwards ... I turned my back on Matthew and at that
time he splashed petrol on
me ... I could smell it ... it went mostly on my back. ... as I turned around
after Matthew had thrown
the petrol I was abusing him saying 'Are you fucking
serious, are you crazy', then we had a physical fight ... I remember rolling
around on the ground ... at the end of the fight I remember having Matthew in a
headlock ... we both stood up and he said 'What are
we doing [name of the
complainant]. I'm sorry'. I said this is fucked up, I need to go home ... he
was telling me no ... he wouldn't
reason with me so I just said just let me go
inside and let me have a shower. I started to walk towards the door, towards
and that's when he lit me on fire. I saw him with the lighter near his
chest ... I was towards the back of the shed walking towards
him. He was
standing at the roller door facing me. I think the roller door was still
closed. As I walked towards Matthew his hand
went from his chest to being
extended, he flicked his lighter. ... I felt like I couldn't get out of the
applicant's contention is that there is considerable inconsistency in these
various versions of events which were not appropriately
attacked during
cross-examination. The first point to be noted is that the inconsistencies, to
the extent they exist, are not so
marked as to be fatal to the complainant's
credibility and, any inconsistencies in her account are readily explained by the
of the event and the significant medical procedures the complainant
endured before making a number of these statements. It is true
inconsistencies about such things as the placement of the roller door (which I
have already addressed) but in the main
the complainant's version remained
consistent as to the critical events. The second point is that counsel
cross-examined upon the
inconsistencies, and cross-examined generally in a
manner that raised issues as to the accuracy of the complainant's memory of the
events of 24 April 2017. For example, she was challenged about her behaviour on
the afternoon of 24 April which involved attempts
at self-harm, her recall of
collecting the dog from the sister's place, taking the backpack and going into
the house and speaking
with Rickie Davey, whether the roller door was up or down
and whether she had observed the applicant lock it. It was, in my view,
suggested to the complainant that she did not have a clear recall of the events
in the shed and the complainant conceded
that as a consequence of what she had
experienced, there were aspects of the evening that she could not clearly
recall. The complainant
was also challenged as to a number of inconsistencies
between her evidence on trial and previous representation she had made to
authorities.
For example, the following cross-examination occurred:
"And you'll recall your evidence yesterday was to the effect you
couldn't remember what you were thinking or why you even put the
exercise rope
over a beam, remember saying that yesterday?.....Yep. Okay, and that's the
truth, is it?.....Yeah.
Okay. Do you recall speaking with police on the 29th June 2017 whilst you
were still under medical treatment in Melbourne?.....Yep.
Did you, in relation to this event...did you say of that event, this: I went
for a walk, I honestly wanted to kill myself that night
'cause I'd had enough.
Did you say that to police?.....I can't recall what words I used.
Okay, that's fine. So you don't admit it because you can't remember, is that
-......Yep. Thank you, that's all I need.
You'll recall there was a second occasion when police interviewed you whilst
still in Victoria and that occasion was the 10th July
2017, do you recall
that?.....Yep.
On that occasion did you say of these events: I went outside and there was a
beam with an aerial out 5 on the roof. And there's some
questioning then about
what the aerial did, but that's irrelevant. I had these elastic exercise bands
and I went and got them out
of the cupboard and tried to hang myself but my feet
still touched the ground so that didn't work. Did you say those words to police
of these events when you were interviewed in July of 2017?.....I don't recall.
You don't recall, thank you."
"Is it the case that the reason you told police that
– I'll put the exact words, sorry – you tried to hang yourself but
your feet still touched the ground, so that didn't work. But you now say you
didn't actually do anything like that; you didn't attempt
to hang yourself at
all. Is it because you're embarrassed by the fact that there was a suicide
attempt on this day?...No.
Well, if you – if there had been you would be embarrassed, I
guess?......No.
No? Okay, right-o. So, whatever you told the police your current memory is
that there was no attempt at suicide on that day? Or you
just don't know one way
or the other whether there was or there wasn't?...I just don't recall.
Okay, you don't recall. Thank you."
in the version you gave on the 29th of June 2017 you said we went – of the
– the night that this incident occurred:
We went into the shed like we
always did to have a cigarette and we went in there and he rolled down the door
and locked it.
Do remember saying that?...Yeah.
Do you recall speaking with police on 10th July 2017? So about 11 to 12 days
after the interview I've just asked you about?...I can't
recall the exact dates
but I remember speaking to them again.
Okay. What I want to suggest to you is that on that occasion you made this
statement to police: He And I interpose the words Mr Davey
grabbed white rug and
went to tie me and I think it was a bit of a scare tactic but he didn't actually
tie me in the chair and that
was when I was like, 'No, I'm leaving' and the
roller door was open and I walked back into the shed. I don't remember
He splashed me with petrol from behind. Is that the description you
gave of the circumstances immediately 10 before petrol somehow
getting on your
clothing when you spoke to police or were questioned by police a second time
– whatever day it was?.....Yeah,
I believe so. Yes."
is not correct to say counsel did not challenge the complainant about
inconsistencies in various statements. Many of the challenges
were met with an
answer that the complainant could not recall. There was no forensic purpose in
counsel repeating large portions
of her previous statements only to be met with
the same answer, particularly in circumstances where the complainant's statement
police of 29 June 2017 was tendered in evidence and the jury could embark
upon their own analysis of any inconsistencies –
again something counsel
invited the jury to do during closing submissions. There could be no doubt that
the import of the cross-examination
as a whole was to cast doubt upon the
veracity of the complainant and raise doubt as to the reliability of her
account. During his
closing address counsel very firmly put to the jury that
they should not accept the complainant as an honest or reliable witness.
further aspect of the applicant's complaint is that trial counsel cross-examined
in a manner which gave rise to the recorded statement
the complainant
participated in with police at the Alfred Hospital on 29 June 2017 being
admitted as a prior consistent statement.
This arose in circumstances whereby
the cross-examiner was pursuing cross-examination which highlighted the essence
of the defence
case, namely that the complainant had poured the petrol on
herself and threatened self harm and then set herself on fire when she
piece of paper which ignited carpet which she stamped out catching herself on
fire. The thrust of the defence case was that
the complainant was "covering up"
what had actually happened, and was falsely blaming the applicant, because she
was embarrassed
not contributing to a GoFundMe page and/or she was looking to preserve
financial benefits she may obtain by selling her story to the media by covering
up the fact it was her own actions which caused
her injuries.
was the cross-examination about the GoFundMe page and the possible future
earnings from telling her story that triggered the
application to re-establish
credit pursuant to
Evidence Act
Trial counsel gave evidence
on the appeal about his decision to pursue this line of cross-examination. He
said he had turned his mind
to the risk that cross-examining as to a motive for
a false account may lead to an application to re-establish credibility, but he
was not particularly concerned about it because the applicant had assured him
that he would produce a witness that could be called
on the defence case, that
would say the complainant had made a statement to her father, at a point earlier
than the 29 June statement,
to the effect that the applicant was not responsible
for the injuries she sustained. Counsel said he was confident he could counter
any attempt to re-establish credibility through the use of the 29 June statement
by establishing the existence of an earlier inconsistent
statement. Ultimately,
the promised witness was never produced by the applicant. Forensic decisions
taken by counsel have to be evaluated
in the context of the unfolding trial.
Hindsight reasoning is of little assistance. Counsel had instructions that this
witness would
be produced and made a considered forensic decision in light of
that. No criticism can be properly levelled against counsel for that
because different circumstances ultimately arose.
also note counsel advanced a legal argument to the trial judge following the
granting of the application to re-establish creditability
which resulted in him
being given leave to further cross-examine the complainant about the content of
the 29 June statement. This
additional cross-examination exposed a number of
further inconsistencies and anomalies in the complainant's evidence that counsel
then relied upon during closing argument.
very nature of the applicant's case involved an attack on the complainant's
credit and reliability. It was a reasonable forensic
decision for the attack on
credit to extend to suggesting a motive for a false account. Counsel was
confronted with a considerable
body of evidence consistent with the guilt of the
applicant. Challenging the complainant as to issues of reliability alone was
to have limited success in terms of creating a reasonable doubt as any
apparent unreliability or absence of memory or recall was
easily answered by the
enormity of the trauma that she had suffered. In endeavouring to foster a
reasonable doubt in the jury's
mind, it was a reasonable forensic decision to
elect to attack the complainant's credibility by suggesting a motive to
It was going to be difficult to advance an argument that the
complainant, for no apparent reason, had falsely accused the applicant
committing this act when there was a very strong body of evidence to suggest
that when the applicant had previously been violent
towards the complainant she
had not complained about it or gone to the police. Endeavouring to highlight
there was a particular reason
why the complainant may have behaved differently
on this occasion was a valid forensic approach. Any cross-examination of a
credit carries with it a risk of re-establishing credit. Counsel was
faced with a delicate balancing act, and given he was of the
understanding that
he had a witness available to him that would counter the re-establishment of
credit, his approach could not be
said, when viewed objectively, to be
forensically unsound or improper and it did not occasion a miscarriage of
applicant further submits there was a failure on the part of his trial Counsel
to limit the extent of the statement of 29 June
2017 that went before the jury.
That submission is without merit. The probative value of the evidence rested in
the jury being
able to assess it as a whole. The re-establishment of the
complainant's credit, from the prosecution's perspective, depended upon
being able to assess the manner in which the complainant was answering
questions, the manner in which she presented, assess
her recall of the incident,
and assess generally the veracity of her account. The very point was that the
document had been admitted
to re-establish her credibility, and allow the jury
to assess and evaluate the challenge made to her credibility during
cross-examination.
In determining the
application, the trial judge took
into account the probative value of the evidence and weighed it against the
prejudicial effect.
The trial judge was conscious of the potential prejudicial
impact upon the applicant, and hence allowed further cross-examination
complainant, in an endeavour to minimise it. There is nothing raised in the
applicant's submissions which suggests that if
his trial counsel had endeavoured
to limit the use of the evidence, pursuant to
Evidence Act
that there was any prospect of him being successful. Indeed, my evaluation of
the 29 June statement is that it was necessary for
the whole of the statement to
be before the jury so they could assess its consistency, or otherwise, with
other aspects of the complainant's
evidence to fairly and properly evaluate the
attack made in cross-examination.
determining that no miscarriage of justice arises from the admissibility of the
statement of 29 June 2017, and the way in which
trial Counsel managed its
admissibility, it is relevant to bear in mind the trial judge gave the jury
clear directions as to what
use they could make of this evidence. The trial
judge also gave the jury very firm directions that they must not allow any
response to this evidence to, in any way, colour their deliberations
(the complainant was in a hospital bed and tubes and bandages
were visible when
the recording was taken). There is no reason to consider the jury would not have
complied with same.
further aspect relevant to the "GoFundMe" cross-examination, that the applicant
raises on his appeal, is an assertion that he
did not instruct his counsel to
cross-examine as to this subject matter, and given counsel did so without
instruction, and it gave
rise to the application to re-establish credibility and
the tendering of the 29 June statement, it is reflective of incompetent conduct
which has resulted in a material irregularity in his trial. This assertion is
easily answered. I do not accept the applicant's claim
that he did not instruct
his counsel about this. Counsel gave evidence about this on the appeal. He
"There were many arguments. The GoFundMe one was one that
went on and on and on. Because I didn't think it was a good idea, and
thought it was a very good idea. And I warned you about – in fact my
concern was about it being seen as an attack on character
and opening up your
character and I remember explaining that to you and telling you what the risks
were ... Re-establishing credibility
was not a major concern to me because you
assured me that there was a witness, whose name was Fowler, who was coming to
had spoken with Mr Evans in the days after [the complainant] had been
taken to hospital, and that Mr Evans had told her – Mr
Evans' senior had
told her – that you were innocent, it was an accident, that kind of thing.
So I wasn't concerned about re-establishing
credibility because you had
instructed me there was a witness who was coming to Court .... Therefore, you
couldn't re-establish credibility
with that second or third statement, if that
was the first. As it turned out, I think you'll recall, despite repeated
... she never turned up, if she existed. That was
my major concern about the GoFundMe page was that it might be seen as an attack
on character ... I thought there was
a real risk that the State would see that
as an attack on character, which might open up an application to attack your
I had your prior convictions, and I didn't think it was in anyone's,
on our side of the tables – best interest to have them
flashed in front of
the jury ... in the end, it was compromised because I said to you 'I'll tell you
what I'll do. I will start
asking questions about it. There is a practice that
if the prosecution think you've overstepped the mark on character evidence,
my experience they usually stand up and say 'I warn my learned friend if he goes
any further with this, there will be an application'
and everyone goes, right,
we won't go any further. And I recall saying to you 'The moment the prosecutor
stands up and says something
like that, that's the end of it. I'm not going any
further'. It turns out, they didn't ..."
hesitation, I accept trial counsel's evidence that he was instructed to purse
the "GoFundMe" line of cross-examination.
The detailed analysis he gave as to
his considerations of the potential impact of the cross-examination, is
indicative that this
was an area of cross-examination that he was not
particularly comfortable in pursuing, but did so because of the applicant's
instructions.
The applicant cannot now complain because, with the benefit of
hindsight, he regrets his instructions. There is no merit in this
submission.
further aspect of the applicant's argument that counsel failed to conduct a
proper cross-examination of the complainant, relates
to an asserted failure to
put aspects of the applicant's evidence-in-chief to her during
cross-examination. The applicant contends
that he provided trial counsel with a
"word for word" narration of what evidence he would give on his trial prior to
Counsel cross-examining
the complainant. The applicant contends that two
particular matters were not raised in the cross-examination of the complainant
with the effect that it adversely affected his credit. Those two aspects
(i) that the applicant and the complainant had fallen over in the shed, before
falling outside; and
(ii) that during the relationship the applicant had intervened when the
complainant attempted to hang herself.
applicant contends that these instructions were provided to his trial counsel in
a proof of evidence, dated 17 July 2017. The
applicant gave evidence about the
provision of this document to his counsel on the appeal. Having had the benefit
of observing the
applicant give this evidence and be cross-examined as to the
contents of the document, it is highly unlikely, in my view, that the
was created by 17 July 2017. It references material that was disclosed to the
applicant after this date and most pertinently,
references the particular family
violence incidents that were relied upon by the State as part of the tendency
evidence, something
that could not have been known by the applicant as at 17
July 2017 as it had not yet been particularised by the State. I find it
unlikely that the applicant would accurately predict the incidents of family
violence that the State would particularise and
rely upon as part of the
tendency evidence, particularly in light of his evidence that many of these
incidents simply did not occur.
gave evidence about his receipt of this document on the appeal. He said the
document was provided to him personally by the
applicant and that it was
provided to him during the trial, before the applicant gave evidence but after
the complainant had given
her evidence on the special hearing. Whilst he could
not recall the specific date he received the document, the contents of the
document satisfied him that it was provided to him after the complainant had
given evidence, because the document speaks of some
of the evidence that she had
given during her pre-recorded evidence. I accept counsel's evidence about that.
It is the only logical
conclusion that can be drawn given the contents of the
any event, irrespective of when the document was created, there is no
miscarriage of justice that arises from the lack of cross-examination
two specific areas. The applicant argues the fall in the shed, before the fall
outside of the shed, is relevant because
it explains the blood pattern evidence
given by Ms Flonta and therefore detracts from the argument that the only fire
event occurred
near the front door of the shed. Counsel for the applicant
emphasised during his closing address that the complainant conceded she
not remember how she got out of the shed. She had said in evidence in chief that
she believed she had walked out of the shed,
but conceded in cross-examination
she could not clearly remember. Therefore suggesting to the complainant a more
detailed proposition
only invited the same response, and achieved little forensically. Moreover,
counsel for the applicant emphasised in closing argument that the complainant's
account did not explain the blood patterning evidence.
Her account offered no
explanation as to why she may have been bleeding at the entry to the shed
whereas the applicant's did. The
applicant's account also explained the presence
of his hat on the shed floor. All of these points were strongly argued during
It is true that the prosecutor made comment about the fact the
applicant's claim of falling over in the shed appeared to be a convenient
attempt to explain forensic evidence, that had not been put to the complainant
in cross-examination, but in the context of the whole
of the trial, little
turned on this point. The prosecutor attacked much of the applicant's evidence
on this basis – that is,
that his evidence appeared to "conveniently"
explain the forensic evidence, and the jury should not consider his evidence as
of the truth, but rather a reconstruction. Equally, the applicant's
counsel submitted to the jury that the complainant's account
objectively explain the forensic evidence and therefore must be rejected by
them. It was a matter for the jury what they
made of such arguments, but I
cannot identify any basis upon which the failure to put the first fall in the
shed to the complainant
gave rise to any realistic possibility that the outcome
of the trial may have been impacted.
make a similar comment about the failure to raise with the complainant the
suggestion the applicant had intervened when she had
attempted to hang herself.
As discussed in respect to unrepresented ground 13 below, the evidence of the
complainant's mental health
and previous mental health difficulties, including
her previous periods of hospitalisation, her diagnosis of depression, previous
suicidal ideation and suicide attempts, including on the day of 24 April, was
before the jury in considerable detail. The cross-examination
of the complainant
very clearly raised her history of self-harm and suicidal ideation and laid the
foundation for the argument advanced
in closing that such a mindset led to the
events of 24 April 2017. It was clearly put to the complainant during
cross-examination
that she had self-harmed during the life of the relationship
with the applicant. She accepted that she had. The State did not suggest
complainant had not experienced considerable mental health difficulties. The
applicant's counsel submitted to the jury her history
of mental health
difficulties, and particularly her mental health difficulties on 24 April, made
it very likely that she had behaved
as the applicant suggested in the shed
– that is, splashed fuel on herself then threatened to burn herself in an
crisis. The impact of the complainant's mental health difficulties on
what happened in the shed was squarely before the jury. Adding
possible example of a mental health difficulty was of minimal consequence in my
view. The failure to raise this with the
complainant was of no consequence in
the context of the trial, and did not in my view detract from the applicant's
the extent the applicant suggests that cross-examining him about intervening in
the complainant's attempt at self-harm may have
given rise to the jury accepting
him as someone who wanted to help, rather than harm the complainant, in my view
there is little
merit in such a submission. There had been considerable
cross-examination about positive things that had occurred during the
relationship
and the complainant had accepted that parts of the relationship
with the applicant were loving and caring, and it was "not all bad".
particular, there was cross-examination about the endeavours the applicant had
made to assist the complainant after the fire event
and the complainant accepted
much of this. Further cross-examination about the applicant intervening in
another alleged suicide attempt
was unlikely to result in any additional
forensic advantage. Moreover, in my view, counsel had to walk a careful line as
to how much
emphasis to place upon alleged suicide attempts during the course of
the relationship. Whilst the cross-examination had revealed
a number of
difficulties the complainant had experienced prior to the relationship, there
was also a strong body of evidence to suggest
the relationship itself, and the
applicant's behaviour towards her, was a cause of mental distress. Evidence of
suicide attempts
within the life of the relationship may also have reflected
adversely upon the applicant and be seen by the jury as reflective of
of harm he caused to the complainant throughout the relationship.
summary then, as to this aspect of this ground of appeal, I accept trial counsel
did not receive the applicant's "proof of evidence"
document until after he had
cross-examined the complainant. But in any event, I do not consider the omission
to raise the two identified
areas in cross-examination had any impact on the
outcome of the trial. The subject matter of the two identified areas were fully
agitated before the jury. Given the issues on the trial, no miscarriage of
justice is identified. Indeed, my overall assessment
of trial counsel's
cross-examination of the complainant was that it was thorough and robust and
provided the basis for counsel to
advance a number of arguments during his
closing address adverse to the prosecution case.
Unrepresented
ground of appeal 7 – the demonstration
I understand the complaint raised by this ground, the applicant asserts his
counsel was incompetent because he failed to allow
him to fully demonstrate,
during his evidence-in-chief, how the complainant picked up the 20 litre fuel
drum and shook it so that
fuel spilt on her, and then failed to highlight during
his closing address the intricacies of this demonstration and how it was
with "expert evidence and the burning pattern on the complainant".
The applicant submits his demonstration "fits like a glove" with
evidence and should have been highlighted to the jury by his counsel.
noted, I have viewed the demonstration the applicant undertook during his
evidence-in-chief. In that demonstration he clearly
describes and shows how the
complainant picked up the 20 litre fuel drum, having already removed the cap, by
placing her right hand
on the top handle and her left hand on the bottom of the
container. He demonstrated how she raised it to about waist height and
it, allowing fuel to come out of the drum and onto the front of her, and fall
down onto her left arm which was lower than her
right arm. Later, in
cross-examination he was asked to demonstrate how he had taken the fuel drum off
her and he demonstrated that
he had taken hold of the handle with one hand,
placed his second hand underneath the container, pulled it from her and sat it
on the ground.
applicant contends the evidence of the demonstration was important as it
explained how fuel came to be on the front of her,
consistent with burn pattern
evidence and inconsistent with the complainant's account that she had her back
to the applicant when
she felt the fuel splash on her. It was also relevant to
explain why the applicant's DNA and fingerprints were on the 20 litre fuel
must say to my mind, this latter point is of minimal significance. There was no
contest that the fuel drum belonged to the applicant
and was in his shed. The
fuel drum having his DNA and fingerprints on it could hardly be surprising.
There was no evidence capable
of identifying when or in what circumstances any
DNA or fingerprints may have been deposited upon the item. The presence of his
DNA and fingerprints on an item that belonged to him and was used by him, was
hardly a matter of great significance in the context
of the overall trial.
Similarly, the absence of a DNA profile consistent with the complainant being
found on the 20 litre fuel drum
was not of critical import. The DNA evidence
established that it was not inevitable that a person would leave a DNA deposit
was capable of being analysed even if they had picked up the container.
Counsel dealt with this in his closing submission. He said:
first area of the prosecution case that I wanted to comment on...relates to
– I'm going to do it together – DNA and
fingerprints. Now, they are
areas of evidence which I suggest play very little importance in this trial.
There are trials where a
fingerprint, or the finding of some DNA, it is like
CSI, that solves the whole case. But this isn't one of them. The prosecution
have not relied to any great amount on the fingerprint or DNA evidence, and
that's not a criticism, neither they should. Because
his fingerprints are found
on the handle of the petrol drum, as he said it would be. There's an
unidentified print on that handle,
and we don't know whose it is, and one thing
we do know is, it was never compared with [the complainant], with great sadness,
a result of the fact that, with the burns, there's no fingerprint that they
could work with. The same could be said in many ways
for the DNA. There's DNA
drum, and he demonstrated it
to you in the witness box, under oath, how he
picked it up, and you'll remember the attendant went up and held it, I think it
when the prosecutor was cross-examining, so he could show how he took it. So
he showed you exactly how it is... But if you think
back and try and re-live
what he did there, you'll find where he went was basically where fingerprints
and DNA have been found, and
there's – where the DNA was found near the
handle, there is other DNA. We don't know whose it is... simply because, as a
of fact, there was not enough of it to be able to properly identify it,
but there's enough to say somebody else touched it, and I
think in one case
three or four people touched an area... The point is the fact that there was
no identified fingerprint or DNA
from [the complainant] does not mean that [the
complainant] didn't touch it, simply because there are fingerprints there that
not identified or not unidentifiable, and there is DNA of which there was
not enough to say whose it was. Again, I am not overstating
that, I hope. I'm
not saying that means it's hers, I'm saying that doesn't exclude the possibility
of it being hers."
(AB Vol 2 Pt B 2150-2151)
was little more that could have been said about the DNA or fingerprint evidence.
The demonstration the applicant conducted
in the witness stand was consistent
with the placement of the DNA and fingerprint evidence and Counsel highlighted
this. A more
extensive demonstration would not have advanced this argument any
further or resulted in any additional forensic advantage.
The more pertinent point was that the applicant's demonstration of how the
complainant handled the fuel drum and how the fuel came
to be deposited on the
front of her, was more consistent with the burn patterning evidence than the
complainant's account. As I
have already discussed, the medical evidence of Dr
Castley suggested the main of the burns, and the deeper of the burns, were found
on the front, left hand side of the complainant.
counsel made this point very strongly during his closing address. He referred
the jury to the evidence of Dr Castley and
made the point that if the
complainant had her back to the applicant when she felt the petrol land on her,
you would expect the burns
to be to the back of her, yet Dr Castley's evidence
was that her burns were concentrated to the front left: (AB Vol 2 Pt B 2144).
He emphasised that this evidence was consistent with the demonstration given by
the applicant in his evidence. It is difficult to
see what further forensic
advantage could have been obtained from a more detailed demonstration, or what
further use Counsel could
have made of the demonstration during closing
argument. The consistency of the demonstration with the forensic and medical
was highlighted on several occasions.
I understand the applicant's contention he suggests that if he had been able to
perform a more detailed demonstration, he would
have highlighted how the
complainant's right hand and forearm were on the handle above the pouring spout,
but the left hand and forearm
were under the drum and therefore below the
pouring spout, thus the way in which she held the fuel drum was consistent with
minimal burns to the right hand and forearm but extensive burns to
the left hand and forearm. In my view the demonstration, if accepted
jury, achieved this. The applicant clearly demonstrated the complainant held the
drum with her right hand on the top handle
of the drum, with the left hand under
the bottom of the drum, supporting the weight of the drum. When the fuel was
shaken from the
container it was a reasonable inference, and consistent with
common sense, that the fuel would fall downward and contact predominately
left arm. The argument the applicant submits a more detailed demonstration would
have allowed him to advance, was available on
the evidence that he gave to the
jury. It was a matter for the jury as to whether they accepted that evidence.
add that too detailed a demonstration which sought to explain every aspect of
the forensic and medical evidence would have exposed
the applicant to a critique
that his evidence was contrived and reconstructed. Whatever happened in the shed
on 24 April happened
quickly and in circumstances of heightened emotions. The
jury may well consider it quite unrealistic that the applicant would recall
pinpoint precision the positioning of things like the applicant's hands and
forearms, the directionality of the fuel spout and
what part of the
complainant's body the fuel initially landed on. The demonstration that was
conducted well explained the applicant's
version of events and was referred to
by counsel several times throughout his closing address. There is nothing I can
identify which
suggests the approach taken by counsel to this evidence was
attended by any error or in any way resulted in a miscarriage of
Unrepresented ground of appeal 2 – alternate limb
– failure to adduce interview of complainant with police, dated 8 April
applicant further contends as part of his complaint as to the conduct of his
trial by his counsel that counsel failed to adduce
evidence of a recorded
witness statement the complainant participated in with police on 8 April 2016.
As noted, there was evidence
led on the trial about a number of violent
incidents that had allegedly occurred between the complainant and the applicant,
prior to and after 8 April 2016, and up until the time the applicant went
into custody on 25 April 2016.
was led from Sergeant Hossack. He gave evidence of having conducted an
electronic witness statement with the complainant
on 8 April 2016. He agreed
that during that witness statement the complainant had denied that there had
been any family violence
perpetrated upon her by the applicant as at that date.
Sergeant Hossack gave evidence that he nevertheless, on 9 April 2016, made
application for a Family Violence Order to protect the complainant from the
the complainant's assertion to police during this recorded statement was in
direct contrast to the evidence she gave
on trial. She was cross-examined about
what she had said to police. She admitted that she had resisted the making of
Violence Order. She agreed that she had told police that no
incidents of family violence had occurred. She said that she had lied
telling police that: (AB vol 2 Part A 96-97).
cross-examination elicited the substance of the recorded statement –
namely that the complainant had told police there
had been no episodes of family
violence between her and the applicant and she did not want a family violence
order. The cross-examination
achieved the forensic purpose of highlighting a
substantial inconsistency in the complainant's account, and demonstrating that
complainant, on her account, had a preparedness to lie to police. It had the
capacity to affect the complainant's credit in a substantial
way. It had the
capacity to raise doubt in the jury's mind as to whether the violence which she
claimed in her evidence had occurred
prior to 8 April 2016 had, in fact,
occurred. Indeed, it had the capacity to raise doubt in the jury's mind as to
the whole of the
complainant's evidence at trial. This line of cross-examination
therefore achieved considerable forensic advantage for the defence.
jury made of it was a matter for them.
applicant submits, however, that his counsel should have gone further and
adduced the interview on the defence case. There are
some very obvious forensic
disadvantages to counsel having done so. Firstly, it would have allowed the
jury to hear and see the
police officer set out a number of allegations about
the applicant's behaviour on 8 April 2016 which were consistent with evidence
given by other witnesses on the trial as to his behaviour on 8 April 2016.
Secondly, it would have given the jury a greater ability
to assess the demeanour
and presentation of the complainant during this interview, potentially in a
manner that was adverse to the
applicant's case. I have read the transcript of
the witness statement between Acting Sergeant Hossack and the complainant. She
presents as providing guarded answers. She does not give a free narrative of
events, but answers very specific questions in a minimalistic
way. It may well
be from watching the witness statement, the jury were left with the impression
that the complainant had indeed
lied to police when she said there had been no
incidents of family violence between her and the applicant. Further, there were
in the recorded witness statement where police officers firmly expressed
opinions that the complainant was in danger. For example,
at one point the
Acting Sergeant said
"By all the reports I've got from officers and from the
independent witnesses in relation to the incident this evening, I believe
you're in danger
[name of the complainant]
. I believe that if I don't do
anything about it, that you are going to, in the long run, suffer for it, okay,
and it's my duty as
a police officer to protect you to the best of my ability,
an opinion from a police officer going before a jury on a trial where it was
alleged that the applicant had, in fact, placed
the complainant in a position of
grave danger, obviously had the capacity to impact the jury adversely to the
applicant's interest.
If the applicant sought to adduce it on his own case, he
could hardly then make complaint about it. Finally, had defence counsel
the evidence, because of the operation of s 371
Criminal Code,
have resulted in the loss of defence counsel's right of last address to the
jury, which in the context of a trial where
credit was a significant issue, was
a valuable position to retain.
my view, there was nothing to be gained, but much to be lost, by adducing the
interview of the complainant with Garth Hossack.
No criticism can be made of
trial counsel for the approach taken. This ground of appeal is without
Unrepresented ground 3 – failure of counsel to
object to the admissibility of record of interview dated 26 April 2016
ground of appeal alleges trial counsel failed to object to this interview being
admitted. That is incorrect. Trial counsel
raised objection to the admission
of this interview on 12 October 2021 and argued that it should be excluded
pursuant to
Evidence Act
(AB vol 2 Part B 368). The trial
judge ruled the evidence was admissible. This ground of appeal as particularised
is without foundation.
However, I will treat it as a complaint that the trial
judge erred by admitting the record of interview.
record of interview was conducted with the applicant at a time when he was in
custody. It involved allegations he had committed
crimes of dishonesty and
allegations he had committed acts of family violence. The interview was tendered
in a heavily edited form
and contained only his answers to some questions about
family violence. In the main his answers were to the effect of "no comment"
when police asked him why the complainant may have alleged certain things he
said "you'll have to ask her".
prosecution relied upon this evidence to demonstrate the applicant had a state
of mind in which he believed he had control in
the relationship and that the
complainant would not turn against him or be disloyal to him. The prosecution
argued that it could
be inferred from the applicant's responses that he had
confidence the complainant would not implicate him in any alleged breaches
the Interim Family Violence Order because she was compliant with his
expectations. The State submitted the evidence was relevant
to place the
relationship into context and, in particular, to demonstrate his belief that
irrespective of the existence of the Interim
Family Violence Order, and his
physical absence from the complainant because of his incarceration, he still
remained in control of
the relationship and retained the complainant's support
and loyalty.
State submitted the evidence was capable of being used by the jury to answer the
inevitable question that arose namely, why
the complainant would remain in the
relationship with the applicant even when he was in custody. It was relevant,
the State said,
to the applicant's state of mind and the jury's assessment of
whether they were satisfied the applicant had any of the tendencies
asserted by
the prosecution, and therefore did not offend
Evidence Act
as it had a use beyond the drawing of an inference unfavourable to the applicant
because he had refused to answer questions.
counsel submitted the evidence did offend
as it had no additional use. He
submitted the evidence was of minimal probative value. He submitted it was not
evidence reflective
of the applicant's state of mind, but rather confirmation of
a factual scenario that had been established by other evidence, namely
April, the complainant told police that no family violence had been
perpetrated upon her by the applicant (the Acting
Sergeant Hossack interview).
Defence counsel argued that what was said by the applicant in the interview was
so far removed from
the issue to be determined by the jury – namely
whether the applicant did an act in the shed intending to cause the death of
complainant – as to carry minimal probative value.
further submitted that the prejudicial effect of the evidence was to create an
impression in the jury's mind that the applicant
was not co-operating with
police because of the series of "no comment". It was submitted that because the
prosecution were only
seeking to rely upon a small portion of the record of
interview, there was a potential risk that the jury may be left with an
understanding that all the applicant was doing was exercising his
right to silence.
trial judge ruled the evidence admissible. In doing so, he said: (AB vol 2 Part
"I agree that there is some danger of misuse by the jury,
which will have to be addressed by directions, and I won't – I won't
attempt to formulate now but I think it also has probative value, in the sense
that it is another step, a link in the course of events
that the jury have been
hearing about, that I've already ruled is admissible. It – it may well be
it doesn't influence the
jury to any considerable extent, that's a factual
submission that can be put to the jury by defence counsel in closing –
argument. But the prosecution assert that it has another use that it's
not a use for a hearsay purpose, it's a use that is relevant
to give context or
complete the context of the course of conduct and to illuminate the dynamics of
the relationship and the accused's
state of mind in respect of those dynamics.
I think it's capable of affecting the assessment by the jury of the
probability of the existence of the dynamics and the nature of
the relationship
that will be asserted by the prosecution. I think it has the capacity to do that
to some extent, and I don't think
– well I've already said there is a
danger of misuse. I don't think it's a significant danger and I think it can be
obviated by appropriate directions. So I intend to admit the interview
but with the variation that I've – I've indicated."
trial judge gave directions to the jury as to the use they could make of this
evidence. He said: (Summing up pp 35-36):
"Now, I need to say some
things to you about that interview. Usually a record of interview of police is
admitted because it contains
admissions made by an accused with respect to
charges which are before the Court. It is admitted for that purpose to prove the
of those admissions. In this case, it's not admitted for that purpose.
The accused admitted nothing in that interview. It's basically a no comment
interview. He was perfectly within his rights not to comment
to the police. He's
not required to answer questions from the police, and in particular when they're
interviewing you after giving
you a caution, you're not required to answer their
questions. That's in fact what the caution says. You're cautioned about that.
he was completely within his rights to give a no comment interview.
In any event, he's not charged in this case, as I've already mentioned, with
the matters he was being interviewed about, and you should
not draw an inference
that he's guilty of those matters simply because he refused to answer police
questions. Why that evidence is
before you is because the prosecution say that
it's relevant for you to assess the accused's demeanour and attitude in the
when you're assessing the relationship, or the nature of the
relationship, and his approach to the relationship with [the complainant].
The prosecution say that his demeanour and attitude in that interview will
reveal to you his confidence that [the complainant] would
not dob him in, would
provide loyalty to him, and would back him up in respect of his dealings with
the police. The prosecution argues
that this evidence supports their assertion
that he was exercising control over the relationship and was comfortable with
that control
because he was expecting loyalty from [the complainant]. They say
that that's relevant to your assessment of whether he had the tendencies
they then say bear on what happened in the shed. It's a matter for you what you
make of that argument, what you make of the
evidence, the weight you apply to
it. But that's how the prosecution say you can use it and you should only use
the interview for
that purpose and for no other purpose.
Of course, Mr Richardson says, 'Well, that interview proves nothing.' He was
entitled to refuse to answer questions. [The complainant]
was free to act as she
decided in respect of her dealings with police and, in fact, it establishes that
this was a – their
relationship was a two-way street. She engaged in as
much of the type of conduct the prosecution are complaining about as he did.
Richardson would say you should use the interview in that way."
can identify no error in the approach taken by the trial judge. The evidence had
a use beyond the drawing of an adverse inference
because of a refusal to answer
questions. It was potentially reflective of the applicant's state of mind as to
his level of confidence
that the complainant would not tell the police about the
true nature of their relationship. That evidence went directly to one aspect
the asserted tendencies, namely his tendency to exercise control over the
relationship. This aspect of the tendency evidence was
of considerable import in
my view, particularly given the evidence that as at 8 April 2016 the complainant
had asserted there had
been no incidents of family violence between her and the
applicant, and the evidence on the trial that during his incarceration the
complainant had maintained her relationship with the applicant to the extent of
discussing marriage and a future with him, whilst
simultaneously expressing to
others her fear of the applicant. Evidence reflective of the applicant's state
of mind and his confidence
in the relationship was relevant to the jury's
assessment of the veracity of such conflicting evidence.
there was potential for prejudice, given all of the other evidence led on the
trial, the risk of misuse was, in my assessment,
minimal. Given the volume and
nature of much of the evidence adduced on the trial, this evidence was unlikely
to be of great moment,
and it is difficult to envisage the jury misusing this
evidence given the clear directions given by the trial
Unrepresented ground 4 – counsel's failure to
exclude a listening device recording dated 23 April 2016
ground alleges that trial counsel failed to object to the admissibility of a
listening device recording dated 23 April 2016.
In summary, this listening
device recording depicts an argument between the applicant, the complainant and
another witness on the
trial, Dillon Davey. On the recording the applicant can
be heard verbally abusing the complainant, and the content of the recording
also consistent with him being involved in a physical altercation with the
complainant. As I have already noted, I have listened
to this recording. It was
admitted as part of the tendency evidence. It is therefore simply not correct
to assert that trial counsel
did not seek to exclude this evidence. As discussed
earlier in these reasons, on 30 July 2021, counsel sought the severance of the
persistent family violence charge from the attempted murder charge and the
alternative of commit an unlawful act intended to cause
bodily harm. The
learned trial judge severed count 1 from counts 2 and 3 on the Indictment, but
nevertheless ruled that the general
evidence of the relationship and the alleged
family violence was admissible on the attempted murder charge.
have already addressed the admissibility of the tendency evidence in earlier
grounds of appeal and there is nothing additional
raised in this ground of
appeal, relevant to the admissibility of the tendency evidence, which requires
comment or a determination.
the extent this ground of appeal asserts trial counsel did not seek to have this
evidence excluded, it must fail, as he did but
the trial judge ruled against the
objection and admitted it.
applicant also complains in respect to this ground of appeal that his counsel
should not have admitted this listening device
recording by way of an agreed
fact. Once the trial judge had ruled the evidence admissible, it was perfectly
proper for counsel
to agree to admit it via an agreed fact. There was no
forensic disadvantage to the applicant in that approach. Indeed, forcing
prosecution to call a witness in order to admit this evidence would have
potentially served the purpose of highlighting it, which
would not have been in
the applicant's interest. There was nothing to be gained by cross-examining the
police officer who inserted
or retrieved the listening device material. The
recording spoke for itself.
also note that in assessing whether any miscarriage of justice was occasioned as
a consequence of the admission of this listening
device recording, the applicant
gave evidence about the incident. In that evidence he accepted it was his voice
on the recording
and the recording depicted an occasion where he, the
complainant and Dillion Davey had been present at his residence. The applicant
gave a version of events as to what he said had happened on that occasion. It
was a matter for the jury as to whether they accepted
his account as to
Unrepresented ground 15 – counsel's failure to object
to prejudicial evidence
this ground, the applicant submits his trial counsel failed to object to a body
of "highly prejudicial material that was irrelevant"
and thereby a miscarriage
of justice has occurred.
particular, the applicant claims counsel failed to object to evidence pertaining
to the following subjects:
(a) his use of drugs;
(b) expert evidence about the effects of methyl amphetamine upon an
individual;
(c) a listening device recording, dated 8 April 2016, tendered as part of the
tendency evidence. This recording was from inside
the applicant's home. In it,
the applicant can be heard speaking aggressively to the complainant, including
by threatening to kill
her, threatening to burn the house down and saying
"You're dead" to the complainant;
(d) intercepted phone messages demonstrating general violence and disregard for
the law, tendered as part of the tendency evidence;
(e) the assault on Jarrod Kringle;
(f) the assault on Jack Evans;
(g) evidence of the applicant's incarceration in periods other than April to
November 2016.
evidence referred to in sub-paragraphs (c), (d), (e) and (f) above all relate to
tendency evidence. I have discussed at length
the admissibility of that
evidence. The submissions made by the applicant relevant to ground 15 raises no
additional aspect relevant
to either counsel's alleged incompetent conduct of
the trial, or error on behalf of the trial judge, which requires
addressing.
to sub-paragraph (a) and (b) and the applicant's use of drugs, evidence was
given by the complainant that shortly before the
fire event on 24 April 2017,
she observed the applicant to be affected by drugs. Her evidence was that after
the "Coke can incident",
at her residence, the applicant and her mother left and
when they later returned, she observed them to be affected by drugs. The
evidence as to the applicant's consumption of drugs was relevant to the jury
assessing how he may have behaved thereafter, including
when he was in the shed
with the complainant.
act that was alleged to have been committed by the applicant was an extreme one.
It involved him, on the State's case, displaying
paranoid, aggressive, violent
and impulsive behaviours. The evidence relating to his drug consumption and the
expert evidence relating
to the effects of methyl amphetamine on an individual
was relevant to the assessment of whether it was objectively more likely that
the applicant behaved in the manner alleged by the complainant.
is noteworthy that in the applicant's evidence he admitted consuming methyl
amphetamine on 24 April 2017, although said he had
done so in the morning but
not at the point in time when he and Wendy Rodway left the complainant's home
after the "Coke incident".
evidence was given by Neil McLachlan-Troup of Forensic Science Service Tasmania.
He gave evidence that the applicant's blood,
which had been taken following his
arrest, was subject to toxicology testing. The results showed concentrations of
amphetamine,
methyl amphetamine and THC in the applicant's blood. Mr
McLachlan-Troup's evidence was to the effect that ingestion, injection or
inhalation of methyl amphetamine, may have various effects upon an individual
including euphoria, extreme confidence and increased
energy. Other effects may
include agitation, paranoia and, in some instances, psychosis. He also gave
evidence that when withdrawing
from methyl amphetamine, individuals can behave
unpredictably and possibly violently. His evidence was that in his opinion, the
use of cannabis did not "cancel out" the effects of methyl amphetamine (AB vol 2
part B 1299-1302).
McLachlan-Troup was cross-examined. He agreed the impacts and effects of methyl
amphetamine vary between individuals and the
effects and impacts of the
consumption of methyl amphetamine may also vary, depending upon the manner in
which the drug was consumed.
Relevant to this, the applicant gave evidence that
he had smoked but not injected methyl amphetamine.
evidence about the applicant's use of drugs generally, and specifically on 24
April 2017, was relevant to the assessment of
the nature of the relationship the
applicant shared with the complainant and, in particular, was relevant to the
assessment of the
likelihood of the applicant behaving as alleged in the shed on
24 April 2017. Whilst no objection was taken to the admissibility
specific evidence, no miscarriage of justice arises because the evidence was
clearly admissible. It was probative of the likelihood
of the applicant having
behaved in violent and aggressive ways during the relationship and specifically
on 24 April. The trial judge
gave directions to the jury as to the care they
should take in their assessment and use of this evidence. He
"You've also heard other conduct, which is not necessarily
directly relevant to the relationship, but was part of the narrative, the
context, and impossible to exclude, which may reveal other conduct which you
might find discreditable or which reveals, or may reveal,
wrongdoing,
lawbreaking or other discreditable features. For example, reference to the use
of illicit drugs; the use of by the accused
– violence against other
people; the fact that he was held in custody for a period of time and the fact
that he was the subject
of a Family Violence Order and from time to time was
subject to bail conditions which included curfew conditions.
The point I want to make at this time is any previous conduct is not the
subject of the charges before you. You would not usually
hear about such
conduct or any wrongdoing because the fact that somebody did something on
another occasion or is a person of particular
character or a person who engages
in certain types of discreditable conduct is, as a matter of logic, not relevant
to whether someone
did a specific act on the occasion in question. I am sure
that must be obvious to you.
In this case, that evidence has been admitted. ... It has been admitted for
very specific purposes which I will discuss with you
in a moment. You must take
great care to only use the evidence for those purposes. I am emphasising this
because it is a very significant
feature of the case. ... You have to be very
careful with how you use the evidence that bears on the relevant and, I repeat,
in mind that he is not charged with any crime except that arising from what
happened in the shed. There can be a natural reaction
to evidence you have
heard. To simply say he is a terrible person who's acted wrongly or
discreditably on other occasions, to say
that because of what he has done or how
he's appeared in respect of the relationship, a natural, emotional reaction can
to punish him. That, of course, would not be logical or correct and
you must not use the evidence in that way and particularly you
must not use it
to form a view about his character to reason that he is the kind of person who
must have committed a crime of the
nature of which he is charged. You must be
careful to avoid any emotional reaction you may have to the evidence to colour
your logical
application of the evidence to the issues in this case. And I
remind you to approach the proof of the alleged crimes in a dispassionate
logical way". (Summing up page 28-29).
addition to these directions the trial judge gave an expert evidence direction,
emphasising to the jury that ultimately it was
a matter for their assessment as
to what they made of the expert's opinion, bearing in mind that it had not been
challenged to any
significant degree.
directions given by the trial judge as to the use the jury could make of this
evidence appropriately guarded against its misuse.
I note no further directions
were requested by counsel at the time of the summing up. There is no merit in
the assertion that the
admission of the evidence pertaining to the applicant's
drug use or the expert evidence as to the effect of the consumption of methyl
amphetamine on individuals, caused a miscarriage of justice.
other aspect of the evidence relevant to the applicant's association with drugs
arose during his cross-examination. During his
evidence-in-chief, the applicant
gave an explanation for his dislike of the complainant's mother, which was
directed at addressing
the State's allegation that he sought to limit the
complainant's time with her mother, as part of his endeavour to keep control
the complainant and the relationship. The applicant gave evidence to the
effect that he did not want the complainant spending time
with Ms Rodway because
Ms Rodway involved the complainant in her shoplifting; he believed Ms Rodway was
working as a prostitute and
he believed the complainant would attend houses of
drug dealers on behalf of her mother: (AB vol 2 part B 1784).
cross-examination the applicant was challenged about this evidence. It was
suggested to him that the reason he did not approve
of the complainant spending
time with her mother is because she was aware of episodes of family violence
that he had perpetrated
upon the complainant and would "take him to task" about
it. The applicant denied this. Leave was granted to cross-examine the
occasions, given Ms Rodway drugs, but denied it was in exchange for
goods. The applicant was cross-examined about his use of methyl amphetamine and
it being a source of angst in the relationship
and his willingness to have other
persons who would smoke methyl amphetamine at his residence: (AB vol 2 part B
1888-1890). The
relevance of this line of cross-examination was to allow the
jury to assess the validity of his explanation that the reason he sought
limit the time the complainant spent with her mother was because of her mother's
characteristics and habits, as opposed to it
being part of his tendency to
control the complainant and the relationship, and also to assess the legitimacy
of aspects of the complainant's
evidence where she had indicated the applicant's
use of methyl amphetamine had been a source of contention in the relationship
had led to arguments.
evidence had a specific relevance given the State's case was that one of the
ways in which the applicant had attempted to exert
control of the relationship
was by limiting the persons, including members of her family, with whom the
complainant was permitted
to socialise. It was for the jury to assess whether
there was an inherent unbelievability in the applicant's claim that he did not
want the complainant spending time with her mother because she was, amongst
other things, a drug user whilst at the same time being
a person who, on
occasions, supplied drugs to Ms Rodway, and regularly used drugs himself.
was no unfairness associated with this line of cross-examination. It arose
because of the evidence the applicant had given.
Any risk of misuse was
negligible given the other issues on the trial and the directions given by the
trial judge.
to evidence of the applicant's custodial status, the jury were well aware the
applicant was in custody between April and November
2016. This fact was relevant
to both the prosecution and defence cases. From the prosecution perspective,
they submitted there was
evidence within this time of the applicant continuing
to assert influence and control over the complainant and the relationship,
the complainant being conflicted about the relationship, expressing a desire to
continue with it to the applicant but telling
others she was scared of him and
wanted to end the relationship. From the defence perspective, there was evidence
that despite the
complainant having an opportunity to withdraw from the
relationship whilst the applicant was in custody, she continued with it by
maintaining regular contact with the applicant and making plans for the future
with him. The applicant does not submit evidence which
revealed this period of
time in custody was inadmissible. He complains however that two other periods of
time were revealed by the
evidence and his Counsel failed to object to such
evidence being led. It is of course relevant, in assessing whether any
miscarriage
of justice arises, that the jury were well aware the applicant had
spent time in custody and the trial judge gave clear directions
approach the jury should take to such evidence (see para 289 above).
was evidence on the trial of two additional periods of time the applicant was in
custody. The first was that during cross-examination
of Rickie Davey by the
State, following leave being given pursuant to
Evidence Act
It was put to him that he had visited the applicant in custody, the day prior to
preliminary proceedings in 2018. This was relevant
to the jury's assessment of
the credibility of Rickie Davey and, in particular, the State's argument that Mr
Davey had changed his
evidence in order to assist his son.
second piece of evidence was of an Arunta call made by the applicant to the
complainant in August 2017, when the applicant was
in custody. The evidence of
the Arunta call was led from Joshua Cumberland, who was a custodial officer at
the relevant time. The
evidence was to the effect that Mr Cumberland had
reviewed CCTV footage of the phone call being made. The phone call had been
by another inmate who then provided the phone to the applicant. The
phone call was in evidence. During the call the applicant could
speaking with the complainant. He said to the complainant, "I love you, I want
to know what's going on". The complainant
responded, "I'm breaching you for
this" (At the time the applicant was subject to a Family Violence Order
preventing him from contacting
the complainant. This evidence was before the
jury by way of an agreed fact). The applicant replied, "No, you're not babe".
applicant then said to the complainant, "Can you just tell the truth?" The
complainant replied, "What about". The applicant said,
"How it happened ...
babe, I did not do that". The complainant replied, "What do you mean you
didn't". Following further discussion,
the applicant said, "Why do you say I
did it though". The complainant responded, "Because you did. Why are you
saying you didn't"?
was also evidence from the complainant's father, Richard Evans, that he was
present with the complainant when she received
this phone call and that she was
visibly upset, shaking and crying after the call. The complainant told him it
was the applicant
on the phone.
evidence was relied upon by the State as post offence conduct. The State argued
it was reasonable to infer from the content
of that phone call that the
applicant was putting pressure on the complainant to not tell the truth about
what had occurred in the
shed because he knew the truth would implicate him. The
evidence of Mr Cumberland was also relevant to the jury's assessment of the
length the applicant was prepared to go to, to make contact with the
complainant, and convey his message. This evidence had a nexus
evidence the State relied upon as to the applicant's behaviour immediately after
the fire event. It was part of the State's
case that the applicant asked the
complainant to lie to others about how the fire had started and told her, that
if she did not say
it was an accident, he would go to prison for a very long
time. The State alleged that the applicant told a number of lies to emergency
services personnel, police officers and a doctor that the fire had been caused
by an accident. Evidence of the making, and contents,
of the telephone call in
August 2017 was relevant to the jury's assessment of whether this was an example
of the applicant endeavouring
to exert pressure upon the complainant and call
upon her loyalty to avoid the truth of him having deliberately set the
complainant
on fire being revealed.
the import of this evidence, its probative value clearly exceeded any prejudice
associated with the evidence disclosing the
applicant's custody status. Both the
evidence of Rickie Davey and Mr Cumberland related to periods of time which were
the fire event. It would come as no surprise to the jury that the
applicant was remanded in custody following an event of this nature.
legitimate criticism can be levelled against trial counsel for not objecting to
this evidence. Had any objection been taken,
it was inevitably doomed to fail
given the probative value of the evidence. Whilst not specifically asserted as
an aspect of this
ground of appeal, I also note for the sake of completeness,
that I can identify no error associated with the admission of this evidence.
noted, both aspects of this evidence had significant probative value and given
the timing of when the applicant was in custody,
and the fact the jury were
aware he had spent time in custody in April to November 2016, the prejudicial
effect was in my assessment
virtually non-existent. There is no merit in this
ground of appeal.
Unrepresented ground of appeal 8 –
counsel's failure to seek a
Evidence Act
this ground, the applicant argues that a direction pursuant to
Evidence Act
should have been sought by his trial counsel, and given by
the trial judge, in respect to the evidence of the complainant. The basis
this submission is that the complainant admitted in cross-examination that she
had lied to police when she gave the witness statement
to Acting Sergeant
Hossack on 8 April 2016 in which she denied any family violence had been
perpetrated upon her by the applicant.
The applicant contends that this made the
complainant's evidence so inherently unreliable that a
warning was
Evidence Act
165 Unreliable
(1) This section applies to evidence of a kind
that may be unreliable, including the following kinds of evidence:
(a) evidence in relation to which
Chapter 3 or
of Chapter 3 applies;
(b) identification evidence;
(c) evidence the reliability of which may be
affected by age, ill health, whether physical or mental, injury or the like;
(d) evidence given in a criminal proceeding by a
witness who may reasonably be supposed to be criminally concerned in the events
rise to the proceeding;
(e) evidence given in a criminal proceeding by a
witness who is a prison informer;
(f) oral evidence of questioning by an
investigating official of a defendant that is questioning recorded in writing
that has not
been signed or otherwise acknowledged by the defendant;
(g) in a proceeding against the estate of a
deceased person, evidence adduced by or on behalf of a person seeking relief in
the proceeding
that is evidence about a matter about which the deceased person
could have given evidence if he or she were alive.
(2) If there is a jury and a party so requests,
the judge is to –
(a) warn the jury that the evidence may be
unreliable; and
(b) inform the jury of matters that may cause
it to be unreliable; and
(c) warn the jury of the need for caution in
determining whether to accept the evidence and the weight to be given to it.
(3) The judge need not comply with subsection (2)
if there are good reasons for not doing so.
(4) It is not necessary that a particular form of
words be used in giving the warning or information.
(5) This section does not affect any other power
of the judge to give a warning to, or to inform, the jury.
(6) Subsection (2) does not permit a judge to warn
or inform a jury in proceedings before it in which a child gives evidence that
the reliability of the child's evidence may be affected by the age of the child.
Any such warning or information may be given only
in accordance with
312 Whilst, of course, the list provided for in subs (1) is by no means
exhaustive, none of those categories apply to the evidence
of the complainant.
Moreover, it could not be said that the complainant's evidence generally falls
within a non-specified category
that might be described broadly as "evidence of
the kind that may be unreliable". There was simply no basis upon which trial
could have sought a direction pursuant to
, and he cannot be criticised for failing to seek a direction when there
was no proper basis upon which to do so. Indeed, it would
have been remiss of
him to do so.
complainant's evidence stood to be assessed in accordance with a principal Crown
witness direction, which was given, but it
did not fall within the type of
evidence that attracts a
direction. There is no merit in this ground of
summary, in respect to all of the grounds of appeal which raise a complaint in
respect to the manner in which counsel conducted
the applicant's defence, I
conclude there is no merit. Objectively, I can identify no decision or action
taken by counsel that is
not capable of rational justification or explanation.
It has not been demonstrated that counsel's conduct resulted in any material
irregularity that gives rise to any significant possibility that the outcome of
the trial may have been affected. Indeed, on my
assessment the applicant was
provided with a vigorous, thorough and forensically valid defence.
Grounds of appeal asserting error by the trial judge
Unrepresented ground of appeal 1 – admission of Facebook message to
Shannon Jones
ground of appeal asserts the trial judge erred by allowing, in re-examination,
the tendering of a Facebook message the complainant
had sent to a friend,
Shannon Jones, on 28 April 2016. This occurred during the pre-recording of the
complainant's evidence in March
2020. Objection was taken at the time of the
re-examination, but it was not ruled upon until 30 September 2021, because there
an understanding that the pre-recorded evidence would be concluded and the
trial judge would rule upon the objection in due course
and, subject to that
ruling, appropriate edits could be made to the pre-recorded evidence. The trial
judge ruled that the Facebook
message was admissible. This ruling was made
after the trial judge had dealt with the severance application and determined
evidence relevant to the relationship generally, and the tendency evidence
was admissible on the attempted murder trial.
I have already explained, the relationship and tendency evidence was significant
in the context of the trial. It was an integral
part of the State's case that
the applicant had been violent, dominant and controlling in the relationship,
the complainant had felt
conflicted and was fearful of leaving the relationship,
but by time the complainant went to the applicant's shed on 24 April 2017,
was firmly of the view the relationship was over. She had conveyed that to the
applicant the night before and during that day;
during the argument in the shed
she had reiterated that and had expressed a strong desire to not only leave the
shed, but the relationship
which led to the applicant's actions in throwing
petrol over her in an attempt to regain control and then ultimately flicking a
towards her and setting her on fire when it was apparent he had lost
contrast, the applicant's case was premised on an assertion that the complainant
had overstated the controlling and violent nature
of the relationship. He relied
heavily on evidence which demonstrated that during a period of time when he had
been in custody she
had remained in a relationship with him and went so far as
preparing documents with an intention to marry the applicant; that she
prepared to act contrary to family violence orders directed at protecting her
and contact the applicant whilst he was in
custody under an assumed name; that
she had made a joint application to amend the terms of the family violence order
so that she
could continue to contact the applicant whilst in custody; and that
she had told police that the applicant had never been violent
towards her and
that she did not want a family violence order.
true nature of the relationship and how the complainant and applicant genuinely
felt about the relationship were significant
issues on the trial.
Facebook message was sent to Shannon Jones on 28 April 2016, at a time when the
applicant was in custody. The content of the
Facebook message included the
"im so sorry ive been so ignorant these last few
weeks! ive been in the biggest domestic violence relationship and kicked out of
you soon and talk in person! i need to be around good
people like you. ive
survived death 3 times but he is finally in gaol for a long time xxx"
trial judge determined the Facebook communication was admissible pursuant to
Evidence Act
. He said this:
satisfied that the piece of evidence in question is properly admitted through
as already discussed. It's permitted in relation to – it's
relevant because it goes to the question of the – it goes
through a chain
of reasoning – it's relevant to the complainant's attitude to the
relationship, which is capable of supporting
and asserting the relationship was
as she has described it in her evidence. Of course, it also goes to rebut any
suggestion that
arises from the nature of the cross-examination, that she has
either fabricated or overstated the nature of the relationship ...
I think the
probative value of this evidence is high. It's the complainant's own words.
It's a contemporaneous document in the
sense that it was written well before the
alleged events which constitute the crime. It was written at about the time of
which are relevant to the relationship evidence. I think that the
jury would – it would be capable of affecting the jury's
assessment of
those questions to a considerable degree." (AB Volume 2, Part A, Page 623).
of the applicant's submission is that the evidence was not admissible in
re-examination, as the decision to allow it to be
tendered at that point
deprived the applicant of being able to cross-examine as to the contents of the
Facebook message.
(1980) 23 SASR 563, King CJ said at
"Re-examination is permitted for the purpose of explaining
matters arising out of the cross-examination. It is to be permitted 'whenever
an answer or answers given by a witness in cross-examination would, unless
supplemented or explained in the manner proposed by the
re-examiner, leave the
Court with an impression of the facts, derived from the witness, that is capable
of being construed unfavourably
to the side responsible for calling the witness,
and that represents a distortion, or an incomplete account, of the truth as the
witness is able to present it': Reg. v. Lavery
per Wells J. at p. 451. In re-examination a party may in many cases 'adduce
evidence which would otherwise be inadmissible, for
the purpose of explaining
away or qualifying matters which have emerged in cross-examination and from
which inferences adverse to
that party's case could otherwise be drawn.' Reg.
v. Clune (No. 1). It is probably impossible to devise a formula which would set
the bounds of re-examination for every case. The variety of circumstances in
which re-examination may be legitimate is too great.
The fundamental requirement
is that re-examination must in some way arise out of the cross-examination.
Commonly re-examination
is allowed to clear up ambiguities in answers given in
cross-examination, to enable a witness to give his version fully of a topic
which has been touched upon but left incomplete by the cross-examiner, and to
re-establish the credit of a witness where answers
given in cross-examination
could be used to affect adversely the Court's view of the truthfulness or
reliability of the witness."
Evidence Act
provides a prior consistent statement of a
witness will not be excluded by the credibility rule in
"(1) it is or will be
suggested, either expressly or by implication, that evidence given by the
(a) has been fabricated; or
(b) has been reconstructed, whether deliberately or otherwise; or
(c) is the result of a suggestion; and
(2) the court gives leave to adduce the evidence of the prior consistent
statement."
in cross-examination it had been suggested to the complainant that she was
fabricating her account of the nature of the
relationship she shared with the
applicant. It had been clearly put to her that she was over-stating and
exaggerating the controlling
and violent nature of the relationship and that her
behaviour of being willing to remain in a relationship with the applicant whilst
he had been in custody, and participating in an application to amend the terms
of the Family Violence Order to allow ongoing contact
between her and the
applicant, was inconsistent with her asserted claims that she was fearful of the
applicant and felt controlled
and dominated by him.
in the trial judge's ruling was a conclusion that the evidence of the Facebook
communication was relevant to the jury's
assessment of the complainant's state
of mind in respect to the relationship, at a point in time shortly after the
applicant had
been placed in custody, and well before the events of 24 April
2017. It was evidence that had the ability to assist the jury in
assessing the
nature of the relationship at that point in time, and was therefore relevant to
the jury making an assessment as to
whether the relationship was more likely to
be of the nature that was described by the complainant in her evidence, or of a
more akin to that suggested by the applicant in cross-examination, or,
indeed, a complicated merging of the two. The evidence of
the Facebook
communication had the quality of enabling the jury to make an assessment of the
complainant's state of mind and was
also capable of being seen as consistent
with the complainant's claims of violent and intimidating conduct on behalf of
the applicant
prior to his remand in custody. Admitting the evidence of the
Facebook communication was permissible pursuant to s 108. It was therefore
proper that it be admitted during re-examination. The trial judge's
determination was not tainted by error.
applicant further contends in this ground of appeal that the trial judge should
have excluded the evidence pursuant to
Evidence Act
already referenced the trial judge's assessment of the probative value of the
evidence. I agree with that assessment. The
evidence had a high probative value
for the reasons already discussed. A substantial issue on the trial was the
true nature of the
relationship; was the applicant violent, controlling and
dominant or was the complainant exaggerating her account? Was the evidence
her staying in the relationship whilst he was in custody more consistent with
the tumultuous but loving relationship suggested
by the applicant? Consideration
of such issues were fundamental to an assessment of what was objectively more
likely to have occurred
in the shed on 24 April. In admitting the Facebook
communication, the trial judge was also minded to the prejudicial effect, but
determined any unfair prejudice that may arise from the language used in the
message, or the possibility that the jury might speculate
directions.
my assessment, the probative value of the evidence was high. The evidence of the
Facebook communication was evidence that was
capable of being used by the jury
in assessing the complainant's fear of the applicant, and the treatment she
received at the hands
of the applicant, at a point in time well before the
incident on 24 April 2017. It was also relevant to an assessment of the degree
of control the applicant had over the relationship and the complainant and
therefore of potential assistance to the jury in contextualising
the conflicted
response displayed by the complainant by, on the one hand, staying in the
relationship, whilst simultaneously harbouring
fears about the violence the
applicant was perpetrating upon her. The risk of unfair prejudice was minimal.
There was nothing overly
emotive about the words of the communication,
particularly when considered in the context of other evidence on the trial. The
did reference "I survived death 3 times" there was no specific detail
associated with that comment and in the context of the other
relationship and
tendency evidence that had been admitted on the trial was unlikely to have
attracted undue weight or been misused
by the jury. A clear direction was given
in respect to the use the jury could make of this evidence and the care that
needed to be
taken. The trial judge said:
"There's also a Facebook
message which [the complainant] had sent to a friend which contains assertions
by her of fears for her safety.
Both documents contain fears for her safety at
the hands of the accused. Now, those documents are admitted – again,
out of court statements. But they're admitted because they're relevant
to – and they provide some evidence, according to your
assessment, but
they provide some evidence of [the complainant's] state of mind at the time she
wrote them. That's what the prosecution
say. The prosecution submit that those
documents are consistent with [the complainant] being in fear of the accused and
with her claims that she now makes in evidence, of his treatment of
her at that time. It's also consistent with the prosecution's
assertion that the
accused had control of the relationship, and the mixed response that produced in
[the complainant]. Loyalty and
staying in the relationship on one hand, and
private, secret fears and doubts about the relationship on the other. Now that
can be used for you to assess those submissions and for that purpose.
How you – what weight you place on them, what inferences
you draw from
them are a matter for you, but you need to take some care in respect of your use
of that evidence. They are in the
same category as hearsay or an out of court
representation of fact. They can prove that what she said in the letter –
she was in fear, et cetera – is true. But it is not on oath. She
wasn't being cross-examined at the time she wrote the letter,
for example. But
it's some evidence that can be used to support her evidence to you in court.
However, you need to be careful about
those letters because saying things like,
"If I did it will be at his hands," in a letter, is obviously something that
could produce
a dramatic in a case like this... It doesn't prove what was in the
accused's mind at the time of the fire. It's relevant of some
evidence of how
she was feeling at the time. Whether that is consistent with what she now says
was happening in the relationship
at that time and nothing more. And you should
avoid any emotional or dramatic reaction to that evidence." (Summing up
direction appropriately guarded against misuse of the evidence by the jury. In
my assessment the probative value substantially
outweighed any risk of unfair
prejudice and the evidence was properly admitted.
Unrepresented
ground of appeal 10 – asserted errors in respect to the evidence of Jarrod
Kringle and Rickie Davey
applicant contends that the trial judge erred by granting leave pursuant to
Evidence Act
for prosecuting counsel to cross-examine Rickie Davey
and Jarrod Kringle, and secondly erred by allowing the tendering of prior
inconsistent
statements made by those witnesses.
Evidence of
Jarrod Kringle
Kringle was called as a witness by the State. His evidence was that in 2016 and
2017, he was a close friend of the complainant
and would regularly visit at her
house at Abbotsfield Road. When asked as to specific occasions he had
interacted with the complainant,
Mr Kringle claimed that he had no memory of any
interactions because of his on-going drug use. He was questioned as to a
he had made to police. Again, he claimed no memory of the contents of
the statement.
was granted to cross-examine Mr Kringle on the basis that his evidence was
unfavourable to the State because of his claimed
lack of recall and on the basis
that he had made a prior inconsistent statement.
of his statement was tendered on the trial through Detective Senior Constable
Jennifer Wood. In that statement he referenced
an incident on 2 April 2017 in
which he was present at the complainant's home and was questioned by the
applicant about the nature
of his relationship with the complainant and then
assaulted by the applicant and David Eaton, all of which occurred in the
complainant's
presence. His description of this incident was consistent with
evidence given by the complainant and Ms Rodway.
Additionally,
his statement to police referenced conversations with the complainant about her
relationship with the applicant, including
that she wished to end the
relationship but could not, and his knowledge of the letter that had been
written by the complainant.
Evidence of Rickie Davey
Davey's evidence has already been discussed but in brief, and relevant to this
appeal ground, Mr Davey gave evidence at trial
that on 24 April 2017 he was at
driveway. Thereafter,
the complainant came inside the house and told him that
the applicant was in the shed. She took a bag to the bedroom, put the kettle
and made hot drinks. She took the hot drinks to the shed. After that he
attended to some domestic chores, then went to the shed
to tell the applicant
and complainant there was a crayfish in the back fridge for them. At that point
the roller door was about
a third of the way down. Five or ten minutes later he
heard a crashing sound, looked up and saw the applicant carrying the complainant
in his arms, out of the shed. They fell over near the barbecue and the
applicant was rolling the complainant on the ground. The
applicant screamed,
"Help. Get the hose. Ring triple zero". He raced outside and got the hose and
provided it to the applicant.
He went back inside and rang triple zero. At
some point, he went into the shed to get the dog because there were "flames on
floor, papers and that". The flames were six to eight inches high. He said
he could not be clear as to which order he did things
but thought it most likely
he went into the shed first because there were no flames in the shed by the time
he called 000. He said
he recalled speaking to the triple 0 operator and was
asked whether there was any fire. He replied, "No, I've stamped it out with
feet". At one point, he said he screamed at the applicant and complainant,
"Tell me what the fuck just happened here" and the
complainant replied, "No, no,
Rick, it was an accident" and kept repeating herself.
was granted to cross-examine Mr Davey on the basis that his evidence was
unfavourable to the State (his evidence of having
seen flames in the shed and
the complainant having told him it was an accident was inconsistent with the
State's case) and on the
basis that he had made a number of prior inconsistent
statements. Leave was also granted pursuant to
to cross examine as to
credibility generally.
such cross-examination it was put to Mr Davey that he had changed his evidence
between the date of the fire event and the
date of the trial, and that his
motivation for changing his evidence was to assist the applicant. It was
suggested to Mr Davey that
he had not told the triple 0 operator that he had
seen a fire in the shed. It was suggested to him that he had not claimed in the
statutory declaration that he made with police on the evening of 24 April 2017,
that he had seen a fire in the shed. Mr Davey was
also cross-examined about the
fact he had not told the triple 0 operator, nor the police officer who took his
statutory declaration
on 24 April 2017, that the complainant had told him that
the fire was an accident. He was cross-examined about evidence he gave at
preliminary proceedings, whereby he corrected some aspects of his statutory
declaration, but did not correct other aspects he subsequently
claimed in his
evidence at trial.
statutory declaration taken from Mr Davey on 24 April 2017 was tendered through
Constable Melanie Long. The original statement
was tendered as P88. A second
copy of that statutory declaration was also tendered as P89. This document
showed some amendments
Mr Davey had made to his original statutory declaration
at the time of the preliminary proceedings. Also tendered as a prior
inconsistent
statement was Mr Davey's evidence at preliminary proceedings. The
evidence he gave at preliminary proceedings was played to the
jury during the
trial. During that evidence Mr Davey did not make mention of seeing flames
inside the shed on the evening of 24
April 2017.
State relied upon the prior inconsistent statements to support their argument
that Mr Davey had changed his version of events
considerably to support the
account given by the applicant. It should be noted that the defence sought that
additional aspects of
the evidence given by Rickie Davey at preliminary
proceedings be put before the jury so that "the whole picture" could be assessed
by the jury.
to the admissibility of the various prior inconsistent statements of Rickie
Davey, the trial judge said:
"I think omission is potentially
inconsistency. I think the jury are quite capable of finding that this is a
very inconsistent statement
with what he gave in evidence, and I will say now, I
think he's a critical witness in this case. Absolutely critical. ... He is
not an eye witness to the actual act, but he is as close as we're going to get
and he is critical. And I think these aspects of
inconsistency are critical to
the jury's assessment, so I think this is all highly probative. I think
everything has been done under
the evidence
is a gateway to
admissibility. I think the gateway has been satisfied. I think the evidence is
admissible under – as an exception
to the credibility rule, but I also
agree that the jury have to hear about, and more than just what was put in
cross-examination,
they have to hear about what happened at the preliminary
proceedings. ... I think as a matter of fairness that evidence has to
well. ... I have already made it clear that they should be getting some
evidence about what happened then – about
how he changed his statement, or
And then further, the trial judge said:
"Firstly, I'm satisfied that for the purposes of determining whether or not
the correction of the statement in evidence given at preliminary
proceedings
section 106.
The answer is yes, I mean that's basically a matter
of judgment, perhaps even a question of fact for the judge but clearly it's
capable of amounting to an inconsistency if – in a circumstance where a
witness has made a police statement, at preliminary
proceedings purports to
correct and add to that police statement in order – on the implications
available, it was done in order
to comprehensively insure that the statement is
given an accurate account of what occurred, but doesn't include things at that
that are subsequently given in his evidence at trial, that's an
inconsistency in my view.
The basis of the admissibility of a prior inconsistent statement is not
section 106.
is a procedural requirement that must
be complied with if it's applicable before the statement will become admissible
section 106
, and as I said this morning, there are consequences if the
statement is admitted for credibility purpose. ...
Section 106
rebutting denials by other evidence and the other evidence is the proof of the
prior statements by means other than from
the answers of the witness.
, sub-section 1 says 'The credibility rule does not apply to evidence that is
relevant to a witness's credibility and that is adduced
otherwise and from the
witness'. ... Under
section 108
, the credibility rule does not apply to evidence
of a prior consistent statement of a witness if the evidence of a prior
inconsistent
statement has been admitted, which is/has been – this is the
first statutory declaration or it is, or will be suggested that
the evidence has
been fabricated, re-constructed etc. So the evidence would be admissible in
order to re-establish Mr Davey's credibility
to the extent that it does so.
Whether it does so, of course, is a matter for the jury but it's admissible for
that reason, but
of course then there is the aspect of fairness that comes into
that and that is that obviously the defence don't want to be put in
the position
of having to adduce this evidence and the procedural implications of doing so.
What it seems to me is happening is
the prosecution is agreeing to put this in
the prosecution case, but saying that if it does so, all of the evidence should
including the cross-examination. I agree with that position. If this is
to go in as what is effectively a prior consistent statement,
that is the
defence want it in, then I think all of the evidence should go in and that
includes the examination and cross-examination
of Mr Davey at the preliminary
proceedings and I think that should occur simply as a matter of fairness,
because the jury need to
hear all of that evidence to be able to assess whether
or not it does actually re-establish credibility." (AB Vol 2 Part B
1715-1717).
should be noted then that whilst the trial judge admitted the original statutory
declaration as a prior inconsistent statement,
the evidence of Rickie Davey that
was given at preliminary proceedings was admitted at the defence request.
Complaint cannot now
be made as to it being admitted. To the extent the
applicant complains about the admission of the evidence given at preliminary
proceedings
in his written submissions, there is no merit.
to leave being granted to cross-examine Mr Kringle and Rickie Davey, in my
assessment it was properly granted.
Evidence Act
was intended to affect a significant change to
previously existing common law principles. The provision permits
cross-examination
by the party calling the witness in a number of circumstances,
including if the witness gives "unfavourable" evidence, or has made
statement which is inconsistent with his court testimony. Whilst the term
"unfavourable" is not defined in the
Evidence Act
, it has been the
subject of considerable judicial commentary. "Unfavourable" does not mean
adverse. It simply means "not favourable"
Kanaan v The Queen
). It is evidence that to some extent, detracts from the case
of the party calling the witness. An inability to recall due to loss
is sufficient to invoke the provision (see
Tasmania v S
[2004] TASSC 84
Randall v The Queen
[2004] TASSC 42
146 A Crim R 197
the Court of
Criminal Appeal considered the application of
At [14] Cox CJ said as
"14 The Act, s 38, represents a clear departure from the
common law which restrained parties from cross-examining their own witnesses
save in circumstances where they were shown to be hostile. It has been the
subject of many observations by the Supreme Court of New
South Wales where the
section has been in operation for nearly a decade longer than in this
R v Kneebone
[1999] NSWCCA 279
(1999) 47 NSWLR 450
case where a crucial eye witness was not called, Greg James J, with whom
Spigelman CJ agreed, made a passing reference to the
section at p 461-462, where
'In the context of a criminal case, care may have to be given to the question
of what 'unfavourable' to the Crown means. That concept
will not necessarily be
satisfied simply because the witness' potential testimony does not accord with
some prosecutor's view of
the appropriate 'camp' or some case theory which does
not accord with all the otherwise reliable evidence.
There have been various views taken in the court as to the meaning of
'unfavourable' in
Evidence Act
at CL., 23 April 1996, unreported);
(Court of Criminal Appeal,
10 June 1997, unreported);
R v Souleyman
(1996) 40 NSWLR 712
(Court of Criminal Appeal, 5 November 1998, unreported);
(Court of Criminal Appeal, 1 April 1997, unreported);
R v Adam and
(Wood CJ at CL, 24 November 1998, 3 December 1998, 11 December 1998,
unreported); on appeal
R v Adam and Adam
(Court of Criminal Appeal, 23
July 1999, unreported);
R v Patsalis and Spathis
(No 10) (Kirby J, 10
August 1999, unreported). Those views properly reflect the object of
Evidence Act
to provide a wider entitlement than s53 of the
, its predecessor. That provision dealt with the circumstance of a
witness proving 'adverse'. However, the full width of any entitlement
and the criteria for the proper exercise of discretion to permit
cross-examination remain to be settled. Other questions
remain as to the
appropriateness of calling witnesses known or expected to give unfavourable
evidence and the eliciting or refraining
from eliciting particular testimony
against the interest of or not to the advantage of the party calling the
witness. There is much
resolved'."
at [24] said:
"24 The granting of leave under s38(1)(a) in no way
depends upon some objective assessment by the trial judge when the application
is made of the truthfulness of the evidence, the subject of the application for
leave to cross-examine on. Indeed, it is only at
the conclusion of all the
evidence that any proper assessment of the truth can be made by the Court. As
the Crown's concern should
always be to place the truth before the jury, where
there is a reasonable basis for presenting a particular version consistent with
the guilt of the accused, there is much to be said for the proposition that a
material witness such as an eye-witness to the
should be subjected to testing if he or she advances evidence
quite inconsistent with that version. In my view, the evidence of both
and Davies was unfavourable to the Crown which had called them as witnesses and
that opened the way to the learned trial judge
to permit their cross-examination
under s38(1)(a). Furthermore, it was clear from a previous aborted trial that if
the Crown did
not test the evidence of these witnesses, it would not be
contested by the defence and might assume an unwarranted probative value
it was led by the Crown."
review of the authorities suggests that where evidence of a witness unhelpfully
conflicts with other evidence that has been or
is to be led by the State, and
the evidence relates to a material issue, or is of importance or of consequence,
then it is "unfavourable"
within the meaning of s 38(1)(A) of the
In considering whether there ought to be a grant of leave, emphasis is
placed on the importance of the fact-finder having the opportunity
evidence to be appropriately tested. Thus in circumstances where it is unlikely
the defence will challenge or test the unhelpful
evidence, a grant of leave may
be warranted.
the evidence of Mr Kringle and Mr Davey fell into this category. Mr Kringle's
evidence was "unfavourable" in the sense
his lack of memory was unhelpful to the
State's case and he had made a prior statement inconsistent with his Court
testimony about
matters of relevance. Rickie Davey's evidence was inconsistent
with the State's case in two very significant aspects and he too had
statements inconsistent with his Court testimony. The in-court testimony was
favourable to the applicant and therefore
unlikely to be challenged or tested by
him. There was no error in the trial judge granting leave and allowing
cross-examination of
either witness.
I can identify no error in the trial judge allowing the prior inconsistent
statements of either witness to go before
the jury to enable the jury to fully
and properly consider the value of the evidence. Without the prior statement of
Mr Kringle,
his evidence that he could remember nothing, would have been of no
use to the jury, yet the account he provided to police in his
declaration was relevant to the jury's assessment of a number of facts in issue.
It was important that the jury were able
to hear and consider each of Rickie
Davey's prior versions of events so as to make a full, proper and fair
evaluation of his credibility,
and the suggestion that his evidence had evolved
and changed to support the applicant. Rickie Davey was an important witness on
the trial and the full ambit of the various versions of events given by Mr Davey
was necessary to enable the jury to fully assess
how his narrative had unfolded
and what impact, if any, that had upon the jury's evaluation of his credibility.
It was in the interests
of justice that the jury have the opportunity to fully
consider the truthfulness of Rickie Davey's evidence and this was only possible
if the evidence was appropriately tested and placed into the context of all that
he had previously said about the subject matter.
is no merit in this ground of appeal.
Unrepresented ground of appeal 5 – admission of the letter written
by the complainant
this ground of appeal, the applicant raises the same complaint as is raised by
represented ground of appeal 3. The issues have
been fully canvassed in respect
to that appeal ground. Nothing new has been raised by the applicant in this
unrepresented ground
of appeal. For the same reasons as I expressed in respect
to represented ground of appeal 3, this ground of appeal must
Unrepresented ground of appeal 9 – admission of
relationship and tendency evidence
this ground of appeal, the applicant raises the same complaint as is raised by
represented ground of appeal 2. The issues have
been fully canvassed in respect
to that appeal ground. In terms of the contention that the trial judge erred by
admitting this evidence,
nothing new has been raised by the applicant in this
unrepresented ground of appeal, and for the same reasons as I expressed in
to represented ground of appeal 2, this ground of appeal must fail.
To the extent, the applicant appears to contend in his written submissions,
that because of the admission of this evidence on his
trial for attempting to
commit murder, and his subsequent plea of guilty and sentence for the crime of
persistent family violence,
he had been punished twice for the same criminal
conduct, I simply note the applicant has not filed an appeal against his
In any event, the applicant has not been punished twice. The
relationship and tendency evidence was available for the jury's consideration
determining whether they were satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that his guilt
had been proved in respect to the crime of attempting
to commit murder.
Following the jury's verdict, he entered a plea of guilty to the crime of
persistent family violence, which had
been the count that had been severed from
the indictment prior to the commencement of the trial. He received a global
sentence for
the crimes of attempting to commit murder and persistent family
violence of 18 years imprisonment with a non-parole period of 12
Comments on Passing Sentence of the trial judge make very clear that principles
of totality and proportionality were applied.
There is no ground of appeal which
alleges an error in the sentencing exercise.
Grounds of appeal
asserting misconduct on the part of the Prosecutor
Unrepresented ground of appeal 6 – unfairness in cross-examination
– suggestion of recent invention; counsel's failure
to object to such
cross-examination and/or re-establish credibility in re-examination.
way of this ground, the applicant complains that a miscarriage of justice
occurred as a consequence of the prosecutor engaging
in an unfair line of
cross-examination by suggesting aspects of his evidence were the consequence of
recent intervention, and further
contends that his trial counsel failed to
object to such cross-examination. Additionally, the applicant contends his
counsel should
have re-examined him to rebut the suggestion of recent invention
by leading from the applicant evidence to confirm he gave the particular
of events to his counsel prior to the trial.
noted in the summary of the evidence given by the applicant at trial, he gave
evidence of an occasion in his sister's shed when
he said the complainant tied a
broken strap from a handbag around her neck and he was compelled to untie it. He
said it was a case
of "either I untied it, or she was going to die". He
described this occasion as "just another threat of self-harm": (AB vol 2 Part
cross-examination, prosecuting counsel put to the applicant that this alleged
incident had never been suggested to the complainant
during cross-examination
and thus she was never given the opportunity to respond to that proposition. The
applicant agreed the topic
had not been mentioned or raised until he gave
evidence but he denied a suggestion by prosecuting counsel that he was "making
the incident: (AB vol 2 Part B 1924).
second area of cross-examination concerned the applicant's evidence that whilst
inside the shed, after the carpet had caught
fire and both he and the
complainant had tried to stamp it, he tried to drag the complainant's cardigan,
which was on fire, from
her and they both fell over inside the shed, before he
picked her up and carried her outside. The applicant identified a position
where he and the complainant landed inside the shed which appeared to coincide
with evidence as to the presence of blood staining.
The clear implication of
the questioning was that the applicant had fabricated this evidence to explain
the existence of the forensic
blood patterning evidence.
following exchange occurred in cross-examination (AB vol 2 Part B
"I suggest that you, at no stage, suggested to [the
complainant], when she was cross-examined, that you fell over in the shed with
her...Sorry? What are you –
Isn't it the case, Mr Davey, that –... What are you –
You are adding evidence –... I didn't cross-examine [the
complainant].
You're adding evidence as you go along to meet the Crown case...No, that's
not the case, Ms Mason. It's the same story I gave my lawyer
before any pre-recording was done, before we knew any evidence.
I suggest that –... Same story I gave my previous lawyer.
As to the aspect of falling inside the shed, you didn't put it to –
through your lawyer to [the complainant] because you've
recently made it up to
meet the Crown case?........I can tell you now, this is what I told my
MR RICHARDSON: You'd better be very careful.
MS MASON SC: (Resuming) Now after you say that you –...That's what I
told my lawyer.
Fell, you say – you now carried her outside, is it your evidence that
you didn't fall anywhere near the car.... I don't recall
falling near the car,
no. Out of the shed, to the right, fell near the barbecue area on the grass.
Can you recall [name of the complainant] – it had been put to [the
complainant] that the two of you fell in the area between
the shed and your car,
where your car was parked....I can't recall.
It's certainly –... My instructions I gave my lawyer was I fell inside
that shed where my hat was.
If I suggest to you that when you – when [the complainant] was
cross-examined, it was never put to her that she – she
and you fell over
twice between leaving the shed and – and where she arrived in the
backyard......I can't even recall the cross-
examine – the cross –
the cross-examination was done, what, 12 months ago? On a video that was later
enhanced and edited?
Not face-to-face in a court like I'm doing today."
for the applicant did not object to either section of cross-examination. The
first section was not accompanied by any suggestion
of recent invention.
However, the second section plainly linked the failure to cross-examine the
complainant about particular issues
with the suggestion that the failure to
cross-examine led to a conclusion that the applicant had recently made up his
evidence about
the fall within the shed to answer some of the forensic evidence
on the State's case. The applicant clearly and strongly responded
assertion by saying he had told this to his counsel, and a previous lawyer, at a
time prior to trial. The applicant was not
re-examined on this point and no
evidence was called to support his credit in that regard.
two sections of cross-examination occurred on 10 and 11 November 2021. Unbeknown
to the trial judge and counsel, on 10 November
2021 the High Court delivered the
decision in
Hofer v The Queen
[2021] HCA 36
274 CLR 351.
The court was
concerned with convictions for sexual assaults on two complainants. The issue
at trial centred on whether the appellant
believed the complainants were
consenting.
the majority judgment of Kiefel CJ, Keane and Gleeson JJ, the observation was
made that the credibility of the appellant was
"important". Their honours
summarised the effect of the cross-examination of the appellant
"3 During the course of the appellant's evidence, more
particularly his cross‑examination, it became apparent that certain of
evidence which was inconsistent with or contradicted that of C1 and C2 had not
been put to them by defence counsel for comment.
On each occasion when this
arose the Crown prosecutor required the appellant to acknowledge the omission,
which, for the most part,
he did. He unsuccessfully attempted on some occasions
to say that his counsel should have done so and on one tried to identify notes
that he had provided to counsel. Towards the end of these areas of
cross‑examination the prosecutor put to the appellant that
two aspects of
his evidence which had not been put to C1 or C2 were, in effect, of recent
invention. Defence counsel did not pursue
objections to these suggestions of
recent invention and the trial judge did not give the jury directions as to the
use which could
be made of this evidence."
majority judgment considered the rule in
Browne v Dunn
(1893) 6 R 67 and
contrasted the application of the rule in criminal cases as opposed to civil
cases. After observing that an omission
to cross-examine on particular matters
may often be corrected by recalling the witness, the majority noted that in New
South Wales
the course "sometimes taken" by the prosecution was to cross-examine
the accused about the omissions, such cross-examination extending
on occasions
to the reason for the omission with a view to impugning the credit of the
accused by suggesting recent invention [31].
Their Honours noted the observation
of Gleeson CJ in
(1990) 19 NSWLR 677
at 690 that it is "one
thing for the cross-examiner to point to the unfairness to a witness who has not
had the opportunity to comment,
it is quite another to suggest that the result
of a failure to observe the rule of practice is that a person should not be
[31]. Such a course "assumes that the reason for the omission is that
counsel were unaware of the matter and that counsel was unaware
because the
accused had not given an account of it in his or her instructions." [32].
majority referred to the decision of King CJ in
R v Manunta
[1989] SASC 1628
at 23 in which his Honour described the course of cross-examining on the
basis of only one reason existing for a failure to cross-examine
as "fraught
with peril". The majority noted King CJ's observation that many explanations may
exist for an omission to cross-examine
which do not reflect upon the credibility
of the accused.
The majority judgment continued:
"34 Where there remains a number of possible explanations as to why a matter
was not put to a witness, there is no proper basis for
a line of questioning
directed to impugning the credit of an accused. Except in the clearest of cases,
where there are clear indications
of recent invention, an accused person should
not be subjected to this kind of questioning. The potential for prejudice to an
is obvious.
on the basis of a mere assumption as to lack of instructions is likely to be
productive of further unfairness in the course
of the cross‑examination.
The assumption will inevitably lead to impermissible questions of the accused,
put expressly or arising
implicitly, as to the actual instructions he or she
gave. An accused person faced with questioning of this kind is likely to feel
obliged to attempt to explain by reference to the instructions he or she in fact
gave when in reality the accused carries no such
onus. Questioning of this kind
may result in the need for counsel or the solicitor for the defence having to
disclose those instructions.
This is a circumstance which should not arise.
most cases, the cross‑examination will have a dual purpose. It will be
concerned with identifying unfairness to a Crown witness
as well as seeking to
have the accused's evidence disbelieved. Where it has the sole purpose of
impugning the credit of the accused
it will be necessary for leave to be sought
from the trial judge. The discussion which will inevitably take place on such an
application
will point up the risks associated with the course proposed.
trial judge should be alert to the problems associated with
cross‑examination. They should be raised with counsel at an early
Where the cross‑examination has occurred, it will be necessary for the
trial judge to warn the jury about any assumption
made by the
cross‑examiner, to draw attention to the possible reasons why the matter
has not been put and to direct the jury
as to whether any inferences are
available." (Footnotes omitted.)
the majority ultimately applied the proviso and found that no substantial
miscarriage of justice had occurred in circumstances
described by the majority
as "extraordinary", their Honours summarised their reasons for finding that
there had been a "departure
from a trial according to law to the prejudice of
the accused":
"41 A miscarriage of justice to which s
6(1) of the
Criminal Appeal Act
refers includes any
departure from a trial according to law to the prejudice of the accused. This
accords with the long tradition
of criminal law that a person is entitled to a
trial where rules of procedure and evidence are strictly followed. The larger
different question raised by the proviso, which is reserved to an appellate
court, of whether there has notwithstanding that departure
been no substantial
miscarriage of justice, focuses upon whether the nature and effect of the error
which has occurred prevents the
appellate court from undertaking its assessment
as to whether guilt has been proved to the requisite standard.
questioning undertaken by the prosecution of the appellant departed from the
standards of a trial to which an accused is entitled
and the standards of
fairness which must attend it. The questioning was such as to imply that the
appellant was obliged to provide
an explanation as to why matters had not been
put to C1 or C2. This suggested he possessed information which he had not given
by way of instructions. The unfairness in this regard was compounded
when the appellant was not permitted by the trial judge to provide
an answer and
by defence counsel not informing the court that he had those instructions. The
attack upon the appellant's credit by
assertions of recent invention was based
upon an assumption which was not warranted. All of these matters were highly
prejudicial
to the appellant." (Footnotes omitted.)
the heart of the circumstances in
was an "unfounded assumption"
that the omission to cross-examine arose because the appellant had not
previously given appropriate
instructions to his counsel and, therefore, the
appellant's relevant evidence was a recent invention. After observing that the
under consideration was not the first occasion upon which
cross-examination of this nature had caused a miscarriage of justice, the
majority addressed the failure of the trial judge to give appropriate
directions:
"47 The prejudice to the appellant was not addressed by
the trial judge, as it should have been. It was necessary that the trial judge
put the omissions in perspective, discount any assumption as to why they
occurred by reference to other possibilities and warn the
jury about drawing any
inference on the basis of a mere assumption. Absent such directions there was a
real chance that the jury
may have assumed that the reason for the omission was
that the appellant had changed or more recently made up his story." (Footnotes
J dissented finding that the court could not reasonably conclude that "no
substantial miscarriage of justice has actually
occurred" [125]. Her Honour
summarised her view with respect to the unfairness caused to the
"126 I agree with Kiefel CJ, Keane and Gleeson JJ that
questions asked of the appellant in cross‑examination by the prosecutor
departed from the standards of a trial to which the appellant was entitled. The
unfairness to the appellant in being asked these
questions was emphasised when
he was not permitted to explain why he thought matters had not been put to the
complainants and other
Crown witnesses. The unfairness was
by defence counsel saying as little as he did about those
matters and by the trial judge not intervening to prevent the questioning,
seeking to remedy the error when it first arose and not telling the jury that
there may be many reasons why a matter was not
raised in cross‑examination
of a witness."
having been delivered on 10 November 2021, and the cross-examination having
occurred on 10 and 11 November 2021, the trial judge raised
the issue of the
decision in
on 15 November 2021. Counsel for the applicant was
asked whether he saw any difficulty with the first section of cross-examination
concerning the strap around the neck of the complainant and responded "no, your
Honour, I don't" (AB Vol 2 Part B 2024).
to the second section of cross-examination, counsel for the applicant informed
the trial judge that in saying "you'd better be
very careful" during the
cross-examination in question, he had in mind informing the prosecutor that if
the cross-examination continued
he would withdraw from the case and give
evidence. Having thought better of such a statement in front of the jury,
counsel decided
not to pursue the matter.
for the applicant indicated to the trial judge that a general direction would
suffice in terms similar to directions given
that an accused person does not
have to explain why a complainant told a lie or made up a story. After
discussion with counsel for
the State, the trial judge indicated the view that
prosecuting counsel "had not crossed the line" and a direction to the jury was
appropriate.
ultimate direction given by the trial judge followed firm directions as to the
burden of proof, and directions emphasising that
the applicant was not obliged
to give evidence and the jury was required to approach his evidence in the same
way as they approached
the evidence of other witnesses. His Honour also
emphasised that, bearing in mind the conflict between the evidence of the
complainant
and the evidence of the applicant, it was "very important" that the
jury "bear in mind that the resolution of the case will not come
down simply to
choosing which witness you prefer, because it's not weighing up one against the
other; you have to be satisfied of
guilt beyond reasonable doubt". Immediately
following those directions, the trial judge indicated he was nearing the end of
summing up and gave the following directions concerning the issue under
consideration (Summing-up p 71):
"Firstly, this point: during
cross‑examination of the accused by the prosecutor, he was asked about
whether his lawyer had
put to the complainant various – in
cross‑examination – various aspects of his version of events,
including those
in the shed, concerning the fire and the reaction to it.
In cross‑examining, prosecuting counsel was getting at a rule of legal
practice that lawyers understand concerning how opposing
counsel should
cross-examine a witness. The rule in general terms, it's just a rule of
fairness, it requires a party who intends
to challenge a witness's testimony on
a point to put a contrary position to the witness, so that the witness has a
chance to answer
An example of this is the accused's evidence that after [the complainant]
caught on fire, they both fell outside the shed near the
hat that can be seen in
the photos. Counsel suggested this had not been put to [the complainant] during
cross‑examination.
If you think this or something else was not put to
[the complainant], then you can take that into account when assessing the
credibility
and reliability of [the complainant's] version; that is, you might
take into account that she was not given an opportunity to respond
suggestion when you're assessing her evidence.
But I warn you very clearly of this, so I direct you of this: you should
not draw any inference from questions asked by the accused's
lawyer which bear
on the credibility of the accused. In particular, you should not infer from the
failure by counsel to put a matter
in cross‑examination, or by putting
something different to what the accused might have said, that the accused had or
given his lawyer any particular version of events.
The law provides for conversations between a lawyer and a client to be
confidential, and we simply do not know and cannot speculate
have passed between the accused and his lawyer. There can be many reasons why
counsel asked or did not ask certain
questions, many of which have nothing to do
with what the lawyer was told by the client. And of course the accused said in
to that cross‑examination that he had told his lawyers about these
things. It would be dangerous and wrong to speculate about
this or to draw
anything from it, and you should not do so." (My emphasis.)
my view, although ideally the cross-examination in the first section should not
have occurred, very little turned on it. In the
context of all of the evidence
counsel for the State
and counsel for the applicant dealt with it during their
respective closing addresses, which is discussed at length in respect to
unrepresented appeal ground 13, I am of the view that very little would have
turned upon this line of cross-examination. Importantly,
counsel for the
applicant was not concerned about it and obviously considered in the environment
of the trial and given all of the
evidence, it was not a point of significance.
second section of cross-examination was far more pointed, and potentially more
damaging to the applicant. It should not have
occurred, and in particular,
counsel for the State should not have put to the applicant that he had "recently
made it up to meet
the Crown case". This line of cross-examination was
objectionable. Counsel for the applicant raised his concern with counsel for
State when he said "You'd better be very careful", although elected not to
object. He should have, but his failure to do so is
not in the category where it
could be suggested a miscarriage of justice arises. Counsel made a forensic
decision to deal with it
he objected, the issue of whether the complainant ought to be recalled to enable
cross-examination in this area would have arisen.
Although, in theory, the
complainant could have been recalled to enable cross-examination to occur, such
a recall was not a practical
proposition. The complainant had given evidence at
a special hearing prior to the trial and her evidence was presented in a
pre-recorded
form. In such circumstances, it would not have been appropriate for
the complainant to be re-called solely for the purpose of being
cross-examined
particularly when the evidence she had
given made it clear that her recall of
the finer details of this time frame was impaired, but also made it clear that
she did not
accept the applicant's version of events.
was no occasion for re-examination. The applicant made it clear in his evidence
that he had told his counsel about these particular
matters. There was little
to be gained from having him repeat this evidence, and indeed, such may have led
the jury to consider
it was a point the defence were concerned about, and lead
to the jury reflecting further upon the suggestion of recent invention.
open to counsel for the applicant to form the view that the matter was best left
with the trial judge giving the appropriate
direction. This is not a case of
incompetency of counsel leading to a miscarriage of justice.
the cross-examination should not have occurred, the directions toward the end of
the summing up were firm and clear. In
particular, the jury was told that they
could not draw any inference from the failure to cross-examine, that the accused
given his version of events to his counsel. The jury was explicitly
directed that there could be many reasons why counsel did or
did not ask
particular questions and were reminded that the accused said in answer to the
cross-examination that he had told his
counsel about these matters. There is no
reason to doubt that the jury would have understood and complied with the clear
directions.
cross-examination concerning these topics was not protracted and occurred during
a lengthy cross-examination of the appellant.
Counsel for the State did not
quickly fell by the wayside.
light of the directions ultimately given to the jury by the trial judge, no
miscarriage of justice arises, and this ground of
appeal must fail.
Unrepresented ground of appeal 11 – length of jury
deliberations
this ground, the applicant contends that the trial judge erred by not enquiring
of the jury after four hours of deliberations
whether they were "deadlocked";
not informing the jury that they were entitled to not return a verdict and not
bringing the jury
back "within the six hour time limit".
starting point is that the
provides no time limits with
respect to the length of jury deliberations, beyond the requirement in
a jury must deliberate for at least two hours before a majority verdict can be
case before the jury had taken approximately six weeks to be heard. It was a
complicated matter with a great volume of evidence.
A number of directions had
been given to the jury which required conscientious application. It was to be
anticipated that the jury
would be deliberating for a relatively extended period
of time. The trial judge appropriately told the jury that how long their
deliberations took was entirely a matter for them. The jury went out at 1.23pm
on 17 November 2021 to commence their deliberations.
They were sworn out for the
night at 4.33pm and resumed their deliberations at 9.37 am on 18 November 2021.
At 12.05pm that day,
the trial judge brought the jury back into Court and
provided them with a majority direction. This occurred after the jury had been
deliberating for more than five hours, so well past the two-hour minimum
required for a majority verdict. It was appropriate given
the complexity of the
trial and the volume of evidence that the majority verdict direction was not
given at an earlier point in time.
The jury returned its verdict at 1.21 pm.
no point during the jury deliberations were there any issues raised by the jury
which suggested they were having difficulty in
reaching a verdict. Neither
counsel for the State or counsel for the applicant suggested at any point that
there were appropriate
grounds for a
direction to be given
[1993] HCA 71
(1993) 179 CLR 44).
it was not appropriate for the trial judge to enquire about the status or
progress of the jury's deliberations. A jury
must be free to deliberate without
any form of pressure being imposed upon them and without any sense of time
must confess to not understanding what the applicant means by "the six hour time
limit". There is no reference in his written
submissions to any provision of
which references a six hour time limit.
any event, my assessment is there was no error in the manner in which the trial
judge provided the majority verdict direction
to the jury, and no error
associated with the passages of time that passed during the jury
deliberation.
was not appropriate for the trial judge to advise the jury that he could
discharge them without the return of a verdict in circumstances
where there had
been no indication that the jury were having any difficulty in reaching a
verdict of ten or more of them. In delivering
the majority verdict direction,
the trial judge made it clear that each individual juror must still act in
accordance with his or
her individual oath or affirmation, and in accordance
with his or her individual conscience and that no individual juror should join
in on a verdict that he or she believed to be incorrect. No error attaches to
any directions associated with the jury's
deliberations.
Unrepresented ground of appeal 12 –
re-examination of Dillon Davey
this ground, the applicant contends that the trial judge should not have
permitted re-examination of Dillon Davey to explain
the context of a text
message he had been cross-examined about.
cross-examination of Dillon Davey, it had been suggested to him that he was the
father of the complainant's child, that child
having been born after the fire
event of 24 April 2017 but before the trial. The same suggestion had been put
to the complainant
during cross-examination. The import of the
cross-examination of Dillon Davey and the complainant was to suggest, by
inference at
least, that they had a close relationship and therefore a motive to
concoct a version of events as to what had occurred in the house
on 23 April
2016. There was evidence from a listening device recording, as referred to in
unrepresented ground 4, that both Mr Dillon
Davey and the complainant had given
evidence about. The purpose of the cross-examination was to suggest that
because of the close
relationship between the complainant and Dillon Davey,
there was a motive for Mr Davey to explain what had occurred on 23 April 2016
a way that was supportive of the complainant but adverse to the applicant.
cross-examination of Dillon Davey he was asked the following:
you ever sent this message or a similarly worded message to anybody:
'LOL me and Mason just got back from Melb seen [the complainant] and my new
baby. So fuck of, yeah, she did have a kid to me, I was
good at hiding it too
ay – sucked in'"
Mr Dillon Davey admitted sending the message but said he could not recall to
whom he had sent the message. He admitted during cross-examination
that he sent
the message intending to cause emotional upset to the person to whom he was
sending it. He agreed that by sending the
message he was wishing to assert that
he was the father of the complainant's baby. In re-examination he was asked to
whom the message
was intended to cause "emotional upset" and he responded
"Matthew". He was asked "Why was that?" and he responded "Threats from
Matthew's family members". The applicant argues that this evidence was unfairly
prejudicial because the jury may speculate that
members of the applicant's
family, including Rickie Davey, were one of the persons who had threatened
Dillon Davey. The credibility
of Dillon Davey had clearly been attacked by the
line of cross-examination. The prosecutor was entitled to re-establish
credibility
in re-examination (s 108 of the
Evidence Act
) without an
explanation as to why Mr Dillon Davey may have sent the false message. The jury
would not have a context in which to
evaluate his assertion that the information
contained within the message was false and he was not the father of the
complainant's
child. This was relevant to an assessment of whether, in fact,
there was any realistic likelihood of Dillon Davey tailoring his
evidence to
assist the complainant because of an intimate relationship with her.
had not been suggested to Rickie Davey during cross-examination by the State as
to credibility issues, that he had sent any threats
to Dillon Davey. There was
no realistic prospect, in my view, that the jury would consider that in any way
likely. The evidence
established that at the time the message was sent, when
the complainant was in Melbourne in hospital in around June or July 2017,
applicant was in custody. Thus, again, it is unlikely the jury would have
considered he was directly responsible for the making
of any threats to Dillon
Davey. In the context of the trial, the evidence given in re-examination was
unlikely to attract much significance
in the jury's deliberations. The defence
were seeking to use the message sent by Dillon Davey as evidence of a prior
inconsistent
statement that impacted upon his credibility but also to prove the
truth of the asserted fact. That is, that Mr Dillon Davey was
the father of the
complainant's child, to support the assertion that he had a motive to tailor his
evidence in a manner that was
favourable to the complainant. The jury were
entitled to assess the likelihood of whether the message was a lie or otherwise.
prejudicial effect of the comment that he had received threats from members
of the Davey family was minimal. In my view, there was
no error in the trial
judge permitting this line of re-examination.
Unrepresented
ground of appeal 14 – unfairness in cross-examination – Facebook
exchange and backpack
this ground, the applicant complains that the prosecution unfairly
cross-examined him about some Facebook messages. The complainant
evidence that on 23 and 24 April 2017, so in the 48 hours leading up to the fire
incident, she had an exchange with the
applicant via Facebook Messenger. She
also gave evidence that the applicant had a Facebook account in the name of
"Andrew Smith".
There was no challenge to the complainant's evidence about
these matters and the applicant conceded in cross-examination he had
account in the name of Andrew Smith.
State also tendered (P26) some Facebook messages that had been obtained from the
complainant's Facebook account after the fire
incident. Those Facebook messages
purported to be between the complainant's account and the account Andrew Smith.
They were dated
23 and 24 April, although the year was not apparent from the
message exchange. The content of the messages, however was consistent
exchange being in the lead up to the fire incident, and was consistent with the
complainant's account of being at work and
having an exchange with the applicant
messages indicates
the complainant intends to "drop all your [the applicant's]
stuff off tomorrow and all you'll need do is get your car". The content
messages was predominately about the participants accusing each other of
infidelity and highlighting issues in their relationship.
Both participants to
the conversation are accusatory and abusive.
I understand the applicant's contention in this ground of appeal he submits it
was unfair that he was cross-examined on the basis
that these Facebook messages
were exchanged between he and the complainant in 2017, when there was no
evidence on the documents themselves
to establish that they were sent in 2017 as
opposed to some other year.
if the applicant did not accept that the messages were sent between him and the
complainant in 2017, he was perfectly entitled
to say so in answer to the
questions. Similarly, if the applicant could not remember when they were sent he
was entitled to say so.
Secondly, there had been no suggestion in the
cross-examination of the complainant that the exchange had not occurred on the
dates in 2017. Thirdly, the content of the messages were consistent
with the year being 2017. Fourthly, the State called a witness,
Karen Clark, who
gave evidence of accessing the messages from the complainant's Facebook account
in 2017 whilst the complainant was
in hospital. There was no challenge to this
evidence. Fifthly, the messages were disclosed to the applicant and his counsel
before the trial commenced. They were disclosed as part of a bundle of
messages from the Facebook accounts that were dated February
to April 2017. If
the applicant wanted to challenge the assertion the message exchange had
occurred on 23 and 24 April 2017, he had
ample opportunity to do so. There was
simply nothing inappropriate, improper or unfair about him being cross-examined
on the basis
that the Facebook messages had been exchanged in 2017, in the 48
hours leading up to the fire incident. It was a matter for the
jury to assess,
given the content of the messages, whether they were of the view they had been
sent at this time or otherwise.
applicant also complains that he was unfairly cross-examined about the green
backpack that was tendered in evidence at the trial.
Constable Dean Walker gave
evidence that he had collected a black and green backpack containing assorted
electrical items from the
floor of the shed at 49 Karanga Drive. The backpack
and electrical items were tendered as a single exhibit (P43). There was no
cross-examination
of Constable Walker to suggest the backpack had not be found
in the form, and containing the contents, in which it was produced and
applicant had referred to the green and black backpack in his evidence as being
the one which the complainant had picked up
and shaken the contents of onto the
floor. It contained the piece of paper with the female's details on it that she
ignited, causing
the carpet to catch fire and, in turn, her.
cross-examination, the applicant was challenged as to how he said the
complainant had been able to shake the papers from
the backpack, yet none of the
electrical items had fallen out onto the floor. The applicant's answer was that
not all of the electrical
items were in the backpack at the time. The following
exchanges occurred during cross-examination:
"So, despite being
covered in fuel, she goes and picks another backpack up?... Yes
Undoes the zip, tips it out, backwardly tips it out, shakes it like that.
Picked it up and shakes it vigorously .... Yep, shook it
around the room,
Is it your evidence that the backpack that was the green and black backpack
that the paperwork that you see in the photograph Mr Coad
took of the contents
of that bag, or came from that bag ...I can't say exactly, no. Not by looking
at the photos.
Isn't it the case, Mr Davey that what was in the backpack was a whole heap of
electrical items were also in there...Yes
What, and you're saying that only the – despite vigorously shaking the
bag, only the paperwork fell out...No, I'm not saying
that. I can't say what
fell out. I'm saying what's on the ground was in the backpack.
Are you saying now that the items you see associated with that bag were not
in it...No, all that stuff wasn't in the backpack. All
that stuff wasn't in it
– some of it maybe, but not all of it...some of it, most of it, some of
it, I don't know, a lot of
it was on the bench, all over the place.
I suggest, Mr Davey, that the backpack had nothing to do with what happened
that night and at no stage did she empty the contents
of that backpack onto the
ground ...Okay Ms Mason
Because the backpack had items in it that would have fallen on the ground at
the same time...It had a lot of items in it. Okay then,
so how did the items
that you see in the photo- how did that get on the ground Ms Mason?": (AB vol 2
Part B 1967 -1969).
was nothing unfair about this line of cross-examination. It was a legitimate
area of challenge with forensic purpose. To
the extent this ground of appeal
also suggests trial counsel failed in his duty by not cross-examining Constable
Dean Walker about
the contents of the backpack, there is simply no merit.
Counsel for the applicant dealt with the backpack issue in his closing address
by pointing out that the backpack had more than one compartment in it and it was
entirely feasible that the electrical items may
have been in one compartment and
the papers that the applicant said fell onto the ground in a separate
compartment, and the complainant
may have only opened one zip.
was photographic evidence indicating papers on the floor of the shed. Whilst how
they came to be there was a point of contention,
the state of the backpack was
unlikely to have been a point of great import in the context of the trial. The
applicant's counsel
validly answered the critique made in cross-examination
during cross-examination. There is no merit in this aspect of the ground
appeal either as to the fairness of the cross-examination or the manner in which
counsel dealt with this evidence.
to the extent the applicant's ground of appeal alleges that the prosecution
acted in an unfair manner by "arranging"
for electrical items to be placed in
the same exhibit bag as the backpack, there is no merit in this submission. I
can identify
no evidentiary basis from which this assertion can be established.
The exhibit packaging was marked for identification on the trial.
available for defence to assess should there be any legitimate concern with what
had been seized from the scene. Property
seizure records were disclosed as part
of the Crown papers. If the applicant genuinely held this concern in advance of
evidence, he had ample opportunity to cross-examine the various
police officers who attended at the scene and collected forensic
There is no merit in this ground of appeal.
Unrepresented ground
of appeal 13 – Prosecution failure to call witness Matthew Poxon
the conclusion of the State's case, the applicant's counsel asked the trial
judge to consider inviting the prosecution to call
the witness Dr Matthew Poxon
on the State's case, and alternatively submitted the trial judge might consider
calling the witness
himself. The submission was made in accordance with the
rationale enunciated in
R v Apostilides
[1984] HCA 38
(1984) 154 CLR 563.
case, the court said at [97]-[98]:
"We have come to the conclusion
that the following general propositions are applicable to the conduct of
criminal trials in Australia:
Crown prosecutor alone bears the responsibility of deciding whether a person
will be called as a witness for the Crown.
trial judge may but is not obliged to question the prosecutor in order to
discover the reasons which lead the prosecutor to decline
to call a particular
person. He is not called upon to adjudicate the sufficiency of those
at the close of the Crown case the trial judge may properly invite the
prosecutor to reconsider such a decision and to have
regard to the implications
as then appear to the judge at that stage of the proceedings, he cannot direct
the prosecutor to call
a particular witness.
charging the jury, the trial judge may make such comment as he then thinks to be
appropriate with respect to the effect which
the failure of the prosecutor to
call a particular person as a witness would appear to have had on the course of
the trial. No doubt
that comment, if any, will be affected by such information
as to the prosecutor's reasons for his decision as the prosecutor thinks
proper to divulge.
in the most exceptional circumstances, the trial judge should not himself call a
person to give evidence.
decision of the prosecutor not to call a particular person as a witness will
only constitute a ground for setting aside a conviction
if, when viewed against
the conduct of the trial taken as a whole, it is seen to give rise to a
miscarriage of justice."
principles were affirmed by the High Court in
Diehm v DPP (Nauru)
303 ALR 42.
As to the type of exceptional circumstance that might
warrant a trial judge's intervention in the calling of a witness, the Court
noted such circumstances would be rare and would require more than the trial
judge considering the prosecutor's reasons for not calling
a witness were
unsatisfactory.
application of those principles as they relate to an appeal court were discussed
Whitehorn v The Queen
[1983] HCA 42
(1983) 152 CLR, 657
per Dean J at [663] and
"663 Prosecuting counsel in a criminal trial represents the
State. The accused, the court and the community are entitled to expect
performing his function of presenting the case against an accused, he will act
with fairness and detachment and always with
the objectives of establishing the
whole truth in accordance with the procedures and standards which the law
requires to be observed
and of helping to ensure that the accused's trial is a
consequence of a failure to observe the standards of fairness to be expected of
the Crown may be insignificant in the context
of an overall trial. Where that is
so, departure from those standards, however regrettable, will not warrant the
interference of
an appellate court with a conviction. On occasion however, the
consequences of such a failure may so affect or permeate a trial as
the conclusion that the accused has actually been denied his fundamental right
to a fair trial. As a general proposition,
that will, of itself, mean that there
has been a serious miscarriage of justice with the consequence that any
conviction of the accused
should be quashed and, where appropriate, a new trial
Poxon was a medical practitioner who had seen both the complainant and her
mother, Wendy Rodway. A statutory declaration from
Dr Poxon had been filed as
part of the Crown papers. The declaration included the
On 10 April 2015,
[the complainant]
see me in the company of her mother.
[the complainant]
presented, again,
with suicidal ideations, indicating that she was considering self harm.
complainant was cross-examined about the visit to Dr Poxon on 10 April 2015.
The following exchange occurred:
"On 10 April 2015, did you consult
any medical practitioner in relation to suicidal ideation and consideration of
self harm? ...I
can't remember the date, but I did in that year."
was a further entry in Dr Poxon's proof of evidence which related to a visit on
10 January 2017, from Wendy Rodway, the complainant's
"Wendy told me that she was concerned as her daughter had
marks on her neck and had yoga rope out, attempted self hanging."
Rodway was asked about this in cross-examination and the following was said (AB
vol 2 Part B 834):
"Did you go to a Dr Poxon and suggest to him that
you were concerned [the complainant] had marks on her neck and had a yoga rope
and attempted self hanging? ...No, that's misconstrued.
The answer is 'no', you never said that to Dr Poxon? (objection) Did you say
to Dr Poxon you were concerned because you daughter had
marks on her neck and a
yoga rope out? Attempted self hanging? ...I never suggested – said that
she attempted self hanging.
She did have, I believe, marks on her neck. It may
have been a yoga rope but never have I thought or even suggested, and nor has
[the complainant] made any suggestion to me, that she was going to self harm by
sought the calling of Dr Poxon so they might establish that Wendy Rodway had, in
fact, told Dr Poxon what was recorded in
his statutory declaration and thereby
establish a prior inconsistent statement relevant to the credit of Wendy
trial judge acknowledged that as a matter of fairness, it would be preferable
for the State to call the witness, Dr Poxon, to
enable the defence to illicit
the evidence from him but declined to call the witness himself. He ruled that
the evidence was not
of sufficient significance to amount to exceptional
circumstances as discussed in
Apostilides
. His Honour invited the
prosecution to consider whether or not Dr Poxon should be made available for
cross-examination (AB vol 2
Part B 1774-1775).
determining that exceptional circumstances were not made out, the trial judge
noted that at its highest the evidence was admissible
as a prior inconsistent
statement relevant to the credit of Wendy Rodway. There was no suggestion in Dr
Poxon's statutory declaration
that the complainant was present when Ms Rodway
made the comments to Dr Poxon. The trial judge also noted it was unclear from
statutory declaration whether the notation "attempted self hanging" was
something that had, in fact, been said by Ms Rodway, or was
a conclusion Dr
Poxon drew from the information he had been given, which was relevant to the
extent of any asserted inconsistency.
The trial judge also commented that if
defence considered the evidence to be of sufficient significance, they were
entitled to call
the witness themselves. It was a forensic decision to
determine whether the loss of the right of last address was warranted when
compared to the significance of the evidence.
State declined to call Dr Poxon. Their explanation for declining to do so was
that the evidence he could give was limited to
proof of a prior inconsistent
statement in respect to the witness Wendy Rodway. Beyond that, general evidence
he could give as to
the nature of consultations between he and the complainant
had largely been conceded by the complainant in her evidence. That is,
complainant had accepted she had experienced previous episodes of suicidal
ideation and various mental health challenges, including
accepting that on the
day of the fire incident, she had experienced mental health difficulties.
my view, the State should have called Dr Poxon. Evidence of the complainant's
mental health was an important part of the trial.
Fundamentally, the defence
case involved the proposition that immediately prior to the fire incident, the
complainant was experiencing
mental health difficulties, had splashed herself
with fuel and threatened to burn herself. It was also part of the defence case
both the complainant and Ms Rodway had downplayed the severity of the
complainant's mental health difficulties in the lead-up to
the fire incident.
Wendy Rodway was the complainant's mother and therefore someone whom the jury
might reasonably consider had an
intimate understanding of the extent of the
complainant's difficulties and how they may have manifested. Evidence that Wendy
had told Dr Poxon of "an attempted self- hanging" – if that is what
the notation recorded by Dr Poxon turned out to be –
in January 2017, only
three months before the fire event, may well have been of use to the jury in
evaluating whether Ms Rodway was
being forthright in her evidence relevant to
the complainant's mental health in the months leading up to 24 April 2017.
no suggestion the evidence of Dr Poxon lacked credibility, it would
have been relatively brief and there is no indication that there
would have been
an undue delay associated with him being called. As a matter of fairness, he
should have been called on the State's
case to allow the defence the opportunity
to explore what he had been told by Wendy Rodway and why that notation had been
That is particularly so, considering Wendy Rodway's evidence that she
had never suggested to Dr Poxon the complainant had attempted
to hang herself
and the complainant had never expressed to her that she had attempted to do so.
formed that view it is necessary to consider the consequences of the failure of
the State to call Dr Poxon. In my assessment,
in the context of the overall
trial, the failure to call Dr Poxon was relatively insignificant. During
closing arguments, counsel
for the State essentially conceded that the
complainant had experienced mental health difficulties, including episodes of
ideation. They did not challenge the evidence which established the
complainant had experienced mental health difficulties on 24
April 2017.
Counsel for the State said this in closing address:
"Well let's
just look firstly at those mental health issues that the complainant brought to
the relationship, if I can say. You might
think that the complainant had her
fair share of challenges in her early life. You've heard evidence about the
death of her friend.
You've heard evidence – evidence about unwanted
advances from her mother's partner and you might think that she dealt with
as best as she could in the circumstances. She accepted that there were times
in her life when she had contemplated self harm,
when she had self harmed in
response to the external stressors. You've heard her account of that in her
evidence, specifically under
cross-examination, but you also heard she sought
on her, she was someone who embraced life. You've heard evidence about
that.": (AB vol2 Part B 2032).
further, counsel for the State said this:
"You've heard that she
expressed this distress about the impact the relationship was having upon her to
her mother at various times
during the course of the relationship, and also to
the accused. As difficult as it was to listen and to read some of the text
and the communications between the complainant and the accused,
you'll see, if you go back to that particular exhibit number, that
many occasions where she expresses to the accused the emotional distress that he
was causing her. On 18 April 2016, there
is an expression where she says,
'You've taken my spirit. You've turned me crazy. You've turned me into
someone I don't know. Someone I don't want to be, and some
days, I don't want
to be here, and every day I question myself'.
The State are saying you can accept she was – she had enormous
challenges that were impacting on her mental health. We don't
disavow that at
all. There was an occasion at 4.00am in the morning you might recall on 23
April, she sends her mother a text, 'I
don't want to be alive no more'. This is
just before the accused was first remanded in custody. .... Littered through
the evidence
you have is a recognition of, firstly, her history of challenges to
her mental health and, more particularly, the challenges the
relationship gave
her, as far as her metal health was concerned: (AB vol 2 Part B 2036).
Further, counsel for the State said this:
'But ultimately, it's accepted by the State that the complainant had
expressed a number of times that she was unhappy, that she hated
she'd become, that she didn't want to be there anymore. And on the afternoon of
the fire event, that she had contemplated
self harm. The State don't disavow
that, that is something for you to consider.'"
is apparent then from the submissions made by counsel for the State during the
closing argument that they conceded there was
a significant body of evidence
which supported a conclusion that the complainant had suffered mental health
difficulties for a number
of years, including episodes of suicidal ideation, and
such an incident most likely occurred on the afternoon of 24 April 2017.
counsel was also able to make thorough submissions as to the role he argued the
mental health of the complainant played
in the event. He said in his closing
"So they are asserting, both of them [the complainant and
Wendy Rodway] that prior to Mr Davey coming into her life, her life was
Happy, outgoing, friends – all the rest of it. Well let's have a look at
the true history of – and can I say
this no criticism of [the
complainant]. I'm sorry that she's had such a horrible life. But if this is an
example of a typical female
teenager, God forbid where we are heading in the
world. She was sexually abused by her stepfather, who committed suicide as a
of it. You will find that at page 790. She had a relationship with this
John Voe when she was aged 15. Let's have a look at what
she said about that.
It was put to her that there had been an issue of ongoing violence between
– by Mr Voe upon her –
you will find that at page 797, line nine of
the transcript, between the ages of 14 and 18. The answer is no. This is what
says, no. But listen to the absolute nonsense she offers as to what
the problem was:
'No, no, it was one issue that I'm aware of with John Voe that ended the
relationship.'
She's asked what it was about:
'I'm asking you what she told you, she reported to you. This is it.'
'That is was agreement of some form or another between her and John and I
believe he – they shared a vehicle together in which
couldn't close the front driver's door. And [the complainant] being so young
didn't understand why it was that you
couldn't close the door.'
So they broke up. Are we living in the real world or it's just some kind of
fantasy world while he was doing what he was doing. ...
So despite the assertion
of both of them that prior to Matthew Davey coming into her life, life had been
one happy life full of friendships
and happy teenage years, you've got the
sexual abuse, the problems with John Voe ... She was taken to hospital by
ambulance after
some form of overdoes. You'll find that at page 798. Her best
friend, Paris, committed suicide, you'll find that at page 798 ...
talked about marks on her neck to Dr Poxon at 799. Neither of them concede any
of this, and in fact, under cross-examination,
[the complainant] concedes that
she had been diagnosed with severe depression as well as many other things that
had happened. Now,
I'm not trying to be cruel to [the complainant] by doing
this. I'm saying this to you: why do the two of them feel the need to keep
the open air of a court the truth of her history? What is about the reporting
of suicidal ideation – what is it they
are trying to hide? Why are they
not telling us that?"
to the events of 24 April 2017, defence counsel submitted this:
got to a point where she had the fight and the Coke had been sprayed around the
room and her mother and Mr Davey left to go and
get drugs. She's saying after
'What did you do when they left ... I had actually grabbed the knife from the
kitchen, I don't know what for and I went for a walk.
Where did you get the knife? ...I had gone for a walk up my street and sat up
there for a while. Then I wanted to be home when Matthew
came home so he didn't
carry on and I wasn't there. So I went home. Started just walking around the
house. I had gone outside,
had a couple of cigarettes and I grabbed some
elastic exercise bands. I'm not sure what my intentions were, but tied them up.
went outside with them, out the back, tied them to the antennae outside in a
loop. I don't know what I was trying to get out –
or I can't remember
exactly what I did. I don't know. I don't know what I was doing with them to
be honest.'
So she concedes that she had a knife, she could hardly deny it, she had
already told the police. She had a knife, and she got some
elastic bands. But
she doesn't know what she was doing with them. Well, what do you think she was
doing with them? And what do
you think is the reason that she's not telling us
that upfront? Because it leads straight into, was there a suicide gesture in a
shed only two hours later? Is that the frame of mind she was in? That's why
it's essential."
counsel also referred the jury to the interview between the complainant and
police at the hospital on 29 June 2017 and noted
"I keep going
walk. I honestly wanted to kill myself
that night. I'd had enough'. You heard
what she told Detective Wood. You'll find it at page 1565. Detective Wood was
cross-examination:
'During the course of the interview which was conducted on the
July 2017, did [the complainant] give you a description of
events that occurred in the late afternoon or early evening of the
April ...Yes, she did.
Did she say that she had, at a time after Mr Davey had left home with her
mother, had gone somewhere for a walk ...She did say that,
And that she returned back to her home?...Yes.
And she said this, her words 'I went outside and there was a beam with an
aerial out on the roof'...She said that, yes, she did.
And then she told you that the pole she was talking about, or the beam that
supported the aerial ...Yes
And then she said: 'This is it, this is it, can't remember what I was doing
with those bands. I don't know, but I don't want anyone
to think that I was
going to commit suicide because I was going to commit suicide at about five or
six o'clock. I might have been
threatening to do it again at nine o'clock. I
actually tried it at five or six o'clock or seven, or whatever time it was, but
actually certainly wasn't trying it at nine, and I had these elastic exercise
bands and I went and got them out of the cupboard and
tried to hang myself, but
my feet still touched the ground so it didn't work'.
Suicide attempt, by pure coincidence, on the same day, only a couple of hours
earlier than he says she was threatening suicide in
the shed of his parents'
young woman threatening
suicide, or at least making some gesture to make it look
like she was threatening suicide. Absolutely no doubt about it at all.
So you've got a long standing history of mental health issues and depression,
you have previous attempts of suicide, one at least
– or they may have
been attention seeking. Most importantly you lie about it. Why not just say
yeah, I did, but that was
different. Why is, why she says, 'I don't know what I
was going to do' when she was in Court when she's already conceded that she
attempting to hang herself. ....Maybe she was feeling desperate. Maybe she
couldn't see a way out. I don't know what she was
thinking or feeling because I
wasn't in her shoes, but you have to ask yourself why she didn't tell the whole
truth about what had
happened only a couple of hours before when it is clear
that she had made a gesture, a suicide attempt, why would it then not be
understand that that's exactly what she was doing when she became emotional with
him because she found some woman's email
address or something in his bag? It's
so stark that you can't ignore it." (AB vol 2 part B 2031-2035).
is apparent from the extracts from the respective closing submissions, the issue
of the complainant's previous mental health
difficulties and episodes of
suicidal ideation, including on 24 April 2017, were fully agitated by counsel
based on evidence that
was before the jury. The additional prior inconsistent
statement that may (or may not) have been obtained from Dr Poxon being called
the trial, is not likely, in my view, to have added significantly to the
respective arguments. It could not be said that the failure
to call Dr Poxon
deprived the applicant of being able to agitate a material issue upon the trial,
or deprived him of the opportunity
to establish an evidentiary foundation from
which to advance arguments pertinent to his case. In my assessment, the
consequence
of the failure to call Dr Poxon was not significant in the context
of the overall trial.
I am of the view that it was an error of prosecutorial judgement to not call Dr
Poxon, given the other evidence that was
available for the jury's consideration
in respect to the issue of the complainant's mental health, I do not consider
that there has
been a miscarriage of justice as a consequence. This ground of
appeal must fail.
Unrepresented ground 17 – fresh
this ground the applicant appeals against his conviction on the basis that, due
to fresh evidence, his conviction is a miscarriage
of justice. The basis upon
which fresh evidence may ground a successful appeal has been stated many times.
If it is credible, or
at least capable of belief, and if it raises a significant
possibility that the jury, acting reasonably, would have acquitted if
evidence had been before it at the trial, then a miscarriage of justice has
occurred and the conviction should be set aside.
Mickelberg v The Queen
[1989] HCA 35
(1989) 167 CLR 259.
It is necessary therefore to embark upon an assessment of
three critical steps. First, the evidence must meet the requirements necessary
to be accepted as fresh evidence. Second, the evidence must be sufficiently
cogent, plausible and relevant as to be capable of being
accepted as true by a
jury; and thirdly, when the fresh evidence is viewed in the light of all of the
available evidence at trial,
it must be apparent that there has been a
miscarriage of justice in that it is a significant possibility that the
applicant would
have been acquitted if the fresh evidence had been before the
jury at trial.
fresh evidence the applicant seeks to rely upon is from a witness, Brett Corey
Pickett. Mr Pickett was called to give evidence
at the hearing of the appeal.
Mr Pickett's evidence was as follows. In April 2017, he was renting a commercial
property in Hull
Street, Glenorchy. In part of the property, he had set up
accommodation. In April 2017, he was in a sexual relationship with Wendy
and he and Ms Rodway would stay at the Hull Street property. There was an
occasion in April 2017 when Wendy Rodway asked
him to do a favour by repairing
the driver's side window of her daughter's (the complainant's) car. Mr Pickett
agreed to do so and
the complainant brought her car to his workshop at the
property. When she arrived, the complainant parked her vehicle in front of
sliding door of the workshop. Whilst Mr Pickett was looking at the car, Ms
Rodway and the complainant went into the shed and
were standing down near an
office area at the back, left hand corner of the shed. Mr Pickett said that
from where he was standing,
he could see the complainant and Ms Rodway. At that
point of his evidence before the Appeal Court, the applicant tendered a
written by Mr Pickett. In that statement, Mr Pickett said as
"I received a call from Wendy. She asked if I could have a
look at the driver's side window of [the complainant's] car as it wouldn't
up and it was jammed. I said I would. Soon after, Wendy and [the complainant]
turned up and parked at the front sliding door
of the workshop. I started to
have a look at the door to see if I could see the problem. Wendy and [the
complainant] were hanging
out inside the workshop. I presumed Wendy was
consuming her daily dose of drugs as she would most times when she came to the
From the car I could see inside the shed partly as the steel door was
partly open. After a little while I could hear the girls
arguing. I heard [the
complainant] scream at Wendy and say I fucking knew he was cheating. I just
caught him out. This went on
for a while. At one point I could see them both
at my workbench in each other's face. [The complainant] looked like she was
On my workbench I had a small tray with a small amount of petrol in it
that I had drained from the petrol tank of my bike that I
was painting at the
time. From the front seat of [the complainant's] car I saw [the complainant]
pick up the tray of petrol and
gesture like she was going to throw the petrol
over Wendy but then she splashed it over herself. I'm not sure how much of the
went on her maybe a litre or so as most of it was on the floor and [the
complainant] had a lighter in her hand and was threatening
Wendy that she was
going to light it. So I ran in and said what's going on. They both went quiet
as if nothing had happened and
they were all good. Then [the complainant] said
to Wendy are you staying or coming? Then they left. I didn't get a chance to
the window. Before they left I pulled Wendy aside and said don't get into
the car while they had petrol on them, I'm sure I've got
a change of clothes
that would fit her and she said we've only got to go home which is about a five
minute drive from my workshop.
The very next day after this I got a call from Wendy saying [the complainant]
was in hospital badly burnt and said Matthew was in
gaol for it. Straight away
I said to Wendy was that from yesterday where she splashed the petrol over
herself? She said she wasn't
sure as [the complainant] was in a coma, so going
off that call from Wendy it must have been the day before that they were at my
I do know Matthew and we do talk when we see each other. I'd seen him on the
outside with [the complainant] sometimes. Since 2017
when he went into custody
I've not had the chance to talk to him about any of it face to face. Recently
only last week Matthew raised
something about his trial and that's when I told
him exactly what had happened at my workshop (exactly what I've wrote here).
was shocked and rang his lawyer straight away and then asked me if I'd
be willing to say this in court and I said I would. He then
asked me to write
in my own words exactly what I saw and heard that day.
All this content I swear is true and correct. Wrote (sic) by Brett Pickett
dated 13 September 2023."
his evidence before the Appeal Court, Mr Pickett said the contents of his
statement were true and correct.
Pickett was cross-examined on the appeal. He admitted he had a history of
committing offences of dishonesty, including by forging
documents and producing
them in order to dishonestly acquire a financial advantage, providing false
information to an airline carrier,
presenting a stolen credit card and forging
the signature in order to receive goods, and presenting a stolen credit card and
the signature in order to receive accommodation. He agreed that he had
travelled on a false airline ticket in order to enter the
State because he knew
there was an existing parole warrant out for him and he did not wish to be
detected. He was also cross-examined
trafficking and aggravated armed robbery. The record of prior convictions of Mr
Pickett was tendered.
Pickett was cross-examined about his interactions with the applicant. He agreed
that in 2017 he had provided his mobile phone
number to the applicant whilst the
applicant was in custody so he could communicate with him. He agreed that in
2017, when the applicant
was in custody and he was in the community, he was in
regular contact with him "for the first couple of months after Matthew got
locked up". He agreed that throughout 2016 he and the applicant had spent time
together in custody and that they knew each other.
He described them as
associates rather than friends. He said the applicant was "more friends with
Adrian than me". Adrian is Mr
Pickett's brother.
to his relationship with Ms Rodway, he said that he had known her for "probably
eight weeks" before the incident he was describing
and had met the complainant
through Wendy, at about the same time as he met Ms Rodway. He was asked whether
he considered the incident
that he witnessed between the complainant and Wendy
as being something that was extraordinary. He said,
"Well no, not really
because to you maybe, but at that time, at that time and in that place it
probably wasn't, it wasn't out of the
ordinary. That sort of stuff happened
every day so."
He was asked:
"At the time this event you say
occurred, was it a surprise to you and did you consider it to be unusual for a
young girl to pour
petrol over herself? ...
He was asked whether he had previously seen a person pour petrol on
themselves and he said, "No". He said:
"This was the worst thing that happened but it wasn't out of the ordinary for
them to come there and fight and argue, all day, every
He agreed that what he had observed was a sufficiently significant incident
to cause him to intervene. He said he intervened
"every other time as
Pickett was asked as to whether he, in fact, saw the complainant pour petrol
over herself. He said:
"Actually, I didn't actually see her pour
the petrol over herself. I seen a gesture as if she was, so I didn't actually
see her pour
petrol over herself. I seen a gesture as if she was."
He was challenged as to whether that was a different account than that which
he had recorded in his statement. He denied there was
a difference. Mr Pickett
agreed that he offered alternate clothing for the complainant to change into
before she departed. He was
cross-examined as to whether the applicant had
suggested that he include a reference to offering a change of clothes in his
(given the applicant's evidence at trial was that he suggested to the
complainant she change clothes after she had poured petrol
upon herself in the
shed). Mr Pickett denied the applicant made this suggestion to him and denied
that he had any knowledge of the
evidence the applicant had given at his trial.
Mr Pickett said that he had never spoken to the applicant about his version of
had happened in the shed on 24 April 2017.
Pickett was asked as to when he recalled witnessing this incident and when he
told the applicant about it. He said:
"Well, Matthew was talking
I was worried about me parole. It still had four and
a half years left on me parole and, yeah, it was just, and it was brought up
I assumed that Matthew knew about this. I didn't know that he didn't know about
it and then when he, as soon as I told him,
he was shocked. I assumed that he
knew about it."
He said that conversation occurred in September 2023.
He said that was the first time he had discussed what he had witnessed with
the applicant. He claimed the applicant had never spoken
to him about the
events of 24 April 2017. He said he deliberately chose not to tell the
applicant about what he had witnessed because
he was worried about himself and
his parole conditions.
agreed that after 24 April 2017 he maintained regular contact with Wendy Rodway.
He denied relaying information that he received
from Wendy Rodway about the
complainant to the applicant.
agreed that after 24 April 2017 he was in contact with the applicant whilst he
was in custody. He agreed Wendy Rodway had sold
him the applicant's tools and a
Skyline car. He agreed that he had told the applicant that he had his tools and
car. He agreed
that in July 2017 he had a conversation with the applicant in
which the applicant asked him to sell the Skyline car for him.
audio recordings of telephone calls were played to Mr Pickett during
cross-examination. He agreed the calls were between him
and the applicant. He
agreed that, in part at least, the subject matter of the calls included telling
the applicant about photographs
he had received from Wendy Rodway which depicted
the complainant in hospital. He agreed that he had passed on information to the
applicant about the fact Wendy Rodway had "done a deal" with 60 Minutes. He
also agreed that during telephone calls with the applicant
he had discussed the
media attention the applicant was receiving.
Pickett agreed that he knew the applicant had been charged with causing the
injuries to the complainant when he had these telephone
conversations with him.
In response to questioning as to why he did not convey the information as to
what he had allegedly seen
in his workshop, he said:
"Because I knew
that the phone call was recorded and I knew that – it says on the start of
the phone calls recording and I wasn't
going to incriminate myself. I wasn't
even allowed to associate with Matthew."
He was asked:
"So, at that point in time you knew there was some important information that
you'd like to tell him, but you couldn't because of
the Arunta call?"
His answer was:
"No, not really. I just didn't think that much into it. Like I said, I told
ya, it's like I said to ya, I probably thought about
it, but I was too worried
Pickett was cross-examined about occasions he had been in custody with the
applicant after July 2017. He agreed they had been
in custody together but said
they were not housed in the same place within the prison very often. He was
asked about occasions in
December 2017 when he and the applicant were housed
together. He agreed that during that time he had the opportunity to speak with
the applicant but said he did not ever speak with him about the case. In
response to a suggestion that Mr Pickett had numerous opportunities
to tell the
applicant what he had seen if, in fact, it was true, Mr Pickett
"I chose not to until me parole was finished and then once me
parole was finished, the first opportunity that I got to speak to Matthew
me parole was finished was this time."
At another point Mr Pickett said:
"Until my parole was finished, I chose not to tell him ... If I'd wanted to,
I probably could've spoken to him but I hadn't."
relevant to this ground of appeal was a witness, Josh Cumberland. Mr Cumberland
was employed with Tasmania Prison Service.
Through him, a table that indicated
dates and locations in which the applicant and Mr Brett Pickett were housed
together within
various areas of Risdon Prison throughout 2016, was tendered.
In summary that table indicated that between April and November 2016,
applicant and Mr Pickett were housed together in the medium security section for
205 days. A second table was provided relevant
to a period between 2017 and
2023. In summary, that table revealed that the applicant and Mr Pickett had
been housed together in
the same unit for a period of 216 days during that time.
Mr Cumberland agreed that, in respect to some of the housing units, the
for two prisoners to be able to communicate with each other would depend upon
the proximity of their cells, and whether were
in the same "walk groups"; but in
other units, the capacity to communicate between prisoners was much easier. He
said that he had
observed Mr Pickett and the applicant interacting with one
another. He was unable to say with any specificity as to how often or
those interactions had occurred.
Fresh evidence – the
noted, where an appeal is brought on the basis of fresh evidence, a miscarriage
of justice will be established if the Appeal
Court considers that there is a
significant possibility that the jury, acting reasonably, would have acquitted
the appellant if the
fresh evidence had been before it at trial. The focus,
therefore, is on the question of whether, in the case at hand, the fresh
evidence is such as to satisfy the Appeal Court that there has been a
miscarriage of justice. The Appeal Court has the responsibility
of examining
the fresh evidence in order to satisfy itself whether the evidence is relevant,
credible and cogent (see
Mannah v Western Australia
[2016] WASCA 19).
the evidence is not credible and cogent it may be rejected. The role of the
Court of Appeal on a fresh evidence application
is to determine whether the
evidence is capable of being accepted as true by a reasonable jury. This
necessitates an assessment
of the fresh evidence in the context of the whole of
the evidence given at the trial.
is fresh if it did not exist at the time of the trial or could not with
reasonable diligence have been discovered. I am
satisfied this evidence is fresh
in the sense that it did not exist at the time of trial because it had not at
that point yet been
fabricated. Having observed Mr Pickett give his evidence I
do not accept that he witnessed the events he claimed on 23 April 2017.
no doubt that his account is a fabrication directed at assisting the applicant.
Mr Pickett was not a credible witness and
his evidence was neither cogent nor
plausible. It tests credulity to accept that Mr Pickett would have seen an
incident in his shed,
whereby the complainant allegedly splashed petrol on
herself and then, despite having many opportunities to do so, did not convey
that information to the applicant despite knowing that he was in custody because
he had allegedly caused significant injuries to
the complainant as a consequence
of a fire event. Moreover, aspects of Mr Pickett's account, such as suggesting
the complainant
change her clothes after splashing petrol on herself almost
mirrored the evidence the applicant gave at his trial. I do not consider
be a coincidence, but is strongly suggestive of Mr Pickett's evidence being
Pickett's explanation that he felt he could not convey the information to the
applicant because of his parole status was not
plausible. If the events
genuinely occurred then all Mr Pickett would be doing was telling the truth
given the events of 24 April 2017. It is
difficult to see how this might jeopardise his parole. To put it bluntly, I
found Mr Pickett's
evidence inherently implausible and unbelievable.
assessing the credibility of Mr Pickett's evidence, it is relevant to take into
account his character. He has a long history
of behaving dishonestly. I have
no hesitation in concluding that Mr Pickett gave a dishonest account when he
claimed he observed
the complainant splash petrol on herself in his shed on 23
April 2017. In my view, no reasonable jury would accept his evidence.
I am in error as to that, this ground can nevertheless not succeed unless the
fresh evidence, when considered in the context
of all of the available evidence,
leads to a conclusion that a miscarriage of justice had occurred. A miscarriage
of justice will
not be established unless the fresh evidence is capable of
removing the certainty of the applicant's guilt that was established by
evidence at trial. For the reasons I discussed in respect to the unsafe and
unsatisfactory ground, in my view, the evidence
at trial against the applicant
was very strong. The evidence of Mr Pickett is not capable of diminishing its
strength. I can identify
no basis upon which it can reasonably be suggested that
a miscarriage of justice has occurred. This ground of appeal must
Disposition
Where necessary, I would grant leave to appeal, but for the reasons expressed I
would dismiss the appeal.
File No CCA 3120/2021
MATTHEW JOHN DAVEY v THE STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
20 September 2024
agree the appeal should be dismissed for the reasons given by Jago
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (829 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter