URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCCA/2025/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
JWE v Tasmania [2025] TASCCA 8 (24 July 2025)
[2025] TASCCA 8
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (COURT OF CRIMINAL
JWE v Tasmania
[2025] TASCCA
STATE OF TASMANIA
CCA 2609/2024
24 July 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Estcourt J, Brett J, Cuthbertson
Criminal Law – Appeal and new trial – Appeal against sentence
– Grounds for interference – Sentence manifestly
excessive or
inadequate – Appellant pleaded guilty to three counts of incest with his
biological daughter – Complainant
was 17 at the time the incidents
occurred – Custodial sentence of four and a half years ineligible for
parole until half served
– Complainant suffered significant mental health
issues – Appellant was the only source of immediate support –
Serious crime with significant aggravating circumstances – Sentence must
reflect modern attitudes towards crimes of this nature
– Comfortably
within the sentencing discretion afforded to the judge – Sentence not
manifestly excessive – Appeal
Aust Dig Criminal Law
Legislation:
Criminal Code Act 1924
Community Protection (Offender Reporting) Act
Sentencing Act
Dalgliesh (a Pseudonym)
[2016] VSCA 148
Hall v Tasmania
[1993] TASSC 70
[2016] HCA 48
(2016) 259 CLR 256
339 ALR 229
Reid (a Pseudonym) v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 145
Taylor v The State of Western Australia
[2015] WASCA
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Office of Director of
Public Prosecutions
Judgment Number:
[2025] TASCCA 8
of paragraphs:
Serial No 8/2025
File No CCA 2609/2024
JWE v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
CUTHBERTSON
24 July 2025
Order of the
Appeal dismissed.
Serial No 8/2025
File No CCA 2609/2024
JWE v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
24 July 2025
appellant, JWE, appealed to this Court against a sentence of four and a half
years' imprisonment and an order that he not be
eligible for parole until he had
served half of that term. The Court dismissed the appeal following the hearing
on 2 July 2025.
These are my reasons for joining in the order of the Court.
single sentence was imposed by Pearce J on 27 August 2024, upon the appellant's
pleas of guilty to three counts of incest.
learned sentencing judge also made an order under the
Community Protection
(Offender Reporting) Act
directing that the Registrar place the
appellant’s name on the Register kept under that Act and that the
appellant comply
with the reporting obligations under the Act for 10 years from
the date of his release from prison. That order is not the subject
The appeal is on the sole ground that the sentence was manifestly excessive in
all of the circumstances.
task of this Court on an appeal of this nature needs to be borne steadily in
mind. It has been explained many times in this Court
and in others. A
restatement of the relevant principles is to be found in
Hall v Tasmania
[2015] TASCCA 6
where Pearce J said at [51]–[52]:
succeed in an appeal on the ground that a sentence is manifestly excessive the
appellant must show that the sentencing discretion
must have miscarried, and the
sentence is definitely outside the appropriate range of sentences for the crime:
Everett v The Queen
[1994] HCA 49
(1994) 181 CLR 295
, per McHugh J at
306. It must be established that the sentencing order is so manifestly wrong
that it could only be the result of
some undefinable error in the exercise of
the judicial discretion:
Bresnehan v The Queen
[1992] TASSC 55
. Manifest excess must be plainly apparent:
Dinsdale v The
[2000] HCA 54
(2000) 202 CLR 321
, per Gleeson CJ and Hayne J at [6].
The sentence must be 'unreasonable or plainly unjust':
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
(1936) 55 CLR 499
appellate court may not substitute its own opinion for that of the sentencing
judge merely because it would have exercised the
sentencing discretion in a
different way:
Lowndes v The Queen
[1999] HCA 29
(1999) 195 CLR 665
. A wide measure of latitude should be accorded sentencing judges:
Postiglione v The Queen
[1997] HCA 26
(1997) 189 CLR 295
per Kirby J at
336. There is no single correct sentence and a sentencing judge 'should be
allowed as much flexibility in sentencing
as is consonant with consistency of
approach and as accords with the statutory regime under which the sentencing is
Johnson v The Queen
[2004] HCA 15
(2004) 78 ALJR 616
cited with approval in
Markarian v The Queen
[2005] HCA 25
; (2005) 228
Hili v The Queen
Jones v The Queen
(2010) 242 CLR 520
the decision of the Western Australian Court of Appeal in
Taylor v The State
of Western Australia
[2015] WASCA 72
, McLure JA at [27]-[31] made the
following observations:
"Legal principles
court can only intervene if the sentencing judge made an express or implied
material error of fact or law. A claim of manifest
excess relies on the
implication of error. The sentence must be shown to be unreasonable or plainly
unjust, it being outside the
range of a sound sentencing discretion.
determining whether an implied error has been made, regard is had to the maximum
sentence for the offence, the standards of sentencing
customarily observed, the
place which the criminal conduct occupies on the scale of seriousness and the
personal circumstances of
the offender.
imposed in comparable cases provide a yardstick or reference point for ensuring
broad consistency in sentencing, bearing
in mind the scope for significant
variations in relevant sentencing factors and that there is no single correct
sentence. What is
important is the unifying principles which sentences imposed
in comparable cases both reveal and reflect.
excess applies to an individual sentence. The totality principle applies to the
total effective sentence for multiple offences.
A breach of the totality
principle is also a claim of implied error.
first limb of the totality principle is that the total effective sentence must
bear a proper relationship to the overall criminality
involved in all the
offences, viewed in their entirety and having regard to the circumstances of the
case, including those referable
to the offender personally."
appellant was originally charged with three counts of rape but the State
accepted his plea of guilty to three counts of incest
in the alternative. In
each case the victim was his biological daughter. From the time that she was
three years old until she was
17 the appellant had little contact with her,
however in 2021 (when she was 17), she moved from New South Wales to live with
The two lived in adjoining rooms in a motel that the appellant was managing
in regional Tasmania.
The defendant had sexual intercourse with the complainant on three occasions
between 27 July 2021 and 11 August 2021. The defendant
was 47 years old during
that period.
The complainant had significant mental health issues. She suffered from bipolar
disorder, anxiety, depression and suicidal ideation.
She had medication to help
her sleep and she had been advised to seek company if feeling suicidal.
On 27 July 2021 the complainant came to the defendant's room with suicidal
thoughts. She took her prescribed medication, smoked
some cannabis that he gave
her and fell asleep on the couch. The defendant suggested that she get into bed,
which she did, and while
she was there he undressed her, and himself, positioned
himself on top of her, and penetrated her vagina with his penis until he
ejaculated. She then dressed in the bathroom, went back to her room, showered
two other occasions of sexual intercourse occurred on 3 August 2021 and 11
August 2021 in substantially the same circumstances.
the third occasion, on 11 August 2021 the complainant told her fiancé and
her mother, (who lived interstate), what had
happened. Her mother arranged for
her to be taken to her great aunt's house who she also told what had happened.
Concerned that she
may be pregnant a test was undertaken but was negative.
The defendant told his de facto partner, who was living in New South Wales at
the time, that he had sex with his daughter because
he "wanted her to know what
sleeping with a real man was like." He also said that on each of the three
occasions he had fondled his
daughter's breasts, touched her vagina and had her
perform oral sex on him.
Examination of the defendant's mobile telephone revealed repeated messages from
him to the complainant inviting her to come to his
room to "cuddle", along with
an internet search history which showed that on at least 55 occasions between 24
July and 10 August
2021 he had sought out and viewed father and daughter
oriented pornographic videos.
the complainant was confronted with the allegations at the end of August 2021 he
left the State, abandoning his home and his
employment. He was not charged until
a complaint was filed in January 2023 and was arrested in New South Wales on 15
March 2023 and
extradited back to Tasmania.
the time of sentencing, the defendant was 50 years old. He had prior convictions
for dishonesty and driving offences and in 1996
he had been sentenced to
imprisonment for four years and six months for aggravated armed robbery. He had
no prior convictions for
sexual offences.
passing sentence the learned sentencing judge made the following
"I regard these as serious crimes. You breached the trust
your daughter placed in you, and the trust of others who allowed her into
care, supervision and authority. You took advantage of your influence and her
vulnerability arising from your relationship,
her age and her fragile mental
health to indulge your own perverted sexual proclivities. These were not
spontaneous or momentary
lapses. You did not give her cannabis intending to
facilitate the crimes but her use of the drug added to her vulnerability. You
did not wear a condom and so the sexual intercourse was accompanied by the risk
of pregnancy and the transmission of sexual disease.
Thankfully neither of those
things occurred although she was in fear of pregnancy for at least some
You are entitled to mitigation from your plea of guilty even though the case
against you seems to me to have been overwhelming and
your plea a recognition of
the inevitable. It facilitates justice by avoiding the need for a trial. Most
importantly it saves the
complainant from the considerable additional trauma of
having to give evidence. On the other hand, you avoided the chance that you
have been found guilty of more serious crimes. The absence of consent is not an
element of the crime of incest. Care is required
that you not be sentenced for
rape. It is to be inferred that the State could not prove beyond reasonable
doubt that the complainant
did not freely agree to sexual intercourse. However,
one purpose of the law is to protect young and vulnerable persons including
their own frailty or misjudgment. It was your obligation to protect your
daughter. Instead, you abandoned your parental responsibility.
It was you who
instigated the sexual acts in a predatory manner for your own selfish purposes.
Your offending did not last for a
prolonged period but each count involved
separate criminality."
Honour took into account all of the aggravating circumstances specified in the
Sentencing Act
, which have application. That section
provides, relevantly, as follows:
Matters to be taken or not
taken into account in sentencing certain sexual offenders
(1) In this section –
aggravating circumstance, in relation to a sexual offence, includes, but is
not limited to, the following:
(a) the victim being under the care, supervision or authority of the
(b) the victim being a person with a disability;
(c) the victim being under the age of 13 years;
(d) the offender committing the offence in whole or in part in the presence of
any other person or persons, besides the victim;
(da) the victim being under the age of 18 years and the offender being a person
in a position of authority in relation to the victim
(regardless of whether the
offence is under section 124A of the Criminal Code, or any other section of the
Criminal Code);
(e) the offender subjecting the victim to violence or the threat of
(f) the offender supplying the victim with alcohol or drugs with the intention
of facilitating the commission of the offence;
(g) the offender making forced or uninvited entry into the victim's home or
other premises;
(h) the offender doing, in the course of committing the sexual offence, an act
likely to seriously and substantially degrade or humiliate
the victim;
(i) the offender causing any other person or persons to carry out an act
referred to in paragraph (e) , (f) , (g) or (h) of this
definition;
disability means any restriction or lack (resulting from any absence, loss or
abnormality of mental, psychological, physiological
or anatomical structure or
function) of ability to perform an activity in a normal manner;
person in a position of authority has the same meaning as in section 124A of
the Criminal Code..."
During the course of the sentencing hearing the learned sentencing judge was
referred to a decision of this Court in
[1993] TASSC 70.
That case involved a Crown appeal against sentence imposed on a plea of guilty
to three counts of incest committed by a father
on a daughter when she was 17
and 18. The only ground of appeal was whether a sentence of imprisonment for six
months on each count
to be served cumulatively, and cumulatively with a further
sentence of six months for indecent assault, a total of two years, was
manifestly inadequate. The majority dismissed the appeal however the case must
be considered as reflecting an outmoded world view
that is now over 30 years old
and does not reflect the views of modern society as to the sexual abuse of
[2016] HCA 48
259 CLR 256
the High Court said at
"...Consideration of 'current sentencing practices' will
include, where appropriate, the proper use of information about sentencing
patterns for an offence . The requirement of currency recognises that
sentencing practices for a particular offence or type of offence
may change over
time reflecting changes in community attitudes to some forms of offending. For
example, current sentencing practices
with respect to sexual offences may be
seen to depart from past practices by reason, inter alia, of changes in
understanding of the
long-term harm done to the victim. So, too, may current
sentencing practices for offences involving domestic violence depart from
sentencing practices for this category of offence because of changes in societal
attitudes to domestic relations."
I observe that Crawford J, who dissented in
, noted the seriousness
of the crime of incest in the following passage at [11] of his
"Sentences for acts of incest between freely consenting and
willing adults are commonly not severe. Frequently imprisonment is not
in such cases. But incest by fathers upon daughters up to the age of say fifteen
or sixteen years is most usually punished
with a significant sentence of
imprisonment. A more lenient sentence will usually be justified only in a case
where particular circumstances
require it in the interests of justice. In
(1982) 45 ALR 331
at 335, Toohey J considered the difference between cases
involving consenting adults and cases involving children:
'The severity which the criminal law has traditionally visited upon the
offence of incest derives from a number of considerations.
It has been regarded
as morally wrong and an offence against religion. It involves the genetic risk
that certain diseases are more
likely to occur. It is destructive of the family
relationship.
It involves a breach of the trust reposed in a parent to care for and protect
his children. The cogency of these considerations has
varied from time to time
and from community to community. In a contribution to
Family Violence - An
International and Interdisciplinary Study
(Editors J M Eekelaar and S N
Katz, Butterworths 1978), Mr A H Manchester reviews briefly the attitude of the
law to incest and concludes:
"The actual practice of the courts indicates that in this context the aim of
the criminal law of incest is, above all, to protect
the young child" (at p
see also Bailey and McCabe:
Reforming the Law of Incest
(1979) Crim LR
The move away from the notion that law is the custodian of morals; the view
that sexual conduct between consenting adults does not
require the intervention
of the criminal law; and an emphasis upon the importance of rehabilitating the
family have all led to a
climate of opinion that prison sentences may not be
appropriate in some cases of incest. But the protection of young children from
corruption and exploitation, especially by someone in a position of trust or
authority, must remain an important and generally prevailing
consideration.'"
The learned sentencing judge noted that, more recently, useful reviews of
sentences for incest were undertaken by the Court of Appeal
in Victoria in
Reid (a Pseudonym) v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 145
, 42 VR 295 and
Dalgliesh (a Pseudonym)
[2016] VSCA 148.
However, as his Honour noted, some
circumstances of those cases were different, and they also involved statutory
sentencing provisions
which do not apply here. In the final analysis there are
too few sentences and the circumstances are too disparate to establish a
sentencing range, much less a tariff.
I note however, as the learned sentencing judge did, that when
Director of
Public Prosecutions (DPP) v Dalgliesh (Pseudonym)
[2017] HCA 41
(2017) 262 CLR 428
the High Court, the comments about the seriousness of the crime of incest made
below, were affirmed by the High Court. I
note in particular, after referring to
a 1986 sentence for incest as a "decision of it's time" and setting out the
passage from
that I have set out above, the plurality in
said, of the observations in that passage, at
"Those observations are distinctly apposite here. The
decision in
was delivered in 1986. In the three decades since,
sexual abuse of children by those in authority over them has been revealed as
most serious blight on society. The courts have developed – as the Court
of Appeal accepted in 'emphatically' rejecting
the respondent's submission that
'there was no violence accompanying the offence' – an awareness of the
violence necessarily
involved in the sexual penetration of a child, and of the
devastating consequences of this kind of crime for its victims..."
Towards the end of his comments on passing sentence, the learned sentencing
judge said:
was decided community attitudes to
sexual offences against young persons have developed considerably, partly
because of the appreciation
of the harm to victims which may result. The
complainant was, for legal purposes, not a child. However, the prohibition of
relations between a father and a young daughter is not just based on the
fact that it is morally wrong, offends societal taboos,
carries a genetic risk
and is a violation of the individual and social role of family, but also because
of the inherent risk of long-term
psychological harm to victims. Here, there is
no victim impact statement but that does not mean that there is no impact. The
of harm to your daughter was added to by her already fragile mental health
which was known to you."
I respectfully endorse those comments.
And I accept the submission of counsel for the respondent, Ms Judd,
"34 The crimes were not spontaneous or momentary lapses.
Whilst the offending did not last for a prolonged period (3 occasions of
course of a 3-week period), each count involved separate criminality. The
appellant pursued a course of conduct, taking advantage
of the circumstances to
satisfy a sexual interest in having sexual intercourse with his biological
daughter as shown in the many
specific searches of various pornographic videos
with a daddy/daughter theme."
submitted by counsel for the State:
"26 It was put, and accepted,
that the circumstances in which the crimes were committed show that the
appellant was the instigator,
and the complainant did not actively encourage the
appellants' offending; any degree of participation by her should be considered
against the background of the appellant's conduct and the circumstances of the
offending. The complainant was still of a young age
and the appellant still
owed her a parental duty to protect her.
is submitted that the learned sentencing judge was correct in noting that whilst
the complainant was, for legal purposes, not a
child, one purpose of the law is
to protect young and vulnerable persons, including from their own frailty or
misjudgement."
In my view, the sentence passed by the learned sentencing judge was comfortably
within the broad range of a sound sentencing discretion
for a case of incest of
this type and entirely conformable with sentences passed by judges of this Court
in recent years, in cases
of sexual abuse of young persons. The sentence has not
been shown to be unreasonable or plainly unjust.
I would dismiss the appeal.
File No CCA 2609/2024
JWE v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
24 July 2025
I have read the reasons for judgment of Estcourt J. I agree with everything his
Honour has said. They represent my reasons for joining
in the dismissal of this
File No CCA 2609/2024
JWE v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
CUTHBERTSON J
24 July 2025
On 2 July 2025, I joined in ordering the appellant's appeal against his
sentence be dismissed. I have read the reasons for judgment
of Estcourt J and
agree with them. They reflect my own reasons for joining in the orders
dismissing the appeal.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (148 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter