URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFC/2023/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Casimaty v Hazell Bros Group Pty Ltd [2023] TASFC 2 (4 May 2023)
[2023] TASFC 2
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (FULL
Casimaty v Hazell Bros Group Pty Ltd
[2023] TASFC 2
: CASIMATY, Gregory
HAZELL BROS GROUP PTY LTD
ATTORNEY-GENERAL
FCA 503/2022
APPEALED FROM:
Hazell Bros Group Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2022] TASSC 9
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Pearce J, Brett J, Geason J
Constitutional Law – The non-judicial organs of Government – The
legislature – General matters – Privileges
– Privilege of
parliamentary debates and proceedings – States – Report of a
parliamentary committee a precondition
of commencement of public works –
Whether parliamentary privilege precludes the admission and consideration of the
committee's
report by a court – Whether the prevention of works in breach
of that statutory requirement creates a justiciable controversy.
Rights 1688
, Article 9.
Public Works Committee Act
Huata v Prebble
[2004] NZCA
Comalco Ltd v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
(1983) 50 ACTR 1
Egan v Willis
[1998] HCA 71
(1998) 195 CLR 424
Cornwall v Rowan
[2004] SASC 384
90 SASR 269
Enterprises Ltd v Attorney-General
[1994] 2 NZLR 451
[1884] UKLawRpKQB 20
(1884) 12 QBD
Prebble v Television New Zealand Ltd
[1995] 1 AC
Bates v Attorney-General of Tasmania
[1995] TASSC 28
Roads Corporation
[2003] FCA 306
Dingle v Associated Newspapers Ltd
[1960] 2 QB 405
Victorian Taxi Families Inc v Taxi Services Commission
[2018] 61 VR 91
Amann Aviation Pty Ltd v Commonwealth of Australia
[1988] FCA 24
[1988] 19 FCR 223
, referred to.
Aust Dig Constitutional Law
REPRESENTATION
McTaggart SC, G O'Rafferty
Second Respondent
: S Kay SC, D
Solicitors:
Second Respondent:
Office of the
Solicitor-General
Judgment Number:
[2023] TASFC 2
paragraphs:
Serial No 2/2023
File No FCA 503/2022
GREGORY JOHN CASIMATY v HAZELL BROS GROUP PTY
and ATTORNEY-GENERAL
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
(Dissenting)
of the Court:
1 Appeal allowed.
2 Order that amended statement of
claim be struck out and action dismissed set aside.
3 Interlocutory
application dismissed.
Serial No 2/2023
File No FCA 503/2022
GREGORY JOHN CASIMATY v HAZELL BROS GROUP PTY
and ATTORNEY-GENERAL
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
I agree with Brett J, for the reasons his Honour gives, that the appeal should
be allowed. I agree with the orders his Honour
File No FCA 503/2022
GREGORY JOHN CASIMATY v HAZELL BROS GROUP PTY
and ATTORNEY-GENERAL
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
This appeal is from a decision of Blow CJ to dismiss an action brought by the
appellant on the basis that the action is vexatious,
because its conduct would
necessarily infringe parliamentary privilege. The nature and history of the
proceedings was succinctly
summarised by the learned primary judge as
"There is a busy junction on the Tasman Highway near the
Hobart Airport. Three roads meet the highway at that junction. They include
Holyman Avenue, which leads to the airport, and Cranston Parade. The plaintiff,
Gregory Casimaty, claims to have an interest in a
piece of land on Cranston
Parade. Some years ago the Tasmanian Government's Department of State Growth
decided that a new interchange
should be developed and constructed at the
junction. Plans and drawings were prepared and submitted for consideration by
the Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Public Works ('the Committee') pursuant
Public Works Committee Act
('the PWC Act'). The Committee
considered and reported upon the proposal in late 2017. Subsequently the
department engaged the first
defendant, Hazell Bros Group Pty Ltd, to construct
the new interchange. The plaintiff has commenced an action seeking declaratory
relief and an injunction restraining Hazell Bros from undertaking the works. He
contends that Hazell Bros has been engaged to construct
the interchange in
accordance with revised plans; and that the works that Hazell Bros has been
engaged to undertake are not the same
as the works approved by the Committee and
have not been considered by the Committee. He has sought a declaration to the
effect that
Hazell Bros' public works are works to which ss 15 and 16 of the PWC
Act apply, as well as the injunction that I have referred to.
The Attorney-General has been joined as a second defendant in this action.
The proceeding before me is an interlocutory application
by her seeking that
this action be dismissed, or alternatively that substantial parts of the
plaintiff's amended statement of claim
be struck out. She contends that the
amended statement of claim does not disclose any reasonable cause of action
because it does
not disclose any justiciable issue. She also contends that parts
of the amended statement of claim offend the principle that parliamentary
proceedings are absolutely privileged, and should therefore be struck out for
being vexatious. Hazell Bros did not wish to be heard
in relation to this
application, and was therefore not represented at the hearing."
The gravamen of the appellant's action is his claim to have a special interest
in the enforcement of relevant provisions of the
PWC Act, in particular s 16(1)
which provides that no relevant public work shall be commenced "unless it has
first been referred
to and reported upon by the committee in accordance with
this section". The primary judge concluded that the alleged impact of the
on the appellant's property arguably constituted a special interest in the
enforcement of the provision. However, his Honour
determined that the appellant
could only succeed in this action if he could show that the new works were so
different from those
reported on by the Committee in 2017, that they cannot be
lawfully commenced without separate referral to and report by the Committee.
Honour was satisfied that the consideration of this question would necessarily
require the Court to examine, discuss and adjudicate
upon the 2017 report and
this would infringe parliamentary privilege. Hence, his Honour concluded, the
action had "no hope of success",
and therefore should be dismissed as
The grounds of appeal attack various aspects of his Honour's reasoning.
However, in essence, the argument is that the appellant's
cause of action does
not require consideration of or reliance upon the 2017 report. It is argued that
the appellant will be entitled
to relief if he can demonstrate that the new
works have not been the subject of referral and report by the Committee as
by s 16(1), and this will not rely upon comparison with the 2017
report. The appellant submits that, in any event, consideration
by the Court of
the 2017 report, and whether it does or does not satisfy the requirements of s
16 (1) in respect of the new works,
does not offend parliamentary privilege.
In response, the Attorney argues that:
(a) The action does not relate to a justiciable controversy, because the PWC
Act, including the operation and application of s 16(1)
and the activity and
responsibility of the Committee thereunder, are matters which relate to the
operation of Parliament and, hence,
are solely within its jurisdiction. The
separation of powers reflected in the principles of parliamentary privilege
prevents the
Court from interfering in any controversy arising in respect of
such questions. This is so irrespective of whether the action requires
consideration of the 2017 report.
(b) Further and in any event, the primary judge was correct to conclude that the
appellant's action would necessarily require the
Court to examine, discuss and
adjudicate upon the 2017 report, and this infringes parliamentary privilege. The
report is subject
to the privilege and hence not admissible for the purposes of
this action.
The critical question upon which this appeal turns, therefore, is whether the
essential issues raised in the statement of claim
will inevitably involve the
determination of questions which are excluded from consideration by the Court
because of parliamentary
privilege. There is no complaint about the approach
adopted by the learned primary judge, which purported to uphold parliamentary
privilege by control of the pleadings. While the privilege may also be enforced
by exclusion of offending evidence, it is appropriate
to exclude issues from the
consideration of the court by control of the pleadings where such issues will
inevitably infringe parliamentary
Comalco Ltd v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation
(1983) 50 ACTR 1.
The question for this Court is
whether his Honour was correct in his determination concerning the application
of parliamentary privilege
to the issues which will arise in the conduct of the
cause of action.
Justiciability
The relationship between justiciability, in the sense of the Court's
process and
decisions of Parliament, and the privileges of parliament was the subject of
comment by Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne JJ
Egan v Willis
[1998] HCA 71
(1998) 195 CLR 424
"Questions respecting the existence of the
powers and privileges of a legislative chamber may present justiciable issues
are elements in a controversy arising in the courts under the general
law but they should not be entertained in the abstract and
apart from a
justiciable controversy. Declaratory relief should be directed to the
determination of legal controversies concerning
rights, liabilities and
interests of a kind which are protected or enforced in the courts. This is so
even though in the area of
public law the ground of equitable intervention has
not been limited to the protection of any particular proprietary or legal
entitlement
of the plaintiff."
In this appeal, the Attorney does not challenge the primary judge's conclusion
that the appellant would arguably have a special
interest in the subject matter
of the litigation, and thereby standing to enforce public rights, if the public
right arises from
the provisions of s 16(1) of the PWC Act. However, the
Attorney argues that this does not resolve the question of justiciability.
the proceedings at first instance, the Attorney's argument was put on the basis
that the PWC Act did not create rights or interests
which were capable of
protection or enforcement by the courts. At the most, it created an
"expectancy", and this is insufficient
to give rise to a justiciable claim. The
Attorney in this appeal submits that the primary judge's finding about standing
to a different question, but has not pressed the "mere expectancy"
argument on this appeal. However, the argument presented by the
Solicitor-General on the Attorney's behalf is that the question of whether the
Governor refers works for the consideration of the
Committee and the Committee's
consideration of and reporting upon those works are matters exclusively within
the control of Parliament.
It is argued that, accordingly, the PWC Act does not
give rise to rights or obligations which can be protected or enforced by the
courts and, therefore, the appellant's cause of action does not relate to a
justiciable controversy.
Parliamentary Privilege
It is uncontroversial that parliamentary privilege as traditionally applied in
England and other Australian jurisdictions is applicable
in Tasmania. This
includes its legislative manifestation in Article 9 of the English Bill of
Rights 1689, which provides as follows:
"That the freedom of speech
and debates or proceedings in Parliament ought not to be impeached or questioned
in any court or place
out of Parliament."
The learned primary judge correctly attributed the application of this
provision in Tasmania to English imperial legislation, in
particular s 24 of the
Australian Courts Act
1828 (Imp). That section provided that statutes in
force in England as at 25 July 1828, and which were applicable in the relevant
colony by reason of local conditions, and the administrative and judicial
machinery then in existence, were to be applied by the
courts of that colony.
The relevant colonies included Van Diemen's Land (now Tasmania). Article 9 of
Bill of Rights
clearly satisfied the conditions of reception, and
accordingly, thereby became the law of the colony. There has been no subsequent
repeal or abrogation of that law by the Commonwealth or State parliaments, and
its effect has not been otherwise affected by subsequent
laws dealing with the
application of laws of the parliament of the United Kingdom in Australia, such
Australia Act
(Cwth). Accordingly, Art 9 remains part of
Tasmanian law. Further, and in any event, in
R v Turnbull
[1958] TASStRp 18
(1958) Tas SR
, Gibson J held that parliamentary privilege as understood in England,
including the provisions of Art 9, applied in Tasmania pursuant
to the principle
of reasonable necessity arising from the nature and function of the institution.
The fundamental nature and rationale of parliamentary privilege was discussed
by the Full Court of the Supreme Court of South Australia
Cornwall and
Others v Rowan
(2004) 90 SASR 269
[2004] SASC 384
is necessary then to consider the nature and effect of the privilege. The
foundation for consideration of the nature of the privilege
rests on the
respective constitutional roles of Parliament and the courts. In
Television New Zealand Ltd
, Lord Browne-Wilkinson, delivering the judgment
of the Privy Council, said (at 332):
In addition to Art 9 itself, there is a long line of authority which supports
a wider principle, of which Art 9 is merely one manifestation,
viz that the
courts and Parliament are both astute to recognise their respective
constitutional roles. So far as the courts are concerned
they will not allow any
challenge to be made to what is said or done within the walls of Parliament in
performance of its legislative
functions and protection of its established
privileges:
Burdett v Abbot; Bradlaugh v Gossett; British Railways Board v
Pickin; Pepper v Hart
. As Blackstone said in his Commentaries on the Laws of
England (17th ed, 1830), vol 1, p 163: the whole of the law and custom of
Parliament has its origin from this one maxim, 'that whatever matter arises
concerning either House of Parliament, ought to be examined,
discussed, and
adjudged in that House to which it relates, and not elsewhere' (citations
Accordingly, an important feature of parliamentary privilege is the protection
of parliament's right to self-regulation. This has
resulted in courts
traditionally refraining from intervention in parliamentary proceedings. This
constraint on the power of the courts
to interfere in proceedings of parliament
was recognised in respect of the House of Commons in
Breadlaugh v Gossett
(1884) 12 QBE 271, a case referred to at some length by the learned primary
judge. The principle is summed up in a comment by Stephen
J, quoted by the
primary judge and which I restate:
"I think that the House of
Commons is not subject to the control of Her Majesty's Courts in its
administration of that part of the
statute-law which has relation to its own
internal proceedings, and that the use of such actual force as may be necessary
into effect such a resolution as the one before us is justifiable."
The protection of parliament's right of self-regulation was applied by the High
Court in New Zealand in
Mangawaro Enterprises Ltd v Attorney-General
[1994] 2 NZLR 451.
As the primary judge noted, in that case, Gallen J held
that a statutory provision which required the Attorney-General to bring to
attention of Parliament, inconsistency between legislation and the New Zealand
Bill of Rights, was concerned solely with the
proceedings of Parliament and,
accordingly, excluded from the jurisdiction of the courts by the operation of
Art 9. His Honour concluded
that the privilege extended to the referral itself,
and accordingly precluded judicial review of an omission by the Attorney-General
to make a referral.
Counsel for the Attorney placed considerable reliance on this case to support
the submission that the controversy raised by the
appellant's statement of claim
is not justiciable. Counsel submits that there are strong parallels between the
legislative process
considered in
and that prescribed by the
PWC Act. As I understand the argument, the claim is that all aspects of the
process prescribed by the PWC
Act are related to the proceedings of Parliament
and, accordingly, excluded from intervention by the Court. Further, and in any
event, it is submitted that the application of the Act in this case will
necessarily involve consideration of the 2017 report, and
this will amount to
impermissible interference in the proceedings of Parliament.
Huata v Prebble
[2004] NZCA 147
, the Court of Appeal of New Zealand
considered the application of this aspect of parliamentary privilege to
legislation concerned
with the election of a member of Parliament and whether in
particular circumstances, that member's seat became vacant. The court
acknowledged that the issue of parliamentary privilege required consideration
because the issues arising under the legislation touched
"on the functioning of
Parliament":
"There is a well settled principle that what is said
and done within the walls of a legislative assembly cannot be questioned in the
Courts. It is recognised that the respective constitutional roles of the Courts
and Parliament normally require the Courts to refrain
from intervening in
Parliamentary proceedings. Conflicts between the judicial and legislative organs
of the state are to be avoided
as far as possible. Generally speaking, a body
such as the Legislative Assembly of Western Samoa is left free to regulate and
its own internal procedure from time to time."
The majority acknowledged that the principle applied notwithstanding that the
parliamentary procedure was prescribed by statute.
However, it concluded that
the relevant statute could override the provisions of Art 9 "expressly or by
implication". The majority
concluded that, in the circumstances of the
particular case, judicial review was available and accordingly "that the court
proceedings must ensure that the requirements of the legislation are
In this appeal, the Court is not dealing with the availability of judicial
review of decisions made under the PWC Act in the sense
prescribed by the
Judicial Review Act
For example, the Court is not being
asked to directly review the refusal or failure of the Governor to refer the
works to the Committee.
Rather, the appellant is seeking a declaration that the
works fit the description of those to which relevant provisions of the Act
apply, and an injunction preventing the commencement of the works until there
has been compliance with those provisions. In my view,
the approach of the
Court of Appeal in
Huata v Prebble
is applicable to the question of the
justiciability of the controversy raised by this claim. In particular, I am
satisfied that it
is a question of statutory construction whether it is within
the jurisdiction of the Court to "ensure that the requirements of the
legislation are observed", or alternatively whether such a role is precluded as
a matter of parliamentary privilege. As observed
by the Court of Appeal, the
application of Art 9 is subject to the provisions of inconsistent legislation,
and the inconsistency
can arise "expressly or by implication". It is,
accordingly, necessary to consider the relevant provisions of the PWC Act in
The PWC Act
As is apparent from the long title of the Act, the purpose of the legislation
is to establish "a Parliamentary standing committee
on public works". The
legislation contains detailed provisions concerning the constitution of the
Committee and its procedures, including
voting and the power to summon witnesses
and take evidence on oath. There are protections and privileges for witnesses
and provisions
dealing with coercive procedures to compel evidence.
The provisions most relevant to this case are ss 15 and 16. They are set out
15 Functions of Committee
(1) The Committee shall, subject to the
provisions of this Act, consider and report upon every public work that is
proposed to be
undertaken by a general government sector body, except any public
work which hereafter may be withdrawn from the operation of this
resolution withdrawing same adopted by each House of Parliament (and whether
such work is a continuation, completion, repair,
reconstruction, extension, or
new work), in all cases where the estimated cost of completing the work exceeds
the relevant monetary
threshold in relation to the work.
(2) In considering and reporting on any work,
the Committee shall have regard to –
(a) the stated purpose thereof;
(b) the necessity or advisability of carrying
it out; and where the work purports to be of a reproductive or revenue producing
the amount of revenue which it may reasonably be expected to produce;
(c) the present and prospective public value of
and generally the Committee shall in all cases take such measures and procure
such information as may enable them to inform or satisfy
Parliament as to the
expedience of carrying out the work.
(3) In this section –
general government sector body
(a) a Government department
within the meaning of the
State Service Act 2000
(b) any State authority
classified as an entity within the general government sector in the Treasurer's
annual report;
State authority
means a body or authority, whether incorporated
or not, that is established or constituted under a written law or under the
prerogative, being a body or authority which, or of which the governing
authority, wholly or partly comprises a person or persons
appointed by the
Governor, a Minister or another State authority, but does not include a
Government department within the meaning
State Service Act
Treasurer's annual report
means the annual report prepared by the
Treasurer under
Financial Management Act 2016
16 Conditions precedent to commencing public
(1) No public work to which section
fifteen applies (except such works as have already been authorized by
Parliament or hereafter
may be withdrawn from the operation of this Act by a
resolution withdrawing same adopted by each House of Parliament), the estimated
cost of completing which exceeds the relevant monetary threshold in relation to
such work, and whether such work is a continuation,
completion, repair,
reconstruction, extension, or new work, shall be commenced unless it has first
been referred to and reported
upon by the Committee in accordance with this
(2) The Governor shall by writing under
his hand addressed to the Committee refer every proposed public work that
exceeds the relevant
monetary threshold in relation to such work to the
Committee for their report thereon.
(3) With every such reference to the
Committee there shall be furnished to the Committee an estimate of the cost of
such work when
completed, together with such plans and specifications or other
descriptions as the Minister administering the
Public Works Construction
for the time being deems proper, together with the prescribed
reports on the probable cost of construction and maintenance, and an
estimate of
the probable revenue, if any, to be derived therefrom. Such estimates, plans,
specifications, descriptions, and reports
to be authenticated or verified in the
prescribed manner.
(4) The Committee shall, with all convenient
dispatch, deal with the matter and shall as soon as conveniently practicable,
being had to the nature and importance of the proposed work, report to
the House of Assembly, if the House of Assembly is then in
session, and, if not,
to the Governor, the result of their inquiries.
(5) If in a report under subsection
(4) of this section, the Committee does not recommend the carrying out of
the work to which the
report relates, that work shall not be commenced unless
and until it has been authorized by an Act."
It is apparent from these provisions that the exclusive function of the
Committee is to examine public works of the defined value,
and provide
Parliament with sufficient information to enable it to determine "the expedience
of carrying out the work". This is clearly
intended to facilitate and ensure
parliamentary oversight of the conduct of such work by government. There can be
no real question
that in carrying out its functions as prescribed under s 15,
the Committee is engaged in parliamentary work, and parliamentary privilege
apply to it. There is ample authority that parliamentary privilege applies to
the proceedings and determinations of a parliamentary
committee. See
However, this case is primarily concerned with a particular aspect of the
operation of s 16. As is clear from the heading of that
section, s 16(1) makes
the referral and report of a proposed public work, a condition precedent of the
commencement of that work.
The referral necessary to satisfy the condition
precedent is prescribed by s 16(2). That section requires the Governor to "refer
every proposed public work" of the relevant value to the Committee for report.
Relying on the reasoning of Gallen J in
Mangawaro Enterprises,
Attorney argues that the referral by the Governor to the Committee under that
provision is part of the parliamentary process and,
accordingly, it comes under
the ambit of parliamentary privilege. Hence, it is argued, the courts cannot
enforce compliance with
the apparently mandatory requirement that every proposed
public work be referred to the Committee. That is a matter solely within
power and responsibility of Parliament.
I am in partial agreement with this submission. The question of whether or not
the Governor refers a proposed work to the Committee
under s 16(2) is not a
matter that can be reviewed or enforced by the courts. However, there is an
important distinction between
the legislation in this case, and that in
Mangawaro Enterprises
. In the latter case, the purpose of the referral
was solely relevant to the work of Parliament. Once made, then the purpose of
legislative requirement to refer is fulfilled, in that the inconsistency has
been brought to the attention of the Parliament, which
can then deal with the
inconsistency as it sees fit. The referral has no further purpose, in particular
it is not related to nor
affects the conduct of any person or body outside
Parliament.
In contrast, the statutory purpose and significance of a referral by the
Governor under the PWC Act extends beyond the facilitation
of review of public
works by the Committee. Under s 15, the Committee is charged with reviewing and
reporting on all relevant public
work. There is no requirement in that section
limiting that power and responsibility to works which have been referred to it
Governor under s 16(2). It is important, in my view, that the mandatory
requirement of referral by the Governor is not contained
in that section, but
rather in the provision dealing with the condition precedent for the
commencement of public works. Section 16(1)
takes the PWC legislation a step
further than merely facilitating parliamentary review of public work. It
prohibits the commencement
of public work unless and until there has been such
scrutiny, that is there has been referral under s 16(2) and consequent report
the Committee. This prohibition does not fall upon Parliament, but rather binds
those who would perform the public work, which
clearly must be executive
government and those who contract with it. The referral by the Governor is an
essential component of the
condition precedent contained in s 16(1). Hence, the
work cannot lawfully be commenced until it comes within the consideration of
Committee by the prescribed mechanism.
In my view, these provisions of s 16 create public obligations which fall
outside the scope of the parliamentary process, and hence
the ambit of
parliamentary privilege. The prohibition on the commencement of work without the
prescribed parliamentary scrutiny is
intended to apply to persons and
organisations outside Parliament. This prohibition is a critical aspect of the
legislative scheme.
Despite this, there is nothing in the legislation which
suggests that enforcement of the prohibition is a matter for Parliament.
contrary, it is clear from the legislative scheme and the legislative text, that
the enforcement of this prohibition is not
a matter that falls within the
parliamentary process, but rather is intended to be a public obligation
enforceable under the general
law. As such, as with any public obligation, it is
intended to be enforced by the courts.
This construction of the legislation can be tested in this way. Putting aside
the facts of this case for a moment, in a situation
where there is no suggestion
of any prior referral of relevant work to the Committee, there is nothing
prescribed in the legislation
which would empower the Parliament to identify or
require the referral of work to it under s 16(2). Counsel for the respondent
that the obligation of referral in such a case is a matter of
executive or ministerial responsibility to Parliament and, for this
falls within the ambit of parliamentary privilege. There may be force in this
argument if the legislative requirement in
s 16 included only that contained in
subs (2) and omitted subs (1). In that situation, the legislative scheme would
be comparable
to that applicable in the
Mangawaro Enterprises
the question of compliance of the executive with the obligation of referral
contained in s 16(2) would be a matter falling
within the parliamentary process.
However, it seems to me that s 16(1) extends the application and operation of
the legislation in
a critical way. The existence of the prohibition in that
section supports the conclusion that the legislative scheme extends beyond
parliamentary process and review by imposing a restraint on the conduct of
persons outside Parliament, where that review has not
taken place. In other
words, if the appropriate referral has not been made, and work is being
commenced, then not only is the relevant
member of the executive in breach of
its obligations to the Parliament, it is in breach of the public duty imposed by
statute. In
practical terms, it will be carrying out work in circumstances which
are prohibited by the legislation, because the appropriate parliamentary
scrutiny has not taken place. It is clear that this is intended to mandate such
scrutiny of relevant public works. Such a scheme
will only have efficacy if it
can be a lawfully enforced on applicable persons outside Parliament. Having
regard to the extensive
prescription and regulation of the powers and procedure
of the Committee once a referral is made, it is inconceivable that if Parliament
had intended that it be part of the legislative scheme that it be solely
responsible for enforcing compliance with the condition
precedent on the
performance of public works, that it would not have included in that scheme
powers and procedures for such enforcement.
It has not done so, and,
accordingly, I am satisfied that the legislation, by implication, envisages that
this public obligation
will be subject to the protection and enforcement of the
Of course, this conclusion does not affect the application of parliamentary
privilege to the work of the Committee once a referral
has been made to it. It
is clear, I think, and not in issue in this case, that parliamentary privilege
will apply in the normal way
to the proceedings and determination of the
Committee. Further, the Court has no role in directly reviewing a decision of
the Governor
to refer or not refer works to the Committee. However,
parliamentary privilege will not prevent the courts from restraining the
commencement of public works in breach of the legislation. It follows that it is
within the authority of the courts to determine
the facts necessary to establish
whether the condition precedent contained in s 16 (1) is applicable and has been
met in a particular
The primary judge's decision
This conclusion does not necessarily deal with the basis of the decision
reached by the primary judge. His Honour's decision was
specifically concerned
with the 2017 report, and the inevitability of the examination of that report by
the Court in the course of
determining this action. His Honour's critical
reasoning is set out in the following paragraphs:
"[30] It is clear
Cornwall v Rowan
and the cases that preceded it that the proceedings
of a parliamentary committee are proceedings in Parliament for the purposes of
the Bill of Rights. In this action, the plaintiff is seeking to have a report of
a parliamentary committee examined, discussed, and
adjudicated upon for the
purpose of determining whether or not the Hazell Bros works are so different
from those reported upon in
2017 that the process of referral and reporting
needs to be repeated. If this Court undertakes that adjudication, it is
conceivable
that, whatever conclusion it reaches, the Committee could
subsequently consider the same question and reach the opposite conclusion.
Parliamentary privilege exists so that such situations cannot arise.
[31] If this Court were to adjudicate upon a dispute as to whether the PWC
Act requires a fresh referral by the Governor and a fresh
report by the
Committee in respect of the Hazell Bros works, the same situation could arise.
In asserting that obligations imposed
by the PWC Act on the Governor and the
Committee have not been complied with, the plaintiff is seeking to impugn
Parliament's supervision
and control of the Executive through the Committee, and
that infringes parliamentary privilege.
[32] The plaintiff's action cannot succeed without this Court adjudicating
upon the 2017 report of the Committee, and the response
of the Governor and the
Committee to the obligations imposed upon them by the PWC Act. Adjudicating upon
those matters would contravene
Article 9 of the Bill of Rights and is therefore
not permitted. The plaintiff's action therefore has no hope of success."
I agree with the learned primary judge that for the purpose of determining
whether parliamentary privilege applies to and affects
the proposed proceedings,
the Court should proceed on the basis that the conduct of the appellant's case
on the pleaded cause of
action will inevitably require consideration of the 2017
report. This deals, I think, with the argument raised by ground 1 of the
Counsel for the appellant submitted that this was an error on the part of the
primary judge because all that is required
to establish the appellant's case as
a matter of law is that the subject works have not been the subject of referral
and report as
required by s 16(1). Taken in the abstract, this submission is
correct. However, the question of whether this litigation is vexatious
it will inevitably infringe upon parliamentary privilege, requires a realistic
approach in the circumstances of this case.
There is no question that comparison
between the work now proposed and that which was the subject of the 2017 report
will arise.
The existence of that report and the difference between the
respective works, are matters which were pleaded in the statement of
apparently, therefore, relied upon by the appellant as part of his case. The
comparison is a circumstance which directly
relates to the lawfulness of the
proposed work and, hence, is relevant to the Court's discretion to grant
injunctive relief. The
primary judge's decision was based on the conclusion that
the consideration of that report for that purpose would infringe parliamentary
privilege. I now turn to consider that conclusion.
Before discussing the relevant principles, I observe that there would appear to
be little decided authority on this question, in
respect of this provision. A
number of other jurisdictions have comparable legislation, but I can locate no
case outside Tasmania
dealing with a similar question arising under such
legislation. The only similar case is in fact a Tasmanian authority,
Attorney-General of Tasmania
[1995] TASSC 28.
In that case, Cox J (as he
then was) dealt with an action which sought declaratory relief and injunctions
in respect of public work,
the commencement of which was said to be unlawful
having regard to the provisions of s 16 (1) of the PWC Act. The issue was
to that in this case, that is whether the public work in question had
been the subject of an earlier referral and report. His Honour
considered the
claim on its merits, made the relevant comparison, and determined that the work
was not so different in character
as to require a fresh referral and report. The
question of parliamentary privilege does not appear to have been raised or
by the judge. Of course, the failure by the parties to raise, or the
judge to consider, the question of parliamentary privilege in
that case does not
resolve the question in this case.
An important aspect of parliamentary privilege is the protection of freedom of
speech during parliamentary proceedings. Hence, those
involved in parliamentary
proceedings will have the protection of absolute privilege for all that is said
and done in Parliament.
For example, in Tasmania, this privilege is applied
expressly by statute: see
Defamation Act
196(2) and (3) of the
Criminal Code.
Further, parliamentary privilege
will prevent evidence of parliamentary proceedings being admitted in court for
the purpose of attacking
the validity of what is done in Parliament or bringing
into question, for evidentiary purposes, the truth of parliamentary statements.
However, the privilege will not prevent proof of parliamentary proceedings,
where the fact of the occurrence of those proceedings
is relevant in the
litigation. The distinction has been explained in a number of cases. For
example, in
Egan v Willis
, Kirby J said:
"As the Privy
Council pointed out in
Prebble v Television New Zealand Limited
is important to avoid confusion between the right to prove the occurrence of
parliamentary events and the prohibition on questioning
their propriety, as for
example, suggesting that a member had misled the House or acted wrongly or from
improper motives."
His Honour was referring to the following passage from the speech of Lord
Browne-Wilkinson delivering the judgment of the Privy
"For these reasons (which are in substance those of the
courts below) their Lordships are of the view that parties to litigation,
whomsoever commenced, cannot bring into question anything said or done in the
House by suggesting (whether by direct evidence,
cross-examination, inference or
submission) that the actions or words were inspired by improper motives or were
untrue or misleading.
Such matters lie entirely within the jurisdiction of the
House, subject to any statutory exception such as exists in New Zealand
relation to perjury under section 108 of the
However, their Lordships wish to make it clear that this
principle does not exclude all references in court proceedings to what has
place in the House. In the past, Parliament used to assert a right, separate
from the privilege of freedom of speech enshrined
in Article 9, to restrain
publication of its proceedings. Formerly the procedure was to petition the House
for leave to produce
in court. Since 1980 this right
has no longer been generally asserted by the United Kingdom Parliament and their
Lordships understood
from the Attorney General that in practice the House of
Representatives in New Zealand no longer asserts the right. A number of the
authorities on the scope of Article 9 betray some confusion between the right to
prove the occurrence of parliamentary events and
the embargo on questioning
their propriety. In particular, it is questionable whether
[1990] 2 QB 460
was rightly decided.
Since there can no longer be any objection to the
production of
the Attorney General accepted (in their
Lordships' view rightly) that there could be no objection to the use
to prove what was done and said in Parliament as a
matter of history. Similarly, he accepted that the fact that a statute had been
passed is admissible in court proceedings. Thus, in the present action, there
cannot be any objection to it being proved what the
plaintiff or the Prime
Minister said in the House (particulars 8.2.10 and 8.2.14) or that the
State-Owned Enterprises Act 1986 was
passed (particulars 8.4-1). It will be for
the trial judge to ensure that the proof of these historical facts is not used
that the words were improperly spoken or the statute passed to
achieve an improper purpose."
There is also authority for the proposition that parliamentary privilege will
prevent the admission of statements made in Parliament
for the purpose of
proving the truth of the facts asserted in those statements. In
Mees v Roads
Corporation
[2003] FCA 306
, Gray J confirmed that it is permissible for a
court to receive evidence "by way of the tender of the records of parliamentary
proceedings
that a particular member addressed the House on a
particular date at a particular time, because this is nothing other than
record". His Honour confirmed that it was permissible to provide
evidence of "the words spoken" rather than simply describing the
effect of what
was done. His Honour pointed out, however, that this cannot be done for the
purpose of establishing that the statement
was "false or misleading" and
provided compelling reasoning supporting the proposition that the purpose of
admitting evidence of
what is said and done in parliament should not be to
establish the truth of the asserted facts. His Honour noted that if this were
permitted, then it would distort the effect of the evidence because the other
party would not be permitted to challenge the truth
of the statement.
In this case, the application of these authorities and the principles discussed
in them must lead to the conclusion that there is
no prohibition against
admission of the 2017 report, or the statements and evidence relevant to that
report, in order to establish
the fact and content of the report. It must also
be permissible to admit the documents referred to in the report for the purpose
of establishing the scope of the work which is the subject of the report. These
facts are sufficient to enable the Court to determine
whether the work now
proposed has been the subject of a referral and report sufficient to satisfy the
condition precedent to the
commencement of work contained in s 16(1). This
determination simply requires a direct comparison between the relevant works, in
the nature of that undertaken by Cox J in
Bates v Attorney-General.
not agree with the learned primary judge that proving the report and underlying
documents referred to in the report for this
purpose will involve the Court
examining, discussing and adjudicating upon the report, in the sense prohibited
by parliamentary privilege.
Nor does it involve using the report or the
documents referred to in it to establish the truth of any facts asserted in
them. Those
matters are simply not issues raised by the appellant's action. The
comparison does not involve impugning the validity of the report
nor questioning
its accuracy. The Court will not need to consider whether the statements made to
the Committee are true or accurate,
nor make any judgement about the correctness
or validity of the Committee's recommendations. In my view, proof of the report
underlying documents for the purpose of the comparison does not infringe
parliamentary privilege.
I also disagree with the conclusion reached by the primary judge that the
Court's adjudication of the difference between the 2017
work and the new work
infringes parliamentary privilege because "the committee could subsequently
consider that same question and
reach the opposite conclusion". In my view, this
is not a relevant consideration. As I have already concluded, the Court has
to determine whether the commencement of the work is unlawful
because of a failure to meet the condition precedent in s 16(1). The
the Governor and the Committee may have a different view does not detract from
the jurisdiction of the Court to grant injunctive
relief to enforce the
provisions of s 16(1). In practical terms, if the appellant is successful in
his action because of such a
determination, then at the most, the relief which
will be available will be an injunction preventing the commencement of the new
work unless and until there has been a further referral and report in respect of
that work. It will be a matter for the Governor
as to whether such a referral is
made. However, unless and until such referral is made then the commencement of
the new work will
be unlawful, and any restraint imposed by the Court will
continue. If a referral is made then, irrespective of the view reached by
Court in granting the relief, one of the possible outcomes is that the Committee
concludes that there is little significant difference
in respect of the relevant
work and so reports to the Parliament, presumably reiterating its earlier
recommendation. Such a conclusion
and report would not be open to challenge
before the courts and any attempt at such challenge would be appropriately met
of parliamentary privilege. However, by that report, the condition
precedent under s 16(1) will have been satisfied, and its purpose,
that is, to
mandate the scrutiny of Parliament before the work commences, will have been
It follows that, at least, grounds 3 and 4 of the appellant's Notice of Appeal
have been made out. The primary judge erred by concluding
that adjudication by
the Court upon the difference between the work to which the 2017 report related
and the work now proposed, for
the purpose of determining whether commencement
of that work is lawful having regard to the provisions of s 16(1) of the PWC
contravenes Art 9 of the Bill of Rights and that, accordingly, the
appellant's action has no hope of success. In my view, the Attorney's
interlocutory application was misconceived, and that application ought to have
been dismissed. I would allow the appeal, set aside
the order of the primary
judge and in its place, order that the Attorney's interlocutory application be
File No FCA 503/2022
GREGORY JOHN CASIMATY v HAZELL BROS GROUP PTY
and ATTORNEY-GENERAL
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
(Dissenting)
The factual background to the action giving rise to this appeal is set out in
the judgment of the Chief Justice at first instance:
"There is a
busy junction on the Tasman Highway near the Hobart Airport. Three roads meet
the highway at that junction. They include
Holyman Avenue, which leads to the
airport, and Cranston Parade. The plaintiff, Gregory Casimaty, claims to have an
interest in a
piece of land on Cranston Parade. Some years ago the Tasmanian
Government's Department of State Growth decided that a new interchange
developed and constructed at the junction. Plans and drawings were prepared and
submitted for consideration by the Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Public
Works ("the Committee") pursuant to the
Public Works Committee Act
("the PWC Act"). The Committee considered and reported upon the proposal in late
2017. Subsequently the department engaged the first
defendant, Hazell Bros Group
Pty Ltd, to construct the new interchange. The plaintiff has commenced an
action seeking declaratory
relief and an injunction restraining Hazell Bros from
undertaking the works. He contends that Hazell Bros has been engaged to
the interchange in accordance with revised plans; and that the works
that Hazell Bros has been engaged to undertake are not the same
as the works
approved by the Committee and have not been considered by the Committee. He has
sought a declaration to the effect that
Hazell Bros' public works are works to
which ss 15 and 16 of the PWC Act apply, as well as the injunction that I have
referred to."
The legislative provisions in the PWC Act relevant to the action
Functions of Committee
(1) The Committee shall, subject to the provisions of this
Act, consider and report upon every public work that is proposed to be
undertaken by a general government sector body, except any public work which
hereafter may be withdrawn from the operation of this
Act by a resolution
withdrawing same adopted by each House of Parliament (and whether such work is a
continuation, completion, repair,
reconstruction, extension, or new work), in
all cases where the estimated cost of completing the work exceeds the relevant
threshold in relation to the work.
(2) In considering and reporting on any work, the Committee shall have
regard to –
(a) the stated purpose thereof;
(b) the necessity or advisability of carrying it out; and where the work
purports to be of a reproductive or revenue producing character,
the amount of
revenue which it may reasonably be expected to produce; and
(c) the present and prospective public value of the work –
and generally the Committee shall in all cases take such measures and procure
such information as may enable them to inform or satisfy
Parliament as to the
expedience of carrying out the work.
(3) In this section –
general government sector body
(a) a Government department within the meaning of the
Service Act 2000
(b) any State authority classified as an entity within the general government
sector in the Treasurer's annual report;
State authority
means a body or authority, whether incorporated
or not, that is established or constituted under a written law or under the
prerogative, being a body or authority which, or of which the governing
authority, wholly or partly comprises a person or persons
appointed by the
Governor, a Minister or another State authority, but does not include a
Government department within the meaning
Service Act 2000
Treasurer's annual report
means the annual report prepared by the
Treasurer under
Management Act 2016
Conditions precedent to commencing public
(1) No public work to which
applies (except such works as have already been authorized by
Parliament or hereafter may be withdrawn from the operation of this
resolution withdrawing same adopted by each House of Parliament), the estimated
cost of completing which exceeds the relevant
monetary threshold in relation to
such work, and whether such work is a continuation, completion, repair,
reconstruction, extension,
or new work, shall be commenced unless it has first
been referred to and reported upon by the Committee in accordance with this
(2) The Governor shall by writing under his hand addressed
to the Committee refer every proposed public work that exceeds the relevant
monetary threshold in relation to such work to the Committee for their report
(3) With every such reference to the Committee there shall
be furnished to the Committee an estimate of the cost of such work when
completed, together with such plans and specifications or other descriptions as
the Minister administering the
Public Works Construction Act
for the time being deems proper, together with the prescribed
reports on the probable cost of construction and maintenance, and an
estimate of
the probable revenue, if any, to be derived therefrom. Such estimates, plans,
specifications, descriptions, and reports
to be authenticated or verified in the
prescribed manner.
(4) The Committee shall, with all convenient dispatch, deal with the
matter and shall as soon as conveniently practicable, regard
being had to the
nature and importance of the proposed work, report to the House of Assembly, if
the House of Assembly is then in
session, and, if not, to the Governor, the
result of their inquiries.
(5) If in a report under
of this section, the Committee does not recommend the carrying out
of the work to which the report relates, that work shall not be
commenced unless
and until it has been authorized by an Act."
Not in contention are these matters:
Hazell Bros works are public works for the purposes of the PWC Act.
cost of those works exceeds the monetary threshold necessary to engage the PWC
2017 the PWC considered and reported upon the interchange works, but not the
Hazell Bros works
Hazell Bros works included revisions to the plans for the interchange
The appellant's contention on the action is that the Hazell Bros works, not
being the same as those previously referred to and reported
upon by the PWC
Committee were commenced unlawfully.
By interlocutory application the second respondent sought the following orders:
to r 259A and B the action be dismissed and that there be judgment of the
Attorney-General (and Hazell Bros Group Pty Ltd)
against the plaintiff with
costs, on account of the amended statement of claim not disclosing any
reasonable cause of action, in
that there is no justiciable issue before the
the alternative to 1, that pursuant to r 259A and B each of paragraphs 2C(c), 3,
5, 6, 7, 8, 14, 15, 16 and 17 be struck out by
reason that they are vexatious in
that they each offend the principal at Parliamentary proceedings and are
absolutely privileged,
and that there be judgment for the Attorney-General (and
Hazell Bros Group Pty Ltd) against the plaintiff with costs.
The Chief Justice made orders in terms of paragraph 2 of the interlocutory
application.
It is not in issue that a report of the PWC Committee about works falling
within the terms of the PWC Act is subject to parliamentary
The appellant contends that to succeed in its action it need only demonstrate
that the Hazell Bros works have not been reported
upon by the PWC Committee. It
asserts that proof of that fact does not require reliance upon or reference to
the 2017 report of the
Committee, with the result that the report does not need
to be examined, thereby avoiding the consequences of its privileged status.
says the report is relevant only to establish an historical "event or
transaction" namely that as a matter of objective fact the
Hazell Bros works was
not reported upon by the Committee.
The appellant submits too that it is unnecessary to consider the 2017 report to
determine that the statutory obligations imposed
upon the Governor in s 16(2) of
the PWC Act have not been invoked or that the obligations on the Governor and
the Committee have
not been complied with. It says that it is unnecessary to
consider or adjudicate upon allegations of impropriety on the part of the
Committee or any person who appeared before it or otherwise question what was
said before the Committee. The appellant contends that
proceedings on the action
do not impinge upon the exercise of a person's freedom of speech in the
parliament or operate to punish
a person for having exercised that right and
that there are no legal consequences flowing from the action against a member of
or a witness before the Committee.
For these reasons it submits that parliamentary privilege is not impugned.
Section 16(1) of the PWC Act articulates a condition precedent to the
commencement of public works. It makes that requirement subject
to exceptions,
including an exception for such works as have already been authorised by
Parliament. Such works may be commenced though
not specifically the subject of a
report. The exception captures works which are contemplated by such a report.
The exception falls for consideration in the appellant's action as an integral
part of the enquiry into compliance with s 16 of
the Act. I have focussed upon
it because it exposes the incorrectness of the appellant's claim that the 2017
report need not be examined.
The question arising by reason of the exception is whether the Hazell Bros
works are "different in character" from the works the
subject of the 2017
report? If they are not so "different in character" they will fall within the
G M Bates v Attorney-General of Tasmania
[1995] TASSC 28
Cox J as he then was. That result will be a complete answer to the appellant's
(above) Cox J was considering an action seeking injunctions and
declaratory relief in respect of public works the commencement of
asserted to have been unlawful because it breached s 16(1) of the PWC Act. The
court compared the works the subject of
the referral and report of the PWC
Committee, and the works the subject of the challenge, and determined that the
work was not so
different in character as to have required a fresh
. The exception was
engaged, and the challenged works were lawful.
The approach taken in
exposes the enquiry required to identify
whether s 16(1) has been complied with.
That enquiry compels a consideration of the PWC report. Such enquiry is
impermissible as the PWC report is a "proceeding in parliament"
under the terms
of Art 9 of the
Bill of Rights
1688 (IMP):
Cornwall v Rowan
[2004] SASC 384
90 SASR 269
, 386 citing
Dingle v Associated Newspapers Ltd
[1960] 2 QB
,410 per Pearson J. The substance of what was said or done in Parliament
cannot be the subject of inquiry by a court:
Victorian Taxi Families Inc v
Taxi Services Commission
[2018] 61 VR 91
, 121 [92] citing
Amann Aviation
Pty Ltd v Commonwealth of Australia
[1988] FCA 24
[1988] 19 FCR 223
, 231 per Beaumont J.
The Chief Justice was correct to hold at [32] that "the plaintiff's action
cannot succeed without this Court adjudicating upon the
2017 report of the
committee...".
Grounds 1 and 3 must fail.
The same considerations inform my conclusion in respect of the second ground of
appeal. The question of whether the Governor acted
or fail to act in accordance
with the PWC Act turns on whether the obligation appearing in s 16(2) of the Act
was engaged. If the
exception applies it was not. It is confronted by the same
problem. It cannot be answered without reference to the 2017 report.
Ground 2 fails.
Ground 4 asserts that the Chief Justice misapprehended the nature of the
interlocutory application because he concluded "the plaintiff's
action... has no
hope of success". He was correct. While in my view orders could have been made
under either paragraph of the Attorney's
interlocutory application, and even if
the more appropriate order was in terms of paragraph 1, the point is
The appeal should be
This Court is unanimous in the
view that the Chief Justice was correct when he accepted the second respondent's
submission that the
proceedings of a committee are a proceeding in Parliament
for the purposes of Article 9 of the Bill of Rights 1688 (IMP). The scope
privilege can be discerned from s 24 of the
Australian Courts Act
(IMP) and Article 9 of the Bill of Rights 1688 (IMP). Article 9 of the Bill
provides that:
"The Freedome of speech and debates or proceedings in
Parlyament ought not to be impeached or questioned in any Court or Place out
Parlyament."
Parliamentary Privilege Act
does not affect any power or privilege possessed by either House of Parliament
before the passing of the Act... The privileges of
the Tasmanian Parliament, to
the extent that they are not defined by statute.. accord with the common law.
The report of the proceedings
of a Parliamentary Committee is a 'proceeding in
Parliament' for the purposes of Article 9 of the Bill or Rights 1688
In art 9: 'impeached' is interpreted to mean 'impeded,
hindered, or prevented' or 'determinately or prejudicially affected or
and 'questioned' is interpreted to mean 'examined, discussed and
adjudged', in Court"
(my emphasis).
(References/footnotes
omitted).[extracted from the submissions of the Attorney-General]
Attorney notes exceptions to the principal relating to the use of Ministerial
statements as an aid to the construction of ambiguous
legislation, and exception
now enshrined in legislation:
Acts Interpretation Act
1931(Tas) ss 8A,
As Brett J notes at
[28], the Court does not appear to have considered the question of Parliamentary
privilege in
presumably because it was not raised.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (249 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter