URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASLPDT/2023/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:16:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v Gregory Stephen Smith [2023] TASLPDT 4; (11 December 2023)
LEGAL PROFESSION DISCIPLINARY TRIBUNAL
Citation: Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v Gregory Stephen Smith [2023]
Parties: Legal Profession Board of Tasmania (Applicant)
Gregory Stephen Smith (Respondent)
Tribunal: Mr. D Wallace Deputy Chairperson
Ms. L Mackey
Mr. M Shirley
Hearing Date: 18 September 2023
Delivered on: 11 December 2023
Applicant: Ms K Cuthbertson SC
Respondent: Mr C Dockray
Solicitors:
Applicant: Tremayne Fay Rheinberger
Respondent: Greg Smith & Co
Amended pursuant to a direction of the Deputy Chairperson
Clerical error: correction of citation of decision
Dated 22 December 2023
Deputy Chairperson
Reasons for Decision
The Application
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania (the Board) has applied pursuant to s.464 of
Legal Profession Act 2007
(the Act) for the Tribunal to hear and
determine a complaint against the respondent Australian legal practitioner. It
regards his
conduct in acting on instructions of Mrs JH (
the complainant
to assist in the recovery of a debt. The ultimate issue for the Tribunal is
whether the respondents conduct when evaluated is characterised
‘unsatisfactory professional conduct’ or the more serious
‘professional misconduct’ as those terms are
defined in s.420 and
s.421 of the Act or at common law.
complaint to the Board was made on the 28 February 2020. It concerns gross delay
and neglect and failure by the respondent to
adequately communicate to the
complainant between July 2007 and December 2019 when new solicitors were
conduct complained of occurred more than three years prior to the making of the
complaint, the Board determined the conduct
could, if proven, amount to
professional misconduct and that it was in the public interest to be dealt with
(s. 482(2) of the Act.)
respondent has practised law for more than 41 years, being admitted to practice
on the 24 February 1982. He has practised on
his own account as a sole
practitioner with a principal’s practising certificate since 2010. His
general practice services
clients in the areas surrounding and including the
towns of Wynyard and Burnie and those in the far Northwest coast of Tasmania.
His work is largely transactional. It is apparent from what has occurred he
engages in some litigation and attends clients in court.
The Particulars of Complaint
its application the Board set out the particulars alleged to arise from the
complaint and its investigation as follows:
. The Board alleges that the respondent is guilty of professional
misconduct, or alternatively, of unsatisfactory professional conduct,
that the respondent engaged in conduct that fell below the standard of
competence and diligence that a member of the public
is entitled to expect of a
reasonably competent Australian legal practitioner, and which involved a
substantial or consistent failure
to reach or maintain a reasonable standard of
competence and diligence, in that the respondent:
(a) Failed to attend to the Complainants matter competently and within a
reasonable time causing gross neglect and undue delay over
a 12-year period;
(b) Failed to communicate with his client the Complainant or update her on
the progress of her matter over a 12 year period. ”
The evidence from the Board consisted solely of the affidavit of the Chief
Executive of the Board. Its exhibits included the complaint
and subsequent
correspondence from the complainant to the Board, a true and complete copy of
the respondents file No 440/07 of the
complainants’ matter, the responses
of the respondent to the Board and the Boards enquiries. No objection was taken
of the evidence by the respondent. The respondent neither gave nor
adduced evidence. The evidence shows the respondent failed to
properly act on
the complainants’ instructions, failed to adequately communicate with her
as to progress of her matter, leaving
her with a belief that proceedings to
attempt recovery of the alleged debt were in progress, over a 12-year period.
find the actions and neglect of the respondent in attending to the
complainants’ matter was as described in the following
The Timeline
of July 2007
. The respondent was instructed to
recover $40,000.00, the complainant alleged she loaned on the 29 June 2006 to
) and her daughter HW (
) (together the defendants) to
purchase a café business in Burnie Tasmania. The complainant had not been
repaid nor had any
instalments of the alleged loan been paid. She saw the
café business advertised for sale and sought the respondent’s
assistance. The respondent noted that nothing in writing had been made
formalising the loan although that had been suggested. The
respondents file
recorded the complainant and
originally were to be partners in the
business. That the complainant changed her mind from buying the business as she
already had
another business to run, but she offered the loan to the defendants
towards the purchase price for them to buy the café business
instead. The
defendants accepted with the complainant to work casually in the business once
her other business was sold. The complainant
had worked for the defendants after
the purchase was completed for some weeks and had never been
3 July 2007.
The respondent immediately wrote to the defendants at the
café business address in the following terms-
“We advise we act for [JH].
On our instructions [JH] loaned to you the sum of $40,000.00 to assist in the
purchase of the leasehold business ......”.
.....................
We are instructed that in September 2006 when [JH] was able to dispose of her
business known as ..... that there was insufficient
trade and income to support
her coming into your business as was intended and therefore at the time she
requested that arrangements
be made to have the loan repaid. A request was also
made in September 2006 and then on the 8
of March 2007 a specific
request was made that the loan be repaid no later than the 30
June 2007 and in the interim weekly payments of $50.00 be made. As at today no
money whatsoever has been received by our client.
We are now instructed that you have the business on the market. Can you
please confirm that it is you [sic] intention to repay the
loan out of the sale
proceeds immediately upon completion of the sale. It the net proceeds are
insufficient to meet the entirety
of the loan then it would be expected that you
meet the balance outstanding out of your own personal resources. We are also
at the time of making the loan an interest rate of 6% was agreed
In addition, there are some recipe books and equipment owned by [JH] in the
store and these must not be included in the sale and will
need to be returned to
our client.
Can you please confirm that the above represents the terms of the original
loan and of the fact of your intention to repay the loan
on the sale of the
business by signing and returning the enclosed copy of this letter.
All communications should be through this office rather than direct to
Yours faithfully
Greg Smith & Co
Per G Smith
of August 2007.
The defendant
telephoned the
respondents office and left a message requesting he phone [
money owed to [JH]-please give her bank A/c
details so she can pay money in”.
The respondent neither contacted either defendants
at the business
or at all. He did not advise the complainant of the contact made by
in response to his letter
so no details of an account to possibly
enable payments was obtained.
Nothing was then progressed.
1 October 2007
. The complainant instructed the respondent to send a letter
to the defendants, giving them 3 options, two being alternatives to
satisfy the
debt by repayment terms and the third, for court action to be taken, presumably
if no arrangements to pay were made.
A response was to be required within 10
days. A draft of the proposed letter was to be faxed to the complainant.
No draft was prepared, and no letter was sent to the defendants as
30 October 2007
. The respondent received a telephone call from Mr Bessell
of Crisp Hudson & Mann lawyers for the defendants. The respondent
by Mr Bessell that the café business was sold, and it would settle in
late November and that the debt would then
The respondents file
of this date notes the respondents reception had noted a message “
[JH]-{ her telephone number]”.
There is no record of any actual
The 23 November 2007.
The respondent wrote to Mr Bessell asking him
to confirm in writing the repayment of the debt, the amount of which was to yet
confirmed, would be repaid from the sale proceeds of the café
business on completion of the sale.
29 November 2007
. This day the respondent received from Mr Bessell a letter,
relevantly as follows–
“ .............
I am instructed to repay the sum of $40,000.00 if the sale proceeds. I am
instructed to deny the claim for interest. “
A copy of this letter was sent by the respondent to the complainant.
the 5 December and 18 December 2007.
In this period exchanges between the
respondent and Mr Bessell disclose there had been no signed contract of sale of
business, but negotiations had been continuing. There was an
acknowledgement by Mr Bessell of the complainant being owed money.
A file note
of the respondent dated the 6 December 2007 records he informed the complainant
that no contract had been exchanged,
the complainant instructing she wanted
interest but that she would not pursue interest if the worst came to the worst
.e., throw good money after bad
December 2007 Mr Bessell advised the respondent the
sale would not proceed, but enquired if the complainant would trade the debt
the business.
The respondent obtained instructions by telephone,
informing Mr Bessell by letter on the 18 December 2007, that the complainant
not take over the business in exchange for the debt and that since no
payments had been made “
no matter how small or irregular
the complainant will pursue the debt, and costs associated with its
December 2007 and 26 May 2008
The respondent
took no action to recover the debt or communicate with the complainant.
Instructions from the complainant to the
respondent were that the business remained unsold, but it was still operating.
The respondent
noted that there was “
really no option other than to
. The file note then includes the following –
s a house at 16 Pearl Street Wivenhoe. Money loaned jointly.
Interest at 6%. You did work out that
loan repaid 4 years @200p/w. [HH] and
[ HW] 16 Pearl St Wivenhoe. Not a registered business name. Serve at
No proceedings were issued following this attendance and instructions.
of July the
complainant called at the respondent’s office and left a message
for the respondent with its reception–
“ [JH] called in re the Writ that was served. Is process underway?
Update pls .Ph...”
The respondent did not respond to this enquiry.
of July 2008 the complainant left a message for the
respondent at his office to the effect that “
the lady is harassing her
now at her home
“and that she was quite concerned, asking the
respondent to call and advise her what to do.
A second note in the respondents handwriting the same day records –
“[HH] been harassing
Go through sols?”
There is no record of the respondent doing anything in response to the
3rd of September 2008
. The respondent received a letter from Mr Bessell. It
raised for the first-time the suggestion that the business arrangement
the café was other than a simple debt arrangement. It asserted
the original intent had been for the complainant and both defendants
partners, each contributing $14,000.00. That the complainant was to fund the
defendants’ contributions each of $14,000.00
and the amounts would be
repaid to the complainant out of profits of the business. “In
words, the amount of the loan was not $40,000.00 but two-thirds of this “.
As there were no profits it stated there was no liability to repay. It
stated the complainant pulled out of the business at the last
minute and ceased
abruptly coming to the business to work. The defendants thought the complainant
was to be a silent partner. It
claimed there had been a breach of contract which
had caused the defendants loss, and the complainant must contribute to losses of
the business.
The letter continued as follows-
My client ...has another buyer. The price is only $20,000.00 and
my clients must accept and sell. It will require your client agrees
the business can be sold for $20,000.00,
your client will not pursue that repayment of the so-called debt and
your client accept the total proceeds of sale (after usual costs of sale) in
full satisfaction of her claim.
If this can be agreed and
the sale proceeds my clients will agree not to pursue their claims of breach of
contract for loss and damage
The respondent sent a copy of the letter to the complainant.
9th of September 2008.
The complainant instructed the respondent in response
of September 2008 letter at his office. She disputed any
partnership with the defendants, silent or otherwise. The respondents file
records that a third partner had been considered but the complainant thought
there was “scope
for too much conflict
”. The complainant
instructed she pulled out of purchasing the business having given ample notice
of doing so. Neither
had given notice of leaving their
respective employments. Both,
wished to purchase the
business, and she agreed to loan $40,000 to enable them to do so. Sufficient
Instructions were obtained and
recorded in the file note to contradict the
assertions of breach of contract. The complainant instructed she would accept
sale proceeds as part payment of the debt and interest.
16 September 2008
. The respondent contacted Mr Bessell indicating the
complainant would not be stopping the sale, (the complainant had instructed that
it was the defendants’ business, and they can sell it if they like), that
she denied she was in a partnership with the defendants,
and that she was not
prepared to state she” won’t be taking any further action “if
she received the net sale proceeds
of the business.
Nothing then was
progressed. There were no communications with the complainant.
2 years later the 23 August 2010
.The complainant attended the respondent
whose file note repeats earlier instructions contradicting the assertions made
in the letter
from Mr Bessell of the 3 September 2007. The file note on this day
also records –
“Originally paid deposit (. ...) on
basis a joint partnership you and [KK]. After paid deposit, you decided
go ahead with it.....
[HH] and [KK] decided could go ahead- .....
You put up money, 4 years to repay”
The file note recorded the defendants had closed the café business in
December 2008 and personal details of
that may help the
respondent were given.
of September 2010.
The respondent undertook
names searches of the café business showing the defendants had been its
registered proprietors, and bankruptcy searches
of each defendant showing
neither bankrupt. With these two searches in the respondents file, is a Lands
Title Office ‘index’
Wivenhoe showing
named as its owner. There is no Lands Title Office
‘title’ search of the two titles disclosed by the
“its entirety” to the
It appears the respondent
had no information whether both of
titles to her
property were free of mortgages. A Tasmanian House of Assembly electoral roll
as of the 29 October 2004 was searched
and residential addresses for both
at that time are shown. The electoral roll of 29 October
2004 was not the most up to date electoral roll.
No action was taken
to progress the matter. The respondent went on leave. The firm Crisp Hudson
& Mann, the defendants’
solicitors, managed the respondents practice
in his absence.
- November 2010.
Having returned from leave, on the 28 October 2010 the
respondent signed a Magistrates Court Civil Division Claim ‘
‘for the complainant against the defendants. It was not then
filed. The respondent attended the complainant on the 16 November
his file notes clarified that if there was any contract for the café
business purchase in 2006 it had been between
the defendants and the vendor, and
not her, and the lease for the business premises was with the defendants and not
her. The complainant
was also not “
on any of the café business
. An address for
was provided to the respondent,
being the same as in the electoral roll of 2009.
November 2010
was filed in the Magistrates
Court at Burnie on the 19
of November 2010 number M 2010/1998
showing the address of
for service being
address for service as in the electoral roll search and given
earlier by the complainant.
was never served. We find there were no attempt to effect personal service of
the Claim ‘or
consider any application for substituted
service. There is no explanation for the respondent’s file not containing
the original
sealed copies of ‘
returned by or
collected from the Burnie Magistrates Court following its filing. The file
discloses a yellow pages search for process
servers in the Burnie, Devonport and
Ridley town area with a map bearing date 2011. It appears this enquiry for
process servers was
not made until the year 2011 or later. None of the listed
process servers on the yellow pages’ search were contacted.
No document other than the original of ‘
filed in the Magistrates Court Burnie referencing
response to the Board, the respondent stated the complainant was not able to
give a specific address for the defendants to
enable service but he drove past
the 16 Pearl Street property of
at some time, noting it being in an
industrial area
was old but externally well-kept, but it was
not apparent if anyone
was living there “.
no record on the respondents file of this drive by of 16 Pearl Street Wivenhoe
or his observations.
The respondent took no further action or communicated with the
complainant.
December 2011
. By this date ‘
was stale for
service. A fresh claim could have been filed or an application made to extend
the time for service
. This day the
complainant wrote to the respondent; she needed to pursue her claim urging the
respondent to see the case to mediation
and court and asked him to advise when
mediation was organised.
The respondent took no action or
. The complainant saw the respondent who noted on his debt recovery
file that the complainant had been recovering from and receiving
treatment for
major health conditions. His note records that the complainant was-
“available for directions hearing and mediation from now on.
The Board investigator wrote to the respondent enclosing a copy of the file
note and asked-
‘Please provide further context and information as to what the
directions hearing, and mediation are referring to’
The respondent replied as follows-
The reference to directions hearing and mediation in the file note
15/05/2012 (annexure E not D) would have stemmed from initial verbal
given to the Claimant as to how a civil claim
progresses/claim/defence/directions hearing/mediation/hearing.”
The investigator did not follow up on the response.
It is apparent from the respondents file that after the 19
December 2012, on a date unknown, he obtained a copy of a Lands Title Office
‘Transfer ‘which disclosed
property at 16 Pearl
Street Wivenhoe had been sold by the 19 December 2012. It noted
‘s address as transferee on the ‘Transfer’ was a
different address to that on the 2009 electoral roll or in ‘
filed in the court. That different address also appears in
an undated file note of the respondents headed “
Location of
Defendants?”
It was unlikely to have escaped the respondents notice
that the witness to
signature as transferee on the
‘Transfer’ was Mr Bessell the lawyer for the defendants.
Nothing then occurred to progress the complainants’ matter or advise
the complainant over the next intervening 6 years.
April 2018.
The complainant’s complaint of
the 22 of February 2020, to the Board, described the period of years leading up
to an appointment
with the respondent on the 9
of April 2018 when
waited and waited for contact from [the
respondent] about the court hearing which did not happen. Over the ensuring
years, I did attempt
to contact [the respondent] but obtained no satisfaction or
explanation as to what had happened regarding the claim.
In April 2018 I summoned up courage and made an appointment to see [the
respondent] regarding the claim. However [the respondent]
was unavailable to
attend the appointment.”
The respondent stated to the Board that the complainant arrived for the
appointment on the 9th of April 2018, but he had been held
up in court. The
respondent’s staff had been unable to contact the complainant before her
arrival. A new appointment scheduled
of April 2018 was
subsequently cancelled by the complainant. A file note indicates the complainant
was to reschedule in a couple
. The respondent closed the complainants file according in his
document management system (LEAP) without the claimant’s permission.
The complainant instructed new solicitors who requested the
complainants file, it being delivered on the 31 January 2020. Only then
complainant discover that no claim had ever been in progress and that any claim
then for recovery of the alleged debt was
out of time, and mediations to resolve
her claim were not possible.
claim for debt against the defendants was possibly statute barred by July 2013.
If later acknowledgements made by the defendants’
agent Mr Bessell in
writing of the defendants owing monies fell within
, the time for fresh legal action possibly extended to the
of September 2014 before being barred if the limitation period
was pleaded in defence.
The Response to the Complaint and
Complainants Reply
32. The respondent’s initial response of the 20 May 2020 to the Board
That for some
time there was an expectation of the debt being paid from the sale by
defendants of the café business.
complainant through 2007 to 2010 was not able to provide specific addresses for
the defendants.
A concern, which
he said he discussed with the complainant was whether it would be tantamount to
throwing good money after bad in
proceeding with a claim given the background
information they had on the defendants and the failure of the café
There was a
likelihood the claim would have difficulty, but that could have been better
expressed and stressed more strongly and earlier.
He should have
expressed more strongly what were the chances of success or of recovery.
He referred to
the lack communication with the complainant about her case, pointing to the gaps
of several years between client-initiated
There is no
written record on the respondents file as to the above matters being expressed,
except by the complainant on the occasion
regarding pursuing a claim for
interest if the proceeds of sale of the business were paid.
complainant responded to the Board on 2 June 2020 to the respondent’s
submission, disputing any reservations were expressed
to her of a difficulty
with the claim or its recovery. The respondent after returning from leave in
October 2010 prepared and filed
after clarifying
instructions with her. In her response
she stated she had phoned the
respondent on numerous occasions and that he was variably unavailable and never
She had phoned regarding mediation several times after
the case had supposedly gone to court and had been told to wait. She also
that she thought she was the customer, and he was working for her and that he
would communicate with her about progress of
respondent declined to make a response to the complainants’ response of 2
respondent’s response to the Boards Murray Letter of the 11 October 2021,
noted the facts were not materially in dispute
unreservedly
accepted that he was guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct pursuant to
“of the Act. The respondent states he thought he made it clear
that prospects of recovery appeared doubtful. No file note,
or letter of advice
or any correspondence hinted at or reflects such advice at any stage. The
respondent acknowledged that he failed
to communicate with the complainant to
appraise her of a failure to locate the defendants and failed to seek the
complainants ongoing
instructions. The complainant does not accept she was given
at any stage either orally or in writing such advice.
respondent stated, he in effect had substituted his own view as to what was in
the complainants’ best interests, rather
than doing that which he ought to
have done. He acknowledged he should have raised the matter when he met her in
sought her ongoing instructions whether to proceed or to
close the file”
. Counsel for the Board in her submission points out
that the respondent does not appear to have advised the complainant that
he filed was stale at that stage or was not
presently on foot. The respondent also acknowledged that he erred “
failing to follow the complainants’ instructions, notwithstanding having
informed her of the risks and drawbacks of her instituting
proceedings and
pursuing her claim”.
Professional misconduct and
unsatisfactory professional conduct
421 of the Act relevantly provides as follows
Professional misconduct
(1) For the purposes of this Act-
professional miscondu
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of an Australian legal practitioner,
where the conduct involves a substantial or consistent
failure to reach or
maintain a reasonable standard of competence and diligence; and
(b) ..........”
38. Section 420 and 422 of the Act relevantly provide –
Unsatisfactory professional conduct
For the purposes of this Act –
unsatisfactory professional conduct
includes conduct of an
Australian legal practitioner occurring in connection with the practice of law
that falls short of the standard
of competence and diligence that a member of
the public is entitled to expect of a competent Australian legal
practitioner.”
422. Conduct capable of constituting unsatisfactory professional conduct
or professional misconduct
(1) Without limiting section 420 or 421 the following conduct
is capable of constituting unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct.
(a) conduct consisting of a contravention of this Act, the regulations or
legal profession rules;
...............
(2) Conduct of a person consisting of a contravention referred to in
subsection(1)(a) is capable of constituting unsatisfactory professional
or professional misconduct whether or not the person is convicted of an offence
in relation to the contravention.”
Professional
rules of practice in place at the time required the respondent to do his best to
complete his client’s business
in a competent manner and in a reasonable
time as well as to inform his client of all significant developments in their
respondent contends that his conduct, although falling short of the standard of
competence and diligence that a member of the
public was entitled to expect of a
reasonably competent Australian legal practitioner, it did not involve a
‘substantial ‘or
‘consistent failure’ to reach or
maintain a reasonable standard of competence and diligence.
approach to be taken under the Act, as distinct from the preceding legislation
Legal Profession Act 1993
, was explained by Brett J in
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v Barclay
[2022] TASSC 14
where his Honour said at
Under the legislative definitions, the first step is
to determine whether the conduct amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
This involves an evaluative assessment of the conduct, measured against the
standard of competence and diligence that a member of
the public is entitled to
expect of a reasonably competent Australian legal practitioner. The second step
is to determine whether
the unsatisfactory professional conduct amounts to
professional misconduct. In making this determination, an assessment must be
as to whether the conduct involved a substantial or consistent failure to
reach or maintain a reasonable standard of competence and
diligence. It is the
finding that the relevant failure has been substantial or consistent which is
critical to the determination
test of ‘substantiality ‘under s.421(1)(a) does not require
consideration of the respondent’s fitness to practice
or that the conduct
be of sufficient seriousness to call into question a lawyer’s fitness to
continue to practice.
that could be an ultimate result following an evaluation of a legal
practitioner’s particular conduct and circumstances.
to the meaning and distinction between conduct involving a
“substantial” or “consistent failure” to reach
maintain a reasonable standard of competence and diligence, the New South Wales
Court of Appeal considered the distinction in
Law Society of New South Wales
[2013] NSWCA 423
“The distinction made by that
definition is between conduct which involves substantial failure to reach or
maintain the required
standard and conduct which involves a consistent failure
to do so. The former directs attention to the nature and consequences of
failure, which may be sufficiently serious to raise questions as to the
lawyer’s competence and diligence and thereby
warrant the description
substantial. The reference to a “consistent failure “is to ongoing
or persisting acts of failing
on different occasions to reach or maintain the
required standard. The same or similar failures which occur on a series of
occasions and are explained by an overarching error of judgement on the
part of the lawyer (which is not itself the or a relevant
failure which is the
subject of complaint) do not involve a “consistent failure “in the
sense in which that expression
is used in this definition.
Board did not rely on the respondents conduct as being a “consistent
failure“ to reach or maintain a reasonable standard
of competence and
diligence. It submitted there was a “
substantial failure
the respondent to reach such reasonable standard.
are comfortably satisfied that the delay and neglect by the respondent is
professional misconduct. He failed to institute proceedings
in a timely manner,
he made no attempt to serve ‘the Claim’ even when filed, he allowed
the time for any fresh claim
to become statute barred, he failed to
communicate to the complainant all the significant matters arising throughout
his retainer,
such as the true status of her matter, and allowed the
complainant to labour under a false belief that mediation was a live step
process of recovering the alleged debt when it was not, the consequence being
that only after 12 years and the necessity to
seek alternative advice did the
complainant become aware of the true way and status of how her business had been
The matter may have resolved, or a repayment agreement made following
been followed up. Proceedings prudently should have issued whilst
the defendants
remained with the café business, at least before it shut in 2008. There
was no reason not to issue proceedings
even whilst an intended sale process of
the business was being pursued.
do not share the respondents doubt about the strength of the complainants
claim. From the respondents file, it was a strong claim
recognised as such by
the defendants and their lawyers’ admissions, and the complainants’
instructions following the
letter of the 3
of September 2008
refuted its assertions. A claim filed in court and served could have resulted in
a default judgement if not defended
or if contested by determination by
agreement or a magistrate giving judgement. Recovery could not be certain but
until December
2008 the café business was an asset of the defendants, and
once judgement there remained the ability to register a caveat
property at 16 Pearl Street Wivenhoe in the period prior to
its sale in December 2012.
of court proceedings could have been affected if reasonable attempts had been
made. If personal service failed an order for
substituted service obtained in
the ordinary course and by usual means of advertisement or bringing to the
defendants notice of
the proceedings by delivery to their
made on a finding of professional misconduct are principally directed to the
protection of the public. They are not principally
directed at punishment. We
noted at the outset of these reasons that the respondent has had a long history
of practice as a legal
practitioner in his community. He has no prior
disciplinary matters. He accepted his conduct amounted to the less serious,
unsatisfactory
professional conduct’ relatively early in the
investigation. Those factors are considered. However, his conduct was a
substantial
neglect of the complainants’ instructions and expectations and
of how a reasonably competent legal practitioner should act.
have outlined at length the respondents’ failures. A reprimand is an
appropriate order as it identifies standards the establishment
and maintenance
of which protects the public.
are satisfied that the orders sought by the Board are appropriate and
(1) the respondent is reprimanded; and
(2) The respondent is to pay the Boards costs of and incidental to the
application to be agreed or taxed in accordance with the
Supreme Court Rules
Court Book [CB]Exhibit FE-37:
magistrates
Court (Civil Division) Rules
Exhibit FE 27 page 108
Rules of Practice
1994 Rule 10(1) and Rule 10(2)
Approved by The Full Court Supreme Court Tasmania in
Legal Profession Board
of Tasmania v Glyn Williams
Legal Profession Board
of Tasmania v Williams [2022] TASSC46
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (641 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter