URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCCA/2025/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
KBR v Tasmania [2025] TASCCA 10 (30 July 2025)
[2025] TASCCA 10
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (COURT OF CRIMINAL
KBR v Tasmania
[2025] TASCCA
STATE OF TASMANIA
DELIVERED ON:
30 July 2025
HEARING DATE:
3 July 2025
Shanahan CJ, Estcourt J, Cuthbertson J
Criminal Law – Appeal and new trial – Verdict unreasonable or
insupportable having regard to evidence – Leave to
Appeal refused –
Appellant sought leave to appeal on the basis that his witnesses' evidence
contradicted the complainants'
– Whether competing accounts must have
raised a reasonable doubt – Credibility and reliability of oral testimony
for the jury – No power to intervene unless, by reason of other
matters, the jury must have been left with a reasonable doubt–
entitled to accept the evidence of all six complainants – Evidence of the
appellant's guilt was strong – No possibility
that an innocent person was
convicted - Appeal against sentence on the grounds it was manifestly excessive
Aust Dig Criminal Law
Legislation:
Criminal Code Act 1924
Aliano v Tasmania
[2025] TASCCA 4
State of Tasmania
[2024] TASCCA 12
AWK v Tasmania
[2024] TASCCA 5
Pell v The Queen
[2020] HCA 12
Chidiac v The Queen
[1991] HCA 4
(1991) 171 CLR 432
Chamberlain v The Queen
[1984] HCA 7
(1984) 153 CLR 521
Libke v The Queen
[2007] HCA 30
230 CLR 559
, considered.
Criminal Law – Appeal and new trial – Appeal against sentence
– Grounds for interference – Sentence manifestly
excessive or
inadequate – Appellant found guilty by jury – Convicted of eight
counts of indecent assault, four counts
of rape, one count of indecent act with
or directed at a child and two counts of persistent sexual abuse of a child
– Sentenced
to 21 years' imprisonment and not eligible for parole until 13
years served – Appellant submitted age and health were not given
sufficient weight – Relevant question whether sentence was unreasonable or
plainly unjust – Comparative sentencing data
of limited use –
Sentence was within sentencing judge's wide sentencing discretion –
Conformable with like sentences
– Sentence not manifestly excessive
– Appeal against sentence dismissed.
Aust Dig Criminal Law
Legislation:
Criminal Code Act 1924
DPP v Pearce
[2015] TASCCA 1
(2016) 28 Tas R 1
House v King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[2016] HCA 48
, referred to.
REPRESENTATION
: L Pennington, S
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Office of Director of Public
Prosecutions
Judgment Number:
[2025] TASCCA 10
paragraphs:
Serial No 10/2025
File No CCA 3004/2023
KBR v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
SHANAHAN, CJ
CUTHBERTSON
30 July 2025
Orders of the
to appeal against conviction is refused.
Serial No 10/2025
File No CCA 3004/2023
KBR v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
30 July 2025
the hearing of this appeal the Court refused leave to appeal against conviction
and dismissed the appeal against sentence. I
have had the benefit of reading
the reasons of Estcourt J with which I concur, and which reflect my reasons for
joining in the orders
of the Court.
File No CCA 3004/2023
KBR v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
30 July 2025
The appeal and the background
On 30 October 2023, the appellant KBR (a pseudonym adopted by the learned trial
judge), having been found guilty by a jury, was
convicted of eight counts of
indecent assault, four counts of rape, one count of an indecent act with or
directed at a child and
two counts of persistent sexual abuse of a child. The
crimes were committed intermittently over a 23-year period, against six
child complainants, two of whom were the appellant's biological
children and four of whom were his grandchildren or step-grandchildren.
The learned trial judge, Jago J, sentenced the appellant to imprisonment for 21
years and ordered that he not be eligible to apply
for parole until he had
served 13 years of that sentence.
The appellant appealed against the convictions and sentence ordered by her
Honour on the grounds that he was "wrongfully convicted"
and that the sentence
imposed was manifestly excessive. I note that the appellant has not referred to
the four counts of rape included
in her Honour's orders however that was an
oversight, and on the hearing of the appeal on 3 July 2025 the notice of appeal
was amended
to include the four counts of rape.
In law, the appellant's appeal to this Court was an appeal as of right against
his sentence but an application for leave to appeal
against his convictions.
Section 401 of the
Criminal Code
provides as
Right of appeal
(1) A person convicted before a court of trial may appeal to the Court
(a) against his conviction on any ground which involves a question of
(b) with the leave of the Court, or upon the certificate of the judge of the
court of trial that it is a fit case for appeal, against
his conviction upon a
ground of appeal –
(i) which involves a question of fact alone;
which involves a mixed question of fact and law
(iii) which appears to the Court to be a sufficient ground of appeal; and
against the sentence passed on his conviction
, unless the sentence is
one fixed by law." (Emphasis added.)
On the hearing of the appeal the Court ordered that leave to appeal against
conviction was refused and that the appeal against sentence
was dismissed. These
are my reasons for joining in that order.
Ground 1 – wrongful conviction
The law in relation to a ground of appeal of this nature was recently
encapsulated by Pearce J in
Aliano v Tasmania
[2025] TASCCA 4
as follows:
"25 The assertion that a verdict is unsafe and
unsatisfactory finds statutory expression in this State in the
, s 402(1), which provides that the Court 'shall allow the appeal if it
is of opinion that the verdict of the jury should be set aside
on the ground
that it is unreasonable or cannot be supported having regard to the evidence.'
The approach that an appellate court
must take when addressing 'the
unreasonableness ground' was authoritatively stated in the joint reasons of
Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson
and Toohey JJ in
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
at 493. The court must ask itself:
'whether it thinks that upon the whole of the evidence it was open to the
jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused
was guilty'.
explained in
, and restated in
MFA v The Queen
[2002] HCA 53
Pell v The Queen
[2020] HCA 12
268 CLR 123
question does not depend on whether, as a matter of law, there is evidence to
support the verdict, but rather whether the evidence
required the jury, acting
rationally, to have entertained a doubt as to the appellant's guilt. An
appellate court must conduct an
independent review of the evidence, but making
full allowance for advantages enjoyed by the jury, including from having seen
heard the witnesses. Because of the central role of the jury in the
administration of criminal justice, this Court is not to substitute
trial by an
appeal court for trial by jury:
R v Baden-Clay
[2016] HCA 35
258 CLR 308
The court must proceed on the basis that issues of credibility
and reliability of oral testimony are matters primarily for the jury.
function of this Court is then to examine the record to see whether,
notwithstanding that assessment, either by reason of other
inconsistencies, discrepancies, or other inadequacy, the court is satisfied that
the jury, acting rationally, ought nonetheless
to have entertained a reasonable
doubt as to proof of guilt
at 145 [39]." (Emphasis added.)
In my view, for the reasons that follow, no jury acting rationally could have
entertained a reasonable doubt as to the appellant's
guilt and leave to appeal
should be refused. The appeal against sentence should be dismissed.
Once again, I note, as was noted by this Court in
PAC v State of
[2024] TASCCA 12
, a refusal of leave to appeal in this case should
be seen as an expression of my view that the proposed appeal against conviction
was wholly unarguable and should have been recognised as such by the appellant's
counsel. Appeals so brought, unnecessarily tax judicial
resources, as may be
seen from the long and detailed reasons for judgment required of Wood J in
AWK v Tasmania
[2024] TASCCA 5.
Once again, I am obliged to observe that
care must be taken by counsel,
as officers of the Court
, to identify and
advance only arguable grounds of appeal. A failure to do so is a breach of
counsel's ethical obligations.
The background
In order to put it in a framework, the argument of counsel for the appellant
that "the jury were left with competing accounts which
should have raised a
doubt", it is useful to commence by setting out the learned trial judge's
findings of fact consistent with the
jury verdicts. I will use the pseudonyms
adopted by her Honour. Her Honour said:
"It is for me to find facts
for sentencing purposes consistent with the jury verdicts. For the purpose of
determining such facts,
I may only make findings adverse to the appellant if
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt they have been proved, and I may only make
findings of fact in his favour if they are proved on the balance of
probabilities. It is obvious from the verdicts that the jury,
or in one instance
the majority of the jury, were satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the truth
and reliability of the evidence
of the respective complainants. I am also
satisfied of the truthfulness and reliability of the testimony of each
complainant, and
I will sentence on the basis that each of the unlawful sexual
acts, which they described in their evidence, and which constituted
respective crime committed by the appellant happened as the complainant
described."
The appellant's daughter R
The learned trial judge in sentencing found that the first series of crimes
committed by the appellant occurred between 1 December
1996 and 12 March 1997.
In that period, he indecently assaulted his biological daughter, R, three times
across two occasions. R was
15 years old and had just finished Grade 10. The
first occasion occurred when R and the appellant were alone at her grandmother's
house. In the lead up to this, there had been an occasion when the appellant and
R had gone for a drive and the appellant had shown
her pornographic magazines.
Her Honour was satisfied that was an endeavour by the appellant to groom R into
accepting as normal the
behaviour he intended to perpetrate upon her. At the
grandmother's house, the appellant pushed R onto the bed, placed his hands down
her pants and underwear and touched her on the vagina. He rubbed the outside of
her vagina. R removed herself from the bed and left
the room. The appellant
persisted in his behaviour, came up behind her, grabbed her from behind, and
again put his hand down her
pants and underwear and touched her on the vagina.
He rubbed her vagina on the outside. He removed his penis from his clothing,
hold of R's hand and placed it upon his penis. He moved her hand back
and forth on his penis whilst still touching her vagina. After
the incident
finished, the appellant told R that she was not to say anything to her mother
because if she did, her mother would leave
and R would no longer have a mother.
That behaviour constituted two counts of indecent assault.
The third count of indecent assault committed against R occurred on an occasion
when the appellant and R were alone together in
a motor vehicle. R was seated in
the driver's seat and the appellant was instructing her on her driving. He
reached over and put
his hand under her skirt and underwear and touched her on
the vagina. He rubbed the outside of her vagina. After this incident ended,
appellant took R to a job interview and behaved as though what he had done to
her was normal.
The appellant's son A
The learned trial judge found that the next child the appellant sexually
assaulted was his biological son, A. Between 1 January
1996 and 31 December
1997, when A was 12 to 13 years of age, the appellant committed acts of indecent
assault and rape against A
on two separate occasions.
The first of those occasions occurred at the family home. Prior to this
incident occurring, there had been an occasion in which
the appellant had called
A up to his bedroom, put on a pornographic movie, and masturbated his own penis
in the presence of A, telling
A it was okay for him to do likewise.
Again, her Honour was satisfied that was indicative of the grooming behaviour
the appellant engaged in prior to his abuse of his
victims. Shortly after that
incident, the appellant invited A to his bedroom. There was a pornographic movie
playing. The appellant
removed his penis and began to masturbate himself. He
then grabbed hold of A's wrist, placed A's hand onto his penis and moved A's
hand backwards and forwards in a masturbating motion. That behaviour amounted to
the first count of indecent assault committed upon
A. The appellant then pushed
A onto the bed, pulled his trousers down and inserted his penis into A's anus.
He penetrated him for
one to two minutes. The act of anal rape was painful for
A. Afterwards, he told him to go and "clean himself up, keep his mouth shut
not tell anyone".
Following this incident, the appellant displayed further sexualised behaviour
towards A. On one occasion he invited A into the bathroom
to wash his back. The
appellant masturbated himself whilst in the bath and then made a joke about how
the ejaculate appeared in the
water. No criminal charge arose as a result of
that act, but her Honour again found that it was indicative of the sexual
and sexualised behaviour the appellant displayed towards his
The next occasion of sexual abuse against A occurred in the bathroom of the
family home. The appellant had asked A to assist him
in washing his back. As A
was doing this, the appellant began to masturbate himself. He then took hold of
A's hand, placed it upon
his penis and moved A's hand back and forth in a
masturbating motion. This behaviour amounted to the second occasion he committed
an indecent assault upon A. The appellant then instructed A to put his penis
into A's mouth and told him to "suck it like a lollypop".
This behaviour
amounted to the crime of rape. This crime ended when the appellant removed his
penis from A's mouth and ejaculated
into the bath. Following this incident, he
told A to keep his mouth shut and threatened him that, if he told anyone, he
taken away and there would be no one to look after the children. That
comment was made in the context of the appellant's wife having
illness, which prevented her from undertaking a number of care duties in respect
to the children. After these crimes were
committed the appellant gave A
cigarettes and other treats. He behaved towards him as though everything was
perfectly normal.
The appellant's step-grandson C
The next victim of the appellant's sexual abuse was his step-grandson, C. C's
father was the appellant's step-son. Between January
2009 and December 2010,
when C was aged approximately 12 to 13 years, the learned trial judge found that
the appellant committed
three crimes against C.
The first occasion occurred at the appellant's home when the appellant and C
were alone at the residence. The appellant put a pornographic
movie on and
invited C to sit with him and watch it. Whilst they were watching the movie, the
appellant exposed his penis and masturbated
himself. He told C that it was okay
and that he could do the same thing. C did as the appellant instructed him. This
incident finished
when the appellant ejaculated in the presence of C. This
behaviour amounted to the crime of an indecent act with or directed at a
The next crime also occurred at the appellant's house when the appellant and C
were alone together. The appellant invited C to go
to his bedroom. He put a
pornographic movie on. The appellant exposed his penis and began to touch
himself. He told C to take his
pants down and bend over the bed. The appellant
then inserted his penis into C's anus. It caused C pain. The act went on for
five minutes. When it finished, the appellant said to C "[I]t didn't hurt
that bad did it?....I used lube".
The second time the appellant raped C was in a milk truck. At the time the
appellant worked as a milk vendor and C had gone with
him to assist with
deliveries. In the early hours of the morning, the appellant parked the vehicle
in a car park and asked C to get
in the back of the milk truck with him and get
a drink. When C got into the back of the milk truck, the appellant shut the door
instructed C to bend over some milk crates. He pulled his penis out, used
spittle on C's anus and placed his penis into C's anus.
Again, this was painful
for C. Afterwards the appellant behaved towards C as if everything was
The appellant's grand-daughter M
The next criminal conduct the learned trial judge found perpetrated by the
appellant, was against his step-grand-daughter M. M's
father was another
step-son of the appellant. The appellant maintained a sexual relationship with M
between July 2011 and July 2015.
M was aged between 7 and 11 when the abuse
The jury were asked to consider three separate occasions on which unlawful
sexual acts were committed against M during the relevant
period. However, M's
evidence made it clear that these were not isolated occasions and that sexual
offences of the same nature were
perpetrated against her by the appellant on a
frequent and regular basis. M described the sexual abuse as happening "a lot",
ninety per cent of the time he was there" during the relevant period.
Whilst her Honour said that it was impossible to quantify the
frequency of the
abuse, she accepted the evidence of M that it happened on many occasions and the
abuse included the appellant variously
touching her to the outside and inside of
her vagina with his fingers and his tongue.
The specific unlawful sexual acts, which constituted the crime of persistent
sexual abuse of a child, as it related to M, are as
The first incident occurred at M's father's residence. M was in a bedroom with
her younger brother. The appellant and his wife regularly
attended the home for
a social visit. On this occasion the appellant entered the bedroom and pushed
the door so it was largely closed
but not latched. M was sitting on the top bed
of a set of bunkbeds. The appellant reached up, pulled her pants down and
touched the
outside of her vagina with his fingers. He rubbed the outside of her
vagina before inserting one or two fingers into her vagina.
The incident lasted
for about five minutes. When it finished, he told M not to tell anyone or she
would get into trouble. M's younger
brother was in the room when the sexual
abuse occurred.
The next specified occasion again occurred in the same bedroom in M's father's
house. This time M was alone in the room. The appellant
entered the room, took
M's pants down and used his fingers to touch the outside of her vagina. He then
placed his fingers inside
her vagina, before using his tongue to lick the
outside of her vagina and then lick the inside of her vagina. This episode of
abuse went on for approximately 10 to 15 minutes. Again, when it ended,
the appellant told M that if she told anyone she would be
in trouble.
The third specified occasion occurred in the same bedroom at M's father's
house. The appellant asked M to go to the bedroom with
him, sat her on the top
bunk, pulled her pants down, touched the outside of her vagina with his fingers,
touched the inside of her
vagina with his fingers and then proceeded to lick
both the outside and inside of her vagina. Again, when the incident ended, the
appellant told M not to tell anyone or she would be in
The appellant's step grand-daughter H
The next victim of the appellant's sexual abuse was his step-grandchild, H. H's
mother was in a relationship with one of the appellant's
step-sons, MR. H
referred to MR as her father and considered the appellant to be her grandfather.
When H was aged between eight and
13, she lived with her mother and MR. During
this time, the appellant and his wife would visit. It was on these occasions
would sexually abuse H.
Again, with respect to H, the jury were asked to consider three separate
identified occasions on which unlawful sexual acts were
committed. Again,
however, the learned trial judge noted that H's evidence made it clear that
these were not isolated occasions and
that sexual offences of a similar nature
were perpetrated against her by the appellant on a frequent and regular basis.
asked to recall how many times the sexual abuse occurred, her
evidence was "too many times to remember". She described it as happening
regularly between when she was six and when she was 13.
The first specified occasion occurred when H was alone with the appellant at
his home. The appellant's wife was at the hospital.
The appellant sat H down on
a mat in the lounge room, removed her pants and underpants and used his hand to
touch her on the vagina.
He touched her on both the outside and inside of her
vagina. He then used his tongue to lick her on both the outside and inside of
her vagina. After the incident ended, the appellant told H not to tell anyone or
she would be in "deep shit". H described being petrified
after this incident had
The second specified occasion occurred at the home where H was living with her
mother and step-father. The appellant was babysitting
H and her siblings. The
appellant came into a bedroom where H was playing with her brothers. He told her
brothers to leave the room
and appeared to lock the door. The appellant placed H
onto the bunk bed and pinned her down. He then used his hand to touch her on
vagina. He also used his tongue to lick her on the vagina. After this incident
occurred, the appellant left the room and acted
as though nothing had occurred.
H felt very uncomfortable.
The third specified occasion occurred at a house where the appellant was
living. The appellant took H to the laundry, sat her on
the washing machine,
held her there, removed her pants and underwear and then used his fingers to
touch both the outside and inside
of her vagina. He also inserted his tongue
into her vagina. After the incident ended, he told H not to tell anyone and to
The learned trial judge found that it was likely the sexual abuse of M and H
was occurring, at least in part, at the same time.
Her Honour said that in her
view that spoke to the extent of the appellant's sexual interest in young people
and also his attitude
of entitlement that he might treat children as mere
objects to satisfy his sexual interests.
The appellant's
grand-daughter G
The final victim of the appellant's abuse was his granddaughter, G. G's mother
was one of the appellant's daughters. On a single
day in July 2019, when G was
aged 16, the appellant committed three acts of indecent assault upon her. G was,
at that time, staying
with the appellant and her grandmother. On this day, G was
alone in the house with the appellant. Her grandmother had gone shopping.
appellant called G into the bedroom. He had a pornographic video playing on a
portable DVD player. He asked G to sit down and
watch it with him. Whilst doing
so, he asked G questions about whether she was sexually active and whether she
liked having sex.
Uncomfortable, G got up off the bed and walked from the room.
As she did so, the appellant came up behind her and placed her in a
bear hug. He
placed his erect penis against her bottom and pressed it into her. This
behaviour amounts to the first incident of indecent
G then moved away to the living room. As she went to sit on a couch, the
appellant pulled her down onto his lap. Her back was to
his front. The appellant
brushed his hand along her thigh and touched her on the vagina, over her
clothing. As he did this, the appellant
said, "What would you do if I gave you a
bit of a tickle?" G responded by saying "It would be weird because you are my
appellant replied, "That doesn't matter though". This behaviour
amounts to the second count of indecent assault.
G moved from the couch area into the kitchen. The appellant followed her. He
pulled her top out to expose her bra and breasts. He
said to her "You have nice
tits. I wish you weren't my granddaughter. I would fuck you myself". This was
the third incident of indecent
assault. Afterwards the appellant told G that she
could not tell anyone about what had occurred and if she did, it would ruin his
marriage to her grandmother. (G did, in fact, immediately tell a friend about
what the appellant had done to her).
The learned trial judge recorded that the appellant's offending came to light
when M "bravely" made a disclosure to a school counsellor.
The matter was
reported to police. As the investigation continued it became apparent there were
further victims of the appellant's
abuse and other members of the family also
made disclosures over time.
The appellant was interviewed by police on two separate occasions after his
alleged conduct came to light. The first interview occurred
on 13 September 2019
and related only to M. The second interview occurred on 13 November 2019 and
raised a number of the further
allegations. The appellant denied any sexual acts
towards any of the complainants. He suggested the allegations may be the result
of some collusion.
The appellant's submissions
Counsel for the appellant, in her written submissions, argued before this Court
as follows:
"318 It is accepted that the law in relation to appeals
against conviction is relatively settled.
Appellant accepts that the jury were best placed to weigh the evidence against
the Appellant.
is also accepted that in this instance the tendency notice would have played a
significant part in the jury's analysis of the evidence.
tendency notice did not displace the States obligation to prove the matters
beyond a reasonable doubt.
a doubt should have remained in the jury's minds in relation to the evidence led
323 The matter was one where the Appellant called
324 That evidence if accepted refuted many of the allegations brought.
examination of defence witnesses did not undermine the evidence given and in no
way showed that the evidence being given was
incorrect or false.
Accordingly,
the jury were left with competing accounts which should have raised a
As has already been noted the appellant gave two interviews to police. He
denied all allegations and suggested collusion. Each of
the complainants gave
evidence by way of pre-recording in terms of the findings of fact made by the
learned trial judge. The appellant
did not give evidence at trial but called
three witnesses, his wife, JR, his daughter, RLR, and his son, BR.
The appellant's counsel argued in her written submissions:
particular some of the evidence specifically
contradicted
the evidence
given by various complainants:
– her father did not have a key to the residence she said she was abused
in at the time of the allegations. [JR] was in
the vehicle on the day of the KFC
b [A] – the general evidence of the business of the
[C] – that he had not stayed overnight and had not been on a milk
d [M] – the opportunity for
the offending to have taken place.
e [H] – the opportunity for the offending to take place.
– the observations of [JR] on the day of the alleged indecent assaults and
the motivation to lie as a result of wanting
to obtain Centrelink.
of these matters alone and in combination should have resulted in the jury
having a doubt regarding the Appellant's guilt to the
charges." (Italics
As earlier noted, this Court must proceed on the basis that issues of
credibility and reliability of oral testimony are matters
primarily for the
assessment of the jury and must examine the record to see whether,
notwithstanding that assessment, either by reason
other evidence
inconsistencies
discrepancies
other inadequacy
Court is satisfied that the jury, acting rationally, ought nonetheless to have
entertained a reasonable doubt as to proof of
Thus, the appellant's appeal, as articulated in the written submissions of his
counsel, is that the witnesses he called raised inconsistencies,
discrepancies
and inadequacies in the evidence of the six complainants to the extent that it
can be said that
the evidence required the jury, acting rationally, to have
entertained a doubt as to the appellant's guilt
. That is to say that the
have entertained a reasonable
Libke v The Queen
[2007] HCA 30
230 CLR 559
per Hayne J (with whom Gleeson CJ and Heydon J agreed).
It is necessary therefore to examine the asserted "contradictions" to see if
that can be said of the whole of the evidence in this
contradictions - R
The appellant submits that R is contradicted in her evidence that she was
assaulted when she and the appellant were alone at her
grandmother's house when
the appellant did not have a key to the residence at the time of the
allegations.
The evidence "
in particular
" relied upon to
establish the contradiction, is that of R's mother who said that she and her
husband did not have a key to her mother's
unit until 2003.
The appellant submits that R is contradicted in her evidence that she was
assaulted in a motor vehicle by the appellant prior to
being dropped off for a
job interview at KFC.
The evidence relied on is that of R's mother who said that the appellant had
never given R driving lessons and that she had been
in the car that day and that
she and the appellant had both taken their daughter to the job interview and
waited in the car for her.
There was also a suggestion implicit in the appellant's submissions that R was
lying about the boys going mushrooming on an afternoon
with the appellant
because mushrooming is a morning activity and that she lied about being with the
appellant when he was watering
raspberries because she is allergic to
The contradictions – A
The appellant submits that A was contradicted in his evidence by "the general
evidence of the business of the house".
I take this submission to be a reference to the evidence of the appellant's
wife that the appellant would take a bath two to three
times a week to ease the
pain in his back, and that it was R, in particular, would help him wash his back
as the appellant could
not reach. The evidence was that the bathroom door would
be open on those occasions.
I note that the appellant's daughter, called by him, also confirmed that her
father had a bad back and would take hot baths and
that she would help her
father by washing his back, as would her brother A – she also said that
the bathroom door was always
open when her father took a
The contradictions - C
The appellant submits that C was contradicted in his evidence that he had
stayed overnight at the appellant's home and that he had
been on a milk run with
the appellant.
The evidence "
in particular
" relied upon to establish the contradiction
is that of the appellant's wife who said that C had never stayed overnight with
the appellant, and she did not recall that any of the grandchildren had
gone on the milk run with the appellant.
There is also reference made to the evidence of C's father that he had no
recall of C spending any time alone with his parents or
nights at his parents'
The contradictions
The appellant submits that M and H were contradicted in their evidence because
there was no opportunity for the offending to take
The evidence "
in particular
" relied upon to establish the contradiction
is that of the appellant's wife who said in relation to M that she had no recall
lock being on the bedroom door in which she slept and that this evidence
aligned with other evidence from MR and if M and H were
at MR's house to be
babysat, "it would be all of them who would be present".
contradictions – G
The appellant submits that G was contradicted in her evidence by the
observations of the appellant's wife on the day of the alleged
assaults, and the motivation to lie was "as a result of wanting to obtain
Centrelink" and being upset the appellant's wife
had said she could live with
The first of these asserted contradictions is a reference to the evidence of
the appellant's wife that she did recall G staying
with her and her husband for
one night on an occasion, but that at the time of the alleged assaults, she had
left the house on the
day for only 25 minutes and that when she returned G was
in the lounge, sitting on the couch "with her phone" and had said to the
appellant "Pop can you run me around to mum's?", which he did.
The second asserted contradiction is a reference to the following evidence
given by the appellant's wife:
"All right. And did you have any
discussions about Centrelink with G? .... Actually, no, until I got messages on
my phone from her.
Okay. And what was the nature of those messages? ... Well, quite nasty.
And what were they about though? ...Um, she reckoned that I'd told Centrelink
she could live at home. She could – she wanted
me to say she had no-where
to live, but that wasn't the truth. She could live at home. She could live with
me. But I hadn't even
talked to Centrelink at that stage."
Pell v The Queen
[2020] HCA 12
, 268 CLR [11], citing
Chidiac v The
[1991] HCA 4
(1991) 171 CLR 432
at 444 per Mason CJ, citing
Chamberlain v The
[1984] HCA 7
(1984) 153 CLR 521
at 618-619 per Deane J; see also
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
at 494 per Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ,
used the interrogative of "a significant possibility that an innocent person has
been convicted because the evidence did not establish guilt to the requisite
standard of proof". There is in my view absolutely no
possibility in the present
case that an innocent person has been convicted.
The "contradictions" advanced on behalf of the appellant, whether they be
characterised as inconsistencies or discrepancies or inadequacies,
and should not be dignified by any close analysis. The evidence of the
appellant's guilt was inexpugnably strong. The
asserted contradictions can be
judged by the relative marginality of the evidence cited in support of them that
I have set out in
substance above.
The jury were entitled to accept the evidence of all six complainants. There
was no serious suggestion of collusion and no realistic
suggestion of false
allegations and concoction other than the appellant's insistence that the
complainants were all lying.
The jury were entitled to treat the minor inconsistencies and apparent
anomalies pointed out by trial
in her closing address (and
pursued on appeal), as explicable in a variety of different ways, including
mistaken memories about non-determinative
detail, or the appellant's wife
seeking to aid him. Such matters did not compel a reasonable doubt.
This Court must proceed on the basis that issues of assessment of credibility
and reliability of oral testimony are matters primarily
for the jury and has no
power to intervene unless "by reason of other evidence", that assessment can be
seen to be unreasonable or
unsupportable. In my view, it cannot.
Above all else, the tendency evidence, which was cross-admissible in all six
cases against the appellant was denouncing. The jury
was entitled to use that
evidence, in the limited way that was explained to them, and along with the
complainants' testimony, to
conclude beyond any doubt that the appellant had a
propensity over many years to use children as the objects of his sexual
gratification.
Accepting that propensity evidence cannot be the sole determinant of, much less
a "shortcut" to, guilt, to say, as was submitted
to this Court by the
appellant's counsel, that it "accepted that in this instance the tendency notice
would have played a significant
part in the jury's analysis of the evidence" is
something of an understatement in this case.
As to questions of the memories of the complainants and issues of opportunity
for some of the crimes to have been committed and
"the business of the house", I
respectfully endorse what was said by Martin AJ in
AWK v Tasmania
"318 This appeal, and many of the
submissions advanced by the appellant, reflect and seek to perpetuate outdated
concepts and myths
surrounding the conduct to be 'expected' of child
complainants in sexual assault cases
Similarly, they seek to perpetuate
such concepts and myths about the evidence of child complainants, often given
many years after
the events. The submissions also overlook the risk-taking
behaviour of sexual predators commonly the subject of evidence in the criminal
agree with the observations of Wood J concerning submissions amounting to
speculation as to memories and behaviours 'expected' of
child complainants. As
her Honour has noted, there exists extensive research in this area. In addition
to research, there is a
wealth of experience in the criminal courts
demonstrating the fallacy underlying the outdated concepts to which I have
The observations of Wood J, which I also respectfully endorse, and which are to
an extent apposite here, were also made in
, at [278]-[280] and were
as follows:
"278 At times, there was an invitation to the jury to
speculate about matters on which there is a body of knowledge and research.
have already mentioned the matter of why the complainant did not make a
contemporaneous disclosure. Additionally, the contentions
concerned notions
incident of abuse alleged. There were
contentions propounded on behalf of the
appellant that if her account was true, then realistically the jury could expect
complainant would not forget or make a mistake about certain details,
often matters of context peripheral to the sexual conduct.
contentions were then pressed before this Court on appeal. This approach can be
seen in a number of the submissions
made, such as in relation to occasion one,
two and seven and how the complainant did not have a memory of putting on her
shoes before
going to the shed where the alleged abuse occurred, her failure to
mention the lock on the shed, and her lack of evidence about sensory
perceptions
such as pain and smell.
nature and operation of human memory is an area of extensive scientific
psychological research: Goodman-Delahunty, J, Nolan,
Gijn-Grosvenor, E L (2017).
Empirical guidance on the effects of child sexual
abuse on memory and complainants' evidence.
Royal Commission into
Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse. Furthermore, scientific findings
do not align, at least in some
key respects, with 'common sense' notions held
within the community about memory. Memory is not like a video tape which
records all details of a particular event in sequence and which can
then be played back years later.
defence counsel may be given considerable latitude by a trial judge in a closing
address, on appeal, counsel can expect the
Court to be cautious about such
contentions and to resist invitations to speculate and to fill gaps in the
evidence with counsel's
version of common sense or intuition. Counsel should
expect the Court to be conscious that memory is a field of expertise and
specialised
knowledge, to be alert to the risk or reality of counsel propounding
erroneous beliefs about memory, and to be aware that there was
no expert opinion
before the jury to support defence contentions made about memory. This
observation, of course, applies with equal
force to the State and contentions it
may make if it is suggested that matters of specialist knowledge are matters
upon which the
jury or the Court on appeal may speculate." (My emphasis.)
As will be obvious the proposed appeal against conviction has no merit and as
already noted, I would refuse leave to appeal.
The appeal against
The appellant's submissions in support of his sole ground of appeal that his
sentence was manifestly excessive are set out in his
counsel's written
submissions as follows:
"335 It cannot be ignored that the court
were sentencing for very serious conduct, relating to multiple complainants over
many years.
it is submitted that even giving these matters full weight the sentence was very
significant.
determination of this ground of appeal will be impacted upon by the
determination of ground 1 [that he was wrongly convicted].
is generally submitted that [KBR's] age and health were not given sufficient
The question for this Court is not whether sufficient weight was given to his
age and health. It is whether the sentence was manifestly
excessive. The legal
principles with respect to such a ground are trite.
The task for this Court in such cases is well established. The appellant must
establish that the sentence imposed was "unreasonable
or plainly unjust":
[2015] TASCCA 1
(2016) 28 Tas R 1
per Pearce J at [8], citing
House v King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
In passing sentence, the learned trial judge made the following comments
relevant to considerations of the appellant's age and health:
defendant is now 70 years of age. He has no prior convictions, which in my view
impact upon the sentencing exercise. There are
dated matters of assault police
and common assault, but they are of such an age that they carry no weight. The
defendant has a strong
work history being the primary provider for his family
until he became a full time carer for wife. I note however that in a matter
this nature, prior good character provides little by way of mitigation. The
defendant is in poor health. He suffers from a number
of medical conditions
including Parkinson's disease, diabetes, COPD, hypertension, osteoarthritis and
depression. Prior to his remand
in custody, he was taking a number of
medications, including some for pain relief which are no longer available to him
prison policy. He is finding his adjustment to an alternate medical
regime difficult. I accept the defendant's time in custody will
difficult because of his age and poor health. He is likely to be vulnerable
within the prison environment. I also accept
the defendant's incarceration will
be difficult for his wife. She suffers from a serious medical condition and the
defendant has
been her full-time carer for a number of years. His absence will
undoubtedly be keenly felt by her. The defendant's wife requires
the assistance
of a full-time carer and alternate arrangements will need to be made, which may
not be easy.
The defendant's advanced age and associated poor health are, of course,
relevant to the assessment of sentence, as is, the impact
of his incarceration
upon his wife. In my view however, none of these factors carry any significant
mitigatory value, particularly
when balanced against the objective seriousness
of the defendant's crimes and his high level of moral culpability for the
It may well be that given the defendant's age, he faces the prospect
of spending a considerable period of his remaining life in prison.
I bear that
in mind in formulating the appropriate sentence, but, that factor cannot, in
these circumstances, justify the imposition
of an unduly lenient sentence."
That approach to those considerations is entirely normative.
And, the question for this Court is not whether the sentence was "very
significant", as it was observed to be by the appellant's
counsel. It was a
heavy sentence passed for heinous crimes. The question for this Court is
whether, having regard to the legal principles
just set out, the sentence was
unreasonable or plainly unjust. In my view it was not. A heavy sentence was
Sentences for crimes of this nature have increased very significantly in the
last two decades.
[2016] HCA 48
259 CLR 256
the High Court said at
"...Consideration of 'current sentencing practices' will
include, where appropriate, the proper use of information about sentencing
patterns for an offence. The requirement of currency recognises that sentencing
practices for a particular offence or type of offence
may change over time
reflecting changes in community attitudes to some forms of offending.
example, current sentencing practices with respect to sexual offences may be
seen to depart from past practices by reason, inter
alia, of changes in
understanding of the long-term harm done to the victim.
So, too, may
current sentencing practices for offences involving domestic violence depart
from past sentencing practices for this
category of offence because of changes
in societal attitudes to domestic relations." (Emphasis added.)
There can be no tariff for the particular combination of crimes for which the
appellant was convicted, and comparative sentencing
data is of limited use given
the unique combination of particular circumstances involved. Nonetheless, some
examples serve to put
the sentence in this case into a regime.
, 3 August 2023, where the defendant pleaded guilty to two counts
of persistent abuse of a child, I passed a sentence of 16 years.
The defendant
was an ex-partner of the mother of two children and sexually abused the children
between ages 8-12 and 5-10. The defendant,
who was a friend of the victims'
family, committed multiple crimes of indecent assault and rape in what was an
egregious breach of
A sentence of 16 years was also passed by Brett J in
, 17 April 2023,
in a case where a jury had found the defendant guilty of two counts of
persistent sexual abuse of a young person.
The victims were the defendant's
biological daughters who he groomed and indecently assaulted and raped between
the ages of 12-15
A sentence of 25 years was passed by Pearce J in
11 May 2023, after
the defendant had been found guilty by a jury of four counts of persistent
sexual abuse of a child and two counts
of indecent assault. That was a grave
case of prolonged abuse by the defendant of his three biological children and
two children
in his household. The abuse included multiple vaginal rapes of
girls of very tender age.
The learned trial judge in passing sentence also made the following comments,
which cannot be gainsaid in my view:
"The fact is the defendant
perpetrated these crimes over a 23 year period. He manipulated the complainants
into silence by using the
threat of the destruction of the family and adverse
consequence for their loved grandmother. By so doing the defendant was not only
able to continue his sexual abuse but he gained the benefit of living freely
within the community during that time. He has avoided
responsibility for his
conduct until now. On the other hand, each of the complainants has had to live
with the consequences of his
criminal behaviour from the time the abuse was
perpetrated upon them. It would be inappropriate and unjust for considerable
to now flow because of the defendant's age and poor health.
The gravity of the defendant sexually abusing his biological children,
grandchildren and step-grandchildren hardly needs to be stated.
It was deviant
and incestuous behaviour. Over a 23 year period the defendant sexually abused
six young people, all of whom were members
of his extended family. The breach of
trust involved was enormous. The defendant bore a responsibility to nurture,
care and protect
his children and grandchildren, but instead he took advantage
of his position of trust within the family in order to abuse each of
them. In so
doing, the defendant destroyed important family bonds, including those of a
father and child, and has left the extended
family unit irreparably damaged. The
abuse occurred at a stage in each of the complainants' lives, which was of
importance for their
psychological, sexual and emotional development. Much of
the abuse was committed within the family homes where the children were
to feel safe and loved, but instead their homes were, I suspect, often permeated
by anxiety, distress and fear about what
might happen to them. This behaviour
was protracted and it was purposeful. It was not isolated nor spontaneous.
The defendant's behaviours encompassed all manner of sexual abuse, including
penetrative and non-penetrative acts. The acts by reason
of their nature and
incestuous character were degrading and humiliating. The defendant groomed his
victims to lower their inhibitions
and used threats and coercion to maintain
their silence. It is aggravating, in my view, that the defendant used the threat
family unit, and/or their grandmother would be adversely impacted if
the complainants disclosed the abuse. Such manipulation must
have exacerbated
the feelings of powerlessness each complainant experienced. The decision to
expose the abuse must have been a terribly
difficult one. Young children were
burdened with the choice of remaining silent and maintaining the family, or
protecting themselves
and risking decimation of the family unit. There is no
question that the behaviour of the defendant involves exceptionally serious
moral and criminal wrongdoing.
He has caused lasting and profound psychological and emotional harm to his
six victims. The sexual abuse he subjected them to has
been traumatic, it has
marred their childhood and significantly impacted their adult lives. I have
received victim impact statements
from five of the six complainants. Those
statements eloquently reveal the extent and nature of the harm caused by the
abuse and the
pain and hurt caused by the consequential destruction of family
relationships. The statements courageously describe the pervasive
and adverse
psychological impact that is understood and accepted to flow from crimes of this
nature. In respect to the complainant
from whom I did not receive an impact
statement, I nevertheless sentence on the basis that it is presumed that sexual
crimes against
children cause harm. In any event, the impact these crimes have
had upon each complainants was also apparent from their evidence.
The enormity
of the conflicting emotions they all experienced and the impact that has had
upon them was plain. I am satisfied the
defendant's conduct has had a profound
and deleterious effect upon each one of the complainants, which is likely to be
lifelong and
the true effect of which is quite frankly, immeasurable. It can
only be hoped that the finalisation of sentence may offer the opportunity
some healings to begin.
I have regard to the aggravating circumstances I am required to take into
account by virtue of the
Sentencing Act
, in particular
sub-sections (1)(a),(c),(d) and (da). I take into account generally the factors
enunciated as relevant to sentencing
child sexual offences in
[2017] TASCCA 4.
The defendant is not entitled to any discount on his sentence for pleading
guilty. Each of the complainants were required to endure
the ordeal of giving
evidence and whilst the defendant is certainly not to be punished for exercising
his right to trial, I have
no doubt each complainant found the court process a
difficult one. The defendant has demonstrated no remorse nor insight into the
gravely serious nature of his conduct.
The sentencing goals, which are prominent in sentencing a matter of this
nature, are community protection, punishment, denunciation
and vindication of
the victims and recognition of the individual harm they have suffered. The
sentence must make clear to the defendant
and others that those who commit
sexual abuse against children, can expect to receive harsh punishment. This
Court has an obligation
to endeavour to protect children and deter such abuse by
the imposition of strong sentences that reflect society's condemnation of
behaviour."
It is well understood, as was observed by the learned trial judge, that in
sentencing for child sexual offences the principles of
general deterrence,
denunciation and vindication of victims are to the fore and I have no hesitation
in concluding that the sentence
imposed on the appellant was not manifestly
excessive. The appellant's assertion of his age and health being underweighted
Honour does not lead me to a different conclusion. I regard the sentence
as strong, but well within her Honour's wide sentencing
discretion and
conformable with sentences passed by other judges of this Court in grave cases
of the sexual abuse of children.
I would dismiss the appeal against
File No 3004/2023
KBR v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
CUTHBERTSON J
30 July 2025
On 3 July 2025, I joined in ordering that the appellant be refused leave to
appeal against conviction and that his appeal against
sentence be dismissed. I
have read the reasons for judgment of Estcourt J and agree with them. They
reflect my own reasons for
joining in the orders of the Court.
The appellant's counsel on this
appeal was not counsel on the trial.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (270 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter