URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASRPDComm/2009/39.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:20:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Devonport & Environs Planning Scheme 1984 Amendment AM 2008/03 [2009] TASRPDComm 39 (8 September 2009)
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Planning and Approvals Act 1993
Resource Planning and
Development Commission Act 1997
Devonport and Environs Planning Scheme 1984
Draft Amendment AM 2008/03
The Amendment
The amendment seeks to rezone rural land for industrial purposes and introduce
provisions complementary to draft amendment 3/08 to
the Latrobe Planning Scheme
No.1 of 1994, to facilitate development of a regional industrial estate that is
integrated in terms of
use, development standards and
infrastructure.
meeting on 2 February 2009 and pursuant to Section 8 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission Act 1997
, the Commission
delegated to Commissioner Roger Howlett and Mr John Vandenberg jointly and
powers and functions under
sections 40
(2), of the
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
in relation to draft amendment
2008/03 to the Devonport and Environs Planning Scheme 1984; and
connection with the exercise of those powers in performance of those functions,
its powers under Part 3 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission
For several years three Councils in the region –
Devonport, Latrobe and Kentish, together with the Department of Economic
Development
(DED), the Department of Infrastructure Energy and Resources (DIER)
and the Department of Justice(DoJ)Land Use Planning Branch –
have jointly
investigated the demand for, and availability of, land for industrial purposes.
The most recent of those investigations
is the Mersey Regional Industrial Area
Planning Study prepared by Hydro Tasmania Consulting. (Version no. 2, finalised
20 June 2008.)
It has been adopted by the Devonport Council as a supporting
document for the amendment.
An extensive analysis of seven potential industrial sites has
identified land near the Devonport Airport as the most suitable site
industrial development to suit the current and future needs of the three
(the Study Area
).” (Hydro Tasmania Consulting,
The report examined the environmental, social and economic values within the
Study Area. The findings and some relevant recommendations
of the report are
included in the following summary, together with information supplied by the
Council in its report pursuant to
Land Use Planning and Approvals
The three local government areas occupy 1,850 km
have a combined population of approximately 37,000 people. Agriculture is a
major industry in the region and the temperate climate
would be favourable for
more capital-intensive Controlled Environment Agriculture (CEA), or in other
words, hydroponic cultivation
in glass houses or equivalent structures.
The Study Area occupies part of the coastal plain between Pardoe Beach and
Brooke Street/ Pardoe Developmental Road and straddles
the Devonport/Latrobe
boundary west of the Devonport Airport. Approximately 62% of the study area is
within the Latrobe municipality
and 38% within the City of Devonport. Apart from
the coastal reserve and the city’s sewerage treatment plant, the land is
owned and currently used for agricultural/grazing
The site occupies some 167 hectares, of which approximately 28 ha is not
available for development and a further 27 ha would be required
for service and
transport infrastructure, leaving a balance of 112 hectares of land available
for new industrial development.
Devonport’s amendment proposes to create a Mersey Regional Industrial Zone
(MRIZ) while the Latrobe proposal is to adopt specified
departures governed by
the same schedule for several titles which collectively form the Mersey Regional
Industrial Area (MRIA). For
the purposes of this decision the proposed MRIZ and
MRIA are referred to collectively under the umbrella term of Mersey Regional
Industrial Estate, or MRIE.
Figure 1. Aerial Photo of MRIE locality.
Pardoe Beach is a high energy beach system backed by vegetated dunes. Hydro
Consulting reported that the dunes were 10-15 metres
high in places. [However,
detailed contour information tabled at the hearing indicates that the dunes
range between 0 and 7m AHD.
(Lidar data acquired March 2008 for DPIW.)
Behind the coastal dune and wetland system, the land is generally flat, gently
sloping, cleared grazing land, crossed by northward
flowing drainage lines.
Levels range from 3.5m – 4 m AHD immediately south of the dunes to 8m
– 10m AHD along the Brooke
Street frontage. Land Systems of Tasmania
classifies the area as equivalent to (non-prime) Class 4 agricultural land,
to wind erosion, waterlogging and salting. A site-specific land
capability survey has not been submitted.
The coastal fringe is also an area containing Aboriginal cultural heritage
values and holds extensive evidence of occupation, including
shell fragments,
seal bones and stone artefacts. Despite disturbance by agricultural use and
municipal works the MRIE is reported
to contain “...
a potentially
valuable archaeological deposit
...” Also, “
The exposed
cultural material is extremely fragile and vulnerable to damage
The study noted, at p.18, “
The area adjacent to the coastline for
approximately 1.6 km (from the eastern boundary to Teatree Rd on the western
edge) and extending
approximately 300m inland, should be excluded from any
future development by zoning it appropriately. The extent of the cultural
deposit, and the potential for sub-surface material to be present makes it
unlikely that impacting on this site could be avoided
if it was subject to
development.”
It recommended that a complete detailed survey by an
Aboriginal Heritage Officer should precede any development.
Some minor historic cultural heritage items (farm machinery etc) were located at
the boundary of Ransford Gardens, but no other items
of historic significance
were noted.
From desktop research, Hydro Consulting reported there are scattered patches of
native forest within the MRIE, including two threatened
native vegetation
communities (
Eucalyptus ovata
forest and woodland,
swamp forest). These communities were recommended by the study to
be excluded from development. Any clearing of this vegetation would
separate approval under a Forest Practices Plan. Further surveys were also
recommended to verify potential habitats for the
green and gold frog, a
burrowing crayfish, the swift parrot and the masked owl, so that mitigation
strategies could be implemented.
As a consequence of agricultural clearing of the original natural forest
vegetation there are extensive views across the site from
Brooke Street and
Pardoe Road to the coastal dunes. Future industrial developments have the
potential to interrupt those views, although
building heights may be limited by
planning controls required for protection of airspace near the Devonport
Within the Devonport and Environs Planning Scheme the MRIE and land to the south
is zoned predominantly Rural, with a small area
zoned Public Purposes at the
Pardoe Waste Water Treatment Plant, around which is a buffer area. Land to the
west of Tea Tree Lane
is zoned Closed Residential. A Noise Exposure overlay,
related to aircraft operation, applies to a coastal strip of land approximately
0.5 km wide.
Available infrastructure in the vicinity includes gas, electricity, water,
sewerage and the roads network. Water and sewerage infrastructure
may need to be
upgraded and the Council foreshadowed that headworks charges may be required
from developers of the MRIE.
Port Sorell Road and Pardoe Road are Category 2 (Regional Freight Road) State
Roads between the Bass Highway and the airport access
road. Sections of Brooke
Street are controlled by each relevant Council. All these roads are part of the
State’s gazetted High
Productivity Vehicle Network.
Brooke Street and Pardoe Development Road join Port Sorell Main Road at a
four-leg roundabout at the southern extremity of the MRIE.
Recorded traffic
levels in recent years are shown in the following table.
Table 1. Traffic volumes in the vicinity of the
Port Sorell MR south of Pardoe Rd
(October 2006)
Pardoe Developmental Rd.
(October 2006)
1.4km west of Port Sorell MR
(August 2002)
Average annual daily traffic AADT
Average weekday traffic
Morning weekday peak hour traffic
Afternoon weekday hour traffic
Source: Adapted from Hydro Consulting study, Appendix 5,
The traffic assessment of the existing road network noted a low crash rate
history on State controlled roads but a high crash rate
in Brooke Street,
including two fatalities. A number of deficiencies in the network were noted,
chiefly in relation to road delineation,
speed limit discrepancies and
The Hydro Consulting report provides a site analysis diagram and suggests
staging development from the southern and western edges
of the MRIE, as shown
Figure 2: Site analysis. (Source: Hydro Consulting, 2008)
Documents supplied
by Planning Authority
• Certified amendment Am 2008/03 in the form of
rezoning 3 titles to Mersey Regional Industrial Zone, applying an overlay
a ‘low impact area’, ‘general industrial area’
and ‘environmental management area’ and new Schedule
11 applying to
the MRI zone.
• MRI Area Planning Study March 2008
• Representations received
(2) report including response to representations and
recommended modifications to the amendment.
Issues for Consideration
From examination of the applications, the following
matters require consideration: -
1. Demand, supply, location and suitability
of industrial land.
development, including potential impacts of climate change, potential land use
conflict and the significance of conservation,
archaeological and cultural
heritage values.
infrastructure and traffic, including:
(a) interaction between airport operations and other uses; and
(b) form, layout and staging of infrastructure and development, including
connectivity across the municipal boundary and relationship
to the existing
industrial zone in the adjacent municipality.
Compatibility
of planning provisions in the amendment with the neighbouring planning scheme
and with the adopted Framework for the
preparation of planning schemes, and
general drafting matters.
Representors
#1.Capt. R.J. Burgess
#2 Dennis Savage
#3 G.C. Walker & others (23
#4 Jill Selby & others (15 names)
Senator Christine Milne
Issues raised in Representations
Inappropriate
location for industry due to prevailing winds (#1,) presence of airport (#3) and
loss of views (#4).
Inappropriate
location for development due to predicted climate change impacts (#3,#4) such as
sea level rise, erosion, storm surge
and coastal incursion.
traffic problems (#2,#3), especially with B-doubles in Brooke Street (#1,#3) and
safety of children (#4).
of farmland (#2), inconsistent with State Agricultural Policy (#3) and
environmental problems (#2,) including odour and air pollution
environmental problems including drainage, pollution, watercourse protection,
insufficient setbacks and impact on endangered
species (#3).
waste water treatment infrastructure (#3).
Inconsistent
with State Coastal Policy in regard to environmental and cultural values
to several Schedule 1 Objectives of LUPA in terms of fair, orderly and
sustainable development, impacts on tourism, recreation
and amenity, heritage
protection and effluent disposal for some industries (#3).
Council’s Response to the Representations
An environmental management area is proposed along the coastal strip.
Environmental Management and Pollution Control Act 1994
is relied on
to protect residential amenity from airborne pollution. Access points from the
MRIZ to the road network should encourage
heavy vehicle use over the State Roads
in preference to Brooke Street. Some increase in traffic in Brooke Street was to
be expected
but would still be well within the capacity of that road.
: The concerns raised are non-specific and thought to be covered by
responses to other representations.
Re: Airport Protection - Tasports has not objected and has itself had
land zoned for light industry.
Re: Pardoe WWTP – Despite the recommendation that no modifications are
required, the discussion of this issue recommends that
of the amendment
and draft Clause S.11.5.3 be withdrawn, in order to retain the current buffer
area provisions at Clauses 8.17.1
and 8.17.2 of the planning scheme.
Re: Landscaping – A 15 m wide, 10m high landscape buffer is considered
Re: Climate change – All land is above 3.2m AHD and most is above 5m AHD
and considered not affected by sea level rise. Clause
S11.6.12 seeks to protect
the dune system from long term changes due to development.
Re: Environmental and Coastal Values – The issue will be addressed by the
Environmental Management Area within the MRIZ and
site specific controls on
development to protect threatened vegetation and fauna.
Re: Conversion of Rural Land – Conversion is seen as being to a more
effective and efficient use, including Controlled Environment
Agriculture. The
Class 4 agricultural land is not seen as locally or regionally significant and
fettering of agricultural use south
of Brooke St is not anticipated.
Re: RMPS Objectives – The draft amendment is seen as consistent with the
RMPS. The site is not used for recreation, and there
will be buffers and
landscaping around the perimeter. There are no heritage items on the site.
Brooke Street is capable of handling anticipated traffic without
prejudice to the safety of children at the Family Day Care Centre
located at 356
Brooke St. EMPCA is the mechanism for controlling emissions from industry
Similar response to that given for #3 in regard to climate
Council noted that in response to a representation on the Latrobe amendment, it
recommended changing the wording of proposed Clause
S11.6.2(1) to read,
“(1) A primary intersection located off Brooke Street within a distance of
300m west of the Brooke Street/Port
Sorell Main Road/Pardoe Development Road
intersection; and”. Council also recommended a wording change to the
landscaping standard
to read “...15m and an average...”. It also
reiterated the changes recommended for the WWTP buffer.
Date and Place of Hearing
April 2009 at the Devonport Council Chambers.
Attendance at the Hearing
Latrobe Council
Sharon Holland, Strategic planner
Devonport Council
Rebecca Wilson, planner
Simon Heung, Engineering services manager
Milan Prodanovic, consultant traffic engineer (by phone)
Department of Economic Development and Tourism
Steven Jarman, Regional manager
Tanya Trost, Project manager
Representors
Mrs Rosemary McLaren
Mr Gilbert Walker
Sen. Christine Milne
Mrs Avis Trickett
Mr Geoff Trickett
Capt Dick Burgess
Interested Persons
David Bovill, affected
Sharn Archer obo Margaret Savage
Reasons for the Decisions
Demand, supply, location and
suitability of industrial land.
The demand for industrial land in the Devonport region has been reported on by
various consultants over the last six years (Lester
Franks 2003, Pitt &
Sherry 2003, SEMF 2005, SGS Economics and Planning 2008, Hydro Consulting 2008)
and a perceived shortage
of suitably located and serviced land was reinforced by
Council staff at the hearing.
Devonport had received 18 applications for new industrial developments since
2007. Most of the vacant industrial zoned land, approximately
25 hectares, was
fragmented and unsuitable for development, for reasons such as small size,
servicing constraints, access, topography,
or nearby residential use. Ms Wilson
advised that one recently serviced parcel at Spreyton represented only 4 –
6 years supply
before all available industrial land would be taken
The SGS report to the Department of Economic Development (DED) projected, for
each Tasmanian region, the area of industrial land
required in the period
2006-2011 to cater for local service industries (related to population growth
rates) and export oriented
industries (related to employment growth rates). For
the Burnie-Devonport region the greatest land demand was estimated at 15.2
for local service industries (recent trend continuing) and 96.9 ha for
export oriented industries (high estimate). However, even
low growth projections
implied a regional demand for 82 hectares of land in
The export led
demand is the more significant. The high growth demand scenario assigned 25.6 ha
for Devonport and 10.7 ha for Latrobe
for export industries whereas local
service industries were projected to require 2 .8 ha and 3.3 ha
respectively.
DED supplied detailed information about Controlled Environment
Agriculture
advised that the site was particularly well located for this type of export
industry due to its topography, mild climate, services
(especially water and
gas) and proximity to ports and a workforce. Mr Jarvis advised that there was
investor interest in establishing
a 4 hectare CEA operation which if successful
could be replicated across other parts of the MRIE.
It is considered that, subject to some qualifications that will be discussed
later in this decision, the draft amendment provides
an appropriate strategic
location for some forms of industrial development. The MRIE site has the
advantages of proximity to ports,
reticulated services of water, sewer,
electricity and gas and ready access to the State Road network. The potential
for Controlled
Environment Agriculture clearly has significance for export led
demand for land.
Even so, the amount of land proposed to be developed has not, in our opinion,
been sufficiently justified by the analysis of projected
supply and demand.
Assuming the adjacent, undeveloped, 30 ha light industry zone (Tasports) is
included as potentially available,
then the combined developable area is
approximately 169 ha (139+30), from which perhaps 20% can be deducted for roads
and service
easements, leaving a net area of around 135 hectares. The 5-year
period demand identified by consultants SGS for Devonport and Latrobe
36.3 ha for export industries and 6.1 ha for local service
industries.
It is considered that the extent of land immediately available for development
within the rezoning should be reduced at this time
to the southern and western
sectors of the MRIA, (as suggested by Hydro Consulting) but without foreclosing
on options for an eventual
northward extension, staged in accordance with a long
term outline development plan, and as justified by expressed
Issue 2 Coastal development etc
The amendment includes, within the MRIZ, all the private land, comprising 3
titles, bounded by the State coastal reserve, Teatree
Lane, Brooke Street, and
the Latrobe municipal boundary. The coastal reserve is only 30 metres wide. Land
within the coastal dune
system is proposed to be included in an Environmental
Management Area. The standard for climate change in the amendment sets a
floor level of 2.9m AHD (Australian Height Datum), although on
Council’s evidence that would be below the predominant ground
level of the
The Hydro Consulting report recognised that the environmental and cultural
values of the coastal strip required protection and recommended
that a corridor,
extending 300m inland from the coast be excluded from development, to enable
protection and further investigation
of aboriginal cultural heritage. The site
analysis plan shows two ‘cultural and environmental values’ sites
that include
the dune system and the lower reaches of Pardoe Creek. The coastal
zone shown is variable in width but approximately 100m wide. The
limitation surfaces associated with flight paths from the airport are also shown
as extending over the northern part of
the MRIE. (See Figure 2)
Senator Milne and others at the hearing alluded to the risks of climate change,
sea level rise and coastal inundation. Senator Milne
referenced several
Australian planning appeal decisions in which coastal development had been
refused on the basis of climate change
The Sharples Report
referred to by Senator Milne and others, provides guidance about the
vulnerability of coastal landforms to the potential consequences
of sea level
rise. The report specifically maps (at Appendix 1, p.133) the Turners
Beach-Northdown Beach segment of the coastline
and characterises the MRIE
coastal strip as “Open sandy shores backed by low sand plains –
erosion + recession vulnerability”.
However it was noted by representors
that scientific evidence compiled since 2006 suggests that the rate of sea level
rise may be
faster than previously thought.
The Commission has digital maps of coastal areas that are at risk from sea level
rise. These are based on Sharples’ models
of coastal vulnerability. The
MRIE section is shown in Figure 3 below, overlain on a Google aerial photo. The
yellow line encompasses
areas of potential flood vulnerability from the maximum
predicted sea level rise in 2100. (Due to scaling differences the position
the line is indicative only, not definitive, and requires detailed on-site
verification.)
Figure 3. Extent of coastal vulnerability. (Source: RPDC)
It should be noted that the Pardoe WWTP is within the vulnerable
The amendment recognises, to some degree, that development should be restricted
in the coastal zone. Following the line of the ‘coastal
zone’ in the
site analysis map, the amendments set aside an ‘Environmental Management
Area’ of variable width (~100m)
adjacent to the Crown coastal reservation.
The extent of the Environmental Management Area is shown on the amendment plans
continuous across the municipal boundary. A ‘General Impact
Area’ (on the amendment plan it is incorrectly called a General
Area) and a ‘Low Impact Area’ are also shown on the
The only uses permitted in the Environmental Management Area are Utilities and
‘Natural and cultural values management’.
The latter term is defined
use of land to protect, conserve and manage ecological systems,
cultural sites or landscapes
Utilities is defined as: - “
use of land for :
(a) telecommunications; or
(b) transmitting or distributing gas, oil, or power; or
(c) transport networks; or
(d) collecting, treating, transmitting, storing or distributing water;
(e) collecting, treating, or disposing of storm or floodwater, sewage or
Examples are a gas, water or sewerage main; electrical sub-station; power
line; pumping station; retarding basin; road; railway line;
sewage treatment
plant; water storage dam; storm or flood water drain and
The definition of Utilities would include the existing waste water treatment
plant but would also allow (as permitted status without
qualification) many
other types of works that could be inappropriate in a sensitive coastal
environment.
There are some difficulties with Council’s approach to this issue. First,
the Environmental Management Area is not considered
extensive enough to protect
the cultural and environmental values identified by Hydro Consulting or to
prevent development on areas
of potential hazard due to sea level rise and storm
Second, the boundaries of the Areas are not readily identifiable on the ground
by title boundaries, fences, contours, survey lines
or physical features. The
nominated, free-form Area boundaries could be difficult to reconcile with later
subdivisional boundaries
and could lead to confusion about the permissible uses
on particular lots.
Third, there are no statements of intent or objectives to distinguish the
desired outcomes for the three Areas or guide the exercise
of discretion within
the MRIE. The intent can only be presumed from comparison of the various Tables
of Use. This is not considered
to be sufficiently clear to establish a staged
development strategy, locate proposed infrastructure or guide applicants seeking
permission.
Fourth, the scope of permitted Utilities, as defined, is such that uses or
developments that may adversely impact upon environmental
and cultural values in
the Environmental Management Area, could not be refused. The two use classes
proposed to be permitted in the
Area are potentially incompatible but the risk
can be minimised by an appropriate qualifying statement in the Table of
It is considered that the boundaries of the three Areas within the MRIE should
be modified and that an Outline Development Plan should
be prepared for the MRIE
+ adjacent light industrial zone (in Latrobe municipal area). Objectives should
be formulated to guide use
and development within the Areas as indicated in the
discussion of Issue 4.
The recommended Area boundaries may be refined in the light of more detailed
site investigation. The aim is to make the boundaries
identifiable on the ground
and more easily capable of incorporation into possible subdivision
Issue 3. Transport infrastructure etc
(a) Road Network
The Council relied on the Traffic Assessment prepared by Milan Prodanovic,
attached as Appendix 5 to the Hydro Consulting report.
Mr Prodanovic’s
analysis of the existing traffic situation was summarised in the Background
section of this decision.
In regard to the proposed industrial estate, the Traffic Assessment used a
figure of 28 employees per developed
to estimate
that full development of 112 hectares would result in up to 3,136 people being
employed within the MRI estate. Total
daily traffic generation would be in the
order of 6,800 vehicles (6,000 cars, 800 commercial vehicles), with an afternoon
total of 1,085 vehicles.
Representors were especially concerned about the current situation in Brooke
Street, including its width, certain bends that were
regarded as dangerous, the
risk to users of the childcare facility and the volume, speed and type of
traffic (which includes B-doubles).
Council advised that Brooke Street would be
widened and that new access point designs would be assessed by Council engineers
development application stage.
At the hearing it was revealed that Tea Tree Lane is not built within its road
reserve. Council affirmed that there was no intention
to allow access to the
industrial estate from this road. The amendment should be modified to reinforce
that intention.
The location of access roads into the industrial estate could significantly
influence the proportion of traffic flowing to the Bass
Highway via either
Brooke Street or Port Sorell Main Road. Subject to several assumptions about
traffic origins and destinations,
the traffic assessment suggested that by
locating the principal access roads not more than 300m west of the Port
Sorell/Brooke Street
roundabout, most of the industrial estate traffic could be
encouraged to use Port Sorell Road as a preferred route to the Bass Highway.
Nevertheless, the traffic assessment forecast that over the next 15 years, 10%
of employee traffic (i.e. 600 vehicles per day) could
be generated from East
Devonport and around 15% of the commercial traffic (120 vpd) would travel to and
from the East Devonport port
area via Brooke St/Tarleton Street.
The suggested access location is reflected in standards (in tabular form) for
the MRIZ (Clause S11.6.2) which state: -
“Objective : To ensure that traffic movements to and from the MRIZ occur
at appropriate locations.
Performance Criteria – P1 No performance criteria.
Acceptable Solution – A1 Access to the MRIZ is limited to:
(1) A primary intersection located off Brooke Street at a distance of
approximately 300m west of the Brooke Street/Port Sorell Main
Road/Pardoe
Developmental Road intersection; and
(2) A secondary intersection to be located along Pardoe Developmental Road;
(3) A secondary intersection off Brooke Street serving the Area at the western
end of the MRIZ without road connectivity with the
remainder of the MRIZ.
Performance Criteria - P2 No performance criteria
Acceptable Solution A2 All lots are accessed from roads wholly located within
The modification proposed by Latrobe Council, (shown with text struck through)
and adopted by Devonport Council at the hearing, is:
“A1 Access to the MRIA is limited to:
(1) One or possibly two high standard intersections with a channelised design,
possibly in the form of a roundabout to be located
along Pardoe Developmental
(2) A primary
An intersection located
Brooke Street
within a distance of approximately 300m west
of the Brooke Street/Port Sorell Main Road/Pardoe Developmental Road
intersection; and
(3) A secondary intersection
to be located along Pardoe
Developmental Road; and
A secondary intersection off Brooke Street serving
the western end of the MRIA without road connectivity with the
remainder of the MRIA.”
The concerns with this approach and the proposed road network standard are that:
(a) Although the Council reported that the Department of Infrastructure Energy
and Resources had been consulted and had endorsed
the traffic assessment, no
written confirmation from DIER, that the proposed access points to the State
Road are acceptable, has
(b) The approach takes the existing network as a satisfactory
‘given’, notwithstanding the crash history in Brooke Street,
presumes that a major industrial estate, generating significant traffic volumes,
can be successfully grafted on to it merely
by specifying the new access points.
(c) Opportunities to improve the network, through design of the industrial
estate, do not to appear to have been explored. Furthermore,
the specification
of only one acceptable solution and the absence of a performance criterion may
be premature and preclude any other
network design alternatives from being
considered.
(d) Acknowledged problems in providing access to the adjacent light industrial
zone have not been addressed by the amendment but
left to future development
applications to resolve, if possible.
(e) Conflict perceived by residents, between industrial traffic and residential
uses in Brooke Street, may be exacerbated.
(f) The modification suggested by the Council introduces a degree of uncertainty
(g) The proposed standards for development that allude to ‘a development
plan’ deal only with subdivision and could be
read as a requirement for
each application separately, rather than an integrated plan for roads,
infrastructure, land use and the
protection of identified environmental and
cultural features.
(h) The reference to an access point in Latrobe municipal area, 300m west of the
roundabout, is obviously inapplicable to the Devonport
planning scheme.
b) Airport operations
Signatories to Mr Walker’s representation were concerned that some food
processing industries could generate wastes that would
attract birds to the
industrial estate, thus raising the level of hazard to aircraft. Concern was
also expressed about the location
of occupied buildings under flight paths and
the risk of electrical interference from industrial use affecting aircraft
and safety. No expert evidence was presented to support or refute
those concerns.
It is considered that the amendment standard for Airport Protection (S11.5.1) is
sufficient to address the concerns raised by representors.
Acceptable solution
A1 requires a use not to increase the presence of birds and acceptable solution
A4 prohibits interference (and
this can be taken to include electromagnetic
interference) with the airport’s or aircraft navigation or communication
facilities.
Modifications to Area boundaries previously mentioned will reduce
the potential for building within the obstacle limitation areas
(c) Other infrastructure
Devonport’s waste water treatment plant (the Pardoe WWTP) also accepts
effluent from the Latrobe sewerage system at times of
low load, usually
overnight. When the WWTP is running at full load, Latrobe wastewater is delayed
in a holding tank. Devonport Council
advised that the capacity of the treatment
plant is 600l/s and the outfall pipe had a capacity of 900l/s. Devonport Council
that the plant’s capacity could be increased to 900l/s as and when
Representors were concerned that the WWTP was basically a primary treatment
mixing plant rather than a secondary treatment plant,
and that effluent from
some potential industrial uses, e.g. an abattoir, would exacerbate existing
odour problems and possible pollution
of coastal waters.
It is understood that Devonport has an effective trade waste policy that
prevents excessive loadings on the treatment plant. The
questions of required
capacity, standard of treatment and control of emissions will be matters for the
newly formed regional servicing
authority, Cradle Water, to address. This
authority will need to be involved in site planning for the
The certified amendment proposed to delete the current buffer area around the
treatment plant and to substitute development standards
to control emissions and
prevent detrimental impacts on persons or products in premises located within
500m of the WWTP. However,
in its report pursuant to
of LUPAA, Council
recommended retention of the buffer area and the removal of clause S11.5.3 of
the certified amendment. Those
proposed modifications are
acceptable.
A natural gas pipeline runs along Brooke Street and Pardoe Road past the MRIE.
Installed in 2007 to serve the Wesley Vale paper mill,
DED advised it was
deliberately oversized along this section to cater for future industrial
Conclusions concerning strategic planning, road network and
infrastructure
It is considered that in the long term development of a major industrial estate
it is not desirable to jump from a broad brush zoning
to the assessment of
individual development applications without an intermediary step to plan the
overall layout and infrastructure
required. This site is sufficiently large, and
the various issues to be resolved are sufficiently complex, to warrant a
master planning exercise to formulate an Outline Development Plan
An ODP should be inserted in the current planning scheme.. The draft amendment
should be modified to require the preparation and
adoption of an ODP prior to
consideration of applications for use or development.
The conclusion on these issues reinforces the desirability of the State
Government, infrastructure providers and the two Councils
initiating a master
planning exercise for the transport network, infrastructure extension/expansion,
subdivision layout and the location
of uses, to precede the acceptance of
development applications. That master plan should be formulated and presented
for inclusion
in this draft amendment.
Issue 4 Drafting of the amendment
The amendment have been drafted in collaboration with Latrobe Council in the
form of a schedule which serves as a kind of ‘mini-scheme’
MRIE with its own statement of purpose, use class definitions and standards for
use and development. It is equivalent to
a ‘Strategic Industrial
Zone’ in the Template endorsed by the
Commission.
This format should assist the
later translation of the provisions into a new planning scheme for the region or
each municipal area
within the region.
The distinctions between the proposed Low Impact, General Impact and the
Environmental Management areas are not considered to be
sufficiently clearly
explained in the amendments and, as previously noted, the boundaries of these
areas could prove problematic.
It is considered that S.11.4. could be expanded along the following lines.
(New) “ S11.4.2 .
The Low Impact Management Area is intended to allow
for a limited range of industrial and related activities that will not have
detrimental
effects on residential uses in the vicinity.
S11.4.2.2 The General Impact Area is intended to allow for industrial and
related activities at locations that are unlikely to generate
adverse impacts on
residential amenity or the environment.
S11.4.2.3 The Environmental Management Area is intended to allow for the
investigation and protection of environmental and cultural
features, and the
avoidance of development in areas that are sensitive or may become affected by
climate change, sea level rise or
storm surge, whilst acknowledging the
continued presence of the Pardoe Waste Water Treatment Plant and the need for
its possible
expansion or upgrading, including the beneficial use of treated
Turning to consideration of permissible uses, with one exception the schedule
adopts the Template’s use class definitions.
The exception is
‘Controlled Environment Agriculture’ for which the definition given
“an agricultural use carried out within some form of built structure
whether temporary or permanent, which mitigates the effect
of the natural
environment and climate. This includes production techniques that may or may not
use imported growth mediums. Examples
of controlled environment agriculture
include glasshouses, polythene covered structures, hydroponic facilities or
This is essentially a subclass of the Resource Development use definition in the
Template. The definition is intended to facilitate
horticulture under controlled
conditions, by way of a qualification in the Use Table, as the only permissible
resource development
use within the MRIE.
There is an unintended consequence of the Council’s suggested definition.
By reference to the general term ‘agricultural
use’, the housing of
birds or livestock in sheds is not excluded, but broad acre grazing or cropping
is prohibited - by way
of omission from the definition and the qualification in
the Table of Use. Poultry sheds and piggeries for example would be permitted
uses in the General Impact Area and discretionary uses in the Low Impact Area.
It is noted that related uses such as intensive animal
husbandry or animal
stockyard/saleyard are not allowed for in the schedule. The impact of, for
example, odours from such uses on
the amenity of other occupants in the zone or
residents in the vicinity could be severe.
It is considered that the definition and Table of Use qualifications should be
modified to exclude intensive animal husbandry and
similar uses but permit the
continuance of broad acre farming until the land is developed for CEA or some
other permissible use.
However, CEA is potentially sensitive to spray drift or
water contamination from chemicals, such as herbicides, so control over this
aspect is desirable. A possible definition of CEA is: -
“a horticultural use carried out within a built structure whether
temporary or permanent, which mitigates the effect of the
natural environment
and climate. This includes production techniques that may or may not use
imported growth media. Examples of controlled
environment agriculture include
glasshouses, polythene covered structures, hydroponic facilities or
An appropriate qualification in the Table of Use might be: -
“Only CEA or broad acre farming that does not involve intensive animal
husbandry or use of herbicides.”
Council submitted that the proposed Standard for Use applying to the Pardoe WWTP
should be deleted and that the current buffer zone
provisions remain.
the amendment was requested to be deleted.
In the Commission’s copy of the Devonport and Environs Planning Scheme
1984, the relevant clauses are numbered 8.19.1 and 8.19.2
(not 8.17.1 and 8.17.2
as suggested in the certified amendment). The clauses read:
“8.19 The following provisions shall apply to the Wastewater Treatment
Plant - Buffer Zone AMENDMENT AM2001/07 19/12/01
addition to the existing zone provisions, the buffer area is intended to protect
the sustainable use of the Pardoe Wastewater
Treatment Plant.
8.19.2 Within the Buffer Area all Permitted as of right (P1) and Permitted
(P) use or Development shall be Discretionary (A).”
It is considered appropriate that these, or similar provisions remain in the
scheme and that
of the certified amendment be deleted. As a consequence,
all use that would otherwise be permitted remains discretionary within the
buffer areas.
The wide scope of the definition ‘Utilities’ has been noted. It is
considered that within the Table of Use for the Environmental
Management Area,
there should be a qualification that allows only a road, a waste water treatment
plant or works necessary for stormwater
management.
The Use Table could be altered to read: - “
Defined Use
Qualification
Natural and Cultural Values
Discretionary
Only if a waste water treatment plant, stormwater management works or
The Standards for Development relating to subdivision and the road network (
S11.6.1, S11.6.2) are considered to require modification
to reinforce the
formulation of an integrated Outline Development Plan. Tea Tree Lane is not to
be used as an access route to the
MRIZ. However there may be existing accesses,
such as to the WWTP that may be required to enable access to permissible
development
prior to the internal MRIE road network being in place. Provision to
enable existing accesses to be used could be allowed at Council’s
discretion, on advice from the relevant road authority. The controlling role of
an Outline Development Plan can be reinforced by
replacing Clauses 11.6.1 and
11.6.2 with the following: -
“S11.6.1 Subdivision, Road Network and Infrastructure Planning for the MRI
Objective: To guide subdivision, use and development through an integrated
Outline Development Plan to determine the location and
standard of roads, access
points and infrastructure services.
Performance Criteria
Acceptable Solution
P1. Minor variations from an Outline Development Plan in the size or dimensions
of lots or the location of roads or service networks
may be considered where the
variation will not detract from the use and development of the subject land and
the operation of the
MRI Area as a whole..
A1. An application for subdivision, conforms to the road network and
infrastructure layout set out in an Outline Development Plan
P2. An existing access point may be used if it does not significantly increase
traffic through the access or adversely affect safety.
A2. All lots are accessed from roads wholly within the MRI Zone
P3. No performance criterion
A3. Lots in the MRI Zone are not accessed from Tea Tree Lane
Standard S11.6.3 relates to building dimensions, siting and design.
Acceptable Solution A1 prescribes 10m building setbacks from roads and
watercourses but offers no performance criteria to allow the
setbacks to be
relaxed. This could prove to be unnecessarily inflexible. Provision should also
be made for setbacks for storage and
parking areas and setbacks from water
bodies and wetlands. A performance criterion should be included to encourage
integrated design
of drainage systems.
Acceptable Solution A2 prescribes that office accommodation must be at the front
of a building and incorporate glass as 50% of the
wall area. The corresponding
performance criterion calls for office accommodation to be visible from roads
and present ‘high
quality design’. The basis on which this standard
was chosen is unclear.
AS3 requires waste storage areas, loading bays, utilities and ancillary
infrastructure to be behind the building line. PC3 requires
such structures to
be camouflaged, screened or coloured to minimise visual impact. The potential
interaction with Clause S11.6.9
Landscaping is uncertain and possibly
conflicting.
Without knowing the form of use and development to which it will be applied, the
standard could be considered unduly prescriptive
in its acceptable solutions,
while the performance criteria are considered too vague to assist in exercising
discretion to relax
or waive the acceptable solutions.
A performance criterion should relate directly to the subject matter of the
acceptable solution(s) (e.g. location of a structure)
and not introduce new
concepts or alternative acceptable solutions (e.g. minimising visual impact). It
is considered that the Standard
should be redrafted to clarify the ways in which
an acceptable solution may be relaxed or waived.
Clause S11.6.6, P2 & A2 repeats S11.5.2 , P2 & A2 and can be
Clause S11.6.7 Sediment Control deals only with sealing of trafficable areas,
which the AS requires must be ‘sealed to the
satisfaction of
Council’. That is considered too uncertain for an acceptable solution.
Also there are other aspects of sediment
control, such as construction protocols
and general site management that could be included. The Standard should be
redraftedto provide
an unambiguous acceptable solution.
The question of climate change and its impacts over the next century is fraught
with uncertainty about the range of possible sea
levels. From the current state
of knowledge it seems reasonable for Clause S#6.10 to set a minimum floor level
of 2.9m AHD as a benchmark
higher than anticipated sea level rise, with
provision for variation through a performance criterion. However, development
should not enable excavation that would set permitted ground floors
much below natural ground level. The standard should be modified
to reflect the
building regulations relating to flood prone areas.
Clause S11.6.13 Environmental and Cultural Values offers no acceptable solution
and the performance criterion given is, “The
development does not cause
disturbance to a threatened species or site of cultural significance.”
This is considered to be
an error that would have the effect of making every
application discretionary, since it would need to demonstrate that the
performance
criterion would be satisfied. Various regulatory authorities may be
involved in assessing compliance with this standard, including
the Threatened
Species Unit, the Forest Practices Authority, Aboriginal Heritage Tasmania and
the Commonwealth government.
It is considered that a better form would be: -
“Acceptable Solution A1. The development does not cause any disturbance to
a threatened species, threatened vegetation community
or site of cultural
significance.
Performance Criterion P1. The application must demonstrate that any disturbance
to a threatened species, vegetation community or
site of cultural significance
has been approved by the appropriate authority in accordance with relevant
legislation for the protection
of species, vegetation communities or sites of
cultural significance.”
Schedule 1 Objectives
(a) to promote the sustainable development of natural and physical resources and
the maintenance of ecological processes and genetic
Comment: It is considered that the certified
amendments seek to promote sustainable development, through recognition of the
and cultural values likely to be present on this large site. However,
more investigation of the occurrence and location of threatened
species and
cultural heritage will be required as part of more detailed site planning
exercises prior to development. The amendment
should be altered to reinforce the
need for those site investigations and, as part of a precautionary approach, the
extent of the
proposed Environmental Management Area should be increased.
(b) to provide for the fair, orderly and sustainable use and development of air,
land and water;
Comment: The draft amendment seeks to promote the fair and orderly development
of a large industrial area, the regional need for
which has been recognised over
many years. However, unresolved issues include the design of an appropriate road
network and service
infrastructure to cater for such a large long term proposal.
The amendment should be altered to include an Outline Development Plan
proposed lands in concert with adjacent lands in the Latrobe municipal area. The
presence of residential uses in the vicinity
should be respected through
allocating nearby parts of the site to low impact uses.
(c) to encourage public involvement in resource management and planning;
Comment: The planning process for these amendments has involved an extensive
period of investigation and consultation within the
region. The exhibition of
the amendments and the public hearing provided adequate opportunity for a range
of opinions to be expressed.
(d) to facilitate economic development in accordance with the objectives set out
in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c);
Comment: The amendment seeks
to facilitate significant investment in local and export based industries,
generally in accordance
with the foregoing objectives.
(e) to promote the sharing of responsibility for resource management and
planning between the different spheres of government, the
community and industry
in the State;
Comment: The preparation of the amendment has been an example of co-operation
between adjoining Councils, the State Government
and the community. More
collaborative work remains to be done in planning the road network and services
for the Mersey Regional Industrial
The Schedule 2 Objectives are considered to be capable of being satisfied, in
terms of strategic planning and co-ordinated action
through an appropriate
planning instrument, such as an Outline Development Plan to give consideration
to the provision of infrastructure
and the protection of environmental and
cultural values.
Application of State Policies
State Coastal Policy
The subject land is within 1km of the coastline and the Policy is applicable.
The three guiding principles of the Coastal policy
Natural and cultural values of the coast shall be protected;
The coast shall be used and developed in a sustainable manner; and
Integrated management and protection of the coastal zone is a shared
responsibility.
The draft amendment has been prepared generally in accordance with these
principles but alterations are considered necessary to enlarge
the Environmental
Management Area and strengthen the protection of natural and cultural
Outcome 2.1.7 of the Policy says, “New industrial development will be
encouraged to locate in specified industrial zones.”
The amendment
provides such a specified industrial zone that can be developed in an integrated
manner to be of regional benefit.
Other relevant outcomes that are addressed
include Outcome 1.2 (referring to Aboriginal sites and relics), 1.4 (coastal
2.1 (coastal use and development) and 3.1 (shared responsibility for
integrated management).
The amendment, once altered as required by this decision, is considered to be
prepared in accordance with the State Coastal Policy.
State Policy on Water Quality Management 1997
The amendment facilitates the development and use of, what will become a fully
engineered industrial estate in which water supply,
stormwater management and
waste water disposal should be capable of being integrated and managed to meet
the objectives of the Policy.
National Environment Protection Measures
The National Environment Protection Measures are not considered relevant to the
assessment of the amendments.
Pursuant to
Section 41(a)
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
the Commission requires the planning authority to alter the draft amendment
to a substantial degree taking into account the matters
contained in Annexure A,
and to submit the altered amendment to the Commission by 31 December 2009.
Commissioner Roger Howlett John Vandenberg
DELEGATE DELEGATE
8 September 2009
Devonport and Environs Planning Scheme 1984
Amendment 2008/03 (Mersey
Regional Industrial Zone)
Amendment 2008/3 to the Devonport & Environs Planning Scheme, 1984 is
required to be altered to a substantial degree by the preparation
and insertion
in the planning scheme of an Outline Development Plan responding to the
following issues:-
results of investigations into Aboriginal Cultural Heritage on land in the
proposed Mersey Regional Industrial Estate within 300metres
results of investigations into the possible presence and location of threatened
flora and fauna within the proposed Mersey Regional
Industrial Estate.
results of a land capability assessment of land within the Mersey Regional
Industrial Estate.
results of an assessment of vulnerability of the proposed Mersey Regional
Industrial Estate to the impacts of climate change including
sea level rise,
erosion, coastal recession and storm surge.
results of consultations with major infrastructure providers including
Department of Infrastructure, Energy and Resources, Cradle
Water, Devonport and
Latrobe Councils, Transend, Aurora, Tasports, Powerco and Telstra in relation to
the preparation of an Outline
Development Plan setting out the layout and
staging of the road network, drainage systems, servicing networks, land uses and
treatment for the Mersey Regional Industrial Estate.
the concepts of Low Impact, General Impact and Environmental Management Areas
are retained in an ODP, they need to de distinguished
by appropriate objectives,
for example:
(New) “ S11.4.2 .
The Low Impact Management Area is intended to allow
for a limited range of industrial and related activities that will not have
detrimental
effects on residential uses in the vicinity.
S11.2.2 The General Impact Area is intended to allow for industrial and related
activities at locations that are unlikely to generate
adverse impacts on
residential amenity or the environment.
S11.4.2.3 The Environmental Management Area is intended to allow for the
investigation and protection of environmental and cultural
features, and the
avoidance of development in areas that are sensitive or may become affected by
climate change, sea level rise or
storm surge, whilst acknowledging the
continued presence of the Pardoe Waste Water Treatment Plant and the need for
its possible
expansion or upgrading, including the beneficial use of treated
definition and Table of Use qualifications should be modified to exclude
intensive animal husbandry and similar uses but permit
the continuance of broad
acre farming until the land is developed for CEA or some other permissible use.
However, CEA is potentially
sensitive to spray drift or water contamination from
chemicals, such as herbicides, so control over this aspect is
A possible definition of CEA is: -
“a horticultural use carried out within a built structure whether
temporary or permanent, which mitigates the effect of the
natural environment
and climate. This includes production techniques that may or may not use
imported growth media. Examples of controlled
environment agriculture include
glasshouses, polythene covered structures, hydroponic facilities or
An appropriate qualification in the Table of Use might be:
“Only CEA or broad acre farming that does not involve
intensive animal husbandry or use of herbicides.”
of the amendment.
the Table of Use for the Environmental Management Area, there should be a
qualification that allows only a road, a waste water
treatment plant or works
necessary for stormwater management.
11.6.3 should be modified to provide for some flexibility in relation to
building setbacks.
S11.6.6, P2 & A2 repeats S11.5.2 , P2 & A2 and can be deleted.
S11.6.7 should be redrafted to provide an unambiguous acceptable solution.
11.6.13 should be modified to provide for an Acceptable Solution as
“Acceptable Solution A1. The development does not cause any disturbance to
a threatened species, threatened vegetation community
or site of cultural
significance.
and the Performance Criterion should be modified to
provide as follows:
Performance Criterion P1. The application must demonstrate that any disturbance
to a threatened species, vegetation community or
site of cultural significance
has been approved by the appropriate authority in accordance with relevant
legislation for the protection
of species, vegetation communities or sites of
cultural significance.”
Performance
criteria should relate to issues and or matters that are clear and unambiguous
and that can be used to test or assess
in a quantitative way whether a
discretion should be exercised.
SGS Economics and
Planning, “Industrial land demand Tasmania. Short to medium term
overview.”, April 2008, Table 17,
“Implementation of Controlled Environment Agriculture in Tasmania,
December 2006” Report to DED by Davey and Maynard,
Graeme Smith and
Howarths Hobart.
Sandon Point, NSW Land and Environment Court, NSWLEC 741, November
Gippsland, Victoria Civil and Administrative Tribunal, VCAT 1545, July
South Australian Supreme Court, SASC 57, March
Ansons Bay,
TASRMPAT 290, December
Chris, “Indicative Mapping of Tasmanian Coastal Vulnerability to Climate
Change and Sea Level Rise.”
used by the Road Traffic Authority of New South Wales for industrial estates and
Planning Directive No.1 - Format and Structure of Planning Schemes
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (7.5 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter