URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASGAB/2020/46.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
KBD (Restrictive Intervention) [2020] TASGAB 46 (1 October 2020)
KBD (Restrictive Intervention)
[2020] TASGAB 46
HEARING DATE(S):
11 September 2020
DATE OF ORDERS:
11 September 2020
DATE OF STATEMENT OF REASONS:
1 October 2020
Ms R Holder, (President)
Mr C Lee, (Member)
Dr M Fasnacht, (Member)
APPLICATION:
Application for Approval of a Restrictive Intervention
CATCHWORDS:
Prader Willi Syndrome – use of body suit – personal restrictive
intervention – therapeutic purpose
LEGISLATION CITED:
Disability Services Act 2011
Division 3,
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION:
This decision has been anonymised for the purposes of publication.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
Provider] made an Application to the Guardianship and Administration Board
(‘the Board’) for Approval of a Restrictive
Intervention concerning
KBD (‘the Application’). The restrictive intervention sought is a
personal restrictive intervention
requiring KBD to wear a body suit, both day
Provider] (‘the Applicant’), is a disability service provider within
the meaning of the
Disability Services Act 2011
is a 32-year-old woman who resides in supported disability accommodation
provided by [the Provider]. KBD shares her accommodation
with one other female
person. KBD has funded supports 1:1 except overnight where one worker is present
at the house on a sleepover
is supported by Life Without Barriers (‘LWB’), a disability service
provider for community access. LWB filed an Application
for the Approval of a
Restrictive Intervention (‘LWB Application’) being the wearing of a
body suit by KBD. The LWB Application
was heard by the Board at the same time as
the Application filed by the Applicant. This Statement of Reasons is only in
to the Application filed by the Applicant.
proceeding to hearing the Board dismissed the Application. Dr Kristen Webb Foss,
while not present at the hearing but as an
employee of the Applicant has
requested a Statement of Reasons, pursuant to
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1995
The Board heard and determined the Application on 11 September 2020.
In attendance at the hearing were:
Allison Buchanan, Applicant from [the Provider].;
Anne Taylor, from Life Without Barriers;
Charley Hodgson, Senior Practitioner under the Act;
Jocelyn Payne, from the Office of the Senior Practitioner, observing; and
Pullen, Clinical Psychologist and author of the Behaviour Support
Board had before it the following documents:
Application
for Approval of a Restrictive Intervention filed by the Applicant dated 10
August 2020;
Application
for Approval of a Restrictive Intervention filed by LWB dated 28 July
Professional Report (‘HCPR’) of Ms Di Pullen dated 24 July
medical reports of Clinical Associate Professor Robyn Wallace dated 20 May 2020
and 1 July 2020 respectively;
of Assessment of Dr Angela Livingstone, consultant psychiatrist dated 26 of
March 2020;
Occupational
Therapy functional assessment report from Altius Group dated 13
December 2019;
from the Senior Practitioner, Mr Charley Hodgson, dated 21 August 2020;
Management Plan (also known as Behaviour Support Plan) from Ms Di Pullen
psychologist dated 29 May 2020 (‘BSP’);
of Behaviour Management Plan (‘BMP’) from Ms Di Pullen psychologist
dated 17 August 2020; and
Publication
titled ‘Prader Willi Syndrome Food Security Basic Concepts’ by
Pittsburgh Partnership.
Legislation
6 Division 3 of the Act provides for regulation of restrictive interventions by
4 of the Act defines a restrictive intervention as meaning
... any action that is taken to restrict the rights or
freedom of movement of a person with disability for the primary purpose of
behavioural control of the person but does not include such an action that is
(a) taken for therapeutic purposes; or
(b) taken to enable the safe transportation of the person; or
(c) authorised under any enactment relating to the provision of mental health
services or to guardianship.
Therapeutic
purposes is defined in the Act at section 4:
includes treating (by
diagnosing, curing or relieving) a disease, disorder, ailment, defect or injury
and facilitating such treatment,
but does not include preventing or reducing the
risk of ailment or injury.
34 of the Act defines two types of restrictive
interventions:
environmental restriction
, in relation
to a person with disability, means a restrictive intervention in relation to the
person that consists of the modification
of an object, or the environment of the
person, so as to enable the behavioural control of the person but does not
include a personal
restriction;
personal restriction
, in relation to a
person with disability, means a restrictive intervention in relation to the
person that consists wholly or partially
(a) physical contact with the person
so as to enable the behavioural control of the person; or
(b) the taking of an action that
restricts the liberty of movement of the person.
power of the Board to make Orders in respect of restrictive interventions is set
out in section 42 of the Act. Section 43 sets
out what the Board must be
satisfied of to proceed to approving a restrictive
intervention.
and Findings
Board has before it a HCPR from Ms Di Pullen which states that KBD has lifelong
severe intellectual disability associated with
Prader Willi Syndrome, and
co-morbidly has Bipolar Disorder which has also been diagnosed as Affective
Psychosis. This evidence was
confirmed by Ms Pullen at hearing. Ms Pullen stated
she has known KBD since 2007 but has worked with her and her support team more
recently in her role as a behaviour support practitioner and psychologist. Ms
Pullen has recently completed a full BSP in respect
Board also has a report from Dr Angela Livingstone that states KBD has Prader
Willi syndrome, which is a genetic disorder (caused
by a loss of function of
specific genes on chromosome 15) associated with intellectual disability,
hyperphagia and a range of medical
issues in addition to the complications of
overeating. She has Type 2 Diabetes, bilateral hip dysplasia, ostopaenia (low
bone density),
and a history of a right cataract and retinal detachment.
Pullen states KBD has severe impairments in cognition and in expressive and
receptive communication. She is not capable of a higher
order thinking required
to make decisions about her health or medical treatment. She is dependent on her
carers for all activities
of daily living.
Board finds that KBD is a person with a disability and is incapable due to her
disability of giving consent to any restrictive
intervention that impacts on her
freedom of movement.
Application makes a request for the use of a personal restriction that is, KBD
wearing two types of body suit, one with a snap
crotch during the day and
another (a shoulder-tied pyjama suit) overnight.
Application states that KBD has the propensity to eat non-food items, in
particular she will dig her anus to retrieve fecal matter
for oral consumption.
The Application provides that the purpose of a body suit to be worn by KBD is to
slow down the acquirement
of her fecal matter, by giving staff time to intervene
and use diversion and re-direction.
Board heard evidence that over a three month period January to early April 2020
and with KBD having 1:1 staff support there were
40 occasions of KBD eating
fecal material at her home. This was when KBD was not wearing a body suit.
Senior Practitioner gave evidence that KBD lived at her family home until she
was 19 years of age. During this time the KBD ‘did
not display any signs
of faecal smearing, eating or rectal picking.’ The Senior Practitioner
reports KBD moved to an Intensive
Support Unit for 3 years, operated by the
Applicant because of increasing severity of outburst behaviours ‘and it
that reports of the faeces-related behaviour started.’ KBD moved
into her present accommodation in 2010. A body suit was used
at times over the
years but was ceased in September 2019.
Pullen gave evidence that when the wearing of the body suit was ceased in
September 2019 KBD’s behaviours of concern increased,
despite the support
and supervision by staff. KBD was said to engage in regular self-injurious
behaviour that is hitting her face,
injuring her eye (detaching her retina) and
causing nose bleeding by sticking her finger up her nose and pulling out her
Applicant stated that when KBD is not wearing a body suit she requires a high
level of staff supervision. It was agreed by all
those present at hearing that
this staff supervision is quite intrusive, as KBD likes to retreat and have time
by herself and will
automatically seek body parts to self soothe.
Senior Practitioner and all others present at hearing supported KBD wearing a
body suit. The Senior Practitioner in his Statement
BSP is being implemented, the body suit is the most appropriate option to enable
KBD to enjoy a good quality of life. The
body suits...have buttons she can open
...therefore still allow her access to her faeces but have the effect of slowing
giving time for staff to intervene. The suit is therefore the least
restrictive option currently available...
question for the Board is whether the body suit worn by KBD is for therapeutic
Pullen gave evidence that PWS symptoms are believed to be caused, in part, by a
defect in the hypothalamus. For a person with PWS
there is a constant
pre-occupation with food accompanied by an unrelenting, overwhelming, overriding
physiological drive to eat.
Normal satiety that is the feeling of fullness after
eating does not exist. Ms Pullen stated the person’s feeling of insatiety
leads to indiscriminate eating including non-food items (pica), eating animal
and human faeces, hoarding activities and a compulsive
rushing behaviour to get
other people’s food. Ms Pullen gave evidence that this neurologically
driven food compulsion leading
to insatiable appetite essentially controls the
person’s functions and behaviours.
Pullen opined that KBD seeking out her faeces and eating it, is a food-seeking
behaviour directly resulting from her having PWS.
Ms Pullen explained that food
security is very important to a person diagnosed with PWS. A person with PWS
must know what they will
be fed, when they will be fed and that there is no hope
they will be able to get food at any other time. Ms Pullen stated best practice
for people with PWS is to have very structured and consistent provision of food
and set mealtimes.
Pullen opined that for KBD food insecurity leads to significant stress and
heightened anxiety which can potentially exacerbate
her other mental health
conditions. Ms Pullen observed there were inconsistent practices and food
security issues across KBD’s
day service and accommodation service
providers, particularly when meals were served and how food was provided to KBD.
Given Ms Pullen’s
evidence, it is open for the Board to find and the Board
does find, that inconsistencies in food practices across her disability
accommodation and disability community support providers would more likely than
not result in anxiety and anxiety driven behaviours
Pullen stated that faeces is food for KBD. As such, ready access to faeces
presents a form of food insecurity for KBD. Unrestricted
access to food, or any
distressing for KBD. Ms Pullen
submitted that the wearing of the bodysuit
reduces the stress of seeking food and in that respect relieves PWS. Further Ms
stated PWS is a ‘disorder’ as it is a dysfunction of the
hypothalamus and regulatory functions. The Senior Practitioner
agreed with these
submissions.
Board questioned Ms Pullen as to whether KBD’s faeces-seeking behaviour
could be due to seeking sensory stimuli. Associate
Professor Wallace in her
report opines that the faeces-related behaviour is not related to KBD’s
PWS but in her opinion is
more likely associated with seeking sensory stimuli,
particularly given she has impaired sight. Ms Pullen responded by saying she
believed KBD seeking her faeces as a sensory stimuli could be seen as a possible
secondary function, but not the primary function.
Ms Pullen states that the data
she has seen indicates that KBD’s first priority once she has accessed her
feaces is to put
it in her mouth, chew and swallow it. Only then is she
interested in any residue on her hand which she will roll it around her
and play with, which may be an enjoyable sensory function for KBD.
The Senior Practitioner expressed support for this view. The Board
accepts this
evidence of Ms Pullen.
Senior Practitioner stated that the wearing of a body suit restricts KBD’s
liberty of movement. The Senior Practitioner
agreed that PWS can be classified
as a disease or disorder. He opined that the wearing of a body suit to ensure
food security ‘relieves’
food stress. The Senior Practitioner stated
relieving food stress which he described as ‘the fundamental
characteristic of
PWS’ by the wearing of the bodysuit should be considered
therapeutic, and therefore outside of the definition of restrictive
intervention
in the Act. The Senior Practitioner referred to the BSP, which contains a
considered plan to reduce the use of the bodysuit,
once appropriate staff
education and training has occurred.
word ‘disorder’ is not defined in the Act. The
Dictionary (2016)
defines ‘disorder’ in the medical context
A derangement of physical or mental health or
To disturb the normal physical or mental health of;
word ‘relieve’ is not defined in the Act. The
Dictionary (2016)
defines ‘relieve’ in the medical context
To ease or alleviate (pain distress, anxiety, need
To free from anxiety, fear, pain etc.
this wording, the Board finds that Prader Willi Syndrome is a genetic disorder
as it disturbs KBD’s physical and mental
health caused by a loss of
function of specific genes on chromosome 15 and results in a driven
preoccupation to seek food to overcome
insatiety. The Board accepts Ms
Pullen’s evidence that unscheduled food causes stress for KBD. Therefore
unrestricted access
to her anus and the opportunity to consume her faeces
results in ‘food stress.’ The Board accepts the evidence of Ms
Pullen and the Senior Practitioner that the wearing of the bodysuit ‘eases
or alleviates’ stress as it means that KBD
cannot obtain food and
therefore removes the uncertainty of getting any unscheduled food.
Board finds on the evidence, the wearing of a body suit relieves Prader Willi
Syndrome. Therefore the Board finds KBD’s
wearing of a body suit is for a
therapeutic purpose and is expressly excluded from being classified as a
restrictive intervention
under the Act.
Board Orders that the Application for Approval of a Restrictive Intervention
filed by [the Provider] is dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (193 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter