URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCCA/2024/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Umgeher-Rhodes v State of Tasmania [2024] TASCCA 14 (23 December 2024)
[2024] TASCCA 14
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (COURT OF CRIMINAL
Umgeher-Rhodes v State of Tasmania
: UMGEHER-RHODES, Kellie Maree
DELIVERED ON:
23 December
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Wood J, Jago J, Martin AJ
Criminal law – Appeal and new trial – Appeal against sentence
– Grounds for interference – Sentence manifestly
excessive or
inadequate – Found guilty of one count of trafficking in a controlled
substance involving conducting an organised
drug business including importation
and sale of significant quantity of methylamphetamine – Pleas of guilty to
a second count
of trafficking and summary offences – Second count involved
commercial trafficking in methylamphetamine and committed 12 months
later while
on bail for first trafficking – Global sentence of 10 years’
imprisonment with non-parole period of 5 years
– Sentence not manifestly
excessive - Appeal allowed to limited extent of correcting sentence with respect
to a summary offence
which carries a maximum statutory penalty of a fine.
Criminal Law Aust Dig [3521]
Cases cited:
Cheung v The Queen
[2001] HCA 67
Director of Public Prosecutions (Acting) v
[2015] TASCCA 1
Director of Public Prosecutions v Kobelke
[2020] TASCCA 110
R v Olbrich
[1999] HCA 54
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Director of Public
Prosecutions
Judgment Number:
[2024] TASCCA
paragraphs:
Serial No 14/2024
File No CCA 2234/2023
KELLIE MAREE UMGEHER-RHODES v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
December 2024
Orders of the
allowed with respect to summary offence of possess thing used for the
administration of controlled drug and sentence for that
offence set aside.
in relation to two counts of trafficking and remaining summary offences
Serial No 14/2024
File No CCA 2234/2023
KELLIE MAREE UMGEHER-RHODES v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
23 December 2024
agree with Martin AJ.
File No CCA 2234/2023
KELLIE MAREE UMGEHER-RHODES v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
23 December 2024
agree with the reasons and orders proposed by Martin
File No CCA 2234/2023
KELLIE MAREE UMGEHER-RHODES v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
23 December 2024
Introduction
The appellant was found guilty by a jury of trafficking in a controlled
substance. Subsequently, she pleaded guilty to a second
offence of trafficking
committed 12 months after the first trafficking, and to three firearms offences,
a breach of bail and an offence
of possessing an item used for the
administration of a controlled drug. Estcourt J imposed a single sentence of
imprisonment for
ten years and directed that the appellant not be eligible for
release on parole until she had served five years of that sentence.
The appellant appeals against the sentence on two grounds. First, that the
learned sentencing judge erred in making findings of
fact as to the level of the
appellant's involvement in the business of the first trafficking. Secondly, as a
consequence of the error,
the sentence imposed was manifestly excessive. The
appellant did not maintain that, absent error, the sentence was manifestly
For the reasons that follow, I would dismiss the
Together with a co-accused, Joshua James Barda, the appellant was tried before
a jury on a charge that between about 21 June 2020
and 9 July 2020, the
appellant trafficked in a controlled substance, namely methylamphetamine
(indictment 1 November 2022 –
280/2022). The jury returned a verdict of
guilty on 24 May 2023.
On 4 August 2023 the appellant pleaded guilty to trafficking in
methylamphetamine between about 2 July 2021 and 22 September 2021
(indictment 24
July 2023 – 170/2023). On the same day, through counsel, the appellant
entered pleas of guilty to the following
charges on complaint:
count of possess a firearm when not the holder of a firearm licence of the
appropriate category, contrary to
Firearms Act
count of possess shortened firearm, contrary to s 116(b) of the
count of possess ammunition when not the holder of the appropriate firearm
licence, contrary to
s 105(3)(a)
Firearms Act
count of breach of bail, contrary to
count of possess thing used for the administration of controlled drug, contrary
Misuse of Drugs Act
16 August 2023 the learned sentencing judge imposed a single sentence of
imprisonment for ten years and ordered that the appellant
not be eligible for
parole until she has served five years of that sentence. Although there are two
grounds of appeal asserting an
error of fact by the sentencing judge and a
manifestly excessive sentence, the appellant's submissions identified an
underlying single
issue, namely, the "findings of fact as to the level of the
appellant's involvement in the business of drug trafficking during the
period". In essence, the appellant complains that the sentencing judge erred in
finding, beyond reasonable doubt, that the
appellant was "the drug trafficking
business owner or a senior associate during the period of the indictment".
At the heart of the case for the appellant is the contention that the finding
of the sentencing judge was "not open on the evidence
before the jury at the
trial". The appellant argued that such a finding "could not be proved, based on
the jury verdict, beyond reasonable
The relevant sections of the remarks of the sentencing judge concerning the
factual basis of the first trafficking were as follows:
first of the trafficking charge the State asserts that it follows from the jury
verdict that for the whole or a significant
period of the indictment the
defendant was conducting an organised drug business of a commercial and
systematic kind involving the
importation and sale of a significant quantity of
methylamphetamine.
The State asserts that the jury's verdict is consistent with the activities
of the defendant's drug trafficking business, including
the following : (a)
engaging another person to travel to Melbourne on 22 June 2020 to collect 990
grams of methylamphetamine intended
for sale, from the defendant's drug supplier
and to send it to the defendant via Australia Post; (b) engaging another person
as courier to import 476.4 grams of methylamphetamine into Tasmania via
the Spirit of Tasmania on 9 July 2020, which was intended
for later sale, and
travelling to Melbourne with that person between 5 and 9 July 2020 to purchase
that amount of methylamphetamine
and then assisting in packaging the drug prior
to its importation.
Between 30 June and 1 July 2020, arranging for the purchase of an ounce of
methylamphetamine from a local drug supplier and between
21 June 2020 and 9 July
2020 selling and/or directing others to sell methylamphetamine from her home in
Goodwood, which she operated
as a retail front for her customers.
I accept that submission.
I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
whilst others were involved in the defendant's drug trafficking business, it was
her business
and was controlled by her or, at the very least, she was the senior
partner in the business
." (My emphasis.)
Appellant's submissions
In written submissions, the appellant relied heavily on evidence concerning the
involvement of persons other than the appellant
in the trafficking business
which was the subject of the indictment before the jury. Specific reliance was
placed upon evidence of
the involvement of Ms Lisa Harwood, Mr Jason Dare, the
co-accused Mr Joshua Barda and Mr Tobias Oddie-Jones. The written submissions
summarised such evidence as follows:
"[15] There were agreed facts
that Harwood had pleaded guilty to trafficking, as had Oddie-Jones;
[16] Jason Dare was apprehended at Hobart airport with Lisa Harwood.
Lisa Harwood
[17] Ms Harwood was living with Ms Rhodes during the period of the
trafficking at 9 McCartney Ave Goodwood. She was present when
police executed a
[18] It is our submission that Ms Harwood had extensive involvement in the
trafficking enterprise which included:
Travelling to
Melbourne on 20 June 2020 with a male to be supplied with 990 grams of
methylamphetamine which she posted in three parcels
from Melbourne by Express
After Hardwood
was apprehended on her return to Hobart airport on 22 June 2020, she received a
phone call from Mr Barda and Barda
attended the airport;
Ms Harwood was
living with the Appellant during the trafficking period and had access to the
phone number registered in the Appellant's
name, messages relied upon heavily by
the prosecution to establish the guilt of the Appellant and her role;
Ms Harwood also
had access to the Appellant's bedroom where police found drugs and scales, and
the phone from which messages to and
from were sent and received and which was
relied on by the prosecution as evidence of the Appellant's
involvement.
Appellant's phone number and phone found at 9
McCartney Ave Goodwood
[19] The Appellant's mobile service, 0488 702 799 which was subscribed in
her name was intercepted by police between 21 June 2020
and 9 July 2020 and the
messages to and from that service were tended during the trial, see P 67;
[20] The prosecution relied on the messages from and to that number
extensively in their submission that the Appellant was running
the trafficking
enterprise.
[21] There was no evidence before the court that the Appellant was author of
the text messages referred to, and relied upon by the
prosecution and that she
was the only person who used the phone. In addition there was no evidence that
the mobile phone on which
the messages were found was in fact her phone. The
police made an assumption that it was her phone because it was found in her
[22] The exhibit P67, sets out the messages. In our submission they show
that others used the Appellant's phone and that the Appellant
was a cog in the
wheel of the trafficking but not the proprietor or equal partner.
[23] In particular we refer to and rely on, among others, messages: 15, 32,
97, 199, 337 and 338, 363 and 364, 370, 494.
[24] The jury had the opportunity to read the messages. There is nothing in
the messages which suggest the role of the Appellant
was the principal or a
partner in the business.
[25] Given that Lisa Harwood lived in the house it is quite possible that
she used the phone to communicate.
Appellant's house – 9 McCartney Ave Goodwood
[26] Police executed a search warrant at Ms Rhodes's and Ms Harwood's
address on 24 June 2020.
[27] On police arriving Ms Harwood was seen coming from the toilet; Later
two snap lock bags containing drugs were found;
[28] Drugs and scales were found in the Appellant's bedroom;
[29] The prosecution did not lead any evidence which suggested that the
Appellant had exclusive use of the bedroom.
Trip to Melbourne
[30] In relation to the Appellant's trip to Melbourne she was involved in the
organisation but it is clear there were others involved
in it. The Appellant's
trip to Melbourne in early July 2020 with Mr Oddie-Jones included Mr Barda
working with her to pay for hotels
and the cars that were bought;
No Hierarchy
[31] Importantly there was no evidence that demonstrated any hierarchy in the
trafficking business. The evidence certainly showed,
and obviously the jury was
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt, of the Appellant's involvement in trafficking
but there was no evidence
before the court which pointed to the Appellant having
anymore extensive involvement than others such as Harwood and Barda."
(Transcript
references omitted.)
Respondent's submissions
The respondent's written submissions summarised the evidence from which the
respondent contended the findings of fact were open
to the sentencing
"7 The evidence led by the State from which the learned
sentencing judge could be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the Appellant
was the owner or senior partner of the drug trafficking business was as
(a) She was the intended recipient of the three parcels containing 990 grams of
methylamphetamine imported into the State because
they sent to the Appellant's
mother and sister's address by Ms Harwood;
(b) The Appellant tracked the delivery of one of those parcels after it was
sent from Melbourne via her online Australia Post account;
(c) She paid for hire cars, accommodation and travel;
(d) Police located $28,220 cash at her home in Goodwood which she admitted
belonged to her [forfeited as proceeds of crime];
(e) She travelled to Melbourne with a male to purchase 476 grams of
methylamphetamine, which was concealed in a vehicle and imported
into the State
[driven by Oddie-Jones];
(f) Whilst in Melbourne, the Appellant purchased a Mercedes Benz for $51,000
and spent $5,620 at Louis Vuitton [vehicle and purchase
from Louis Vuitton
forfeited].
(g) She arranged and/or financed the purchase of the Commodore station wagon
which was used to conceal the methylamphetamine referred
to in para (e)
(h) Assisted Mr Oddie-Jones package the methylamphetamine prior to its
concealment [the appellant's DNA was located on packages
in one or two PVC pipes
used to conceal the drug].
addition, lawfully intercepted messages (Exhibit P67) relating to a mobile
service subscribed in the Appellant's name when considered
as a whole, revealed
that the Appellant regularly utilised the service in running her drug
trafficking business. In particular Exhibit
P67 showed:
(i) That she arranged for the purchase of an ounce of methylamphetamine from a
local drug supplier and delivery of it to her home
between 30 June and 1st July
(ii) The sale of, making arrangements to sell and/or directing other persons to
sell methylamphetamine from her home between the
entire 3 week period of the
indictment.
Appellant contends that the evidence led at the trial established that other
persons' involvement in the drug trafficking business
was equal to that of the
Appellant. In particular, it is submitted that Lisa Harwood's involvement was
response, the Respondents submits as follows:
(a) Whilst Ms Harwood travelled to Melbourne and arranged for 990 grams of
methylamphetamine to be posted to Tasmania, that was where
her involvement in
the drug business ended;
(b) Whilst Ms Harwood was living with the Appellant at the Macartney Avenue
property at the time police executed a search warrant
on 24th June 2020, the
evidence also established that Ms Harwood was arrested on that day. There was no
evidence led at the trial
that Ms Harwood returned to the property and lived
with the Appellant for the duration of the indictment period;
(c) There was no evidence that the mobile phone located by police at the
Appellant's home in Goodwood was the phone from which the
intercepted text
messages were sent and received. The evidence merely established that there was
an Apple iPhone found in the main
(d) The messages contained in Exhibit P67 referred to by the Appellant in
paragraph 23 of their submissions, do not support their
assertions that others
used the mobile phone and that the Appellant was merely a cog in the wheel of
the trafficking business.
Appellants counsel at the sentencing hearing accepted that the Appellant's
involvement in the business was not on equal footing
with Lisa Harwood, because
she had pleaded guilty in relation to the first importation only and not to
being involved in selling
methylamphetamine or the second importation.
was clearly open on the evidence for the learned sentencing judge to be
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the trafficking
business was the
Appellant's, or at the very least, she was the senior partner in that business,
from the evidence led at the trial.
None of the sentencing judge's findings were
inconsistent with that.
was no error in the learned sentencing judge's determination of the facts."
(Appeal book and transcript references omitted.)
Factual basis for sentence
of the trafficking crimes related to the Appellant conducting a large scale
organised drug business involving the importation
and sale of methylamphetamine,
of a commercial and systematic kind for the whole, or a significant period of
the indictments. Whilst
other persons were involved in the Appellant's drug
trafficking businesses, their operation were controlled and directed by
Indictment 280/2022
activities of the Appellant's drug trafficking business which operated between
21 June 2020 and 9 July 2020 included the following:
(a) Engaging another person to travel to Melbourne on 22 June 2020 to collect
990 grams of methylamphetamine, intended for sale,
from the Appellant's drug
supplier and arrange for it to be imported into Tasmania via Australia Post;
(b) Engaging another person to act as a courier to import 476.4 grams of
methylamphetamine into Tasmania via the Spirit of Tasmania
on 9 July 2020, which
was intended for later sale;
(c) Travelling with that person referred to in (b), to Melbourne between 5 and
9 July 2020 to purchase the methylamphetamine and
packaging the drug prior to
its importation;
(d) Between 30 June and 1 July 2020 arranging for the purchase of an ounce of
methylamphetamine from a local drug supplier; and
(e) Between 21 June 2020 and 9 July 2020, selling and/or directing other
persons to sell methylamphetamine from her home which she
operated as a retail
front for her customers.
seized $28,220 cash from the Appellant's home when a search warrant was executed
on 24 June 2020 and $850 was found in her
handbag when she came off the Spirit
of Tasmania on 9 July 2020.
Appellant purchased a Mercedes Benz sedan for $51,000 and Louis Vuitton items
valued at $5,620 whilst she was in Melbourne in
all of the 1,466.4 grams of methylamphetamine imported into Tasmania was sold as
points/0.1 grams for $150 per point, there was
14,664 points valued at
$2,199,600.
that same quantity of methylamphetamine was sold in ounce quantities/28 grams
for $28,000 per ounce, there was 52.38 ounces valued
at $1,466,399.
evidence led on the trial revealed that the street price of methylamphetamine
increased substantially during 2020 as COVID affected
the supply of the
Jury verdict
The jury having returned only the general verdict of guilty to the charge
contained in the indictment, it is unknown whether the
jury reached any
agreement as to the precise factual basis of the offending. It was the task of
the sentencing judge to make findings
of fact his Honour found were proven
beyond reasonable doubt and consistent with the verdict of the jury. In this
context it is appropriate
to note the basis upon which the case was presented to
Early in her opening remarks to the jury, having provided the jury with a copy
of the indictment, counsel for the Crown plainly
stated the basis of the Crown's
case against the appellant:
"So, ladies and gentlemen, it is the
State's case that Kellie Rhodes was in charge of a business in trafficking
methylamphetamine
which operated on a continuous and regular basis for the
three- week period in the indictment, or for a significant portion of that
Furthermore, it is also the State's case that Joshua Barda assisted Ms Rhodes
in her drug business by actively participating in and
providing his assistance
to Ms Rhodes which enabled the drug business to be carried on.
So it is the State's case that Ms Rhodes and Mr Barda were, in that
three-week period, or a significant portion of that three-week
period, engaged
in the business of trafficking in methylamphetamine. They were involved in
sourcing and obtaining methylamphetamine
from drug suppliers, importing the drug
in to Tasmania from Victoria for later sale, and selling the drugs to various
Now , that indictment is yours, please feel free to write on it and
make notes as you wish, but you can put it away for the moment
and no doubt
you'll have to refer to again when it comes to time to deliver your
for the Crown then outlined the evidence the Crown expected to lead, including
evidence as to the involvement of other persons
in the trafficking enterprise.
The involvement of others was presented as assisting the appellant. After
identifying such evidence,
counsel again specified the Crown case that the
appellant was operating "her drug business":
"It is the State's case
that Ms Rhodes operated her drug business from her home at 9 Macartney Avenue in
Goodwood and also delivered
quantities of methylamphetamine to her customers
herself or engaged others to do this on her behalf."
In closing submissions, counsel for the Crown urged the jury to be satisfied
that the appellant was "operating a business of trafficking
in methylamphetamine
on a continuous and a regular basis for the three week period covered in the
indictment, or for a significant
portion of that period." Counsel put to the
jury that the co-accused, Mr Barda, assisted Ms Rhodes "in her drug trafficking
The tenor of the address continued to urge that the drug trafficking
enterprise was the appellant's drug business in which others,
including Ms
Harwood, assisted the appellant. At the conclusion of her remarks, counsel put
to the jury that the appellant "was operating
a well organised and profitable
drug business", and that Mr Barda was actively involved in "Ms Rhodes' drug
business" and "assisted
Ms Rhodes greatly at selling and delivering quantities
of methylamphetamine for her business".
Counsel for the appellant adopted the same approach in her address to the jury.
She drew a clear distinction between proof of involvement
in the business of
trafficking specified in the indictment, as opposed to involvement in an
individual transaction. During her address
counsel placed considerable emphasis
on the activities of Ms Harwood and Mr Oddie-Jones.
The address to the jury by counsel for the appellant plainly urged that even if
the appellant had been involved in an individual
drug transaction, the Crown had
failed to prove that the appellant was involved in the trafficking in which
other persons were engaged.
Similarly, the trial judge was careful to identify
the same distinction between involvement in the business of the trafficking and
individual importations, offences which were available as alternatives should
the jury find the appellant not guilty of trafficking.
His Honour explained to
the jury that it would have been open to charge the appellant with three
individual occasions of trafficking,
including selling to various people, but
such a course had not been chosen by the Crown:
"But that's not what
the Crown chose to do in this case. The Crown made a decision, this wasn't one
of those cases where there was
just an instance of trafficking here and an
instance of trafficking there. Crown decided when it drew up the charge on the
that the accused were running a business, they were running a
business of trafficking in a controlled substance. So, what does that
In 3.4, I've said:
'It amounts to trafficking if over a period of time, a person engages in
the business of selling a controlled substance, and in such
a case, to traffic
means to carry on a business or a trade.'
As Ms Wilson said to you in her opening, the State is not required to prove a
specific offence on a specific date, but it must prove
beyond reasonable doubt
the carrying on of the business over a period of time involving the trafficking
in a controlled substance."
in his remarks to the jury, the trial judge identified the Crown case that the
appellant "was operating a business, this business
of trafficking, and it
– was doing so on a continuous and regular basis for the three week period
covered in the indictment,
or at least for a significant portion of that
period." His Honour reminded the jury of the Crown case that Ms Harwood, in
to Melbourne and sending parcels back, "was acting on behalf" of the
appellant and that Mr Barda's "job" was to help the appellant
track the parcels.
Subsequently the trial judge described the question for the jury as to whether
the jury was satisfied that the appellant, during
a significant period of time
within the period charged in the indictment, was "involved in the carrying on of
a business of trafficking
in methylamphetamine". Later, in response to a
question by the jury which appeared to expose a concern as to how an importation
be excluded from the concept of trafficking, his Honour repeated his
earlier remarks concerning the choice of the Crown not to charge
individual acts
of trafficking, but to bring an indictment "alleging trafficking by running a
business, which is more serious." The
response to the jury question
"So, if the State fail to convince you, if you're not
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused were involved in running
business, that is a continuous for a period, and a systematic commercial
operation, if you're not satisfied as to that, then they
are not guilty of the
trafficking charge as brought.
So, if your concern is, how could you import but not be trafficking, well
it's the way the State brought the charge. There's not parts
to the charge.
There's not, you know, guilty of the first Melbourne trip, guilty of the
Melbourne-Devonport trip, guilty of the selling.
Either you're satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that they were involved in running a business, a continuous
commercial systematic
operation, or they're not guilty of the charge as brought
– and the only other charge, the only other law that they breached
importing a controlled substance into Tasmania, which is a lesser – which
is a lesser charge."
principles to be applied are not in
. First, the sentencing judge
was required to sentence on a factual basis consistent with the verdicts of the
jury. In this context,
the jury was satisfied that the appellant engaged in the
business of trafficking during the relevant period of the indictment, as
to engaging in three or less individual acts of drug importation which could, in
each instance, have amounted to an occasion
of trafficking. The jury was
satisfied that the appellant was engaged in trafficking on a continuous basis
over the relevant period.
Also in this context it is appropriate to bear in mind the Crown case that it
was the appellant's business in which others assisted
her, but it was not
necessary for the jury to reach a decision as to who was the owner or operator
of the business.
a finding that the appellant was the owner or operator of the business was a
finding adverse to the appellant and could
only be made, and used as a basis for
sentencing, if the evidence satisfied the sentencing judge of that fact beyond
reasonable doubt.
Thirdly, before such a finding could be made, the evidence had to be capable of
supporting such a finding beyond reasonable doubt.
capable of supporting finding
Underlying the appellant's case on appeal were two fundamental contentions.
First, that the evidence was incapable of supporting
a distinction between the
role of the appellant and the involvement of Ms Harwood. Secondly, that the
evidence was incapable of
supporting a conclusion that it was the appellant who
engaged in the majority of the SMS exchanges evidenced in exhibit P 67, rather
than Ms Harwood or another co-offender. I reject both contentions.
Ms Harwood lived for a period at the home of the appellant, there was no
evidence to suggest that she was involved in any
illegal activity after her
arrest on 22 June 2020 following the first importation from Melbourne. There
was no evidence as to whether
she resided with the appellant following her
arrest. Significantly, nothing in the evidence suggested that Ms Harwood
the importation, gave directions to anyone or paid for any expenses
associated with the importation. There was no evidence that
Ms Harwood profited
from any of her activities.
for the appellant urged it was open on the evidence to find that Ms Harwood and
others used the appellant's mobile phone.
Assuming use by Ms Harwood and others
cannot be excluded, the possibility that others used the appellant's mobile
phone does not
detract from the probative value of the evidence in the case
against the appellant.
mobile telephone was found by the police on the bed in the appellant's bedroom
of her home, but there was no evidence that it was
the mobile that operated
through a number ending 799. However, a mobile service subscribed in the
appellant's name operated through
a number ending 799. Of the 526 SMS messages
involving 799 identified in exhibit P 67, counsel for the appellant could point
messages only, the contents of which suggested that the appellant was not
the author. By way of contrast, there are numerous messages
containing reference
to the appellant's Christian name which clearly demonstrate that the appellant
was the author of the SMS exchanges.
Viewed in its entirety, P 67 provided
strong evidence that the appellant was using the mobile service in her name
ending 799 in
the operation of the business of trafficking in methylamphetamine,
and that she was the author of the vast majority of the SMS messages
this context I note numerous messages in the period 5-7 July 2020 clearly
demonstrating that the appellant was using the mobile
telephone 799 while in
Melbourne. A number of the exchanges relate to the availability of a Mercedes
Benz motor vehicle which the
appellant sought to view, indicating on 7 July 2020
that she was "over from Hobart and heading back tonight".
of the SMS exchanges suggest that any person was giving directions to the
appellant. It is readily apparent that the appellant
determined what happened
in the business of trafficking and that she utilised her mobile telephone in a
directive fashion.
was made during submissions of the fact that Ms Harwood pleaded guilty to
trafficking in respect of the first importation
from Melbourne. However, as the
sentencing judge observed during submissions, Ms Harwood pleaded guilty on the
basis of a limited
set of facts and there was no question of parity involved. Ms
Harwood's plea was not of any assistance to the sentencing judge in
determining
the role played in the first trafficking by the appellant.
assessment of the probative value of the SMS exchanges found in exhibit P 67 as
a piece of circumstantial evidence, and consideration
of the competing
submissions concerning P 67, are to be considered in the context of the totality
of the evidence. The totality
of the evidence strongly supports the conclusions
from P 67 to which I have referred. The summary of the evidence provided in the
respondent's written submissions and set out in [10] of these reasons
conclusively demonstrates that not only was the finding of
the sentencing judge
open to his Honour, it was the obvious and appropriate conclusion. In
comparison with other persons shown to
be involved in the trafficking, including
Ms Harwood, the appellant's activities possessed the hallmarks of a person in
the business of trafficking and who benefited from it. No error has
been demonstrated.
counsel for the appellant in oral submissions specifically stated that in the
absence of error the appellant was not contending
that the sentence was
manifestly excessive, for reasons which will become apparent it is appropriate
to deal with the questions of
penalty and the significance, or otherwise, of the
classification of the appellant's criminal activity in the first
trafficking.
Ground 2 – Manifestly excessive
As to the sentence of imprisonment for ten years, the sentencing judge was
imposing sentence for a number of offences, but particularly
for two periods of
significant commercial trafficking in methylamphetamine. His Honour was imposing
sentence, correctly, on the basis
that the trafficking business conducted in the
two relevant periods was the business of the appellant and was controlled by her
at the very least, the appellant was the senior partner in the
The relevant facts were summarised by the sentencing judge:
the first of the trafficking charge the State asserts that it follows from the
jury verdict that for the whole or a significant
period of the indictment the
defendant was conducting an organised drug business of a commercial and
systematic kind involving the
importation and sale of a significant quantity of
methylamphetamine.
The State asserts that the jury's verdict is consistent with the activities
of the defendant's drug trafficking business, including
the following: (a)
engaging another person to travel to Melbourne on 22 June 2020 to collect 990
grams of methylamphetamine intended
for sale, from the defendant's drug supplier
and to send it to the defendant via Australia Post; (b) engaging another person
as courier to import 476.4 grams of methylamphetamine into Tasmania via
the Spirit of Tasmania on 9 July 2020, which was intended
for later sale, and
travelling to Melbourne with that person between 5 and 9 July 2020 to purchase
that amount of methylamphetamine
and then assisting in packaging the drug prior
to its importation.
Between 30 June and 1 July 2020, arranging for the purchase of an ounce of
methylamphetamine from a local drug supplier and between
21 June 2020 and 9 July
2020 selling and/or directing others to sell methylamphetamine from her home in
Goodwood, which she operated
as a retail front for her customers.
I accept that submission. I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that whilst
others were involved in the defendant's drug trafficking
business, it was her
business and was controlled by her or, at the very least, she was the senior
partner in the business.
As to the second count of trafficking, the defendant was again operating her
drug business from her home in Goodwood, which operated
as a retail front for
her customers. She was responsible for sourcing large quantities of
methylamphetamine from drug suppliers within
Tasmania and selling various
quantities to a large number of drug customers.
The defendant received text messages and phone calls almost every day of the
three-month period from her customers, requesting methylamphetamine,
persons – sorry – requesting – from her customers requesting
methylamphetamine or from persons who could
supply her with that drug for sale.
An examination of the defendant's mobile phone seized during a police search
indicated that the
defendant was using encrypted messaging to organise the sale
The defendant relied on and was assisted in her business by two main
associates, Lisa Harwood and Joshua Barda, who received instructions
direction from the defendant about the operation of the drug business and were
involved in the delivery and sale of methylamphetamine.
In some instances, Ms
Harwood and Mr Barda used the defendant's mobile phone to make and receive calls
from drug customers or suppliers
at the defendant's direction.
On 22 September 2021 police executed a search warrant at the defendant's
Goodwood house and an ice pipe was located in the main bedroom
count 6 on complaint 7429/2021. Also located was a .410 Mossberg bolt-action
repeating sawn-off shotgun, one .22 round,
and five .410-gauge shotgun
cartridges as well an empty .22 magazine and a .22-calibre Sterling self-loading
sawn-off rifle. 90 rounds
of 22 ammunition and two 12-gauge cartridge and six
410-gauge cartridges. The firearms were classified as a pistol and the defendant
was not, and had never been, the holder of a firearms licence rather, and they
are counts 2, 3 and 4 on complaint number 7429 /2021.
Count 5 on that complaint was an occasion when the defendant was intercepted
by police with a thousand dollars in fifty-dollar notes
in her pocket and
falsely identified herself as Natasha Carr and told police that she was on her
way to hospital. I accept the State's
submission that the matters for which the
defendant has been found guilty at trial and to which she had pleaded guilty
very serious instances of trafficking. The objective seriousness of
the offending for both matters is high, particularly having
regard to the
systematic commercial and continuous nature of the trafficking business during
the periods of the indictments.
Despite their combined duration being relatively short, the scale of the drug
– that's 15 weeks in total, the scale of the drug
business was significant
operating almost every day in that period. And the operation of both businesses
was aimed at the generation
of large profits, giving the quantities of
methylamphetamine purchased wholesale and the significant number of retail
customers the
defendant serviced.
The State is unable to accurately quantify the weight of methylamphetamine
that was sold by the defendant or the income that was received
by the drug
business. However, had all of the methylamphetamine imported by the accused on
24 June 2020 and 9 July 2020 been sold,
the street value would have been between
one million four hundred and sixty-six thousand three hundred and ninety- nine
dollars and
two million one hundred and ninety-nine thousand six hundred
dollars, depending on how it was sold.
In addition, the calculable income from the defendant's 2021 business was
between one hundred and seventy-four thousand four hundred
and twenty-eight
dollars and three hundred and five thousand two hundred and fifty dollars. The
value of the methylamphetamine involved
is clearly significant. It could have
generated an income in the vicinity of two point five million.
Most of the defendant's drug customers paid her, Mr Barda and Ms Harwood in
cash for the methylamphetamine. However, some of her customers
electronic transfer to the defendant's Westpac Bank account. Between 5 July 2021
and 21 September 2021, she received thirty-one
thousand four hundred and forty
dollars from her drug customers.
Also between 2 July 2021 and 6 September 2021, Mr Barda and Ms Harwood
deposited three thousand one hundred and ten dollars into the
Westpac Bank
account. The total of the account was therefore thirty- four thousand five
hundred and fifty dollars."
respect of the second trafficking the appellant accepted the Crown facts that
she was "operating an organised business of trafficking
in methylamphetamine"
and was operating "her business" from her home. However, the sentencing judge
reached his findings as to the
first trafficking through his assessment of the
trial evidence without reference to the facts of the second trafficking.
As to matters personal to the appellant, the sentencing judge provided the
following summary:
"The defendant is now 40 years of age. She had an
unremarkable upbringing, and married at age 18. Initially she describes the
as having been good. She and her husband purchased a house together and
she was employed. They had three children together. They
are now aged 20, 16,
and 14. As the relationship progressed, however, it became marred by family
violence. The most significant event
that the defendant describes is when both
of her front teeth were knocked out by her husband. She also describes various
abuse, apart from actual physical violence, including being ostracised
from her family and friends.
Eventually she was able to leave the relationship. At that point in time her
husband took all of her savings and left her with very
little support. She was
trying to deal with the breakup of her relationship as well as the trauma
associated with it, and she started
to associate with a group of former
associates. Unfortunately, they were people who used drugs , and the defendant
accepted drugs
offered to her by them.
Thus, from the age of 30, the defendant was using methylamphetamine on a
regular basis, and inevitably developed an addiction. She
lived something of a
double life, and she hid this, and she continued to raise her family. The
defendant describes being dragged
further and further into a culture of drug
use, meeting people of the worst kind, and becoming more and more entrenched in
scene to the point where she owed money for drugs, and was led into
funding her own habit and paying her debts by selling methylamphetamine.
In terms of the defendant's future, she has been employed in the prison
kitchen while she has been in custody, and has found the work
rewarding. She
still maintains a close relationship with her children, despite her
incarceration. After release from custody, she
states that she wants to leave
her former life behind, and in this regard, since she been in custody, she has
been able to break
her addiction."
The sentencing judge correctly observed that apart from the appellant's pleas
of guilty to the second period of trafficking and
the other incidental offences,
there was "little" that could be said in mitigation. The appellant had
previously offended against
the drug laws and breached suspended sentences. In
addition, the second trafficking offence was committed while the appellant was
on bail for the first trafficking offence. His Honour correctly observed that
both personal deterrence and general deterrence were
important factors,
particularly bearing in mind that methylamphetamine is an insidious drug which
destroys the lives of those who
use it. His Honour, again correctly, noted that
a trafficker either chooses to ignore the prospect of harm, or puts their own
and profiteering ahead of that harm, and that such conduct "demands
denunciation and a heavy penalty to deter others."
The principles governing appeals against sentence on the basis of a complaint
that the sentence is manifestly excessive are well
settled and do not need
. In essence, in the
absence of error, it is for the appellant to demonstrate that the sentence was
unreasonable or plainly unjust.
The appellant engaged in two periods of significant trafficking in an insidious
drug for commercial profit. She was in control of
both operations and benefited
from the profits. She did not cease her criminal activity voluntarily. Rather,
having being apprehended
for the first period of criminal activity, the
appellant chose to repeat that criminal conduct 12 months later while on bail
the first trafficking. As recent authorities have demonstrated, while there
is no discernible range of sentences for crimes of drug
trafficking, those who
control operations and benefit through profits commit crimes at the higher end
of the scale of seriousness,
and such crimes attract severe
sentencing judge imposed a sentence which appropriately reflected the gravity of
the appellant's total criminal conduct.
the hearing of the appeal, counsel for the appellant contended that, for the
purpose of sentencing, the classification of
the appellant as "the" senior
partner in the business was significantly different from a finding that she was
"a" senior partner
in the business. The discussion concerning this issue
proceeded on the basis that the sentencing judge, correctly, was not excluding
the existence of other trafficking operations which were providing the
methylamphetamine to the appellant. His Honour was concerned
with the operation
of trafficking conducted by the appellant.
discussed, the sentencing judge sentenced on the basis that the appellant was
controlling the first trafficking business or, at
the least, she was "the"
senior partner in the business. In my view, the distinction between the
appellant being "the" senior partner,
and being "a" senior partner for
sentencing purposes in this case is of no consequence. The appellant was
engaged in operating a
business of trafficking pursuant to which the first
trafficking offence occurred. It matters not if another person or persons were
also operating the business on an equal footing with the appellant. Even if
they were, in my view a single sentence of imprisonment
for ten years would not
be a manifestly excessive sentence, particularly as the second trafficking
offence was committed while the
appellant was on bail for the first
trafficking.
It would be a sentence well within the proper range of the sentencing discretion
available to the sentencing judge. Even if the
factual distinction was
established in favour of the appellant, I would not interfere with the
these reasons, subject to one minor correction, I would dismiss the appeal.
Included in the offences for which Estcourt J imposed
a single sentence of
imprisonment was an offence relating to possession of a thing used for
administration of a controlled drug
Misuse of Drugs Act
attracts a fine only. It is appropriate, therefore, to allow the appeal for the
limited purpose of setting aside the sentence
as it applies to that offence, but
leaving the remainder of the sentencing order in place. No additional penalty
should be imposed
Cheung v The Queen
[2001] HCA 67
R v Olbrich
[1999] HCA 54
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Acting) v Pearce
[2015] TASCCA
Director of Public
Prosecutions v Kobelke
[2020] TASCCA 110.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (194 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter