URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASHPT/2019/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:16:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dr Jane Tolman v Tasmanian Board of the Medical Board of Australia [2019] TASHPT 7 (30 September 2019)
[2019] TASHPT 7
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL
Dr Jane Tolman v Tasmanian Board of the Medical Board of
[2019] TASHPT 7
TOLMAN, Jane
TASMANIAN BOARD OF THE MEDICAL BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
19, 21, 22 & 26 February 2018
DELIVERED ON:
30 September 2019
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Chairperson Webster
Tribunal Member: Dr J
Tribunal Member: Dr J Davis
CATCHWORDS:
Appeal from decision of Performance and Professional
Standards Panel – medical practitioner – unsatisfactory professional
performance – correct and preferable result
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (Qld) Act
2009; ss181,
182, 184, 185, 186, 191, 192, 199, 200, 202;
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (Tas) Act
Health Practitioners Tribunal Act
Kudelka v Medical Complaints Tribunal
[2004] TASSC 31
Qidwai v Brown
[1984] NSWLR 100;
Queensland Nursing Council
[2011] 1 Qd R;
[2009] QCA 364
Medical Board
of Australia v Woolard
[2017] WASCA 64
(2017) 51 WAR 32
Singh v Nursing and Midwifery
Board of Australia
[2015] VSC 576
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Karakatsanis & Anor v Racing Victoria Limited
[2013] VSCA 305
(2013) 42 VR 176
Craig v Medical Board of South Australia
Peeke v Medical Board of Victoria
unreported 19 January
; Honey v Medical Practitioners Board of Victoria
[2007] VCAT 526
DETERMINATION:
The decision of the Performance and Professional
Standards Panel made on 10 February 2016 is confirmed.
REPRESENTATION:
B. McTaggart
Respondent:
P. Jackson SC
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation
[2019] TASHPT 7
INTRODUCTION
1. This matter has previously been the subject of a preliminary
determination with respect to the nature of the proceedings:
[2018] TASHPT 1.
These reasons concern the determination of the substantive issue between the
parties. In this matter, Dr Tolman has applied, pursuant
to s21(2) of the
Health Practitioners Tribunal Act 2010 (“the Tribunal Act”) for a
review of a decision made under s199(1)
of the Schedule to the Health
Practitioner Regulation National Law (Qld) Act 2009 (“the National
Law”) which has been
adopted as the law of Tasmania by s4 of the Health
Practitioner Regulation National Law (Tasmania) Act 2010.
2. The decision in
respect of which a review is sought is a decision made by a Performance and
Professional Standards Panel (“the
Panel”). The Panel conducted a
hearing over 2 days on 4 and 5 June 2015 and on 10 February 2016 published its
decision and
provided reasons for that decision. The Panel concluded Dr Tolman
behaved in a way that constituted unsatisfactory professional
performance. The
Panel imposed a reprimand together with 23 conditions on Dr Tolman’s
registration. The operation of those
conditions was stayed upon conditions
which were imposed by the Tribunal: see
[2016] TASHPT 3.
3. Dr Tolman’s
position is this Tribunal, pursuant to s202 of the National Law, substitute
another decision for the Panel’s
decision. The decision which she submits
the Tribunal should substitute for the Panel’s decision is the Tribunal
should find
Dr Tolman has no case to answer and that no further action is to be
taken as is provided for by s191(1)(a) of the National Law.
If contrary to that
submission the Tribunal finds Dr Tolman has behaved in a way that constitutes
unsatisfactory professional performance
then she seeks to make submissions on
penalty, based on the Tribunal’s decision, before the penalty is
determined.
4. The respondent’s position is the Panel’s decision
both in respect of its finding that Dr Tolman engaged in unsatisfactory
professional performance and the sanctions it imposed was the correct preferable
result in respect of the matter to which its decision
relates. It submits that
presented with essentially the same material as the Panel had before it, but
having regard to the additional
opinions provided since the Panel delivered its
determination which have been obtained from Dr Walker, Dr Barbato, Professor
and Dr Chapman, and the evidence received viva voce from Professor Bell and
Dr Chapman and after making its own findings in respect
of all of that material
it says the Tribunal should come to the same result. Accordingly the respondent
submits the Tribunal should
confirm the Panel’s decision subject to the
modifications made to that decision by the Tribunal by its orders of 2 May 2016.
In addition it is submitted the Tribunal should order the removal of the stay
imposed by the Tribunal’s order of 2 May 2016.
The History of These Proceedings
5. Dr Tolman’s application to this Tribunal was filed on
8 March 2016. It is regrettable that from that point it took some
before her application was heard. The first thing that occurred was Dr
Tolman’s application for a stay was heard
on 18 April 2016 and a decision
with respect to that application was handed down on 2 May 2016.
June 2016 the first directions hearing was held. A timetable was set for the
provision by the respondent of all the material
considered by the Panel, that
the applicant was to deliver to the Tribunal and the respondent copies of all
material upon which she
intended to rely at the hearing save for any documents
already forming part of the material which was before the Panel and she was
to identify any documents not intended to be relied upon or documents to which
an objection will be made to their tender. The
respondent was also given time
to identify any documents or material it would not intend to rely upon at the
hearing of this matter.
7. On 8 June 2016 the Tribunal received from the
respondent almost 9,000 pages of material. Thereafter on 31 August 2016 Dr
filed and served reports and/or proofs of Dr Barbato and Clinical
Professor Bell and on 5 September 2016 she filed and served a proof
8. On 17 October 2016, Dr Tolman, on her own account, enquired about
a mediation. The respondent agreed to that course and a date
of 12 April 2017
was organised which appears from the file to be the earliest date on which
everybody was available to attend such
a conference. The mediation did not
resolve any of the issues in dispute between the parties.
9. The first
directions hearing I conducted in this matter was held on 3 May 2017. Prior to
that directions hearing both the solicitor
for Dr Tolman, on 24 April 2017, and
the solicitor for AHPRA, on 26 April 2017, indicated they did not object to me
hearing this
matter despite my previous firm, Dobson Mitchell & Allport, a
firm at which I had been a principal, acting for Dr Tolman for
the best part of
2016. I raised this issue again in the presence of counsel on 3 May 2017 and
both indicated that their respective
clients did not object to me hearing the
matter. I advised that I knew nothing about the matter until I had considered
the Tribunal’s
file prior to that directions hearing. At that directions
hearing the respondent confirmed its previously expressed view in an email
June 2016 that it wished the Tribunal to be comprised of the Chair and two
professional members. Dr Tolman’s position
on this point was she was
content for me to hear her application alone but noted the respondent’s
request and was therefore
content with two professional members rather than one
professional member and a community member. A list of potential Tribunal
was therefore to be provided to each party.
10. At the resumed
directions hearing on 7 August 2017 counsel for Dr Tolman indicated his view was
the list which had been circulated
did not comply with s12(1) of the Tribunal
Act and that needed to be complied with first before we moved on to s12(2) which
the list which had been circulated appears to comply with. Counsel for
the respondent tended to agree with that position. I therefore
directed AHPRA
to provide to the parties and the Tribunal a list of Tasmanian practitioners
pursuant to s12(1) within 14 days. There
was then a discussion about the
documents which the respondent wished to rely on and which Dr Tolman objected
to. It was at that
time counsel for Dr Tolman indicated he would not be
available to conduct Dr Tolman’s application until February or March 2018
and he therefore suggested we look at a date at that time for the hearing of
this matter. I indicated we could set that time aside
and once we had the list
of Tasmanian practitioners this matter could be relisted and I would then hear
the parties as to who, on
that list, was appropriate for appointment to hear
this matter.
11. The next directions hearing was conducted on 4 September
2017. It was determined after some argument there was insufficient information
respondent indicated he would have his solicitor
undertake relevant enquiries.
Once suitable practitioners were identified they then needed to be contacted to
determine their availability.
I directed AHPRA to make enquiries as to the
availability and suitability of the seven practitioners on that list who Dr
considered were suitable. The directions hearing was adjourned to enable
those enquiries to be conducted.
12. The next directions hearing was
conducted on 2 October 2017. It was indicated at that time by counsel for the
respondent there
was only one general practitioner on the list who was willing
and available and given her response to AHPRA’s enquiry, she
suitable. The previous list was then referred to and Dr Tolman’s counsel
indicated he was prepared to treat that
list as a s12(2) list. Counsel for the
respondent indicated AHPRA would make enquiries of the medical practitioners on
The matter was pencilled in for hearing on 19 February 2018 and the
directions hearing was adjourned until 23 October 2017.
13. On 23 October
2017 counsel for both parties indicated there were three possible members; two
on the Tasmanian list and one on
the s12(2) list. It was submitted I had to
choose from the Tasmanian list first and if I was satisfied about both
candidates on
that list then there was no need to go to the National list. Dr
Tolman’s position was all three were suitable. It was not
clear whether
one of the Tasmanian practitioners was available to commence this hearing on 19
February 2018 so the matter was again
adjourned for those enquiries to be made.
After considering the information I had been provided I considered Dr Davis met
the requirements
set out in s11(2)(a)-(d) and therefore he was formally
appointed as a professional member of this Tribunal in these proceedings.
was also directed that the matter be listed for a prehearing conference
approximately one month prior to 19 February 2018.
14. In late October 2017
the parties revisited the medical practitioners on the Tasmanian list. The
respondent proposed Dr Williams
as a professional member, she having previously
been excluded. Dr Tolman’s solicitor indicated his client did not object
the appointment of Dr Williams. After determining her availability and after
being satisfied she met the requirements set out in
s11(2)(a)-(d) I formally
appointed Dr Williams as a professional member of this Tribunal on 2 November
15. The matter was then set down for a prehearing conference on 22
January 2017 and for hearing on 19 February 2018. At the prehearing
directions were made as to the filing and service of any witness statements to
be relied upon by either party. The witness
schedule, the need for video links
and the provision of documents to the Tribunal Members on a USB (given the
volume of them) were
discussed. As were the objections which Dr Tolman intended
to take as to the admissibility of some of the material which the Panel
considered. There was also a discussion with respect to Dr Tolman’s
objection in respect of each of the witnesses which
the respondent proposed to
call whose evidence does not touch upon any of the patients. The matter was
adjourned for hearing to
19 February 2018 at 10:00am. It was heard on 19 to 22
February 2018 and on 26 February 2018.
16. During the hearing an order was
made that the names of the patients be de-identified. In these reasons each of
the twelve patients
will be referred to as Patient 1 to Patient 12
respectively.
17. The manner in which Dr Tolman’s application was
conducted is worthy of comment. In a letter from her solicitor to the Tribunal
of 1 February 2018 the following statement appears:
avoid a miscarriage of justice, Dr Tolman maintains her objection to any member
of the Tribunal considering the documents
contained within that file prior to
those documents being tendered at the
18. An email from her solicitor to the Tribunal of 16 February
2018 is in the following terms:
“Mr McTaggart SC has
started to review the Respondent’s opening submission as prepared by Mr
Jackson SC.
Objection is taken to the submission, which makes express reference to a
summary of evidence the Respondent knows has been objected
to. Accordingly, the
Applicant objects to the Tribunal considering the Respondent’s submissions
prior to a determination of
the admissibility of the
19. As a result of this correspondence the Tribunal did no
reading prior to the hearing. Accordingly the Tribunal’s consideration
the voluminous documentation which it considered did not take place until after
the hearing and at times when each of the Tribunal
members were available. The
Tribunal’s determination in this matter was therefore significantly
PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE PANEL
A Background
20. The Panel’s reasons record that AHPRA received a
notification on 13 June 2013 about Dr Tolman from the Executive Director
Medical Services at the Royal Hobart Hospital (“RHH”) where Dr
Tolman was employed. That notification was authored
21. The Tasmanian Board of the Medical Board of Australia undertook
an investigation and determined on 13 February 2015 that a Performance
Professional Panel be established.
22. By letter dated 27 March 2015 AHPRA
advised Dr Tolman of the Medical Board of Australia’s decision to
establish a Performance
and Professional Standards Panel pursuant to s182 of the
National Law. The letter identified allegations concerning Dr Tolman’s
practise of medicine in respect of twelve patients. By specific reference to
documents and witness statements it provided detailed
reasons for establishing
23. By letter of 12 May 2015 Dr Tolman was given notice pursuant
to s184 of the National Law of the matters set out in s184(2)(a)
(a) The day, time and place at which the hearing was to be
(b) The nature of the hearing and the matters to be considered at the
(c) That Dr Tolman was required to attend the hearing;
Dr Tolman may be accompanied at the hearing by an Australian legal practitioner
or other person;
(e) That if Dr Tolman failed to attend the hearing, it may
continue in Dr Tolman’s absence and the Panel may make a decision;
(f) The types of decisions the Panel may make at the end of the
24. In particular, the notice identified the hearing would
determine whether Dr Tolman had behaved in a way that constituted unsatisfactory
professional performance or unprofessional conduct. The notice identified nine
issues to be considered by the Panel in relation
to twelve patients. The notice
enclosed the medical records of each of the twelve patients together with
documentation provided
by Dr Sandford, statements obtained during the
Board’s investigation, an independent practitioner report obtained by the
and responses and supporting documents from Dr Tolman.
B. The Allegations
25. The Panel considered whether nine issues arose in relation
to some or any of the twelve patients and those issues are set out
in paragraph
3.1 of the Panel’s decision as follows:
(a) Whether Dr Tolman’s record keeping and
documentation were unsatisfactory;
(b) Whether Dr Tolman’s decision
making was excessively hasty and not fully considered;
(c) Whether Dr Tolman
failed to adequately discuss, communicate and consult with
(d) Whether Dr Tolman accelerated treatment
inappropriately;
(e) Whether Dr Tolman sanctioned the aggressive and
inappropriate use of medications;
(f) Whether Dr Tolman was too quick to
assess patients as lacking decision making capacity;
(g) Whether Dr Tolman
failed to properly make a diagnosis, or was inflexible in her
(h) Whether there were diagnostic uncertainties regarding the
cessation of antibiotics; and
(i) Whether treatment decisions were well
founded on medical grounds.
26. It is agreed by the parties paragraph 25 is the matter or
matters to which the Panel’s decision relates.
27. The parties agreed
the summary table which appears in paragraph 3.2 of the Panel’s reasons
identified which issues were
of concern to which patients. It is in the
following form:
Identified Issue
• Paucity of documentation in the medical
• Lack of discussions, consultation and communication with the
patient and/or her family
• Lack of diagnosis prior to treatment
• Precipitous acceleration of treatment
assessment that the patient lacks decision making capacity
discussions, consultation and/or communication with the patient and his
• Rapidity of decision making
• Precipitous
acceleration of treatment
• Aggressive and inappropriate use of
medications
• Poor documentation of discussions with family and
• Rapidity of decision making
• Precipitous
acceleration of treatment
• Aggressive and inappropriate use of
medications
• Rapidity of decision making
• Precipitous
acceleration of treatment
• Diagnostic uncertainties regarding the
cessation of antibiotics
• Rapidity of decision making
discussions, consultation and communication with the patient and/or her
• Rapid assessment that the patient lacks decision making
• Paucity of documentation in the medical
• Lack of discussions, consultation and communication with the
patient and/or his family
• Uncertain medical grounds regarding
treatment decisions
• Rapid assessment that the patient lacks decision
making capacity
• Inflexible diagnosis – lack of recognition for
alternate options for treatment
• Diagnostic uncertainties regarding
cessation of antibiotics
• Lack of discussions, consultation and
communication with the patient and/or her family
• Aggressive use of
medications
• Paucity of documentation in the medical
• Aggressive use of medications
• Lack of discussions,
consultation and communication with the patient and/or his
• Rapidity of decision making and an absence of justification
for decisions
• Paucity of documentation
• Aggressive use of
medications
• Lack of discussions, consultation and communication with
the patient and/or his family
• Diagnostic uncertainties regarding
cessation of antibiotics
• Missed diagnosis of #NOF
• Improper decision
C. Documentation before the Panel
28. The Panel records in its reasons at paragraph 5.1 that it
had regard to 357 pages of documentation in relation to the notification
investigation, 740 pages of supporting documentation and testimonials provided
by Dr Tolman together with 7,788 pages of medical
records concerning the twelve
patients. At paragraph 5.2, the Panel notes Dr Tolman provided a further 119
pages by way of closing
submissions. At paragraph 5.3 the Panel says there were
9,004 pages of documents for the Panel to consider. At paragraph 5.4 of
reasons the Panel refers to Appendix A which is a list of all the documents
provided by AHPRA to Dr Tolman and to each of the
Panel members prior to the
hearing. At paragraph 5.5 of the reasons the Panel refers to Appendix B which
is a list of all the documents
provided to the Panel by Dr Tolman by way of
closing submissions and at paragraph 5.6 of its reasons the Panel refers to
C which is a list of other documents to which the Panel had
29. The Tribunal was provided with:
(a) The documents set out in the index to this decision
numbered 1 -665. Documents 20, 18 and 28 were separately tendered by counsel
for the Board and marked R1-3 respectively. Documents 30-37 were separately
tendered by counsel for Dr Tolman and marked A1-8 respectively.
A further copy
of document 36 (A7) which corrected paragraph numbers was also tendered and
(b) The Panel’s written decision.
(c) The medical records
of the twelve patients (7,788 pages).
(d) Testimonials (exhibit A10) provided
by a number of hospital specialists (11), general practitioners (8), families ,
locum geriatricians
at the Royal Hobart Hospital (2), geriatric registrars (4),
senior nurses (7), allied health workers (2), administrative and community
organisations (9) and university academics (7).
(e) Letter from Matthew
Double to Dr Tolman (exhibit A11).
(f) Letter from Matthew Daly to AHPRA
(exhibit A12).
(g) Article “Demenita Care: how we get it wrong and
what’s needed to get it right” by Dr Tolman and Dr Morrissey
Vol 5 No 1 February/March 2016 Australian Journal of Dementia Care (exhibit
(h) A further 1,196 pages of material AHPRA received from Dr Tolman
which includes, amongst other things, documents 1-21 in paragraph
29(a), most of
the testimonials in paragraph 29(d), a number of articles, a response from Dr
Tolman to AHPRA of 13 July 2014, some
flyers for presentations or seminars which
Dr Tolman presented at and some certificates for workshops she participated
(i) While the Tribunal members considered the documents at (d)-(g) and
the articles, flyers and certificates at (i) they were not
taken into account in
our determination of this matter. The major reason for this was those documents
were not relevant to the issues
before the panel with respect to the 12
patients. A further reason was where a testimonial, for example, did comment on
before the panel with respect to one of the 12
the comments were made from a lay not a medical perspective.
D. What Transpired at the Panel Hearing
30. It appears from s4 of the Panel’s written reasons for
its decision Dr Tolman did not seek leave to be legally represented
hearing. Despite that the decision notes her legal representative was present
for most of the hearing as a support person
but did not take part in the
proceedings. In her legal representative’s absence, Dr Tolman was
supported by a colleague.
It seems from the Panel’s reasons at paragraph
4.2 no applications were made by Dr Tolman during the proceedings and the Panel
took into account the documentation mentioned in paragraph 28. Paragraph 10.3 of
the Panel’s reasons discloses the Panel members
reviewed the medical notes
of the 12 patients and discussed each of them with Dr Tolman during the hearing.
The Tribunal notes that
of the five Panel members, three were medical
practitioners and of those three, two were
specialists
E. The Panel’s Determination
31. With respect to the allegations set out in paragraph 25 and
the issues which were of concern with respect to each of the 12 patients,
Panel made the following findings:
(a) Whether Dr Tolman’s record keeping and
documentation were unsatisfactory:
(b) Whether
Dr Tolman’s decision making was excessively hasty and not fully
considered:
(c) Whether
Dr Tolman failed to adequately discuss, communicate and consult with
(d) Whether
Dr Tolman accelerated treatment inappropriately and sanctioned the aggressive
and inappropriate use of medications:
(e) Whether
Dr Tolman was too quick to assess patients as lacking decision making
Patient 5 – there was no finding with respect to this
8 – there was no finding with respect to this
10 – there was no finding with respect to this
(f) Whether
Dr Tolman failed to properly make a diagnosis, or was inflexible in her
(g) Whether
Dr Tolman demonstrated diagnostic uncertainties regarding the cessation of
antibiotics:
9 – there was a finding that it was reasonable not to continue the
administration of
antibiotics
(h) Whether
treatment decisions made by Dr Tolman were well founded on medical
32. The Panel then considered the standard of conduct
reasonably expected of a medical practitioner of an equivalent level of training
or experience, which in this case is an experienced geriatrician. It then
referred to Good Medicine Practice: A Code of Conduct
for Doctors in Australia
(“the Code”). The purpose of the Code is set out in paragraph 1.1
as follows:
describes what is expected of all doctors registered to practise medicine in
Australia. It sets out the principles that characterise
good medical practice
and makes explicit the standards of ethical and professional conduct expected of
doctors by their professional
peers and the community...This Code does not set
new standards. It brings together, into a single Australian Code, standards
have long been at the core of medical
33. At paragraph 1.2 the Code says it is used for the following
• To support individual doctors in the challenging task
of providing good medical care and fulfilling their professional roles,
provide a framework to guide professional judgement.
• To assist the
Medical Board of Australia in its role of protecting the public, by setting and
maintaining standards of medical
practice against which a doctor’s
professional conduct can be evaluated. If a doctor’s professional conduct
varies significantly
from the standard, that doctor should be prepared to
explain and justify his or her decisions and actions. Serious or repeated
to meet these standards may have consequences for a doctor’s
medical registration.
• As an additional resource for a range of uses
that contribute to enhancing the culture of medical professionalism in the
health system; for example, in medical education, orientation,
induction and supervision of junior doctors and international medical
and by administrators and policy makers in hospitals, health services and other
institutions.
34. The Panel says in its decision at paragraph 24.6 it had
regard to the following sections of the Code:
• Section 1.4 – Professional values and qualities
of doctors;
• Section 1.6 – Substitute
decision-makers;
• Section 2.0 – Providing good
• Section 3.0 – Working with patients;
4.0 – Working with other health care professionals;
• Section 8.4
– Medical records; and
• Section 8.8 – Medical records,
certificates and giving evidence.
35. The Panel then looked at what expertise the Royal
Australian College of Physicians (“RACP”) says specialists in
medicine will have. That expertise is set out in paragraphs 24.7 to
24.10 of the Panel’s decision in the following terms:
geriatrician has expertise in the diagnosis and management of complex and/or
multifactorial internal medicine
disorders impacting on the cognition and
functional status of the older person.
geriatrician adopts a diagnostic approach to the practice of acute internal
medicine in order to identify reversible pathologies
impacting on a
patient’s function, psychological and social wellbeing.
24.8 • The RACP Curriculum for Geriatric
Medicine incorporating the Professional Qualities Curriculum provides a minimum
of proficiency for geriatricians:
Acute medical
care of the older patient: The approach of the geriatrician will reduce the
incidence of post acute syndrome and functional
decline associated with
hospitalisation.
Management of
geriatric syndrome: disorders characterised by the combination of age-related
changes, accumulated pathology, polypharmacy,
and acute illness reducing the
threshold for the occurrence of falls, delirium and incontinence.
Pharmacology
and polypharmacy issues in the management of older people, acute and long term
management of neurodegenerative disorders
and stroke in the older
Coordination
and management of the rehabilitation of the older person who, as a result of an
acute medical or surgical problem, has
suffered a functional decline.
care for the older person with complex and multifactorial problems in the
community setting.
Working as an
integral part of a multidisciplinary team delivering healthcare to the older
person. The geriatrician may be called
upon to be the team leader.
Assessment of
the care requirements for the older person who may require community or
residential care management of aged care services
across the continuum of
Teaching the
principles of geriatric medicine to undergraduate and postgraduate students in
medical and allied disciplines.
24.9 Specialists in geriatric medicine are
characterized by the specific training, expertise and roles they fill across the
24.10 A geriatrician is expected to:
diagnose, treat and manage acute and chronic illnesses in older people.
principles of internal medicine in older people.
whether and when to order diagnostic tests and interpret results.
Work within
teams that provide assessment, rehabilitation and care of older
36. Although not in the documentation before the Panel
paragraph 35 was taken by the Panel directly from the Geriatric Medicine
Training curriculum which appears on the Royal Australasian College of
Physicians website.
THE STATUTORY SCHEME AND ROLE OF THE TRIBUNAL
37. Section 182 of the National Law provides for the
establishment of a Performance and Professional Standards Panel. It provides,
by subsection (1):
National Board may establish a performance and professional standards panel if
(a) the Board reasonably believes, because of a notification or for any other
reason, that –
(i) the way a registered health practitioner
practises the health profession is or may be unsatisfactory; or
(ii) the registered health practitioner’s professional conduct is or
may be unsatisfactory; and
(b) the Board decides it is necessary or appropriate for the matter to be
referred to a panel.”
38. Section 185 deals with the procedure of the Panel and it
“(1) Subject to this
Division, a panel may decide its own procedures.
(2) A panel is required to observe the principles of natural justice but is
not bound by the rules of evidence.
(3) A panel may have regard to –
(a) a report prepared by an assessor about the registered health practitioner
or student; and
(b) any other information the panel considers relevant to the hearing of the
39. Section 191(1)(b)(i) permits a panel to decide, after
hearing a matter about a registered health practitioner, that the practitioner
has behaved in a way that constitutes unsatisfactory professional performance.
40. Section 192 of the National Law requires the Panel to give notice of its
decision to the National Board who must in turn give
notice to the registered
health practitioner and if the hearing related to a notification that led to the
establishment of the panel
under s181(1)(a), notice is to be given to the
notifier. Section 192(3) requires the notice provided to the registered health
practitioner
must state the decision and the reasons for the decision.
B. Appeals from the Panel and Powers of the Tribunal
41. Sections 199(1)(i) and (k) provide that a person, who is
the subject of a decision by a panel to impose a condition or, who is
a reprimand, may appeal that decision to the appropriate responsible tribunal.
Section 199(2) provides the appropriate
responsible tribunal for a decision to
take performance action in relation to a registered health practitioner is the
responsible
tribunal for the participating jurisdiction in which the behaviour
the subject of the decision occurred. So that is, in this case,
the Tribunal
established in Tasmania under the Tribunal Act.
42. Section 17 of the
Tribunal Act provides for the jurisdiction of this Tribunal as follows:
A reference in the National Law to an appeal against a decision is, for an
appeal in accordance with that Law to the Tribunal,
a reference to a review of
the decision as provided under this Act.
(2) The jurisdiction, conferred by the National Law
on the Tribunal as the responsible tribunal, to hear and decide an appeal
a decision is to be taken to be jurisdiction conferred on the Tribunal
to hear and decide under this Act a review of a decision.
(3) The Tribunal may exercise the jurisdiction,
conferred by the National Law on the Tribunal as the responsible tribunal, to
and decide an appeal against a decision if a person has, under
section 21(2)
, applied to the Tribunal for a review of the decision.
(4) In exercising the jurisdiction, conferred by
the National Law on the Tribunal as the responsible tribunal, to hear and decide
an appeal against a decision, the Tribunal may exercise the powers, and perform
the functions, conferred on the Tribunal by this
Act or the National
43. Section 21(2) of the Tribunal Act provides: “A person
who is the subject of a decision referred to in s199(1) of the National
who may, under that Law, appeal to the responsible tribunal, may apply to the
Tribunal for a review of the decision.”
That is, this section provides
for the process by which an appeal is to be brought and expressly characterises
the proceedings as
involving “a review” by the Tribunal of a
“decision”; that is the appeal is brought by way of an application
to the Tribunal for a review of, in this case, a decision of the Panel.
Therefore the appeal under s199 proceeds on the basis there
has already been a
44. Section 27(1) of the Tribunal Act provides that if an
application is made under s21(2) for a review of a decision and the applicant
has been given, by the person who made the decision, a statement of reasons for
the decision, the applicant must provide the statement
to the Tribunal.
Therefore the reasons for the decision which Dr Tolman has applied to this
Tribunal to review must be supplied
by her to the Tribunal.
45. Division 2
of Part 5 of the Tribunal Act deals with the nature of the proceedings before
the Tribunal. Section 28 provides:
purpose of a review by the Tribunal of a decision is to produce the correct and
preferable result in respect of the
matter to which the decision
(2) The Tribunal must hear and decide a review of a decision by way of a
fresh hearing on the merits of the matter to which the decision
46. Section 202 of the National Law sets out what decision or
decisions a Tribunal can make after hearing the appeal under s199.
Section 202
“(1) After hearing the
matter, the responsible tribunal may –
(a) confirm the appellable decision; or
(b) amend the appellable decision; or
(c) substitute another decision for the appellable decision.
(2) In substituting another decision for the
appellable decision, the responsible tribunal has the same powers as the entity
made the appellable decision.”
C. The Question for this Tribunal
47. These proceedings are only concerned with whether, in
respect of the care exercised by Dr Tolman in her dealings with any of the
twelve patients, she failed to exercise the standard of knowledge, skill or
judgement reasonably expected of a health practitioner
of an equivalent level of
training or experience, in one or more of the ways alleged in the notice of the
Panel’s hearing given
to Dr Tolman under s184 of the National Law.
Accordingly these proceedings are not concerned with any allegation of
misconduct or
impropriety. In fact the respondent in both its written and oral
submissions made no allegations of professional misconduct or unprofessional
conduct against Dr Tolman.
48. It is noted the Panel can find Dr Tolman
behaved in a way that constituted unprofessional conduct (National Law:
s191(1)(b)(ii))
and the Tribuanl can therefore make that finding (National Law:
s202(2)). The respondent has not asked the Tribunal to do so.
D. The Relevant Standard
49. Section 5 of the National Law defines unsatisfactory
professional performance in the following terms:
unsatisfactory
professional performance
, of a registered health practitioner, means
the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised by, the
practitioner in
the practice of the health profession in which the practitioner
is registered is below the standard reasonably expected of a health
practitioner
of an equivalent level of training or
experience.”
50. It is therefore the standard which the Tribunal concludes
is reasonably to be expected of a hypothetical health practitioner of
equivalent level of training or experience to that possessed by Dr Tolman
against which her professional performance, or more
specifically the care
exercised by her, in respect of the twelve patients in question is to be
51. The Tribunal may be assisted in determining what that standard
is by having regard to the following:
(a) the documented standards included amongst the papers for
the Tribunal;
(b) the evidence of those who practised in the same area at the
relevant times and who were able to observe Dr Tolman and more specifically
were able to observe and provide evidence about her dealings with one or more of
the twelve patients.
52. Although the Tribunal is not bound by the rules of evidence
it might be said the central rule, now provided for in
Evidence Act
, should guide the Tribunal’s approach. That is the Tribunal may and
should have regard to any evidence that if it were accepted,
could rationally
affect, directly or indirectly, the assessment of the probability of the
existence of a fact in issue in the proceedings.
53. The facts in issue in
these proceedings are set out in paragraphs 25 and 27 above. It might be said
then the Tribunal may have
regard to evidence in the various statements from
witnesses that comment on general observations of Dr Tolman’s practices
by those witnesses together with their observations insofar as they compare
her practice to those of others they have observed and
worked with; that is
these observations go outside the care of the twelve patients.
Tribunal can also take into account the evidence of experts whose opinion
evidence is intended to assist the Tribunal to come
to an understanding of what
the relevant standard is viz. whether, based on informed and objective analysis
of the patients’
records, it can be said the standard was met by Dr Tolman
in respect of the twelve patients.
55. The Tribunal can also take into
account the training, knowledge and experience of the professional members of
this Tribunal.
It was suggested by counsel for the respondent the very purpose
of a professional specialist tribunal is to provide it with the advantage
being able to bring its own expertise to its deliberations. It was submitted
that is one of the reasons s37(2)(b) of the Tribunal
Act expressly permits the
Tribunal to inform itself on any matter in any way it considers
appropriate.
56. It is clear that a specialist tribunal is not required or
obliged to accept and apply evidence from other health practitioners,
acknowledged to be of good repute and competence, as to what an appropriate
standard of conduct or performance is in any
given situation: Kudelka v Medical
Complaints Tribunal
[2004] TASSC 31
. Of course a tribunal may
accept and apply that evidence and can be informed of the acceptability or
otherwise of certain practices
or conduct and the existence of a
“majority” and “minority” view point of acceptable
conduct by evidence
the cogency of which it accepts: Qidwai v Brown [1984] NSWLR
100 at 105. It is clear from Fletcher v Queensland Nursing Council
[2011] 1 Qd
[2009] QCA 364
a tribunal is required to form its own opinions and make value
judgements that because of their very nature and the specialist nature
tribunals, courts will ordinarily be reluctant to disturb even where the issue
is one of alleged misconduct, rather than professional
performance. In that
case, Chesterman JA said at [86]:
Tribunal is a specialist one. Its expressions of opinion that conduct does or
does not amount to unsatisfactory professional
conduct should be given
considerable weight and not disturbed in the absence of demonstrated error in
the process of reasoning, or
fact finding, or the application of the statutory
definition to the facts. This I understand to be the orthodox approach to
from specialist tribunals.”
E. The Onus of Proof
57. The Panel found Dr Tolman practised in a way that
constituted unsatisfactory professional performance. It imposed a reprimand
conditions on her practice. Dr Tolman has appealed against the finding that she
behaved in a way that constitutes unsatisfactory
professional performance, the
imposition of a reprimand and the imposition of conditions on her registration
as a medical practitioner.
The respondent’s position with respect to onus
was there is probably no onus of proof in these proceedings because they are
strictly adversarial and do not involve allegations of impropriety or misconduct
but instead involve an assessment of the professional
performance of Dr Tolman
measured against the standard to be expected of her peers in circumstances where
the respondent takes a
position in which it advances no specific allegations of
misconduct in the Tribunal. This was the position before the Panel where
respondent simply put all relevant material before the decision maker. The
Board was not a party to, or legally represented,
in the proceedings before the
Panel and is only a party to these proceedings by virtue of s200(b)(ii) of the
National Law.
58. This is to be contrasted to the situation where the Board
brings proceedings in the Tribunal which allege professional misconduct
unsatisfactory professional performance: see Medical Board of Australia v
[2017] WASCA 64
(2017) 51 WAR 32
and Singh v Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia
[2015] VSC 576
59. Who has the onus and, if there is an onus,
need not be determined in these proceedings. The Tribunal takes the view that
to justify a finding of unsatisfactory performance it must be satisfied
as to that matter on the balance of probabilities; however
the degree of
persuasion required is affected by the seriousness of the allegations made. In
this case the allegations set out in
paragraphs 25 and 27 are serious. The
Tribunal must actually be persuaded of the correctness of the matters of
complaint. As Dixon
J said in Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
at 361-362:
truth is that, when the law requires proof of any fact, the tribunal must feel
an actual persuasion of its occurrence or
existence before it can be found. It
cannot be found as a result of a mere mechanical comparison of probabilities
independently
of any belief in its reality...Except upon criminal issues to be
proved by the prosecution, it is enough that the affirmative of
an allegation is
made out to the reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal. But reasonable
satisfaction is not a state of mind that
is attained or established
independently of the nature and consequences of the fact or facts to be proved.
The seriousness of an
allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an
occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences flowing
a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
question whether the issue has been proved to the reasonable
satisfaction of the
tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable satisfaction’ should not be
produced by inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony or indirect
references.”
60. In the context of disciplinary proceedings it is
appropriate for a tribunal to adopt the approach of requiring that it be
“comfortably
satisfied” of the facts in issue: Karakatsanis &
Anor v Racing Victoria Limited
[2013] VSCA 305
(2013) 42 VR 176
THE EVIDENCE
The Medical Records
61. The Panel considered the medical records of each of the
patients. Our summary is as follows.
62. Patient 1 had a complicated past medical history including
a CVA with hemiparesis and dysphasia, chronic obstructive pulmonary
pneumothorax, bullous pemphigus, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, osteopenia,
cataracts, osteoarthritis of the spine,
tuberculosis (1964), recurring UTIs, and
she had experienced episodes of both urinary and faecal incontinence.
was sent to the ED of the RHH from her nursing home on 7 July 2012 with a
history of dyspnoea, abdominal pain and distension,
decreased oral intake and
cough over a period of approximately 3 weeks.
64. Because of her past stroke
with expressive dysphasia she presented as a difficult historian but was able to
understand. The notes
record an advanced care directive when she was admitted
to the Glenview Nursing Home on 25 May 2011 which stated “Allow to
‘naturally’, receive only comfort care and pain relief even if this
shortens my life.” This was signed by
Patient 1’s daughter. The
referring documents from the nursing home describe Patient 1 as “a
delightful resident with
a wicked sense of humour”. The next of kin were
identified as her daughter and son. She was admitted to general medical unit
under consultant Dr Roland McCallum with a diagnosis of anaemia (gastric bleed),
secondary to medication (Prednisolone, Clopidogrel
and NSAIDS). She had been
noted to have coffee ground vomitus and abdominal x-rays had raised the
possibility of intra-abdominal
pathology. Medications suspected of inducing
gastric bleeding were ceased and Esomeprazole commenced in an effort to repair
gastric erosion. The notes record Dr McCallum’s ward round on 7 July
2012 “likely GIT bleed, OPU review tomorrow”.
On 8 July 2012 she
was seen by Dr McCallum and team and the notes record discuss with family, ?
malignancy, not for investigation
or treatment (blood transfusions).
July 2012 the patient was referred by Dr Galea from the McCallum unit to OPU for
an opinion on care and management. On 8
July 2012 the notes record the drug
Azathioprine (the admitting notes queried the use of this drug) had been
prescribed by a private
dermatologist 12 months previously for her skin lesions.
The notes further record the patient consented to the administration of
units of packed cells and this decision had been arrived at by the patient,
Helena, Peter and the step-daughter. Dr Tolman makes
an entry in the notes on 8
July 2012 - quality of life poor, immobile, doubly incontinent, dysphasic, GIT
bleed highly likely, discuss
with daughter, agrees comfort care, transfer to
OPU, daily obs, PRN meds for comfort, no further blood tests, review regular
aim for early transfer back to nursing home. A GOC plan is completed on 8
July 2012 by Dr Galea with Dr Tolman having been informed.
The GOC was C,
palliative, which is treatment aimed primarily at symptom management and quality
of life. The patient was not for
CPR, intubation or ventilation but is for
active management e.g. antibiotics and tube feeding. There were to be no MET
notes detail extensive discussions of the medical unit C intern with
the family – son, daughter and step-daughter (these discussions
decision to give two units of packed cells).
66. On 9 July 2012 there is a
referral to palliative care from Dr McIntyre for Dr Tolman. The notes state
that a decision had been
made for comfort care and would appreciate review and
follow up in the community. Dr Edwards, from the palliative care team replies
to this request on 10 July 2012 with the recommendation of a return to Glenview
and the patient was discharged on 10 July 2012.
67. Death was certified on 15 November 2012, it having occurred
the day before on 14 November 2012. The cause of death was given
failure of 3 weeks duration and the associated conditions were an oesophageal
stricture and oesophageal reflux. The death
certificate was completed by Dr
68. Review of the file indicates Patient 2 had a very long history
of involvement with the RHH for a variety of conditions which include
oesophageal stricture requiring regular dilatation, oesophagitis, alcohol abuse,
osteoarthritis, a perforated large bowel in 1985
requiring ileostomy and a total
colostomy, mild chronic renal impairment, benign prostatic hypertrophy resulting
in a transurethral
resection of the prostate, hypertension and he was
genotypically a haemochromatosis patient with homozygosity for the C282Y
He had been investigated for lytic bone lesions. This latter
diagnosis was suggested by a high PSA score, hypercalcemia and high
phosphatase. In 2007 it was noted he had a small area of adenocarcinoma in the
prostate when he’d had his transurethral
69. Review of his
biochemistry from September 2012 until the time of his death indicates
significant renal impairment but apart from
the possibility of pre-renal causes
due to hypovolemia and dehydration states, the exact aetiology of his renal
impairment remains
obscure in the notes. However in October and November 2012,
prior to his death, he had experienced urinary tract infections with
Candida infections.
70. Patient 2’s final episode of care at the RHH
began on 16 September 2012 when he was admitted under the gastroenterology
for dilatation of his stricture. A goals of care plan completed at that time by
Dr Samedani (RMO) indicated he was to be regarded
as a category B which
specifies limitation of medical treatment with the goal of care to be curative
or restorative but with limitations
on CPR. It should be noted the consultant
was not informed of this GOC plan.
71. Post dilatation he was transferred to
P3 for rehabilitation but was found to be not cooperative with rehab and thus
was ultimately
transferred to the OPU ward 6A on 5 November 2012 under the care
of Dr Tolman.
72. When transferred to the older persons unit from the
rehabilitation ward the following issues were identified in the admission
of Dr Hovinga:
(a) Oesophagitis with stricture, scope and dilatation
performed without significant improvement in swallowing;
(b) Worsening renal
impairment – likely to decreased oral intake;
(c) Increased liver
function tests – ? secondary to haemochromatosis;
(d) Cognitive
impairment – delirium and dementia;
(e) Chronic
alcoholism;
(f) Transurethral resection of the prostate 2007 –
prostatic adenocarcinoma – query increased PSA.
73. Whilst on the rehabilitation ward the issue of whether
liver biopsy and venesection should be performed were considered but neither
these strategies were eventually followed up.
74. The notes indicate Patient
2 was seen by Dr Tolman on 3 November 2012 when in the Peacock centre. MMSE
score 18/30. “Patient
thinks he is dying, does not want to go to nursing
keeping with alcohol and cigarettes. Frail, deconditioned and incapacitated.
Nice man. Very low underlying physical and cognitive
reserve. Has a daughter.
Impression – insightless, declined due to poor reserve, recent major
illness, current delirium.
Lack of motivation as he thinks he is dying.
Prospects for recovery relate to time rather than an active process”
(concomitant
review of nursing notes at that time do not indicate nursing
concerns re delirium.)
75. The GOC plan on admission to the OPU was for
category B (curative or restorative treatment) but not for CPR, intubation or
ventilation
and no MET calls. This plan had been drawn up on 2 October 2012 by
Dr Forster, the RMO for Dr Skelton who had been informed of the
admission to the OPU this plan was endorsed on 6 November 2012 by Dr Kylie
Butcherine. On 6 November 2012 the gastroenterology
team reviewed Patient 2 and
noted the worsening - liver function tests indicating some degree of cholestasis
and their recommendation
was for a further dilatation for his stricture –
the opinion was given that the abnormal liver function tests were more likely
due to be drug induced rather than from haemochromatosis. The opinion further
stated that iron stores need to be established before
recommending any
venesection.
76. The file then records entries from the admission date of 5
November 2012 until his death on 14 November 2012. The following are
observations from the file:
• 6 November 2012 – the RMO notes a Mini Mental
State Examination score of 18 out of 27. Patient wasn’t orientated
time but he refused several of the test items.
• 6 November 2012 at
1700hrs Dr Tolman reviewed the patient and her notes indicate: “discussed
with gastro team, gastroscopy
and dilatation every 1 to 2 weeks for several
weeks, no liver biopsy or echo, IV fluids as soon as possible, may need nursing
plan thereafter.”
• 6 November 2012 Dr Kylie Butcherine, the
geriatric registrar indicated the following issues in the file: cognition 18/27,
nutrition/hydration cachexia, oesophageal stricture, haemochromatosis,
obstructive liver function tests, AKI, hypercalcaemia, increased
serum protein,
elevated PSA (adenocarcinoma) gleason score 7, discharge
• Interdisciplinary meeting on 8 November 2012 – present
Tolman, Hovinga, Graham, PT, OT, social worker, dietician, NUM,
pharmacist, medical concerns dilatation, bladder containing pus treated by
antibiotics, allied health concerns candidate for
P3 rehab, discharge plans
– assess if good candidate for rehab.
• 9 November 2012 at
1150hrs Dr Tolman – “remains very unwell but has picked up a little
this morning. He has taken
a little orally and is communicative. Lucid and
orientated. Thin triple plus, abdo soft, calves S and V, toes down going,
pain, ileostomy working well. Plan – rehydrate with subcutaneous
fluids for 48hrs, encourage mobilisation, encourage oral
intake, dietician,
repeat oesophageal dilatation 2 to 3 weeks, ACAT for HC, family to visit Rosary
Gardens today, bloods Monday.”
• 9 November 2012 – gastro
review, picked up a little, repeat gastroscopy and dilatation 2 to 3
• 9 November 2012 – interdisciplinary meeting (Tolman and
Butcherine present), medical concerns – thrush in oesophagus,
issues with
liver and prostate.
• 10 November 2012 – urology review - high
PSA most likely a result of prostatic cancer, patient needs bone scan if not
already done, will discuss with consultant.
• 12 November 2012 –
outpatient ward round Tolman and team, two daughters present and patient.
Discussion between Tolman
and daughters - no sign of improvement so path most
likely palliative. Daughters agree and want him comfortable. Don’t want
things drawn out. Feel Patient 2’s wife may not be keen to go full
palliative care at present but they feel it is best for
their father. Cease
intravenous fluids. Subcutaneous fluids, comfort care main priority. Dr Tolman
to discuss with wife.
• 12 November 2012 – Jackson covering OPU
intern. Phone call from Dr Tolman discussed with Patient 2’s wife and
have agreed upon short trial of intravenous fluids. Plan to review clinical
state following 24hrs of intravenous fluids.
• 13 November 2012 at
1010hrs – Dr Tolman discussed with family - deteriorated over night.
Children (three) very keen
for palliation. Wife upset but appreciates need for
comfort care. On examination unrousable, shaky, abdo soft, calves soft. Plan
– comfort care as charted as he may rally with good comfort care. Plan to
send to nursing home should not yet be aborted.
• 13 November 2012
– interdisciplinary meeting, Tolman, Butcherine, Hovinga, Graham, students
and allied health. Medical
concerns - increased sodium 166 yesterday, discharge
? Rosary Gardens.
• 14 November 2012 – OPU ward round 1315hrs Dr
Hovinga - comfortable at present, no concerns voiced by family. Continue
syringe driver at same dose. GOC terminal.
• The file contains a GOC
plan dated 14 November 2012 signed by Dr Hovinga, OPU registrar with the
consultant named as Dr Tolman
(who was informed of the plan) that the diagnosis
is oesophageal stricture and the category of treatment is D, the GOC is
not for CPR, intubation or ventilation.
• 14 November 2012
– interdisciplinary meeting Tolman, Butcherine, Hovinga, Graham, students
and allied health. Medical
concerns - ongoing deterioration, syringe driver in
situ, social worker to advise Rosary Gardens of ongoing deterioration. ?
inappropriate
to transfer.
• 14 November 2012 2215hrs pronounced
• 15 November 2012 – Hovinga OPU registrar, death
certificate completed, contacted Coroner’s office, notified that
a natural death. There is no entry concerning discussion with the family of the
possibility of a post-mortem examination
of the patient.
77. Death certificate notes myocardial infarction –
minutes. Delirium - days. Dementia - ?years. GIT bleeding – days.
of death 13 March 2012. Death not reported to the Coroner. Death certificate
signed by Dr Jane Tolman 13 March 2012. The
notes indicate that Patient 3 had
last been seen by Dr Tolman on 12 March 2012.
78. Patient 3 was seen in the
Emergency Department on 9 March 2012 with a presenting complaint of PR bleeding.
He had a past history
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, ataxic gait with
falls, transurethral resection of the prostate, past transient ischemic
traumatic cervical spine fracture 2002, fractured right neck of humerus,
cataract removals, haemorrhoids, colonoscopy 1993
and anxiety. The history of
presenting complaints reveals Patient 3 lived alone but his carers had
discovered his bed full of blood.
He had experienced PR bleeding over several
years but this had increased over the days prior to his presentation to the ED
associated symptoms of pain and urgency. His carers also indicated he had
not been eating well and had lost weight and they felt
there had been some
cognitive decline over 3 months. His biochemistry in the ED was satisfactory
and his obs, apart from slightly
raised blood pressure, were also deemed to be
satisfactory. He was determined not to be for the surgical unit and was
assessed by
the emergency multidisciplinary assessment team (EMAT). Notes
indicate he wants to change his Enduring Power of Attorney, not managing
of kin, sister. Has daughters but little
work assessments were ordered. The management plan adopted was for admission to
the OPU for
palliation and analgesia.
79. He was admitted to the geriatric
ward on 9 March 2012 and the admitting notes completed by Dr Butcherine state
that Patient 3
was an 84yo man with PR bleeding and likely dementia + or –
delirium and not coping well at home.
80. That is the extent of Dr
Butcherine’s contribution to the admitting notes which were then completed
by Dr Brannigan on behalf
of Dr Butcherine. The notes state, amongst other
things - MMSE score of 15/30, dementia likely, + or – delirium,
have capacity, palliative care as per Drs Tolman and
Butcherine’s assessment. If further PR bleeding for comfort care,
diazepam, cease and rationalise medications, PRN analgesia. Aim high
care placement. The history and examination of the patient
on admission were as
per the ED notes. There is no neurological examination. ACAT reassessment was
required and he was designated
as a falls risk.
81. The GOC plan for Patient
3 was completed on 9 March 2012 by Dr Brannigan with Dr Tolman having been
informed and the category
was determined to be category C, the GOC is
palliative. Patient is not for CPR, intubation or ventilation but is for the
active management e.g. antibiotics, tube feeding and not for MET
82. The nursing notes from 9 March 2012 until his death on 13 March
2012 describe him as being alert and orientated. There are no
concerning the possibility of delirium. He was noted to be independent in
activities of daily living, continent. He
fell out of bed on 11 March 2012 at
0430hrs but he was assessed as uninjured and put back to bed. Mini mental state
examination
performed on 9 March 2012 gave a score of 15/30. He was orientated
to year, date and month, to the State, city and hospital. His
registration was
2/3, recall 0/3 and attention and concentration 0/5.
83. On 13 March 2012
at 0320hrs he was certified as dead. The cause of death was given as myocardial
infarction. His death was not
reported to the Coroner and the death certificate
was completed by Dr Tolman.
84. Nursing home patient since 2010. Death certificate
completed on 27 March 2012 by Dr Hannah Jackson. The date of death was 27
2012 and the death was not reported to the Coroner. No post-mortem was
performed. The cause of death was given as uro sepsis
with no duration
recorded. Other conditions listed on the certificate include ischemic heart
disease, diabetes mellitus type 1,
hypertension, hypothyroidism and
Parkinson’s disease.
85. The notes indicate an advance care directive
had been completed on 22 September 2010 upon admission to nursing home care.
stipulated treatment where medically appropriate and for palliative care at
St Ann’s nursing home. The advanced care directive
indicates the patient
wished to remain at St Ann’s for treatment where possible and was
completed by the family and signed
by the GP Dr Exarhagos.
86. Patient 4
was seen in the ED on 24 March 2012. The notes indicate she was 87yo with
increased confusion who had recently been
put on antibiotics for a presumed
urinary tract infection but agitation and confusion had increased. The patient
was admitted to
the OPU with a diagnosis of urinary tract infection and
hyperglycaemia. Review of the notes indicates past attendance at the diabetes
clinic for management of her diabetes mellitus. There had been an admission in
February 2008 for a syncopal episode with a blood
sugar level of 2.7, in May
2008 with hyperglycaemia, a fall in 2010 with diabetic ketoacidosis and in March
2010 post a fall where
a CT scan showed multiple cerebral and cerebellar
haemorrhagic contusions, multifocal acute subarachnoid and intraventricular
haemorrhages.
The CT also revealed a left occipital fracture but no surgery was
performed. Cognitive decline had been noted in the admission
for hyperglycaemia
the urinary tract infection in January 2011 and also after the skull fracture as
87. The file notes indicate the admission in January 2011 with a
blood sugar level of 32.4 and associated dehydration had been treated
successfully with intravenous fluids and insulin.
88. Patient 4 was
admitted to the OPU on 24 March 2012 under Dr Tolman and a GOC plan with a
diagnosis of likely UTI and hyperglycaemia
was completed by Dr McIntyre on 24
March 2012. The form indicates Dr Tolman was informed of this plan and Patient
3 was characterised
as category B – limitation of medical treatment and
GOC is curative or restorative. The patient was not for CPR, intubation
ventilation but is for the active management (antibiotics and tube feeding) and
with regard to MET calls the form indicates no
but if deteriorates for medical
registrar review.
89. She was reviewed by Dr Tolman on 25 March 2012 –
“doing poorly, not responsive overnight, no oral intake, drip in
discussed with family comfort care please, no obs, no insulin, mouth care
etc.” The nursing notes on 25 March 2012
state the abdominal subcutaneous
line with driver was put in and a blood sugar level of 9.9 recorded. Insulin
was ceased (the blood
sugar level on admission was 20 and the notes indicate
non-acidotic diabetic ketosis). The management plan was as previous episodes
with intravenous fluids and insulin.
90. The notes record that 20mg of
morphine and 20mg of midazolam were recorded to be administered via the
abdominal subcutaneous syringe
driver (the intravenous line in the foot had been
removed previously on Dr Tolman’s orders).
91. On 26 March 2012 the
notes of the ward round recorded by Dr McIntyre indicate “daughter
present, patient having sips of
water, daughter knows she is for comfort care,
she is better today, had been drowsy on presentation, daughter feels she is
– says patient is talking. On morphine, midazolam syringe driver,
patient states she has no pains anywhere, has been in Compton
Downs for 18
months, can eat and drink if she wants, no breakthrough morphine medication
required. Issues – confusion, plan
to keep patient comfortable, can eat
and drink if she wants” (note the records do not indicate any
reconsideration at this
stage of the GOC plan to a palliative approach but the
limitation of medical treatment categorisation of 24 March 2012 was still
presumably operative).
92. On 26 March 2012 the endocrine registrar, Connell,
reviewed Patient 4 as type 1 diabetic. Symptoms of diabetic ketoacidosis
epigastric pain, nausea, vomiting, tachypnoea, polyuria, thirst,
headache and general unwellness. Suggest aim for sufficient insulin
ketosis and the worst of hyperglycaemia. Suggest addition given she has been on
basal bolus regime for greater than 20
years, might it cause distress to the
patient missing doses?”
93. The notes at page 2267 contain an entry at
1230hrs written by Dr McIntyre on 26 March 2012 - written in retrospect family
comfort care. Fiercely independent, poor quality of life, use of insulin
would be to prolong life, agree with comfort measures.
The notes record there
was a family meeting with McIntyre, Tolman, Graham, four children and
grandchildren present. The notes further
go on to state that Dr Tolman has
discussed with Dr Duffield who will review “we are more than happy for the
endocrine team
to takeover care if they feel this is appropriate.” Dr
Duffield writes in the notes on 22 March 2012 “I feel the above
is appropriate and endocrinology need not be involved in her
94. At page 2768 an entry of Dr Tolman on 26 March 2012 records
increased medications, “please give plenty of
breakthrough.”
95. One breakthrough of morphine is given to settle some
agitation. Medications were subsequently increased to 30mg of morphine and
of midazolam. At this stage in the record there is still no change to the GOC
plan and no comment from the OPU treating team
by way of discussion of the
endocrinology registrar’s suggestion of low dose insulin.
patient deteriorates overnight and is certified dead at 0745hrs by intern
Jackson on 27 March 2012. Note that the death certificate
as completed above
makes no mention of diabetic complications contributing to the urosepsis or
97. The death certificate was signed by Dr Hannah Jackson on 26
March 2012. Cause of death advanced dementia (no duration recorded).
Associated conditions hypertension, atrial fibrillation, ischemic heart disease.
Case not reported to the Coroner and no post-mortem.
98. This 83yo man with a
history of dementia diagnosed in 2008 by his private geriatrician (Dr Dunbabin)
was seen in the ED on 12
March 2012 with a history of decreasing mobility, falls
and a possible left foot drop. He complained of back pain and had had five
falls in the preceding 4 days. Back and joint pains had affected his overall
mobility in the preceding 3 weeks and his wife was
having trouble managing him.
He was also, at times, aggressive and irritable.
99. Apart from the
conditions recorded in the death certificate above, he also had a history of
parathyroid adenoma and benign prostatic
hypertrophy with associated
transurethral resection of the prostate.
100. A GOC plan was completed on
12 March 2012 which appears to have been superseded by a further GOC plan on 15
March 2012. The
12 March 2012 GOC was completed by Dr Izzettin with a diagnosis
of falls and poor mobility and the category was B, limitation of
treatment, GOC is curative or restorative but the patient is not for CPR,
intubation or ventilation but is for the following
active management e.g.
antibiotics and tube feeding and MET calls were approved. The consultant
responsible was not informed of
101. The second GOC plan which was
completed on 15 March 2012 by Dr Geetha (no designation is given for Dr Geetha),
and again the
consultant was not informed of the plan. The diagnosis on the GOC
was falls and poor mobility and this time the category was palliative,
102. Review of his past history showed sciatica diagnosed in 2010 with
radiation down the left leg, mild renal impairment. In 2011
a letter from Dr
Dunbabin to his GP described semantic dementia as part of a probable
frontotemporal dementia. The letter also states
asymptomatic hypocalcaemia with
parathyroid adenoma removal in 2007 and stable myocardial ischemia. Dr Dunbabin
draws attention
to a delirium post TURP in 2005. The problem of gait was
addressed by Dr Dunbabin and thought to be due to his frontotemporal dementia
and a MRI at that time was consistent for frontotemporal dementia. He was
placed on an Exelon patch (Rivastigmine) (anti-colinesterase
inhibitor).
103. He was admitted on 12 March 2012 and the admitting
examination records him as being well with normal vitals and full neurological
examination was performed (the first full neurological examination noted in the
cases reviewed thus far) and a left sixth nerve palsy
causing chronic diplopia
present since 2008 was noticed. He also was noted to have a high stepping gait
and the impression was of
progression of dementia and allied health input and
treatment adjustment was suggested as part of his inpatient admission. The
notes were completed by Dr Chris Hughes.
104. The admitting notes
from 12 March 2012 completed by Dr Izzettin, med senior, record that Patient 5
was to be admitted to the
OPU and stated that “he is an 83yo man
presenting with falls and poor mobility and a background of progressive
dementia. Dementia
was trialled on a patch (Exelon) but taken off 3 weeks ago
due to muscular pain. Hypertension, atrial fibrillation (not on warfarin
aspirin), hypercholesterolemia, unstable angina, parathyroidectomy 2007 for
parathyroid adenoma, TURP 2005, chronic back pain
and falls. Neuro-examination
done, essentially normal. Left plantar equivocal. Power tone and cranials
tested”, urea 9.4 creatinine 89. The notes
indicate his admission to OPU was characterised by problems with urinary
poor appetite, mild dehydration and aggression which improved if his
wife or daughter were present. Dr Tolman saw him at 1300hrs
on 12 March 2012
(page 3078). The notes record “discussed with wife, dementia 6 years,
forgetting how to move and this has
happened suddenly. Six weeks ago coping at
difficulties
but has been too tired to have any perspective. Daughter in
Canberra. Son, 23yo, at home (mental illness). Dr Dunbabin has seen
Exelon patches made him worse. Feels he’s had quality until 3 weeks ago.
He enjoyed his outings but this has gone.
Wants whatever best for him but no
ICU MET calls CPR chest compression. Plan ACAT, capacity assessment, clarify
goals, to keep
settled, to find nursing home, to aim for restoration of some
quality of life, if none over the next few days then concentrate on
105. The notes then record “discussed with daughter.
Understands that her father has dementia, agrees with the thrust of our
Patient 5 is very unsettled, he is insightless, lacks judgement and has no
skills to problem solve. His mobility has markedly
declined, probable praxis
problems, Patient 5 does NOT have the capacity to make decisions relating to
complex matters such as finances,
medical decisions and accommodation. I
recommend that a surrogate decision maker be appointed. His wife has enduring
guardianship
and POA. Fluids, bowels, check urine, minimal sedation only to
keep manageable.” Subcutaneous doses of midazolam were given
him on an as required basis. On 13 March 2012 midazolam was changed to oral
quetiapine.
106. Nursing notes over the next few days describe periods of
agitation, aggression (delirious). The ward round on 13 March 2012
McIntyre) records the change from midazolam to quetiapine 12.5mg bd. The ward
round on 14 March 2012 records distress today
with trouble sleeping. It is
noted that his creatinine had increased to 156 (previously normal). The notes
do not record any medical
consideration of delirium which had been noted in the
nursing notes. The notes record at 1730hrs on 14 March 2012 he was seen by
Jackson (intern). Bladder scan revealed a litre of retained urine which may be
contributing to his distress and he was given
an indwelling catheter which was
placed in overnight. A ward round on 15 March 2012 with Dr Lees as consultant
was conducted. On
16 March 2012 the Lees ward round as recorded by Dr Jackson
stated patient sat out of bed with daughter and investigate if was previously
Rivistigmine. The progress notes at this time record that he is confused,
disorientated, agitated and hallucinating. Dr Tolman
on 15 March 2012 records -
F.C. with wife and daughter. Long history of dementia, major decline in recent
months, no precipitants,
lost mobility, delusions, troubling +++, not responsive
antipsychotics, agitated +++, past week refusing oral intake, wife and family
see no QOL, unable to cope with him at home, have requested comfort care. We
agree intermittent dose of medication for comfort when
settle commence syringe
driver with appropriate doses. ACAT assessment, apply for bed at RG, either
palliative or dementia specific,
aim to get comfortable, oral intake is
required. The GOC is NOT to shorten his life but to give him and his family the
symptom relief and comfort.
107. On 16 March 2012 Dr Butcherine
records issues with dementia, behaviour and haematuria. Plan not for
medications, query PRN sedation
(page 3093).
108. The weekend intern on 17
March 2012 states contact Dr Tolman re treatment for agitation. Verapamil to
recommence for increased
blood pressure. midazolam PRN.
109. Over the next
few days he remained agitated, distressed and paranoid. Morphine, midazolam and
haloperidol were administered
but there were no changes in his environment or
any indication of non-drug management of his problems.
110. On 20 March 2012
he pulled out his catheter and syringe driver and he experienced several falls
from his chair and bed. A possible
admission to Roy Fagan on 21 March was
considered but was delayed until his bladder issues were sorted out. On 21
March 2012 he
was found face down on the floor and subcutaneous midazolam and
haloperidol were given PRN. The notes records that Dr McIntyre,
the medical
registrar, discussed with Dr Lees, the issue of placement and Roy Fagan were
happy to accept prior to Rosary Gardens
(but above notes indicate that this
matter was reconsidered on 21 March 2012).
111. On page 3056 (20 March 2012)
at 2000hrs Dr Tolman saw the patient and states not comfortable, needs increase
in medications.
The nursing notes then record at 2130hrs that he was given one
mg of haloperidol and 5mg of midazolam because of agitation and the
driver changed to morphine 25mg, midazolam 25mg and haloperidol 3mg.
112. On 21 March 2012 the OPU ward round with Dr Tolman and others cease
obs, driver to stay the same at present, will reconsider
during the day. In and
out catheter as required. At 1040hrs on 21 March 2012 Dr McIntyre, medical
registrar, records - discussed
with daughter, not being transferred to Roy
Fagan. When awake distressed, agitated, keeping him more on the sedated side.
in complete agreement. On 22 March 2012 at 0945hr geriatric ward round
Dr McIntyre - breakthrough x 2 in the last 24hrs. Two breakthrough
and one breakthrough morphine. The notes contain an abbreviation
“CCMX” and signed by A Grover, med 5.
113. The notes record a
ward round at 1030hrs on 23 March 2012 with Dr Tolman and the notes indicate
settled, no more investigation,
comfort care, not thinking of moving
114. Over the next days he remains sedated but irritable and
disturbed. He was certified dead at 0530hrs on 26 March 2012 by the
intern Feng.
115. Resident of Ningana Nursing Home. Date of death 3 August
2012. Death certified by Dr Sansom. Death certificate completed 3
August 2012
by Dr Sansom. No post-mortem. Death reported to Coroner. Cause of death
natural. Causes of death sepsis (5 days),
intra-abdominal infection (5 days),
associated condition: dementia, type 2 diabetes.
116. 82yo lady seen in ED on
29 July 2012. The presenting history was of approximately one week history of
being generally unwell.
Hallucinating, refusing medications and with an
associated fever (39.3C). Olanzapine 2.5mg a day had been started but she had
117. Past medical history included diabetes mellitus type 2,
hypertension, atrial fibrillation, anxiety, right total hip replacement
iron deficiency, anaemia, gout, hypercholesterolemia, umbilical hernia repair,
cholecystitis with secondary pancreatitis
and open cholecystectomy in 2011,
dementia and brain stem ischemia. When she had become unwell at the nursing
the nursing home notes indicate that low dose olanzapine
had commenced and a delirium screen performed however she failed to improve.
The GP, Dr Gangell, requested a transfer to the RHH and Patient 6’s
daughter (who was interstate) was notified by phone.
The referring notes refer
to the patient also being delirious, breathless and paranoid.
ambulance transfer notes record the patient is reported as usually being bright
and active. Examination in ED revealed possible
early consolidation in the
right lower lobe of the lung. Elevated white cell count and a diagnosis of
probable respiratory infection
but a need for a clean midstream urine specimen
to exclude urinary tract infection. The patient was admitted to the medical
and a GOC plan completed on 29 July 2012 by senior registrar Dr Ilenis
which categorises Patient 6 as category B – the GOC
is curative or
restorative and specified the use of antibiotics and fluids and the patient was
for MET calls. The form specifies
Patient 6’s daughter was the person
responsible for decision making. The form also indicates no consultant was
informed of
the GOC plan. At this stage Dr Skelton, staff specialist, was
responsible for her care.
119. Review of the patient’s files indicated
10 days prior to admission on 29 July 2012 she had been seen in the ED for a
episode in 2 days of acute dizziness. No neurological examination was
performed but the dizziness was thought to be hyperventilation
secondary to
anxiety. She had in the 2 years prior to this, three presentations for
complications relating to her abdominal hernia
(in the notes it is described as
an umbilical hernia and an incisional hernia). This had been present for 74
years causing her abdominal
pain, vomiting and distension on each of the three
occasions (one in 2009 and two in 2010). A partial obstruction was felt to be
the cause and it was treated conservatively.
120. The patient’s file
indicates Patient 6 was transferred on 30 July 2012 to OPU for management of her
infection (blood cultures
were positive) and for continuation of IV fluids,
antibiotics and olanzapine. Notes made by Dr Butcherine at this time indicate
her abdomen was tender with a possible mass being present on the right hand
side. On 30 July 2012 there is a microbiology alert
because of positive blood
cultures to gram positive cocci and gram negative rods (coliforms and
enterococcus). Antibiotics were
suggested and the notes record if the GOC are
not palliative then will advise with sensitivities tomorrow (page
121. General progress notes commence on 29 July 2012 with admission to
med D under Dr Hutchison and the notes record floridly delirious.
Intravenous
fluids and investigations were commenced and olanzapine and haloperidol charted.
There was no neurological examination
at the time of admission except moving
“all four limbs”. On 30 July 2012 the medical D ward round notes
you to OPU for taking over care of the patient” and signed by
Dr Prebble.
122. Dr Butcherine’s admission notes to the OPU on 30 July
2012 at 1050hrs report likely intra-abdominal sepsis from HL RACF
(dementia)...cognition: delirium dementia. Discuss with Patient 6’s
daughter no answer and no voicemail. Discuss with Tracey
no answer and no
voicemail. Discuss with [?Greg?]. Reluctant to discuss health and GOC. Agrees
with antibiotics and comfort care,
will contact his siblings. GOC discussed.
Plan OPU antibiotics to tazocin. Await arrival of daughter to discuss GOC.
and E and FBE.
123. On 30 July 2012 the nursing notes state the
family visiting through shift that day and daughter to stay on. IV running
tazocin commenced. Family have expressed concern re treatment to be
done for their mother. They are concerned that drs are not
investigate the cause of delirium. Family are not willing to make life changing
decisions until investigations are done.
Jane Tolman phoned and will meet
family at 0730hrs tomorrow.
124. On 31 July 2012 Dr Tolman, at 0800hrs has
written in the file - discussed with family, probably adhesions (has had before)
probably vascular for 10 years, QOL poor, plan stop intravenous and
antibiotics. Oral intake is tolerated. Continuous medication
for comfort.
Discuss to nursing home when stable.
125. On 31 July 2012 at 1130hrs the OPU
ward round (Dr Hovinga’s notes) record - analgesia as required, continue
syringe driver,
increase dose if required, frequent breakthroughs, cease meds
that are not essential to comfort. At that stage a syringe driver
10mg of morphine, 10mg of midazolam and 1mg of haloperidol had been
126. On 1 August 2012 at 0930hrs Dr Skelton’s notes indicate
- three top ups of morphine had been required overnight. The impression
terminal decline. The plan terminal care, may die in the next 24hrs. A second
GOC plan was completed on 1 August 2012 supervised
by Dr Skelton, the staff
specialist, which indicated Dr Tolman had been informed. The GOC plan indicated
a diagnosis of sepsis and
the category had been changed to category D, the GOC
is terminal, the patient is not for CPR, intubation, ventilation or MET calls.
In terms of the person responsible or enduring guardian involved in decision
making none are recorded on the form.
127. The notes record on 2 August
2012 under Dr Tolman - moaning, otherwise settled, abdomen soft, increased
syringe driver medications.
128. Notes on 3 August 2012 indicate the patient
was settled and she died later that day.
129. Further perusal of Patient
6’s medical notes indicates that during an admission in 2011 for an iron
infusion for anaemia
under Dr Skelton the patient had signed a form indicating
no active measures such as CPR, intubation or ICU but MET calls only.
Mental State Examination performed on 4 April 2011 scored 13/30 with 0/3 recall
at 3 mintues and 0/10 for attention and concentration.
It was also in 2011 that
after a cholecystectomy and umbilical hernia repair, the patient was diagnosed
with impaired cognition
– mild dementia. CT scanning at around this time
showed brain stem ischemia and a small aneurysm of the internal carotid artery
was queried.
130. Date of death 4 August 2012. Death certificate completed
by Dr Tolman on 6 August 2012. Death was reported as natural. Post-mortem
not to be conducted and was reported to the Coroner. The cause of death was
acute renal failure of 2 days and lower respiratory
tract infection of 4 days.
Associated conditions given were ischemic heart disease and congestive cardiac
131. The notes record that Patient 7 (92yo) was brought to the ED on
3 August 2012 by her son. She had become unwell, unable to stand
and had been
incontinent of urine and faeces. She was nauseated, coughing and short of
breath. The notes of Dr Johnson from the
ED indicate she had had multiple falls
and had recently been treated for a chest infection. The son had been advised
by the GP to
bring her to the RHH for palliative care. The ED notes record the
plan was for treatment of her nausea, food and fluids. A message
was left for
Dr Tolman for further advice and possible admission to the OPU. The ambulance
notes for the admission record the patient
lived with her son and was picked up
from home but did not want to go to hospital. Investigations in the ED revealed
right lower
lobe consolidation and queried subcarinal adenopathy and there was
evidence of renal failure with an eGFR of 9mls/m, urea of 29.3
and a creatinine
of 412. There was also a neutrophilia of 17000. Review of the medical notes
indicates that apart from the conditions
listed on the death certificate Patient
7 had also suffered with hypertension, gastro-oesophageal reflux, iron
deficiency anaemia
and gout. Severe arthritis had meant that for the previous 3
years she’d been unable to mobilise.
132. On 3 August 2014, notes of
Dr Martin, Med 5, indicate a review by Dr Tolman had recommended admission to
the OPU. Comfort care
was to be provided with an ACAT assessment for a nursing
with this plan.
133. Patient 7 was admitted to the OPU at 1410hrs on 3 August
2012 with the admission being performed by Dr Sansom. A GOC plan was
at the time of admission signed by the OPU registrar, Dr Hovinga, and the form
indicates Dr Tolman was informed of this
plan. No note is made of the person
responsible or enduring guardian on the form. The diagnosis on the GOC plan is
falls, chest
infection, CCF and the category of care was C. (GOC is palliative,
treatment being aimed primarily at symptom management and quality
of life.) Dr
Sansom’s admitting notes record the patient complained of productive
cough, fevers and rigor, dyspnea, malaise
and fatigue, multiple falls over the
last few days. Hasn’t mobilised for 3 years. The notes record Dr Tolman
has contacted
the patient’s son who is happy for comfort care and requests
nursing home placement on the eastern shore. Examination revealed
the patient
as not being orientated to place, day, month or year and the impressions
recorded were of delirium, secondary to heart
failure, ? KTI, ? IHD, ? urinary
tract infection, ? gastro. Also the possibility of pneumonia was considered and
a diagnosis of
underlying dementia made.
134. At 1540hrs on 3 August 2012,
Dr Skelton reviewed the patient and biochemical tests, ECG and x-rays of chest
and hip were ordered.
Fluids and oxygen therapy were instituted and further
advice on diuretics and anti-hypertensive required. The notes record Dr Tolman
saw the patient at 1800hrs on 3 August 2012 (the entry incorrectly puts the date
as 3 July 2012). No history or examination is recorded
in the notes, however Dr
Tolman’s entry states “[Patient 7] has been saying she’s dying
for some time. She says
she is ready. Her bloods are now back and many are
poor. Discuss with family comfort care is appropriate. Whatever she needs for
comfort should be given. Plan no drip or obs. Meds for comfort. Meds for
prolongation of life can be ceased.” The IV and
usual medications were
ceased. Patient 7 remained agitated overnight and was given morphine and
midazolam as per Dr Tolman’s
orders and she passed away at 0405hrs on 4
August 2012.
135. Date of death 19 March 2012. Death certificate completed
by Dr Jackson 20 March 2012. Cause of death small bowel obstruction,
Other diagnoses in cause of death were constipation and dementia. No durations
given for either. No associated conditions
were listed. The cause of death was
reported as natural. No post-mortem was performed and not reported to the
136. Patient 8 was brought in by ambulance from his home in Bagdad
on 10 March 2012. He lived alone but was supported by his family
close by (seven daughters and seven sons). The family attended to his personal
care, housework, shopping and finances.
The notes from the ED of 10 March 2012
stated he had been found unconscious on the floor by his son and a fall from a
queried. He was noted to be febrile, incontinent of urine and
confused and unable to get up and the family believed he may have
been on the
floor at home for over 12 hours. The notes record concerns of the family that
in recent weeks he had not been eating
or drinking and they were worried he
would waste away. They also noted his cognitive abilities were declining. A
past history of
asthma and diabetes was noted and the impression was of a
urinary tract infection with confusion and an associated diagnosis of dementia.
A chest x-ray, biochemical and haematological tests and ECG were ordered and an
intravenous line inserted.
137. The patient was admitted to the OPU that
evening and intravenous fluids, antibiotics and further investigations ordered.
was completed by Dr Izzettin, RMO, on 10 March 2012 which gave a diagnosis
of mechanical fall and the category of treatment was B,
GOC is curative or
restorative. The patient is not for CPR, intubation or ventilation but is for
MET calls. The form indicates
the family had been consulted in the completion
of that form (son and daughter) but the consultant had not been informed of the
The admitting notes of Dr Izzettin record - pleasant elderly man, thin and
wasted and issues hypovolaemia and likely rhabdomyolysis
secondary to a
mechanical fall. Generalised weakness and deconditioning, cognitive impairment,
elevated white cell count and CRP,
? focus of infection - most likely UTI. Plan
appropriate candidate for OPU, IV rehydration, antibiotics, chest x-ray, urine
blood culture, “GOC with limitations discussed with family
138. The notes record that on 12 March 2012 at 1130hrs Dr
Tolman reviewed the patient. The notes state - discussed with son, will
resistant to nursing home, poor insight, daughter and other son not answering.
“I do not think he has the capacity to make
decisions about complex
matters (medical treatment) such as accommodation, finance. Plan speak with
family tomorrow to confirm nursing
Downs with his brother. Discussed with son all family agree needs nursing home
placement.”
139. A new GOC plan is completed on 13 March 2012 with
the patient’s category being changed to category C – the GOC is
palliative. It specified the patient was still to receive antibiotics. This
plan was signed by Dr McIntyre and the form indicates
Dr Tolman was informed.
The form does not record the person responsible or any enduring guardian
involved in the decision making.
The notes of 13 March 2012 do not contain any
record of any examination on that day or any information concerning the
of this form.
140. The notes of 15 March 2012 of Dr Lees’
ward round indicate the patient was mobilising well, catheter removed and
antibiotics
stopped and other treatment changes were recommended. He was also
assessed for a nursing home.
141. On 16 March 2012 the notes of the OPU ward
round of Dr Lees indicate the patient was alert and comfortable, sitting on the
Plan RVCTB report. The notes record the patient becoming nauseated and
unwell on 16 March 2012 with coffee ground vomitus overnight
on 16 March 2012
and again on the evening of 17 March 2012.
142. Examination by the weekend
intern noted low level rigidity with no bowel sounds. An abdominal x-ray was
ordered and the intern
reviewed the x-ray and diagnosed constipation. An enema
was scheduled for the following day.
143. The notes of 18 March 2012 indicate
discussions took place between Dr Tolman and the family at which time nursing
and symptom control were agreed. There is a record of Dr Tolman
discussing the difficulties in treating constipation in dementia
Further vomiting and abdominal pains are recorded and the enemas prescribed
appeared to have little effect on the constipation.
144. The notes of Dr
Tolman’s ward round on 19 March 2012 indicate the patient feeling
“not too bad”. Impression
dementia, fibre and pear juice, await bed
in Compton Downs. On 19 March 2012 at 1840hrs the notes record - pain tummy and
At 1955hrs the notes record - vomiting, ? aspiration, Cheynes Stokes
breathing, semi-conscious. At 2040hrs - black vomit. Endone
2.5mg orally had
been prescribed for his pain. Dr Tolman was contacted concerning the vomiting
(page 3999). Morphine and midazolam
were given and later further sedation and
glycopyrolate. A syringe driver was recommended but the patient died before it
inserted at 2245hrs on 19 March 2012.
145. This lady had a complicated past history with many
presentations for falls, a fractured right humerus, a right total hip
replacement,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, ischemic heart disease,
hypertension, aortic valve replacement, chronic back pain, ? subarachnoid
haemorrhage 2000, osteoporosis, recurring cellulitis, congestive cardiac
failure, rheumatoid arthritis, gastro-oesophageal reflux
disease, colonic polyps
and chronic anaemia (blood loss). She had been admitted in the past in August
2011, January 2012 and March
2012. She had been placed in category B on each
admission on the GOC plan. She represented on 17 May 2012 being brought in by
from the Mary Oglivy Nursing Home to the ED. She had been found
slumped in a chair and was febrile and thought to be septic. The
ED intern, Dr
Beaumont, noted Patient 9 had been unwell for months with cellulitis, congestive
cardiac failure and herpes zoster.
He noted the patient was unable to give a
history and was drowsy. As the patient was known to Dr Lees she was admitted to
unit with a diagnosis of infective exacerbation of her chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (? bi-basal pneumonia). The progress
notes of 17
May 2012 (Dr Lees, 1125hrs) indicate - being transferred to OPU, too drowsy to
take medication, poor prognosis, is dying,
suggest change to syringe driver,
brother phoned.
146. The GOC plan on 17 May 2012 gives no diagnosis but
placed Patient 9 in category D, GOC is terminal. No consultant was informed
this classification, no person responsible or enduring guardian is noted on the
form, it is signed by Dr MacCartin (?). The notes
of 17 May indicate the
patient was seen by Dr Tolman at 1715hrs. No obs or blood tests recorded. An
increase in the dose of midazolam
in the syringe driver was ordered. The notes
record a family meeting. The family meeting was comfortable with treatment for
only. The notes of 17 May 2012 also indicate when the patient was seen
by Dr Lees and admitted to the OPU and the GOC changed, when
the daughter
arrives there would be discussion concerning changing the medications to a
syringe driver.
147. Positive blood cultures and urinary tract infection
were noted on 18 May 2012. The notes at 1100hrs - Tolman ward round positive
blood and urine cultures, patient comfortable at the moment, increased dose in
syringe drive, remove indwelling catheter, nil obs.
The notes further record Dr
Tolman’s entry of a plan of management which is for comfort care as per Dr
Lees on presentation
and after discussion with family (no record in notes of any
family discussion). There are further entries indicating the patient
to get out of bed subsequently, sit in a chair and was comfortable. Increased
doses in the syringe driver were noted but
not the reason given for the increase
in dose. Further notes of Dr Tolman - the patient was comfortable but has
declined overnight.
The only complaint recorded is of a stuffy nose.
148. Continuation notes point to the patient gradually improving and on 21
May 2012 medications were decreased in the syringe driver.
The patient
continued to improve. The syringe driver was removed and oral medications
commenced. The patient was eventually transferred
followed up over the next few months.
149. Patient 10 was brought in by ambulance to the ED on 13
September 2012. He was noted to be 81yo and had been unwell for 3 days
fevers, rigors and vomiting. Urinary tract infection was suspected and despite
having previously been commenced on antibiotics
and Maxalon for vomiting, he
continued to get worse and was found to be in rapid atrial fibrillation. He had
a past history of an
aortic valve replacement (on Warfarin therapy),
pre-existing atrial fibrillation, pulmonary fibrosis requiring oxygen therapy at
rheumatica, benign prostatic hypertrophy with a permanent
indwelling catheter
(changed 4 days prior to presentation to ED), a past history of three
cerebrovascular accidents and a history
of gait problems and falls with a
compression fracture of L1 in 2011.
150. Dr Short in the ED discussed with
the family and Dr Lewis a GOC plan. This was completed on 13 September 2012.
The diagnosis
was urosepsis and the category determined was category B, GOC is
curative or restorative with specification of fluids and antibiotics
calls (Dr Lewis was the consultant and was informed of the plan). Treatment was
commenced with intravenous fluids, antibiotics,
steroids, change of indwelling
catheter and various investigations ordered. He was admitted under the medical
151. Over the next week the patient was treated for acute pulmonary
oedema and his atrial fibrillation. He was found to be weak but
able to take
oral medications, food and fluid. Assessment by physiotherapy for
rehabilitation revealed him not to be suitable for
rehab. During his time on
the medical ward (Dr McCallum’s unit) he became fluid overloaded and his
renal function deteriorated.
Antibiotics for Citrobacter infection were stopped
on 19 September 2012 and replaced by Augmentin and the notes of 19 September
2012 indicate a transfer to OPU when a bed is available.
152. The progress
notes on 20 September 2012 indicate he was seen after transfer to the OPU during
the ward round (Dr Hovinga and
others). Notes record the daughter says he is
confused but better than usual today. Issues raised were ongoing infection and
and the plan as a result of that meeting was a change in the GOC,
discharge planning and allied health review.
153. The OPU ward round notes
on 21 September 2012 (Dr Hovinga) report the patient was more drowsy but denied
shortness of breath
and feeling comfortable. The family were reported as being
in attendance and the issues raised were ongoing infection, confusion
breathing worse today. Plan was to continue current meds, if deterioration
comfort means only and if improves likely nursing
21 September 2012 at 1700hrs reports - not well today, discuss with daughter,
appreciates he’s
very unwell, wants comfort care if he declines, wife
understands the prognosis. Plan comfort care in the event of
154. On 23 September 2012 Dr Tolman records at 1030hrs - worse
today, still high calcium, CRP and WCC, better hypernatremia, imaging
kidneys, pulmonary infiltrates, faecal loading, multiple lymph nodes,
Citrobacter UTI 13 September 2012 adequately treated.
History pulmonary
fibrosis 2006, atrial valve replacement, Melanoma (Simon Thomson), BCC probable
right ear June 2012, not surgical
candidate, fitting cataracts, compression
fractures, ischemic heart disease, CAGS 2003, TB 1950, CVAs frontal, occipital
and cerebellum,
hypertension, PMR (Dunbabin), falls AF. Discuss with Julie, has
spoken with her family, agrees he is very unwell, he fluctuates
ready to die. Once his life prolonging meds cease plan comfort care, am happy
to be called, no obs please, oxygen
if required for comfort, oral intake as
155. The ward rounds notes on 21 September 2012 at 1135hrs (Drs
Tolman, Hovinga, Wilson and med 5 resident) record the patient as
being sleepy,
syringe driver operating with midazolam 15mg, morphine 10mg and glycopyrolate
1.2mg. The plan was to keep comfortable
and monitor urine output.
social work notes on 24 September 2012 in the file state request from family to
cease social work today. Upset re patient’s
deterioration but they have
been aware he is dying. Just finding the waiting difficult. Support
157. The OPU ward round on 25 September 2012 (recorded by Dr
Butcherine) states non-verbal, looks comfortable, issues terminal care,
antibiotics, no ACAT to stay on 6A for terminal care, terminal pathway, change
GOC. The GOC plan was changed on that date to
category D, terminal care, with
Dr Tolman having been informed by Dr Butcherine of this change. The persons
responsible are not
recorded on the form.
158. On 26 September 2012 at
1045hrs the patient was certified dead by the OPU intern.
159. This 71yo man living at home was seen in the ED on 7 March
2012. The complaints were of generally decreased functioning over
period with acute worsening on the day of presentation. He had become confused
and delirious and whilst normally ambulating
could not stand up or speak. The
patient had a past history of non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus,
glomerulosclerosis resulting
in chronic renal failure (he had been treated in
the past with peritoneal dialysis), cerebral ischemia and previous episode of
hypertensive
encephalopathy. Assessment in the ED revealed he had a delirium
state, low serum sodium (122) and high creatinine (399). Brain
significant changes on the left side with the possibility of a cerebral infarct.
The notes record the patient was coughing
purulent green sputum and a chest
infection was suspected. He was admitted to a medical ward.
admitting notes on 8 March 2012 to medical D indicate the patient had confusion
on a background of dementia. The notes also
state he had a congenital solitary
kidney and recorded diagnoses of anaemia, iron deficiency and bone disease.
Other issues the
notes record include delirium on a background of dementia, ? a
lacunar infarct, possible hypertensive encephalopathy and secondary
infection. They also record chronic hyponatremia secondary to
161. Patient was referred by Med D resident Hutchinson at 0925hrs
on 8 March 2012 to Dr Tolman for review. Dr Tolman saw the patient
2012 (time not noted) and noted - 71yo, wife, two children, ex-smoker, three
packets a day for 30 years, none for 30 years,
alcohol been big beer drinker
until 12 months ago, greater than 60gm per day, solitary kidney congenital,
refused dialysis, coronary
artery disease, due for echo today, ? dementia. The
notes then record problems over the past 6 months with language, judgement and
perseveration and praxis. Dr Tolman’s notes go on to record the patient
has no history of psychosis, very compulsive, disorientated
in time only in the
last week and has lost 17kg since October. They record sudden onset of not
being able to walk or get out of
bed on the previous day. The impression
recorded is of probable dementia, ? alcoholic, ? vascular, now delirium,
multiple factors,
plan comfort care with no antibiotics, bloods, treat any
symptoms, aim for recovery of function if possible, not ICU, CPR, MET calls,
quiet unit, good care, happy to be contacted.
162. Two GOC plans were
completed on 8 March 2012; one by the medical registrar (name undecipherable)
and the second by Dr Geetha.
The GOC category on both plans is for palliative
care and the forms do not record any person responsible and the forms do not
that the consultants were informed. The admitting notes of Dr Geetha
to OPU state the issues are delirium, cognitive decline and
destination and the plan was for palliative care, no blood investigations. Dr
Tolman saw the patient on 8 March 2012 and
states not well, unsettled, suggest
PRN morphine and midazolam, if no improvement tomorrow then reconsider his meds
and direction
of care. I am happy to be called for advice.
163. On 9 March
2012 a ward round at 1140hrs attended by Drs Lees, McIntyre, Jackson and Tucker
said - wife present with the family,
gradual decline over 6 months, accelerated
on Wednesday, holding on to furniture, harder to understand, was driving, mainly
decreased agitation versus yesterday, kidney problems noted, review
bloods and chest x-ray, likely infection. Impression left lower
lobe pneumonia
and delirium, family does want antibiotics, happy for blood tests for
monitoring. Plan to commence antibiotics, oral
Endone chart ECG.
March 2012 Dr Tolman’s notes at 0930hrs record - not much change, fed
breakfast, not able to be showered, obs stable,
discuss with Patient 11’s
wife was awake a little yesterday, plan continue with meds while able to
swallow, antibiotics will
be reviewed Sunday or Monday. Try not to disturb
much, aim to clear delirium and then determine whether nursing home placement or
165. On 11 March 2012 at 1145hrs, Dr Tolman
records - more settled but intermittently agitated, does not need strict fluid
soft diet please, bed washes tolerated, bowels monitor and increase
laxatives, plan review Tuesday for mobility and function, assess
whether likely
to be able to get home, change intravenous cefotaxime to IM for convenience and
to reduce disruption.
166. On 12 March 2012 at 1045hrs Dr Tolman’s
notes indicate - still delirious but periods of lucidity, eating, mobility very
unsteady, saturations have been good throughout, on examination chest clear,
abdo soft, calves soft, impression Patient 11’s
delirium seems to have
been precipitated by worries over transport to a medical appointment at Calvary
last week. He worked himself
up to a real state of agitation and this was on a
background of chronically low sodium which was 123. I think he probably
in the ED. He certainly developed multiple [undecipherable] and
subcutaneous bleeds on his limbs from thrashing around. Patient
is rather nervous about taking him home and understands the likelihood of
further episodes of delirium. Suggest
OT and physio review tomorrow for advice
re possible benefits of rehab. ACAT assessment, family meeting for discharge
plans, capacity
assessment when cognitively settled.
167. On 13 March 2012 on
the OPU ward round Dr Lees records the patient had not had morphine or
midazolam, lying in bed, more alert
and responsive today, no chest pain, wife
says Patient 11 has improved a lot, talking similar to baseline. The plan was
cease midazolam,
PRN haloperidol charted, cease cefotaxime, change to oral
antibiotics (Augmentin), contact GP, isosorbide 30mg daily charted, consider
today, have discussed with wife re discharge options, home with supports,
rehabilitation. That was signed by Dr Tucker, Med 5.
McIntyre’s ward round on 14 March 2012 at 1530hrs, feeling better, bowels
fine, sleeping well. Plan started on amlodipine,
transfer to P3 when bed
169. On 15 March 2012 he was transferred to P3 and survived for a
further 8 months before dying in November 2012.
170. This 92yo lady from a nursing home was seen in the ED on 8
March 2012. She had been referred with the possibility of having
cerebrovascular accident. The patient had been noted to be slumped to the left
and had developed a left sided facial droop.
The patient had a history of
ischemic heart disease, hypertension, dementia, osteoarthritis and
hypercholesterolemia. She was incontinent.
The ED notes indicate the left
lower limb doesn’t move and appears shortened with external rotation. The
impression was of
an elderly, demented patient with a fractured neck of femur.
X-ray confirmed an intertrochanteric fracture. The notes record the
discussed with the son – explained that even if we found something wrong,
not going to intervene as poor...Happy
for treatment comfort. The notes record
to discuss with Dr Tolman for admission...The handover and transfer checklist
from the record
indicate a diagnosis of fractured left neck of femur.
171. The patient was admitted to OPU on 8 March 2012 at 2030hrs by the night
resident and the admitting notes state 91yo female from
nursing home with one
episode of conscious collapse, nil injury with slight left sided weakness and
facial droop. Past medical history
vascular dementia, CCF, ischemic heart
disease, atrial fibrillation, CKD3, osteoarthritis and ? pulmonary embolism in
history continues with poor memory of event today, nursing staff
reported an episode when she collapsed slowly into the chair, nil
loss of consciousness. They reported slight left sided weakness and facial
droop, no speech disturbance.
172. Issues in the admitting notes record the
patient talks of conscious collapse and fractured left neck of femur and in the
plan it is specified that there be an orthopaedic review concerning
the fractured neck of femur.
173. Dr Tolman reviewed the patient at 0730hrs
on 9 March 2012 - discussed with son Clive. Happy at Sandown for 3 years, GP is
Aizen, would be happy with return to nursing home with good plan. Would not
want active medical management in the event of a decline.
Could go to OPU after
9 if were unable to do discharge planning prior.
174. On 9 March 2012 at
1510hrs the patient is reviewed by the orthopaedics unit. The notes indicate
the patient is alert and pleasantly
confused. The external rotation is noted of
the left leg and records that the hip is unstable. X-ray shows the left
intertrochanteric
fractured neck of femur and the plan was to discuss with the
surgeon reasonable to offer operative fixation. Fast from midnight,
take over care post op. That is signed by the orthopaedic
175. The orthopaedic registrar at 1630hrs reports that discussed
with son, risks and benefits explained, elected to proceed, continue
176. The operation was subsequently performed, the patient was slow to
recover and was transferred back to her nursing home eventually
where she died.
There is no record of Dr Tolman considering the fractured neck of femur in this
Associate Professor Alan Sandford
177. It is Associate Professor Alan Sandford who made the
original notification to AHPRA. In his statement attached to the notification
he makes a number of allegations concerning Dr Tolman’s dealings with
patients under her care.
178. Associate Professor Sandford says at the
beginning of his statement it is based upon his own observations, discussions
of documents. In addition he has had verbal briefings by staff
within THO – South that have made representations to him over
the previous
weeks and months.
179. In his statement he raises the following
allegations:
• Dr Tolman lied when asked in a Mortality and Morbidity
meeting within her clinical service as to whether the death of Patient
been referred to the Coroner.
• In respect of Dr Tolman’s
management of patients he said:
have also become particularly concerned with the nature of Dr Tolman’s
practice in respect to the management of patients
coming into her service being
rapidly and ‘pragmatically’ assessed as palliative and then managed
with an end result
of death. The decisions surrounding these decisions may be a
result of a desire to organizationally expedite patient throughput.
expeditious decision-making is organizationally desirable in times of pressure
for beds but may not take into account significant
elements of geriatric care,
which aims to manage reversible conditions associated with
In respect of this allegation he says the following:
“...Patient 2, a
patient who may have had a reversible condition of low sodium who was treated
with palliation and a syringe
driver. In this case others in the team had
agreed with the provisional assessment but they were dismissed. An autocratic
was then made by Dr Tolman and the Registrar Dr Butcherine was severely
admonished...
Such autocratic decision making...appears motivated by expedience and a
desire to please the Organisation and the families in relieving
their suffering
rather than pain and suffering of the patient; tending to overlook or ignore any
potential reversible conditions
and instead favour
palliation.”
He concluded:
“I believe Dr Tolman
is practicing
in a manner that constitutes risk to her
patients...”
180. Associate Professor Sandford provided to AHPRA, with the
notification, a list compiled by him of cases that were of concern.
identifies 18 patients together with a summary of his concerns with respect to
each patient. Twelve of the patients identified
in that list are the 12
patients identified by the Panel at paragraph 3.2 in its
notification has not been taken into account by the Tribunal. As is clear from
Associate Professor Sandford’s letter
he makes allegations only. There is
no evidence to suggest he personally observed Dr Tolman’s clinical
practice. Although
he refers to Patient 2 it is not in respect of an allegation
dealt with by the Panel and it is therefore not relevant to what the
must decide.
182. Patient 2 is also referred to by Associate Professor
Sandford and he does refer to a matter which was relevant to the Panel’s
determination. However it is not clear where the information with respect to
this patient came from. It may well be hearsay. The
reason for this conclusion
is he refers to receiving testimonials from personnel within THO – South
and he assembled an “impression”
of an organisational behavioural
pattern. While he does refer to personal observations he does not specify
whether he made this
observation personally with respect to Patient 2.
Associate Professor Sandford says he is aware of this case but does not say how.
He also refers to his statement being based upon his review of documents but the
only document referred to is a report prepared by
Mr John Snowden. His comments
and/or opinions with respect to Dr Tolman’s clinical practice where there
is no specific reference
to an issue considered by the panel is of little weight
and is put to one side.
Dr Catherine Yelland
183. In 2013 Dr Yelland was the Director of Medicine and Older
Persons Service, Redcliff Hospital in Queensland. In conjuction with
Tulloch who is a geriatrician at Eastern Health Melbourne, she carried out a
review of aged care services at the Royal Hobart
Hospital in October 2013. That
review was undertaken at the request of the Acting Chief Executive Officer of
THO – South and
the involvement of Dr Yelland and Dr Tulloch was arranged
with the assistance of the Chief Executive Officer of the Royal Australasian
College of Physicians.
184. In her report, Dr Yelland made the following
conclusions which the respondent said were relevant to this case and which were
based on a review of 22 “cases of concern” which were submitted for
consideration in her review:
(a) Cause of death on death certificate appears to have been
inaccurate in a number of cases:
• Renal failure, when last biochemistry did not support
• Myocardial infarct, when death was sudden and unexpected and
should have been reported to the Coroner.
(b) Deaths not reported to Coroner – e.g. death after
a femoral fracture, presumably after a fall.
(c) Fractured femurs treated
with analgesia, when standard management is surgical pinning unless patient is
unlikely to survive surgery.
(d) Inadequate assessment or treatment of acute
and potentially reversible conditions.
(e) Palliative or end of life care
approach, either without reason or without documentation. At times, the
decision to move to end
of life care appears to have been made earlier than
(f) Lack of consultation with family.
185. Dr Yelland reported that:
Tolman’s colleagues had the impression that she would adopt a palliative
approach very early in the admission, when
further investigation and treatment
would have been expected. She used the phrase ‘need to be
realistic’, appeared to
regard a hip fracture as a terminal event, and
said that nursing home care was an end of life event. She appeared to transfer
who were nearing the end of life, from other units, despite the
existence of palliative care service in the hospital, or the patient
normally have remained in the treating
186. In addition Dr Yelland said:
“Junior doctors were
concerned about the doses of medications given, and the use of syringe drivers
(to deliver a constant subcutaneous
or intravenous dose of medication, such as
analgesia or sedation)...
The use of opiates, midazolam and large doses of antipsychotic medications is
not recommended, nor is it accepted practice. Use of
syringe drivers is only
indicated where there are major pain issues and the patient is unable to take
oral medication.
From the interviews, other clinicians conform to usual clinical practice. In
the limited number of cases reviewed it appears that
at times, Dr Tolman treated
patients who have clinical presentations consistent with
with syringe drivers,
administering morphine and midazolam. She did not ask for psychogeriatric
consultations for difficult patients.
There is little doubt that in some cases
this shortened their life.”
187. Dr Yelland also noted:
“Concerns about
[Dr Tolman’s]
clinical practice included ‘aggressive terminal
sedation’ of patients, inadequate evaluation of clinical problems and
insufficient time allowed for improvement in
188. In the third last paragraph of her report, Dr Yelland
comments upon Dr Tolman’s professional performance in the following
“The management of
frail older patients, particularly those with dementia, appears, within the
limits of this review (which
did not directly observe clinical care) to fall
outside the standards of evidence based practice, and that which would be
by her peers.”
189. Dr Yelland says that she and Dr Tulloch, as reviewers,
were able to access the notes of the cases which were submitted for their
consideration and also had comments from other clinicians but they said this
would introduce a bias so their comments on the cases
“are aggregated and
general, and are an impression from a peer, rather than a more detailed analysis
of each case”.
190. Dr Tolman says that of the 12 patients the subject
of the Panel’s decision there were four which fell within this review,
namely Patient 3, Patient 5, Patient 8 and Patient 12. Having considered each
patient’s medical record and Dr Yelland’s
report and noting that the
initials used in Dr Yelland’s report for three of the four patients are
not consistent with those
patients’ actual initials, the Tribunal is
satisfied the four patients mentioned in Dr Yelland’s report are the
of the Panel’s decision. Even though the use of initials vary,
the Tribunal examined the comments of Dr Yelland with respect
to three of the
patients and cross referenced those comments with the medical
191. As to Patient 3, the comment is the death certificate points to
a condition for which no evidence was noted in the medical record.
No weight is
given to this comment because it was not an issue before the Panel.
relation to Patient 5, Dr Tolman submits the Panel’s findings with respect
to this patient related to the aggressive
use of medication and Dr
Yelland’s comment that it was unclear why the patient needed analgesia and
sedation goes more to record
keeping. It is clear the Panel’s findings
with respect to this patient were more than submitted by Dr Tolman; see
31. One of the findings in relation to this patient by the Panel is a
lack of a diagnosis while another was the aggressive and inappropriate
medications. It might be thought Dr Yelland’s comment about it being
unclear why the patient needed analgesia and sedation
goes to a lack of
diagnosis and in those circumstances it is suggestive of an aggressive and
inappropriate use of medication. This
point is given no weight by the Tribunal
because of what Dr Yelland and Dr Tulloch say at paragraph 189. Having
considered the records
ourselves we will make our own determination about these
193. As to Patient 8 Dr Yelland’s comment is not relevant to
the Panel’s findings with respect to the poor notes and a
discussions, consultation and communication with family. It may be relevant to
the finding with respect to whether Dr Tolman’s
treatment decisions were
well founded on medical grounds, however we have given no weight to the comment
because of what Dr Yelland
and Dr Tulloch say at paragraph 189.
relation to Patient 12 the comment is in relation to not reporting the death to
the Coroner. That was not an issue considered
by the Panel and is given no
195. The Tribunal agrees with Dr Tolman’s submission that any
other conclusions drawn by Dr Yelland, unless related to the 12
patients, are of
little or no weight. The Tribunal also agrees Dr Yelland’s letter to Ms
Holden, which is attached to her
report, is irrelevant to the issues before the
Tribunal as it does not refer to any patients at all.
Dr Andrew Gangell
196. In his letter to AHPRA dated 24 July 2014, Dr Gangell says
the following:
concerns regarding Dr Tolman’s approach to end of life care have been in
relation to the time frame over which major
changes in clinical goals were made
and the opportunity for family members to digest these changes before they were
End of life care is a very complex area of medicine with substantive grey
areas regarding what could be determined as best practice.
As a clinician, Dr
Tolman often appeared proactive in adopting a palliative approach. I do not
hold objection to Dr Tolman’s
approach in general but did hold concerns
that on occasion, the decision to move away from quantity of life
(interventionist) medicine
to symptom management (palliative) medicine was made
with haste such that primary care providers and relatives did not have time
effectively contribute to the decision
197. Dr Gangell referenced those concerns to two patients of
his, one of whom was Patient 6 whose circumstances were considered by
In relation to Patient 6, Dr Gangell said:
“I note that my
records contain scant details of the management of
[Patient 6]
the RHH. I am not certain of which clinicians were directly responsible for
which decisions. Overall the decision not
to initiate heroic intervention to
alter the outcome of a likely terminal event was probably quite reasonable but
the speed at which
this conclusion was determined left her family distressed by
a lack of explanation. As a primary care physician I was frustrated
decision to obtain more information regarding the nature of
illness – hence her transfer to an acute care facility
– had been overridden without being allowed to contribute to that
decision. Subsequent questions to me from family regarding the course of events
were not easy to answer.
I note the degree of direct influence on these events by Jane Tolman is not
clear to me as I have not had access to the hospital
198. Dr Gangell concluded with two observations; the first was
that the clinical decision for palliative management of his patient
likely the most appropriate management, but he said:
“...but the decision
was made in a way that denied the family adequate time and explanation to
understand what her cause of
death was and why the decision not to treat the
underlying illness was made.”
199. Secondly, he observed in his opinion Patient 6’s
case in its own right did not “constitute evidence of inadequate
patients from Jane Tolman”, but it was an example “of scenarios
where a rapid decision process regarding life
ending management resulted in
family distress”.
200. The Tribunal notes Dr Gangell did not have
access to the hospital notes and a lack of discussion and/or consultation with
family and/or the patient was not a finding of the Panel in relation to
Patient 6. Accordingly no weight is given to Dr Gangell’s
Dr Martin Morrissey
201. Dr Morrissey wrote to AHPRA on 24 December 2013. He said
the following:
am a Senior Old Age Psychiatrist employed by the Department of Health and Human
Services in Tasmania...I have been in my
current role since 2002 and as a
consequence have had professional contact with Dr Tolman since she began working
in Tasmania. During
this time Dr Tolman and I have shared many common patients,
have participated in various Service Planning forums and educational
activities.
Because of our respective roles as Senior Clinicians within Geriatric Medicine
and Old Age Psychiatry, we have also had
extensive contact regarding the working
relationship between these two services.”
202. He goes on to say in that letter:
“Dr Tolman’s
geriatrician colleagues have raised concerns with me that Dr Tolman has made
what appear to be impulsive
decisions regarding the allocation of resources
without adequate consultation with them and they have felt pressure to change
clinical practices in line with those of Dr Tolman. This has been
particularly so in relation to the care of patients with advanced
Concerns have also been raised regarding Dr Tolman’s alleged interference
in the clinical care of patients under
her geriatrician colleagues, for example,
making major changes with regards to clinical management in an after hours
mention this in particular because two of my Old Age Psychiatry
colleagues have had direct experience with Dr Tolman altering and/or
undermining
the clinical management of patients under their (the Old Age Psychiatrists)
203. Having shared many common patients and as a result, we
infer, having observed or experienced Dr Tolman in practice, Dr Morrissey
“Dr Tolman’s
approach to the care of patients with advanced dementia, in my opinion, sits
outside of the management practices
of both myself, her colleagues and I would
suggest, a wide body of our colleagues working in this area. Specifically, I
Dr Tolman uses terminal sedation (e.g. syringe driven combinations of
narcotic and benzodiazepine medication) in situations where
I would not have
anticipated that the person would be within days of dying. On more than one
occasion I have suggested to Dr Tolman
that her practices are ‘further
along the euthanasia spectrum’ than I am comfortable with. The area of
end of life care
for people with dementia is quite a controversial one and there
are probably many more examples of patients with advanced dementia
inappropriately kept alive through aggressive medical management than there are
of patients whose death is hastened by medical
intervention. I would reiterate
however that at this point in time I believe Dr Tolman’s practices lie
outside of those regarded
as appropriate by colleagues working in the
204. None of Dr Morrissey’s comments are directly
relevant to the twelve patients considered by the Panel and therefore the
before this Tribunal. Dr Morrissey was asked to provide an opinion on whether
Dr Tolman had a personality disorder or other
mental health condition. We
attach no weight to his letter.
Professor Michael Ashby
205. Professor Ashby made a statement to AHPRA which is dated
24 December 2013. In that statement he says:
have known and worked with Dr Tolman for 7 years, since my appointment
Director of Palliative Care, Royal Hobart Hospital and Southern Tasmania Health
Organisation [in 2007]].
I had no prior knowledge of her or her
I make the following observations:
have had NO specific clinical situations, witnessed directly by myself, where I
have felt that Dr Tolman acted in an unethical manner
which regard to care or
decision making at the end of life.
have been consulted by her from time to time about such clinical matters, and
have usually agreed with her management.
have taught with her at on
least one external professional
education session and largely agreed with her approach, especially with regard
to the stages of dementia
viewed as a progressively fatal
condition.”
206. Later in his statement, Professor Ashby made the following
observations:
“12. On a number of
occasions it was observed in our team, as a general comment, that Dr Tolman used
syringe driver infusions
at the end of life without the same degree of clinical
specificity as palliative care physicians.
Tolman had a reputation for ‘out of hours’ interventions, especially
in nursing homes, to change goals of care to terminal
care. There is little
doubt that such interventions may have been at times appropriate in a general
climate where decisions to limit
medical treatment are often perceived by health
workers to be too difficult, and hence are avoided. Families and nurses were at
times reported to be grateful, but I heard rumours that some general practice
colleagues were not happy with process, and sometimes
could certainly be said that Dr Tolman was energetic in her palliative care
interventions in the aged care sector, and was seen
by many as the go-to person
for difficult decisions.”
207. The Tribunal gives no weight to Professor Ashby’s
statement. It does not relate to any of the issues which the Panel considered
and/or determined with respect to the twelve patients.
Dr Kylie Butcherine
208. Dr Butcherine was interviewed on 11 October 2013 and
statements made by her in that interview which are relevant to the twelve
patients whose circumstances were considered by the Panel are as
made a unilateral decision to put a patient of Dr Lees’ on a morphine and
midazolam infusion – he died very quickly.
There was much distress
amongst doctors and the nursing staff at this decision. Many were concerned
aggression of the care. I think it was
[Patient 5]
“One case that caused me much angst was that of
[Patient 3]
[Patient 3]
presented to DEM on a Friday evening having been found
dishevelled at home in a pool of blood. TAS had described neglect and thought
the blood was coming from his rectum. He was very confused when I saw him with
Dr Tolman. It was after hours and I had some personal
event to attend so she
told me to leave and that she would attend to him. I recall that this man had
no next of kin, GP or family
apparent. There is very little about him in his
file. Sometime later (weeks) a referral from a GP for investigation of PR
appeared in his DMR. This most definitely was not present at the time
of his admission. I was dismayed to return to work after
the weekend to find he
had died unexpectedly. There was no apparent cause in his notes. He was alive
then found dead. Dr Tolman
had certified he had died from a myocardial infarct.
I could see no evidence for this. No chest pain, no ECG, nor any blood test
support it. I raised my concerns with Dr Tolman, firstly that I was surprised
at his sudden death, secondly that she had written
a death certificate, thirdly
that he had not been referred to the coroner, fourthly that she had diagnosed a
myocardial infarct and
finally that he had no person responsible. She told me
that I was very junior and would understand in the future that sometimes
people just die. She told me that everyone’s heart stops when they die so
her cause of death was valid. She told me she
did not think there was any need
to trouble the coroner.
Prior to his case being presented to the audit, I again raised with Dr Tolman
my concerns. I said that I thought his case could raise
concerns from the
audience. She reassured me she was confident with her management. During the
discussion of cases a question was
asked directly of Dr Tolman ‘Did you
report this to the coroner?’ She replied ‘Yes’. After the
presentation
in the corridor outside the lecture theatre, I said to her
‘Did you forget that you did not report
[Patient 3]
coroner?’ She replied ‘No, I did not forget. They are trouble
makers and do not need to know that’ or words
“It was clearly documented that
[Patient 12]
had a fractured hip
but Dr Tolman did not tell the family this. She offered terminal care and
omission was detected by OPU junior
medical staff after the weekend, the family were offered and accepted operative
management.
They were unaware of the fracture and alternative, non-terminal
sedation, pathway.
With an unstabilised fracture it is a very big thing to deny the family a
choice on the course of action.
Another example would be that of
[Patient 2]
. Dr Tolman declined to
treat an iatrogenic electrolyte imbalance and instead jumped to terminal care.
She told the team this was
the family’s wishes. I was not happy with this
and proposed an alternative pathway. Dr Tolman was enraged by this. I was
ridiculed in front of the team. She told me I needed to do things her way or to
get out of Geriatrics. That geriatrics in Hobart
was not big enough for the
both of us. She had further discussions with the family who, when presented
with an alternative declined
terminal sedation. I observed that Dr Tolman went
ahead with the sedation after hours anyway. There were several witnesses to
conversations. I was questioned in front of a panel of Doctors and
Nurses. When one of them agreed with my point of view they were
all told to
leave. She proceeded to reprimand me for some time. In the end I agreed with
her that I was an inadequate doctor.
Partly because I thought it would make her
stop and partly because she had told me so many times that I actually believed I
was useless.
Death would have happened anyway, but not in the manner and
rapidity that occurred.”
209. In the interview Dr Butcherine was asked to express her
view about “morphine, midazolam, syringe drivers in OPU and elsewhere,
terms of use, application” and whether she had “other experience to
compare it to”. Her response was:
“In Sydney in 1994, as
a rural NSW intern. My GP training was part rural and part in Wagga.
I had 8 years in Coronary at Calvary in Wagga. I start[ed] physician
training in 2008 at St Vincents then came here for resident-based
I had two years as a general medical registrar. I started geriatrics in
[Dr Tolman’s]
use of midazolam is abhorrent. They are the only drugs
JT knows how to use. I believe she jumps to drivers very quickly and excludes
alternatives. There are numerous ways to manage these patients.
...It is very hard to stop a driver once started.
There are so many other ways to manage pain in palliative care. My concern
is the intention of the use of the drugs. The intention
is terrifying. Death
is being hastened and being driven by administrative
210. No weight is given to Dr Butcherine’s comments in
paragraph 209. They are not relevant to an issue either before the Panel
this Tribunal. Her comments made with respect to Patient 5 are also given no
weight because she is not definite about the identity
of the patient and there
is nothing from that patient’s notes which corroborates what she says. Dr
Butcherine’s comments
Panel’s decision or the determination of this Tribunal.
Tribunal does take account of Dr Butcherine’s comments with respect to
Patient 12 because what she says about Patient
12 is corroborated by the
records. It is also relevant to an issue which was considered by the Panel;
i.e. the missed diagnosis
of the fracture of the neck of the
Butcherine’s comments with respect to Patient 2 have been taken into
account because one of the issues with respect
to that patient was whether Dr
Tolman accelerated treatment inappropriately and sanctioned the aggressive and
inappropriate use of
medications.
213. Finally Dr Tolman submits comments
made by Dr Butcherine that the medical notes gave no indication of what went on
with Patient
2 and Patient 12 are conclusions without any factual foundation.
Problems with documentation is an issue highlighted with Patient
Patient 12 and so therefore will be considered to that extent.
Dr Alison Cleary
214. Dr Cleary was interviewed on 11 October 2013 and makes the
following comments about Dr Tolman’s practice in response to
a question as
to whether she had any concerns about Dr Tolman’s practice:
a lot of concerns, particularly in 2009 when I was doing the advanced
1. Clinical decision making, and
2. Capacity and legal decision making, and
decision making about discharging and shortening stays as soon as
For example Jane might say of a 90 year old who has a
fever and is on antibiotics ‘No, they are frail. There is no need for
antibiotics.’ Her push was to ‘get them out, get them
...There was a very strong focus to have patients seen quickly and
‘pushed through’ (ie; rapid discharge dates) by the
middle of the
There were always a lot of syringe drivers.
I’d done some advanced training in palliative care (QLD 2006 6 months)
when I worked in Queensland.
Often the patients would be approaching the terminal phase (expected weeks)
would make rapid
decisions. It was just a matter of putting things in play earlier than I would
Often (once the syringe driver was in, the patient was of) no interest to the
ASSAT team Jane would often try to get them to a nursing
was up. JT would often take charge of the drivers once in place.
- Cessation of active treatment, antibiotics, IV fluids.
Quite often JT’s clinical focus wouldn’t be on completing a
course of treatment, eg antibiotics, ceasing anticoagulants,
or heparin.
She’d say ‘They are frail’ or ‘They are 88, they
don’t need that!’ She would shorten
the courses of treatment and
deem that treatments were futile or burdensome and so cease drugs or cancel
investigations.”
215. Dr Cleary said she had worked with other geriatricians
both in Hobart and in Brisbane and:
“I think there was a
different approach by JT compared to other Consultants. JT was not always
focussed on the best outcome
or taking the time to carefully consider a big
decision re treatment.
She held meetings with the family early and set expectations. ‘This is
what your elderly relative may or may not recover from.’
She is very good
with families – lovely, polite. They would say ‘You’re the
doctor’ (and agree with what
proposed).”
216. Dr Cleary compared her approaches to certain aspects of
care with her perceptions of Dr Tolman’s practices and says:
“The area of
palliation/termination is a grey area. Patients were inappropriately put on a
pathway to palliative care. Less
so in hospital but more so in the
Now I do many Dementia and difficult behaviour patients. Often her solution
to negate behavioural issues is a syringe driver.
In patients with mid to late stage dementia, and dangerous behaviours or risk
situations, who may also be approaching terminal phase
(dementia), we use a lot
of sedation. But there is a fine line between agitation and symptoms that
can’t be managed in any
other way. I have never put a patient on a
syringe driver for behaviours as it almost always results in end of life in days
If patients require high doses of benzos and pain relief, and are no longer
mobile, not eating and drinking, I will use a syringe
driver, (once I’ve
got a cumulative dose, but no oral intake). I will roll it (cumulative dose)
into a syringe driver, but
it’s not my first port of
217. As is clear from the passages set out above Dr Cleary
makes general comments only and does not deal with any of the patients
subject of the Panel’s decision or which are relevant to the issues before
this Tribunal. No weight is given to her statement.
Dr Joanna Bakas
218. The respondent did not rely on the letter of Dr Bakas of 6
December 2013. We have excluded it from our consideration of this
Dr Andrea Lees
219. Dr Lees was interviewed on 16 October 2013 and in her
statement she comments on Patients 11, 12 and 5. Her comments are as
my time on OPU there were two patients I had concerns about. The first was a 71
year old gentleman,
[Patient 11]
who we saw 4 days after OPU opened. JT
was asked by Dr Chris Hutchinson on 8 March to admit this man. JT documented in
the patient
progress notes a social and functional history but no examination
findings and no mention of discussion of Goals of Care with the
JT signed on the medication chart to cease IV antibiotics and to commence PRN
morphine. I recommenced the antibiotics 9/3/13 following
discussion with the
patient’s family.
The family wanted restorative care and were not aware the antibiotics had
been stopped. He had a left lower lobe pneumonia and cellulitis.
He was moved
to P3 on 15 March and discharged home on 4 April. At discharge, his acute
confusion was reduced and he required minimal
assistance. He was next admitted
on 7 November with a right lower lobe pneumonia.
[Patient 11]
away on 9 November 2012.
The medication had been charted by the night medical registrar but stopped by
JT. My main concern with this case, and others, was
that JT doesn’t
actually identify the important determinants of health affecting patients. She
also had poor communication
with this family.
It’s not clear what this family’s role was in
decision-making.
I’m very concerned that when she sees a diagnosis of dementia it
precludes the patient from having other treatment irrespective
of the degree of
severity of the symptoms.”
220. Dr Tolman’s position with respect to these comments
are she is criticised with respect to Patient 11’s notes and
speak for themselves. The conclusion Dr Tolman does not identify the important
determinants of health affecting patients
is a conclusion which does not have
any factual basis. The Tribunal takes the view this evidence is relevant to
issues raised by
the notification and considered by the Panel with respect to
comments will therefore be compared to what appears in the medical notes for
this patient.
221. In respect of Patient 12, Dr Lees said:
“The second patient
[Patient 12].
JT didn’t communicate with the
patient’s son about her left fractured neck of femur (#NOF). JT
documented that she
said to the son the patient should be returned to the
nursing home.
When I asked her on 13/3/12
[whether she knew of the fracture]
said ‘No’. She said she didn’t look at the x-ray. And it
didn’t appear she had read the medical registrar
admission notes the page
before her entry (9/3/12 at 0730) indicating the #NOF. I did the ward round on
9/3/12 at 1105h. When Dr
Jennifer MacIntyre telephoned her son, at my request
as I was uncertain whether he knew of the fracture, he stated that he
know of the fracture.
The patient had advanced dementia but was not actively dying, so surgery was
first choice of treatment.”
222. Dr Tolman’s submission about this was Dr Lees’
comments were hearsay and they are not “within an issue within
matter”. These comments will be taken into account by the Tribunal. The
evidence is relevant to the issues identified
by the Panel with respect to this
the complaint is the conversation is hearsay, the rules of evidence do not apply
in this Tribunal. In any event, applying
the rules of evidence, the
conversation between the two doctors with respect to whether or not Dr Tolman
did or did not know of the
fracture is an admission against interest and
therefore admissible
223. At page 67 of
the papers, Dr Lees refers to Patient 5. She says that patient died after she
left and she was surprised. She
says he was okay when she was there. Those
comments are irrelevant and of no weight and are not taken into account by the
Dr David Dunbabin
224. Dr Dunbabin was interviewed on 16 October 2013. He says
Dr Tolman’s
of practice was representing a slightly extreme end of the range of normal
[Her approach was]
‘I come in, I rapidly assess
what’s happening re the patient, I might talk to the family, I make a
decision and then move
on’. A decision to go to palliative treatment
which leads to death within days is made after one visit or one assessment.
used rapid assessment and a rapid decision making processes
225. Dr Dunbabin explained that approach from anecdotes he
received in the following terms:
“I have had messages
from GPs with concerns about patients rapidly dying. JT was okay to see
patients any time of day or night.
They would say that Mrs Bloggs seemed fine
on Friday, but was dead on Monday after a syringe driver put in by
226. In addition he said:
“I only have two
experiences to report:
was a dementia patient of mine. JT saw him and said to me ‘I was asked to
see this fellow. This is what’s happened.
I spoke to his family’
and that was it.
was also a woman with Parkinson’s disease. JT made the decision to stop
all medications and active treatment.
Unquestioningly, both patients were nearly at the end
of life. I’d be very surprised if they would be alive in 12 months time,
but taking a decision to put someone on a syringe driver so abruptly is
questionable.
...The GPs expressed concern about long term patients being treated as
palliative and the lack of consultation by JT.
Neither of these patients were in severe pain or respiratory distress and
there was nothing requiring a rapid
227. Dr Dunbabin’s statement is of no weight and is not
taken into account by the Tribunal. There is nothing relevant in his
He refers to two patients but they are not identified.
Dr Frank Nicklason
228. Dr Nicklason was interviewed on 1 November 2013 and was
asked to describe any “clinical concerns – general and
with Dr Tolman’s practice. He responded to that query as
frail patients express a death wish when they are uncomfortable – but keep
going when they are made comfortable
These patients can
seen as ‘bed-blockers’. The
decision to offer purely ‘palliative’ care in an acute setting and
is provided
too early at times.
I used the word ‘palliation’ in quotation marks because I
don’t believe that this was what was being done. I believe
aggressive terminal sedation, the intent being to hasten death, applied which is
a questionable decision. It needs to be
investigated.”
229. Dr Nicklason concedes he had “very little direct
observation and direct clinical interaction with” Dr Tolman but
colleagues who he said told him of their concerns, one being “a very
concerned specialist dementia nurse in the
NW – Denise Chaston” and
another GP colleague, Dr Andrew Elkerton. He was then asked whether other
geriatricians shared
his concerns and he said:
“All of them have
expressed concerns about it,
[along with]
the Geriatric Medicine advanced
trainee last year, Kylie Butcherine.”
230. Dr Nicklason said he had a conversation with Dr Tolman as
to whether syringe-driver terminal medication for behaviour management
was an appropriate way of dealing with dementia manifestations. He said he had
concerns about how Dr Tolman analyses people
presenting to hospital with
delirium or severe depression. He said:
“The problem is not
establishing the base line functioning of the person (prior to the illness
precipitating hospitalisation)
before determining the next
231. Dr Nicklason expressed the opinion Dr Tolman’s
“practice is not mainstream”, and that insofar as his own view
“There are people with
irretrievably appalling quality of life and I’m okay with the use of
syringe drivers then if necessary,
but not where someone is ambulatory and not
without family involvement.”
232. The contents of his interview which are represented by the
sections set out above are irrelevant to the issues considered by
the Panel and
which are relevant to the issues before this Tribunal. As Dr Nicklason
concedes, he had very little direct observation
and direct clinical interaction
with Dr Tolman. His statement is given no weight by the Tribunal.
Dr Scott Chamberlen
233. In his interview of 18 October 2013, Dr Chamberlen refers
to Patient 1. He says:
was a patient at Glen View Nursing Home,
[Patient 1]
- ...I was asked by
JT at the request of Greg Pitt GP who had been away when the lady was in
hospital and then discharged back to
her nursing home. Dr Pitt was
uncomfortable with the direction of care and asked Jane and she asked me to see
My concerns re this patient. When I discussed with the family (and Jane had
met with the family), the family felt she had cancer
as a provisional diagnosis.
‘She’s in a nursing home, let’s keep her comfortable’.
My view – there
were other plausible explanations and my diagnosis was
that she did not have cancer. Medicine is all grey, and Geriatric Medicine
even greyer. There are many different ways to manage and all are equally valid
to make decisions.
This is an example of information given to the family by JT. It’s not
incorrect, but weighed and biased in a certain direction
to get a certain
decision or a certain outcome.
I can only surmise what it’s driven by...to end suffering or...I
don’t know.
The palliative outcome was reasonable but so was investigation of the
condition. She had been out of hospital for 2 days –
if I had sent her
. It was the process of decision making that I was uncomfortable
Quick rush to judgment on what the diagnosis should be and the management,
– focus on what the family wanted and less involvement
of what the patient
Often there is very subtle manipulation of information, eg by saying
‘This means she has dementia’ – dementia means
investigate people, you go for comfort care. I am uncomfortable with her
234. The Tribunal has decided not to give Dr Chamberlen’s
statement any weight. This is because there is a dispute as to who
family of the provisional diagnosis of cancer. Dr Tolman says that was Dr
McCallum. Dr Chamberlen does not set out in
detail what information Dr Tolman
gave to “the family”. In addition, his surmise is irrelevant.
There is the possibility
of a malignancy which is discussed with the family
mentioned in the notes of Dr
balance of the interview is irrelevant.
Dr Janina Skelton
235. Dr Skelton was interviewed on 25 October 2013. Her
evidence is in very general terms and does not comment upon any of the twelve
patients which were the subject of the Panel’s decision. The flavour of
her evidence can be understood from the following
extracts of her statement.
She says she only worked with Dr Tolman in a clinical setting at the OPU for 2
months from July 2012
and therefore acknowledged she was “not greatly
aware of JT’s clinical work”. In respect of that period she
patients in the OPU were admitted under JT rather than some being under being my
‘bed-card’. This was after
advice given to me by my colleagues who
had already worked on OPU with JT. She had a tendency to change decisions and
of patients who I had already seen and so all OPU patients were kept
under her ‘bed-card’.
I have worked on other wards where two consultants worked alongside each
other but managed different patients. I have never found
this to be an issue
before. One consultant would rarely change a colleagues management and only
after discussing it first. JT often
changed decision already made and did not
discuss first.”
236. Dr Skelton was asked a very general question as to whether
she had any concerns regard Dr Tolman. Her answer focused on Dr Tolman’s
clinical practice. She said the following:
“A huge difference in
practice to most geriatricians, favoured non-investigative and use of palliation
early. Also concerns
subcutaneous morphine for most symptoms and rapid decision making about a
prognosis (within 24 hours).
JT’s clinical practice was acceptable most of the time. However, if a
patient was actually unwell or delirious, she would often
inappropriately) make a rapid decision and provide no time to obtain information
or afford the patient time to recover.
Generally JT spoke with family members about the management plan which she
always documented in the patient notes. I am not able
to comment specifically
on any discussions she had with family as I was not
237. This evidence is not taken into account because it does
not comment on any of the twelve patients considered by the Panel.
Professor Matthew Jose
238. The respondent did not rely on the evidence of Professor
Jose which is set out in his statement to AHPRA dated 8 November 2013.
Tribunal has not taken it into account in its consideration of this matter.
Dr Michael Chapman
239. As part of its investigation the Board obtained a report
from Dr Chapman who is a geriatrician and palliative medicine specialist
with Calvary Health Care in the ACT as a staff specialist. At the time of his
initial report (pages 239-287 of the court
book) he was engaged in a PHD through
Monash University which focused on the ethics and experience of decision making
for persons
with dementia and their carers. He sits on the steering committees
of several national programs which focus on providing palliative
care to older
persons including the Palliative Approach toolkit rollout to Aged Care
Facilities through Brisbane South Palliative
Care Collaborative and the
Specialist Palliative Care and Advanced Care Planning Advisory Services projects
being run through a consortium
including Austin Health, ANZSPM, PCA and other
organisations. He is also a council member and secretary for the Australian and
Zealand Society of Palliative Medicine and a council member for Palliative
Care Australia’s National Policy Advisory Council.
240. Dr Chapman was
provided with all of the notifier’s documents together with the statements
obtained by AHPRA from those
who had worked with Dr Tolman either at the Royal
Hobart Hospital but more particularly on the OPU. Those statements are from Dr
Butcherine, Dr Lees, Dr Cleary, Professor Ashby, Dr Nicklason, Dr Dunbabin, Dr
Chamberlen, Dr Skelton and Professor Jose. He was
also provided with the
letters of Dr Bakas and Dr Morrissey. He considered eighteen separate patient
records including those twelve
patients which were considered by the Panel. His
comments with respect to the six patients who were not the subject of the
determination were redacted from his report.
241. A summary of
his comments and opinions from the clinical cases appears at pages 285 and 286
of the court book in the following
of the situation and cases described previously rely on summarised reporting of
conversations and situations rather than
direct reporting. Given the complexity
of the ethics and communications implied in some of these situations it may be
that the notes
and recounting available do not do justice to the situations as
they were. This report then acknowledges what can’t be known
data that is available, but has sought to provide balanced comment on what is
available. It is also timely to acknowledge
that this report cannot comment on
Dr Tolman’s practice in a general way, but only in these instances which
have been reported,
which presumably are indicative and yet make up only a
fraction of the cases which she has been involved in.
In general terms I feel that there are a number of concerns which can be
identified in a number of areas of Dr Tolman’s clinical
and professional
In regards to her clinical practice from the case examples that have been
provided Dr JT’s approach often seems one which assumes
a position that a
‘comfort care’, palliative approach is the only way forward. A
clinician as experienced as Dr Tolman
would well know the flexibility required
to manage complex clinical situations in patients with as many issues as the
ones mentioned.
This flexibility is not apparent in the cases, nor
interestingly is it apparent in the way Dr Tolman discusses these cases in her
response letter, though the mitigating factor of the adversarial nature of this
process needs to be taken into account. In the cases
discussed there seems
often to be a ‘right’ way forward for Dr Tolman. How this approach
and her conviction affects
the perspectives of families and patients she is
talking to is impossible to gauge though it is notable that in several cases
understandings
reached in conversation with Dr Tolman are directly recanted when
the same events are discussed with others. It is also notable
that on a number
of occasions the patient themselves seems to have been left out of discussions
and decisions in regards to their
own management without clarity of why this
should be the case. Part of this could be due to Dr Tolman’s habit of
documenting
only the results of discussions rather than what has proceeded
within them, though this is not knowable within the information that
available to me.
Dr Tolman’s view of the palliative approach is one where symptom
management is addressed aggressively with sedating medications
which are not
always the most appropriate in the circumstances. As highlighted in the cases
above on some occasions these decisions
have been contentious, and others
potentially dangerous. Dr Tolman’s approach is also to cease other
medications which are
not ‘comfort care’ medications which yet again
in some of the above cases may have caused more harm than good. Dr Tolman
not back up these positions with clear documentation of a diagnosis of dying
which leads one to feel that often these
or terminally focused
approaches are assumed to be appropriate for all palliative patients, regardless
of their needs at the time
in question.”
Dr Tolman’s Response to the Notification
242. Dr Tolman responded to allegations put to her in a letter
from AHPRA dated 21 October 2013 concerning each of the twelve patients
circumstances were subsequently considered by the Panel by letter dated 17
December 2013. We have considered Dr Tolman’s
letter and the summary in
paragraphs 8.23-8.177 of the Panel’s reasons comprehensively summarises Dr
Tolman’s position.
It is as follows.
243. Patient 1 was an 80 year old woman from a high care
facility admitted under Dr McCallum in the early evening. He noted the patient
was a difficult historian, that the daughter was present for half of the
interview and the plan was to admit her with further family
discussions
244. Dr McCallum saw the patient later that evening and the next day
and suggested a referral to the OPU with a return to the nursing
in brief a discussion with the family and a reference to a possible malignancy
but does not provide further detail.
245. Dr Tolman has written she saw the
patient prior to admission to the OPU, that she had a detailed discussion with
the daughter
who resided some distance from the hospital. Dr Tolman obtained a
history of Patient 1 from her daughter. The poor quality of life
suffered by
Patient 1 was noted – she was immobile, doubly incontinent and dysphasic.
She says she discussed treatment options
with Patient 1’s daughter based
on Patient 1’s life since entering the nursing home in 2008. She says she
and clarified the goals of care, making certain they accorded with
Patient 1’s past wishes and the daughter’s present
wishes. She says
the daughter agreed that comfort care would be the most appropriate course of
action. She noted in the record
the patient’s GP was away.
Tolman notes that neither the OPU geriatrician Dr Skelton or Dr Chris Edwards,
the palliative care registrar, made any contact
with the family.
247. In her
response to Dr Chapman’s report, Dr Tolman says:
• every element of every discussion cannot be
documented;
• the paucity of documentation by other doctors is not
raised as an issue;
• she was the only doctor to have a detailed
discussion with the families;
• she was the only consultant to do a
goals of care document;
• whilst Dr McCallum was the admitting doctor,
the care of this patient was given to the OPU. Dr Skelton was heavily involved
in this patient’s care. While only one consultant can be listed as
“admitting doctor” she says they were very
much a team.
248. In response to Dr Chamberlen’s concerns that there
had been insufficient investigation of Patient 1’s condition,
noted the OPU team simply endorsed the goals of care plan set out by Dr
McCallum’s team and it was his team that
first thought of a possible
diagnosis of an underlying cancer and that it was his team that wrote in the
notes that further investigation
of that condition was inappropriate.
addition, Dr Tolman says in light of Patient 1’s history and the
family’s wishes the OPU team felt the management
plan was appropriate.
According to Patient 1’s daughter, her mother had poor quality of life and
the decision was made, in
conjunction with her, for Patient 1 not to have
further investigations.
250. In response to criticisms that her approach was
too “focus [sic] on what the family wanted” and that she was
to rush to judgement”, Dr Tolman said she was very focused on
the needs of acutely ill older people and that rapid, collaborative
defines best practice in the elderly.
251. Patient 2 was first seen by Dr Skelton (consultant
geriatrician) and Dr Hovinga (registrar) in November 2012. The patient’s
medical conditions were ilesostomy, worsening renal failure, oesophageal
stricture, deteriorating liver failure, declining cognition
and chronic
alcoholism. He was refusing review by a speech pathologist and his recorded
goal of care was palliative.
252. When Dr Tolman first saw this patient she
agreed with the assessment of Dr Skelton and Dr Hovinga.
253. Patient 2 was
transferred to the OPU as he was dying and everyone knew this, including the
patient and his family. With a view
to providing him the last possible chance
of survival, Dr Tolman says the OPU team agreed he would undergo oesophageal
dilation which
took place on 7 November 2012.
254. He was noted to be more
unwell the next day, his condition “fragile and precarious”. This
was not a surprise to
the treating team, however Patient 2’s wife was not
coping with his poor condition.
255. The dilations did not improve matters by
12 November 2012, parenteral fluids had been commenced on 9 November 2012.
care was begun using a syringe driver in response to his continued
decline and he died, not unexpectedly, the next day.
256. Dr Butcherine, who
disagreed with the palliative approached adopted by the team, undertook serum
electrolyte testing in the later
stages. The patient’s high sodium count
was noted on 12 November 2012 but Dr Tolman did not see this as an issue as it
often part of the dying process. She says in her letter “His high
sodium was the consequence of his dying, not the cause”.
257. Dr Tolman
disagrees with Dr Butcherine’s decision to measure the electrolytes in the
first place and also disagrees the
abnormality should have been
258. The family, the ward staff and finally even the patient
himself were all aware he was dying. Dr Tolman says “It would
crazy to interrupt good symptom control with attempted reversal of this
biochemical imbalance.”
259. Dr Tolman notes this patient “could
not eat due to oesophageal stricture which was no longer responding to
dilations, he
had a worsening liver and renal failure, he was delirious due to
his medical condition and his alcohol dependence over many years
distressed and suffering.”
260. As to the allegation of Dr Chapman of
“lack of diagnosis prior to treatment”, Dr Tolman responds by saying
diagnosis is often absent in the real worlds”.
delivery of medication by a subcutaneous route is not always terminal sedation.
This method, she says, can be carried out
for months or longer and the patient
eats as tolerated. She says terminal sedation is intense sedation which is
accompanied by the
restriction of food and fluids. She says she has never
practised terminal sedation.
262. The commencement of midazolam in a syringe
driver “is very common practice and does not put my management at odds
that of peers.”
263. This man was 84 years old and had undiagnosed dementia
prior to his admission to the OPU on 9 March 2012 with rectal bleeding.
had been no family contact, or GP contact, since 2007. His history was obtained
from his close friend.
264. He was unkempt, with offensive foul smelling
feet. He had disabling chronic back pain and was impulsive and perseverative
a Mini Mental score of 15/30. He was functionally very dependent and his
dementia would have precluded him from being able to benefit
rehabilitation. His history was obtained from his close friend who was clear
Notwithstanding that the patient died unexpectedly on the ward a few days
265. Dr Butcherine says she was surprised by his death, but Dr Tolman
says he was after all an elderly man who had not been complying
with his medical
care and presented with rectal bleeding. Natural deaths, she says, do not
warrant investigation and she later confirmed
with the Coroner’s
Associate, Mr Russell Smith, this was not a reportable death. She denies lying
to a member of the mortality
meeting about whether this matter had been referred
to the Coroner.
266. Dr Tolman says the management of older people depends on
a range of factors. As patients age, disorders of neurodegeneration
manifest. Patients are increasingly frail, cognitively impaired and often
unable to make informed decisions. She says
no neurodegenerative illness can be
cured. Diagnosis depends on a comprehensive history backed up by a thorough
examination and
targeted investigations. The goal of care may be palliation
when cure is not likely. She says best practice is to have a collaboration
the medical team obtains the information it needs to make plans and serve the
needs of the patient.
267. Patient 3 was 84 years old and suffered
self-neglect for years. He had been in hospital for 4 days prior to his sudden
overnight. There had been no fall or medication
268. “[Patient 3] would not have wanted this (to be
resuscitated) and it would have been cruel to put this to a man who was
delirious and/or dementing.”
269. “I do not understand what Dr
Chapman means by a precipitous acceleration of treatment. Our plan was based on
teamwork. He died unexpectedly.”
270. Patient 4 was an 89 year old woman admitted from a nursing
consciousness. She had a history of brittle diabetes with many previous
admissions. She also suffered from Parkinson’s
disease, hypothyroidism,
recurrent and frequent urinary tract infections, frequent falls and she had a
permanent pacemaker. At her
age her quality of life was poor. She was on ten
different medications.
271. Upon her admission to the OPU, her goals of care
in the context of being unwell, in a nursing home with multiple co-morbidities
was palliative. She was given full curative treatment with IV fluids, insulin
and antibiotics. She remained unwell 24 hours later
despite the continued
272. Dr Tolman arranged to meet the extended family on the Sunday.
This meeting was documented by a RN from the OPU who found the
confronting and “spent her time comforting distressed family rather than
documenting my conversation with them”.
273. The family unanimously
thought her quality of life was poor and she had suffered enough. After that,
comfort care commenced
and all the pain and suffering associated with the active
management of her diabetes ceased. Dr Tolman believes this decision was
sensible, humane and medically appropriate.
274. The OPU team assessed this
patient as very close to death and after consultation with the family and with
their agreement, the
comfort care approach was implemented.
275. The syringe
driver was commenced and the patient was offered oral intake as and when she
could tolerate it. She settled and
died peacefully on day four of her
276. The doses of midazolam and morphine were judged by Dr Tolman
and her team to be appropriate. These doses equate to less than
1mg per hour.
The use of benzodiazepines and opioids for her symptom control were administered
with a goal of comfort. “I
did not aim to terminate her life
277. The decision to cease active treatment was supported by
the patient’s wishes contained in a 2010 Advanced Care Directive
more recent Not for Resuscitation Order. While these documents were conflicting
they gave some indication that unnecessary
measures to keep Patient 4 alive
should not have been pursued. In any case there was unanimous agreement of the
treatment plan from
the family and the OPU (excepting Dr Butcherine).
Tolman denies there was rapid decision making or precipitous acceleration of
treatment. She says she tried the “usual
care” for a period of 24
hours during which time the patient deteriorated. She helped the family make an
informed choice about
the appropriateness of care, and with the agreement of the
family, changed course.
279. Patient 5 was an 83 year old man who presented on 12 March
2012 from home with symptoms of advanced dementia: falls, declining
worsening cognition, delusions and hallucinations. He had been an eminent
architect with a devoted wife and family. His
dementia was diagnosed 6 years
previously.
280. In the preceding weeks prior to his admission, his family
reported he had suddenly forgotten how to move and there had been no
identifiable quality of life.
281. His physical examination revealed multiple
bruises but no other abnormalities. His investigations revealed no reversible
but for urinary retention which was quickly treated. The
comprehensive geriatric assessment suggested he was in Stage Five on the
Clinical Dementia Rating Scale.
282. The aim was to attempt to restore some
quality of life but also obtain an ACAT approval for residential aged care.
That assessment
was undertaken.
283. His physiotherapy assessment noted the
resumption of mobility was highly unlikely. He was a high falls risk because he
was impulsive
with poor motor planning skills. His oral intake remained poor
and he went into renal failure.
284. His bowels were difficult to manage, he
became agitated and aggressive and he was climbing out of bed. Antipsychotic
medications
were not effective. He developed a fungal groin infection which
contributed to his agitation and he remained distressingly unsettled.
Tolman saw him every day and spoke to his wife daily. There were daily
discussions with the ward staff.
286. After a family meeting on day six after
admission, it was agreed his prospects for recovery were slim. He was suffering
the goal was to attain comfort care. The aim was never to undertake
terminal care or terminal sedation.
287. A syringe driver was commenced due
to his agitation and poor swallowing. The aim was to increase dosage to achieve
288. Despite his medications, he was still agitated from time to
time. He had a fall from bed and his oral intake declined further.
day 16 of his admission, most probably due to renal failure. His death was not
reported to the Coroner as he died from
the consequences of the dementia which
is a terminal condition.
289. Dr Tolman asserts there was nothing rapid or
precipitous about this man’s care which was difficult but which involved
communications.
290. Dr Tolman says her use of benzodiazepines was
appropriate to treat the behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia when
nothing else worked and there were issues of suffering or danger to the patient
and other patients. She denies an enthusiasm for
these drugs.
291. As to the
use of morphine Dr Tolman says it was used with the intention to achieve
symptoms control in the context of BPSD but
it did not assist.
292. Elderly
and dementing, he was a physical mess, falling, constipated, eating poorly and
intermittently going into urinary retention.
Dr Tolman says he was also
severely troubled by delusions of persecution following his wartime experiences:
he believed he was before
firing squads and about to be buried alive. His
agitation was hard to control and he was suffering.
registrar’s medical notes indicate that a transfer to the Roy Fagan
(psychogeriatric unit) would not be appropriate
as it would be difficult to
manage his urinary retention and this may unsettle him further. The plan was to
do intermittent catheters
when he was uncomfortable. In addition “when he
is awake he is distressed and agitated so we are keeping him more on the sedated
side”. She says the family were in complete agreement with this
294. “As the doctor, I take responsibility but very much enjoy
the team approach in which the opinions of other professionals
295. This patient was an 82 year old woman from a high care
facility who presented to the hospital delirious, combative, septic and
She was obese and had suffered for 40 years with abdominal pain and obstructions
and an episode of pancreatitis. Rehabilitation
following her surgery in March
2011 was punctuated by medical complications and confusion with hallucinations
(MMSE 13/30). She
had a history of dementia, heart disease and diverticular
disease. Her family reported that she had a poor quality of life, and
confirmed by the staff at her care home.
296. She was admitted to the
hospital under the medical team of Dr Hutchinson on 29 July 2012 with fever and
delirium. The OPU team
took over care despite it seeming likely she had
intra-abdominal sepsis. The OPU registrar attempted to or made contact with
of her children and altered the antibiotics on the Sunday.
297. Concerns
from some family members were expressed to nursing staff later that evening
the cause of the delirium. Dr Tolman
met with the daughters early the next morning and recorded in her notes the most
likely causes
of the delirium was the patient’s adhesions which she had
suffered from before. She discussed the patient’s life, the
diagnosis of
dementia and what the daughters described as poor quality of life. The plan was
to stop antibiotics and give treatment
for comfort. Adhesions are frequently
298. After discussions with family, her GP and the residential
aged care facility, it was decided further investigations would not
and would likely cause grief and suffering to this elderly, demented patient.
Her heart condition made the prospect of
surgery even more unlikely. It was
decided to aim for comfort care and transfer her back to the nursing home. With
this in mind,
antibiotics were ceased and comfort medications commenced via the
subcutaneous route.
299. While comfort was being achieved, and prior to
transfer, the patient died. The clinical decision to cease antibiotics and
comfort care was reached by the team in collaboration with others, and
was based on still current best practice for an elderly, demented
residential care facility who, by the account of her family, doctors and carers,
had no quality of life.
300. Dr Tolman stated there is a worldwide
acknowledgement that the administration of antibiotics is futile at the end of
a person with dementia (and in many other circumstances), at least
insofar as it is intended to do more than relieve pain or discomfort.
addition, there exists an commonly known and universally accepted need to limit
the use of antibiotics so as to slow the loss
of potency that overuse in the
human and animal populations has brought about.
301. Dr Tolman says the
discussion to move to comfort care was discussed at the multidisciplinary
meeting because every patient was
discussed every weekday morning at that
302. In respect of the apparent lack of documentation about her
discussion with the GP, staff and family Dr Tolman said “I have
managing elderly patients who are dying for many years, and have managed to
achieve patient comfort and family and staff satisfaction
without the use of
antibiotics on occasion. I fail to see what they would have added. If the GP
rang me back after I had left a
message, and if I failed to document this, then
that’s how the real world operates in acute care.”
303. Dr Tolman
says there was nothing rapid or precipitous about her decisions with respect to
treatment. The diagnostic uncertainties
associated with antibiotic use in this
context were minimal. They would not add to the patient’s
304. Dr Tolman refers to an unsolicited letter of thanks received
from the son of this patient which mentions the great work and care
provided to
his mother. While referring to the somewhat inevitable outcome the
patient’s son emphasises the compassion, dignity
and care given to his
mother and family.
305. This patient was a 92 year old woman who presented from
increasing falls and not coping at home. Her son was not able to care for her,
but loved her dearly.
306. Examination and investigation revealed she had
suffered an acute myocardial infarction, acute kidney failure and heart failure.
The treatment options were discussed with her family and GP.
307. Dr Tolman
says a palliative approach was chosen, in light of the patient’s age,
comorbidities and failing function which
meant that rehabilitation, in the
unlikely event she survived, was unlikely to be of benefit. Her prognosis was
poor and her loved
one opted for care aimed at comfort, not cure.
Tolman says the hospital notes record this 92 year old presented for palliation
after her son, who was not able to cope at
Jones, and agreed this was the goal of the presentation.
309. Writing this
very elderly woman with very significant comorbidities up for MET or
“blue” calls is not compatible
with best practice in geriatric
medicine. There are numerous academic papers that indicate this kind of
“futile” treatment
of the very elderly causes much suffering to both
the person receiving the invasive treatment and to their families.
decision to aim for comfort care was taken with all due care and after
considerable consultation with those involved in her
life. It was made in an
appropriate way by experts in the field of aged care. A MET call would have
only subjected her to more
suffering and would not have added to the length or
quality of life. MET calls, moreover, are overused in circumstances where the
treating team fails to plan effectively. Comprehensive management plans on the
OPU limited the usefulness of MET calls for any patients.
311. The Goals of
Care did not need to be reviewed or active management instituted when the blood
results indicating acute renal failure
were received. The aim of the medical
plan was to achieve comfort. This was achieved. This is not a reason for
altering the aim
of care, and inflicting further suffering.
312. Dr Tolman
says further, the ambulance assessment records Patient 7 as having
“refused all treatment offered”. She
notes the patient’s son
had told her Patient 7 had been saying she was dying “for some time”
and that she was ready
313. Dr Tolman says “I do not understand
Dr Chapman’s concerns and feel that this family was well supported by the
and her treating team at the hospital. There was ample evidence that the son
and GP were appropriate with their goals. There was
nothing rapid about my
decision making, rather it was based on evidence and a collaborative approach.
Even though [Patient 7’s]
admission was brief, several discussions with
her and her family were recorded. The patient was clear in what she wanted, and
son relayed this to our team.”
314. Patient 8 was an 81 year old man admitted to the OPU from
than 12 hours. This occurred on a background of general cognitive and physical
decline over a year. The family had reported
three falls, confusion, poor oral
intake, progressive weakness and generalised reconditioning. They visited him
daily and took care
of his personal care and household chores.
315. He was
thin, wasted, incontinent, disorientated and required a hoist for transfers. He
was accepted onto the OPU by Dr Tolman
on 11 March 2012. His abdomen was soft
and non-tender and no masses were palpable.
316. On 12 March 2012 Dr Tolman
saw Patient 8 and obtained a history from the available family. It was likely
he would need a nursing
to later that day.
317. Due to Patient 8’s poor insight into his plight
concerning mobility and hygiene, a capacity assessment was undertaken.
noted he had bowel problems at home and had been soiling his underwear. On the
evening of his first day on the ward he was
administered appropriate
318. Dr Tolman says she did not see him for several days after
this as he was seen by Dr Lees. She says the medical records do not
that Dr Lees queried his bowels or palpated his abdomen over the following 4
days. There are inconsistent notes over the
following week as to whether or not
this patient had a bowel movement.
319. He became hypotensive on 14 March
2012 and Dr Lees arranged for some investigations and commenced new medications
on 15 March
2012 but not for bowels.
320. He was then seen by Dr Butcherine
later on 15 March 2012 but the weekend plan made no mention of his bowels.
Patient 8 reported
feeling unwell and needed to vomit. He ate little and
continued to vomit.
321. He had a large coffee grounds vomit in the early
hours of 17 March 2012, was given an anti-emetic and was reported to be eating
and drinking well since. However, the intern who saw him did not examine
322. There was a loss of consciousness recorded but resolved. Further
vomiting occurred in the late afternoon until he was examined
by an RMO early
that evening. He reported after examination “generalised low
rigidity” and absent bowel sounds. He
considered the differential
diagnoses to include constipation, bowel obstruction and a perforated peptic
ulcer. Abdominal imaging
revealed gas in the rectum, faeces in the colon and a
distended colon. He diagnosed constipation and proposed a fleet enema in the
morning as Patient 8 was “settled tonight”.
323. Dr Tolman does
not recall being called in respect of this patient and there is no record in the
notes of any after hours consultant
being called. She states the RN entry
indicating laxatives for Patient 8 “as per medical practitioner’s
suggestion”
may have come about as a result of the medical
practitioner’s random call to the ward or the RN calling her with a
324. Dr Tolman met with the family the following day; that is on 18
March 2012, and explained the difficulties in diagnosing and treating
constipation in cases of dementia. She says she explained the seriousness of
the situation and the limits to treatment options.
325. Later that day
Patient 8 had two small coffee grounds vomits. He received both oral laxatives
and enemas. He was unwell in
the evening. Dr Tolman states constipation may
have contributed to his demise but also his dementia with chronic bowel problems
may have been a major contributor. As the abdominal film indicated, air within
the rectum, a complete obstruction was excluded.
326. Dr Tolman conducted the
ward round on 19 March 2012 and says Patient 8 had abdominal pain and increased
blood pressure. There
was mild distention in his abdomen but bowel sounds,
although slightly abnormal, were heard.
327. It was decided further
investigations in this fiercely independent man with advanced dementia who was
bound for a nursing home
would be inappropriate. Dr Tolman believed he was
328. Patient 8 was given laxatives and enemas through the day
without effect. He had a huge vomit. He then had a faeculent vomit,
aspirated and became progressively unresponsive. Dr Tolman was phoned,
medications for comfort were suggested but Patient
8 died some minutes
329. Dr Tolman says the treating team failed to identify bowel
problems and during the admission it was often difficult to determine
the patient had a bowel motion or not. In addition, as he lived alone, his
family were not fully aware of his bowel difficulties
prior to his
330. While Dr Tolman makes reference to the delay in the diagnosis
of the small bowel obstruction by her team, she expresses some
doubt whether the
outcome would have been any different if it was diagnosed earlier. She said
this was explained to the family on
18 March 2012 and they recognised these
difficulties.
331. In terms of his capacity, Dr Tolman’s assessment
treatment was based on the history obtained from the patient’s son which
was consistent with additional family conversations.
Ward staff repeatedly
confirmed the patient’s confusion, unsteadiness and dependence.
Tolman says vomiting and nausea were intermittent. Examination and radiology
were consistent with constipation. At the family
meeting on 18 March 2012, she
says she discussed the difficulties of diagnosing and managing constipation in
patients with dementia.
She recorded they understood those difficulties and
agreed with comfort care in the event of a deterioration.
333. In response to
the allegation of a rapid assessment of lack of cognitive capacity, Dr Tolman
points to the ward’s social
worker entry on 13 March 2012 which records he
had cognitive impairment and lacked capacity regarding accommodation at home
on the team’s assessment. She notes poor hygiene, reliance on seven
daughters and seven sons for personal care, meal preparation,
groceries and
shopping. She notes the family requesting residential aged care as they were
unable to meet his escalating needs.
334. Dr Tolman holds the view that based
on what they knew of Patient 8 and his values that if he had been able to
decide, he would
not have chosen any other path.
335. As the ward opened in
the first week of March 2012, note taking was still being developed but teamwork
and discussions were not
a problem. Both the treating team and the family
members were in no doubt as to the grounds for the treatment
336. Dr Tolman says she reviewed the abdominal films and visited
the radiology department for an independent review; she says there
ambiguities.
337. Dr Tolman says this patient was under the care of Dr Lees.
Patient 9 had a history of many hospital presentations since 2009
which involved
cellulitis of her lower limbs, pain and breathlessness. Patient 9 suffered
cognitive impairment as a result of an
acquired brain injury in 2000 and she
probably had stage 1 vascular dementia. Her histories were unreliable and she
perseverated.
338. This patient presented to the Royal Hobart Hospital
Emergency Department on 17 May 2012, was diagnosed with an infective
exacerbation
of chronic pulmonary disease and was admitted under Dr
339. Dr Lees saw her in the Emergency Department and diagnose
bilateral pneumonia on a background of severe COPD despite writing in
hospital notes that the chest film appeared unchanged since 6 March
340. Dr Lees had contacted the patient’s daughter regarding the
continued cessation of Warfarin despite the increased risk of
stroke. Dr Lees
noted the patient’s prognosis as “likely poor” and obtained
consent from the patient’s daughter
to commence a syringe driver. Prior
to its commencement, upon arrival in the OPU the patient was noted to be drowsy
on six litres
of oxygen per minute.
341. Dr Tolman saw this patient on 17 May
2012 at 1715hrs. She supported the decisions made by Dr Lees. She was aware
the patient
may have reversible pathology and had identified a possible urine
infection as well as carbon dioxide toxicity but was also aware
of her general
poor quality of life with frequent hospital admissions, a concerned GP and an
unsettled daughter. The options were
discussed with the family and Dr Tolman
supported Dr Lees’ decision.
342. When the blood cultures came back
positive on 18 May 2012, Dr Lees decided to stop comfort care. Dr Tolman
understood she made
the decision based on the history, suffering and the
administration of several antibiotics.
343. Patient 9 was comfortable after a
decline through the night and her family were content with Dr Lees’
344. Dr Tolman says, however, that the aim of care after about 20
May 2012 was truly palliative rather than terminal as Dr Lees had
anticipated.
Dr Tolman says she coordinated this and she was in frequent communication with
the patient’s family.
345. On 21 May 2012, as this patient was
comfortable, the doses in the driver decreased and it was decided to review the
the driver the following day.
346. Dr Butcherine saw the patient on
22 May 2012 to review the pain. This was critical as Patient 9 had been
admitted on a host
of analgesics which had now been ceased.
Butcherine suggested a complicated regime and noted it would require Dr
Tolman’s approval as consultant. She recorded
she had discussed that
regime with Dr Tolman and Dr Chris Edwards from palliative care. Dr Tolman was
not clear whether this occurred.
348. This patient was initially managed by
Dr Lees and Dr Butcherine. Dr Tolman says she was not involved in the decision
to commence
terminal care on this patient and was unlikely to have done so
herself. She denies she used aggressive doses of medications including
349. Dr Tolman says the palliative care team under Dr Chris
Edwards orchestrated the regimen of pain relief. When the patient improved
regimen was de-escalated, a not infrequent undertaking in the management of very
sick people.
350. In respect of the syringe driver, Dr Tolman says its aim
was palliation, that is, comfort care. If comfort was achieved then
not be appropriate to cease it. The reason the driver was weaned and then
ceased was the patient’s overall condition
improved and she no longer
needed this delivery device for the administration of medications to achieve
351. Dr Tolman says Dr Lees was the most junior member of the
consultant geriatric staff having only one year of geriatric training.
the demands of running the entire department, Dr Tolman delegated her
supervision. Dr Tolman is critical of Dr Lees and
says the complaints about her
patients demonstrates her poor understanding of aged care, of dementia and of
patient centred care
as opposed to doctor centred care.
352. Dr Tolman says
at the time of these events, Dr Butcherine was a first year geriatric registrar
and Dr Tolman accepts responsibility
for her training.
353. Patient 10 was an 81 year old man who presented on 14
September 2012 unwell with anorexia, lethargy, nausea, fevers, rigors,
confusion, cough and drowsiness for days, with significant decline over weeks
and months. He had a background of an extensive medical
history including three
strokes, pulmonary fibrosis, melanoma, poor visual acuity, aortic dissection,
CABGS, atrial fibrillation,
aortic valve replacement, vertebral compression
fractures and polymyalgia rheumatica.
354. He underwent a number of
investigations and treatments for the diagnoses of acute kidney injury and
sepsis. He was admitted
under a medical team but continued to decline despite
their investigations and treatments. He was referred to the aged care team
saw him on 19 September 2012 and he was transferred to the OPU.
Tolman says his relentless downhill course continued, his breathing was worse
and he was noted as confused by Dr Hovinga on
21 September 2012.
Tolman saw him 1700hrs that day, assessed his condition and spoke with his
daughter who could see he was very ill and appreciated
the poor prognosis. In
the event of a decline she wanted comfort care. She said that the
patient’s wife was well aware of
his condition and prognosis.
2100hrs later that evening the RN noted excoriation of his groin and anal
region. The following day, 22 September 2012, he
was not eating.
Tolman reviewed all his investigations on 23 September 2012. She noted despite
all the medical team investigations and treatments,
his blood tests remained
deranged, with high white cell count, CRP and calcium. His imaging had
confirmed an irreversible pulmonary
infiltrate, irreversible atrophic kidneys,
intractable faecal loading and multiple lymph nodes which very likely signified
malignancy.
359. Dr Tolman made contact with the daughter who indicated she
had spoken with the rest of the family. She believed he was ready
that in light of the considerable suffering and poor prognosis she requested
that life prolonging medication be stopped.
She said the family wanted his
symptoms treated.
360. After discussions with nursing staff, doses of
midazolam 15mg, morphine 10mg and glycopyrolate 1.2mg were administered via
subcutaneous route.
361. On 24 September 2012 he denied being in
any pain. His family were, however, noted to be upset about his
deterioration.
362. On 25 September 2012 he was alert and verbally conversing
with family but declined through the night and died the next morning
September 2012.
363. The decision to palliate was appropriate given the
failure of extensive investigations and treatment to find a focus of the
infection, his poor swallowing and eating, his extreme lethargy and
poor quality of life and the fact he knew he was dying, his family
knew he was
dying and Dr Tolman knew he was dying.
364. Dr Tolman reviewed his whole case
history, investigations and progress conferring with both the family and the
multidisciplinary
team. The team were in consensus with the decision to
palliate. By the time palliation was commenced on 23 September 2012, Patient
was not and never became able to participate in such discussions.
365. Patient 11 was admitted to the OPU on 9 March 2012 with
increasing confusion on a background of dementia. He had chronic renal
a solitary kidney and he had declined dialysis. His kidney function was 15% of
normal and this led to bone disease, calcium
phosphate abnormalities, difficulty
with medications and anaemia. He had gout, diabetes, hypertension, asthma and
an essential tremor.
366. The admitting doctor obtained a history of
worsening cognition over 2 years and there were difficulties coping at home.
test abnormalities were identified and antibiotics were commenced for a
possible urine or chest infection.
367. Dr Tolman assessed him the following
day and identified further history consistent with dementia. She thought he had
on the background of dementia with renal and liver disease and
significant weight loss with a poor prognosis. His dementia and previously
documented resistance to active treatment of his life threatening renal disease
were of major concern.
368. Dr Tolman commenced discussions with the
patient’s wife about his delirium and his prospects for the future. She
the potential gain for the continued use of antibiotics was
negligible. They were therefore ceased.
369. The basis for stopping the
antibiotics were a discussion with his family, a comprehensive assessment,
familiarity with his medical
records and a holistic patient centred approach.
As the infection was not defined, Dr Tolman saw no benefit in continuing with
antibiotics.
370. The antibiotics were restarted by Dr Lees. The patient
was transferred to rehabilitation on 15 March 2012 but made only minimal
improvements before being discharged on 4 April 2012. He died on 9 November
371. Patient 12 presented to the Royal Hobart Hospital
Emergency Department on 8 March 2012 from a nursing home with a cerebrovascular
accident after having one episode of conscious collapse, nil injury with slight
left-sided weakness and facial droop. No pain was
reported. The admitting
registrar discussed these matters with Dr Tolman prior to admission to the OPU
with the plan of a transfer
Tolman says there was no discussion of any fracture of the neck of the femur.
She says the registrar made a final entry in
the medical record after their
conversation referring to a fracture. She says the admitting doctor missed the
fracture himself initially
and did not call her back to correct the
patient’s history. She says “After the conversation with me, the
fracture must
have been noticed, and radiology confirmed the fracture. But was
not notified of this. The fracture was not mentioned until the
fourth page of
the admission.”
373. The patient was reviewed the following afternoon
by an orthopaedic registrar who noted the fracture and recommended surgery.
underwent the surgery on 10 March 2012 and suffered post-operative delirium,
constipation and poorly controlled pain.
374. Dr Tolman states she was not
aware of the fracture because the patient was not aware of the fracture. She
says the fracture
was later diagnosed by the surgeon. She denies she
deliberately withheld information from the son.
375. Dr Tolman says she was
not aware of the fracture when she discussed the patient’s condition with
the son. She states his
wish was that care be directed at comfort in the event
of a decline.
376. Dr Tolman says her involvement with this patient was
limited to the initial discussion with the registrar in the Emergency Department
and the later conversation with the patient’s son.
377. Dr Tolman says
it was the surgeon’s responsibility to inform the son of the fracture
diagnosis. She also says she believes
Dr Lees and Dr MacIntyre had a discussion
with the son concerning the fracture.
378. Dr Tolman says it was Dr Lees who
informed the son of the fracture but did not give the son an opportunity to
decide on surgery
or not. Dr Tolman says that, in her opinion, nonsurgical
management of the patient would have been a reasonable course of action
circumstances and might have given the patient a better quality of life and also
a longer one.
379. The patient was discharged to the nursing home on 14 March
2012 where she died the following day.
380. Dr Tolman admits she made an
error by failing to read the medical notes during the evening of the admission
or at 0730hrs the
following morning and by failing to conduct an examination of
the patient.
THE NEW EVIDENCE
381. The Tribunal has previously
the nature of Dr Tolman’s appeal in this Tribunal is neither an appeal in
the strict sense nor a hearing de novo. Rather it
is a hybrid whereby the
material to be considered is confined to that placed before the Panel but with
the opportunity afforded to
both parties to present additional evidence which
bears directly upon the decision of the Panel.
382. In that regard Dr
Tolman presented evidence from Clinical Associate Professor Stuart Walker, Dr
Michael Barbato and Clinical
Professor Anthony Bell. Reports of Clinical
Associate Professor Walker and Dr Barbato were tendered by consent and they were
cross-examined. Further documentation and reports were provided by Clinical
Professor Bell which were tendered and he was cross-examined.
On behalf of the
respondent an additional report was provided by Dr Michael Chapman and he was
also cross-examined.
Clinical Associate Professor Stuart Walker
383. Clinical Associate Professor Walker’s report of 18
January 2017 consists of two pages plus his 22 page curriculum vitae
consists of a cover page, a contents page and general details, his school
graduate education, his post-graduate career, publications,
career plans and
interests. He specifically comments on the records of Patients 1, 4, 8, 10 and
384. Clinical Associate Professor Walker has 15 years’ experience
as a consultant vascular surgeon. He says over his career
he has reviewed in
great detail many patient records and therefore has a good understanding of
current accepted practice in Australia.
He has been surgical advisor to the
medico-legal department of the Royal Hobart Hospital and chair of the Death
Review Committee
of the Royal Hobart Hospital.
385. Clinical Associate
Professor Walker is of the view the Panel’s assessment of the quality and
accuracy of Dr Tolman’s
record keeping is not consistent with his
experience of record keeping by practitioners of an equivalent level of
experience. His
assessment is Dr Tolman’s record keeping is above
average. He goes as far as to say it is very good. He considered each of
patients where allegations had been made against Dr Tolman for poor notes.
During the course of his review of those records
he refers to other consultants
making either extremely brief or no notes and leaving the note taking to junior
386. Clinical Associate Professor Walker was not cross-examined.
Tribunal has determined it will not give this expert’s evidence any
weight. The reasons for this are as follows:
• Clinical Associate Professor Walker was not presented
to the Tribunal as an expert witness in the field of geriatric medicine
palliative care. His comments about appropriate record keeping in geriatric
medicine or palliative care are therefore of limited
value. Generic comments
the Tribunal.
• There is question mark over his detachment and
objectivity as he was presented in these proceedings as an expert witness
he provided supportive testimonials for Dr Tolman in the proceedings
addition to saying Doctor Tolman’s record keeping is above average and
that it was very good he says “...it
is clearly identified who has made
the entry, the writing is legible and is [sic] most circumstances the signature
is followed by
a legible contact mobile telephone number.” He therefore
has misconceived the areas of concern addressed by the Panel; that
is Clinical
Associate Professor Walker has looked at the form of the records rather than
their substance and content. If the records
were of a proper standard then it
would be self-evident from their examination that a patient’s care was
either at or not at
an appropriate standard.
• Finally the Tribunal is
not assisted by Clinical Associate Professor Walker’s very brief summaries
of the medical records
with respect to the five patients mentioned above. In
the majority of those cases he does not comment or express any reasoned opinion
on what the records do say with respect to the specific issues before the
Dr Michael Barbato
388. Dr Barbato’s report of 29 July 2016 is two pages in
length and attached to that are a further ten pages which represent
his summary
of the medical records for each of the twelve patients and his curriculum vitae
of four pages.
389. Dr Barbato has been a medical practitioner for 50 years
and for the first 20 years he was in private practice, first as a general
practitioner for 2 years and then as a consultant physician. From 1989 until
2014 he worked in palliative care and during that time
directed palliative care
services in the ACT as well as the Sacred Heart Hospice, Darlinghurst and St
Joseph’s Hospital, Auburn.
390. Dr Barbato reviewed the records of the
twelve patients and he concluded:
the twelve cases under review, Dr Tolman has not only met the requirements
expected of a competent medical practitioner,
but she has also demonstrated a
level of commitment, compassion and professional care that brings credit to the
medical profession.”
391. Dr Barbato goes on to say he found no evidence Dr
Tolman’s documentation was unsatisfactory and in his experience it is
duty of the resident and registrar to ensure such documentation is recorded and
392. In addition Dr Barbato found no convincing evidence of hasty
and ill-considered decision making.
393. Finally he found no evidence to
justify the allegations brought against Dr Tolman.
394. Dr Barbato has
considered all of the allegations which constitute this matter and while he has
not expressly referred to the
allegation of a lack of discussion, consultation
and communication with family in respect of Patient 7, the submission from Dr
counsel was it is implicit in his findings, that this allegation
was not made out.
395. The Tribunal has not afforded any weight to Dr
Barbato’s opinions. The first reason for this is Dr Barbato describes
as a “friend and colleague” of Dr Tolman but despite this he
says he “made every effort to remain objective and
impartial and not let
my association with her influence my judgment”. The Tribunal has, of
course, no way of knowing whether
or not Dr Barbato remained objective and
impartial in expressing the opinions he did.
396. Second, nowhere in his
report does Dr Barbato address the standard against which Dr Tolman’s
performance is to be measured
for the purpose of these proceedings. It is not
even clear he was aware of what that standard is. While he says Dr Tolman has
the requirements expected of a competent medical practitioner there has
never been a suggestion by the Board she is not competent.
As was submitted by
counsel for the Board, a competent medical practitioner may still fail in a
given situation to meet the standard
reasonably to be expected of a hypothetical
medical practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience. That
is not addressed by Dr Barbato at all in relation to Dr Tolman’s
care of any of the twelve patients.
397. Third, in his report Dr Barbato says
one of the things he has learned and which particularly stands out as a result
of his experience
in caring for people in the twilight of their life is
“each person has their own particular story which cannot be ignored.
Personalised care depends on uncovering this story as much as it does on the
professional skills and experience of the caring physician.”
Dr Chapman,
in his statements, and in his oral evidence, agreed that that approach was
necessary. Dr Barbato though, says nothing
the evidence led him to conclude Dr Tolman had met that standard in respect of
all or any of the
twelve patients. Dr Chapman, on the other hand, believed the
patient records adequately demonstrate Dr Tolman did not meet that
standard. Dr
Chapman’s primary criticism of the records are not that Dr Tolman failed
to take an adequate history but that
one is often unable to discern from the
records what it is that she actually did or did not do.
398. Fourth, having
expressed the opinions Dr Barbato could find no evidence in the records of the
twelve patients “that documentation
was unsatisfactory” and
“no convincing evidence of hasty and ill-considered decision making”
Dr Barbato concedes
others may hold a different view. That is he concedes his
view may well not be accepted.
399. Fifth, Dr Barbato’s brief
consideration of the concerns expressed in respect of each of the twelve
patients does not, in
our view, disclose a close and careful examination of the
patients’ records and provides no reasoning for any of the conclusions
expresses. A clear example of this is Patient 1. The allegations with respect
to Patient 1 are poor documentation and lack of
discussion and consultation with
patient and family. His response is as follows:
only are several discussions with the daughter noted during patient’s
brief stay (not all with Dr Tolman) but the
patient was also seen by a
palliative care team who endorsed the goals of care. This patient not only
received appropriate care,
but she and her daughter were also partners in the
decision making.”
400. However when one compares that analysis with that of Dr
Chapman in his
of Dr Chapman’s criticism, which is reflected in the Panel’s
findings, is the uncertainty of the history and
treatment goals pathways which
results from the paucity and ambiguity of relevant entries in the
401. So, whereas Dr Barbato notes “several discussions with
the daughter [are] noted during patient’s brief stay (not
all with Dr
Tolman)”, Dr Chapman has analysed what the records do not reveal with the
conclusion being their deficiencies leave
considerable uncertainty as to what
was discussed, to what extent various issues were discussed, to what degree
important information
was communicated and what levels of awareness of various
issues were achieved. He therefore specifically addresses the major concern
“Excellent palliative
care for a person such as
[Patient 1]
would then include discussion of
goals, prognosis and options. Some of this conversation not clearly articulated
in the notes by
402. When Dr Chapman makes concessions with respect to some of
Clinical Professor Bell’s opinion he nonetheless adheres to his
of the lack of detail and certainty in the documentation, as opposed to the
incomplete and ambiguous notations that were
apparently sufficient to satisfy a
plainly lesser standard which was applied by Dr Barbato. Accordingly, by way of
example, Dr Chapman
“I agree with Prof
Bell that Dr Tolman’s clinical records and testimony within
Decision display how important she considered
quality of life. In palliative care the result of a
‘comprehensive evaluation’ often requires a clinician to recognise
that prolonged physical assessments, screening tools or investigations are
inappropriate. A balance must be struck between what
is ‘best’ in
terms of clinical assessment, and what is ‘best’ for the person at
The clinical elements of this case support the awareness of this
issues. However, it remains uncertain what was considered
in resolving this way forward, and the documentation to describe these
complexities is unclear or inadequate.
Clinical Professor Anthony Bell
403. Clinical Professor Bell’s long statement appears in
the Case Book at pages 587-665. At the relevant time in 2012 he was
Medical Officer of the Royal Hobart Hospital. He was also Chairman of the
Credentialing Committee and Chairman of the
Serious Incident
404. Clinical Professor Bell assessed the twelve cases “in the
context of the practical realities of public hospital
His opinion is based upon a comparison between Dr Tolman’s clinical
practice and what was common among other clinicians at
the Royal Hobart Hospital
at the time. His conclusions included the following:
• Dr Tolman’s record keeping was equal, if not
superior, to the record keeping of other involved clinicians – especially
those with primary responsibility for the patients’
Panel inappropriately criticised Dr Tolman’s communication with
patients’ relatives and families when the
written record demonstrate that
there is no basis for such criticism. Dr Tolman both from the records and his
own personal and professional
experience is one of the best communicators with
families. In addition her availability for her patients and their families is
• Of the twelve cases he reviewed there was only one example where he
could question the actions of Dr Tolman and that was in
respect of poor
documentation with respect to Patient
minor and did not impact on the patient’s outcome.
405. During his oral evidence, Clinical Professor Bell
confirmed the OPU commenced in March 2012 when he was in the positions referred
to in paragraph 403. He was on sick leave for 2 months when the OPU commenced
operation. He had nothing to do with setting it up.
He had a lot of
involvement with Dr Tolman.
406. During his evidence, Clinical Professor Bell
explained the system of handover between clinicians at the Royal Hobart Hospital
in 2012 was that clinical management for the patient passed at handover to the
then treating clinician. He indicated problems could
occur and he tried to have
clinicians handover face to face. He said the clinician handing over the
patient could express opinions
but the clinician receiving the patient did not
need to follow those opinions. He said this gave clinical freedom for a
to work freely.
407. In relation to criticisms made with respect
to Dr Tolman’s note taking, Clinical Professor Bell says the general
of note taking in the 1980s and 1990s was reasonable but the standard
fell in the 2000s. He said it was a problem which was difficult
said Dr Tolman’s notes were one of the better set of notes but he
acknowledged they were not perfect and were not
detailed “but at least she
wrote notes” which he said was not always the case with
408. Clinical Professor Bell also had no concern with Dr
Tolman’s prescription of morphine and midazolam in the twelve cases.
said they were the drugs of choice for staff at the Royal Hobart Hospital at the
relevant time. He said it was appropriate to
continue to use those medications
given Dr Tolman was setting up a new unit so that staff were using medications
with which they
were familiar. In respect to dosage he explained the rate of
infusion also needs to be factored in and he did not think Dr Chapman
that when he raised concerns with respect to the medication levels prescribed by
409. The exclusion of opinion evidence by
Evidence Act
is ameliorated by
which provides by subsection (1):
a person has specialised knowledge based on the person’s training, study
or experience, the opinion rule does not
apply to evidence and opinion of that
person that is wholly or substantially based on that
knowledge.”
410. The Tribunal has disregarded Clinical Professor
Bell’s evidence where it is in conflict with the evidence of Dr Chapman.
The reasons for this are first he conceded the practice of palliative and
geriatric medicine is a specialised field of practice
which he has not practised
in. He has clinical practice in those areas in the ICU but he conceded the ICU
is a different environment
from that of the OPU. His opinion does not satisfy
Evidence Act 2001
and could be excluded in its entirety however we
have decided to exclude it where it conflicts with the evidence of Dr Chapman
Dr Chapman’s concessions with respect to some of Clinical Professor
Bell’s evidence.
411. Second it was clear Clinical Professor Bell
provided his opinion despite the fact he freely conceded before the notification
with respect to these proceedings he was a supporter of Dr Tolman and her work
practices and was a strong supporter of hers after
he retired from the Royal
He conceded in cross-examination that the purpose of providing his opinion was
to exonerate Dr Tolman and not to carry out an objective
assessment of the
matter according to the records. When the matter came before the Panel he not
only accompanied her for a period
of that hearing, he also provided a
testimonial. He offered to provide his opinion to Dr Tolman. This is not a
case where his opinions
was independently sought by Dr Tolman’s legal
advisors. Having conceded those matters he did not seek to persuade the
he departed from that approach at any point. The Tribunal is therefore
satisfied he did not approach the task of providing an expert
opinion in this
matter with objectivity and detachment.
412. In addition Clinical Professor
Bell admitted in cross-examination he did not undertake a careful analysis of
any of the material
that was provided to him and in any event he was not
provided with all the material. He says Dr Tolman gave him a file but he did
not have regard to it. He read the Panel’s report several times. He
looked at the patient files and reviewed those. The
material he was provided
with lacked any of the evidence obtained by the initial investigation of the
notification. In any event,
having made the comments in paragraph 404 the
Tribunal is satisfied that even if he had been provided with that material he
not have considered it in a detached fashion. It was clear a number of
colleagues including Dr Chamberlen and Dr Nicklason had made
complaints about Dr
Tolman. He asked for evidence. Records were provided but nothing else other
than that was provided.
413. Accordingly the Tribunal gives no weight to
Clinical Professor Bell’s conclusion the allegations investigated by the
at its hearing “were baseless” and that in his opinion the
hospital records concerning the twelve patients disclosed
example where [he] could question the actions of Dr Tolman...and that was a
minor issue that did not impact on the
outcome for the
addition Clinical Professor Bell’s opinion is to be given little weight
because the only standard, against which he
judged Dr Tolman’s record
keeping, was the standard at the Royal Hobart Hospital at the relevant time
which he described as
previously alluded to, the best he could say about Dr Tolman’s record
keeping against that standard was that it was “better
415. In addition Clinical
Professor Bell was unaware of the definition of unsatisfactory professional
performance provided by
of the National Law. It is clear from his evidence
he has not undertaken any assessment of whether Dr Tolman has met that standard.
He made it clear he was assessing her performance against the Royal Hobart
Hospital standard as at 2012.
416. In conclusion then, the Tribunal takes the
view that Clinical Professor Bell’s opinions are not the product of a
and detailed analysis of all the relevant evidence and neither are they
the product of a careful and detailed analysis of that evidence
he did have
regard to. Finally, his opinion is not the product of a detached and objective
assessment of the evidence he had regard
to but is the product of a belief that
earlier complaints about Dr Tolman’s professional performance from her
colleagues had
no foundation and a preconceived bias towards assisting to
exonerate her in these proceedings. This he conceded in
cross-examination.
Dr Michael Chapman
417. Dr Chapman is a geriatrician and palliative medicine
specialist working in Canberra in the Australian Capital Territory. His
role is Director of palliative care at Canberra Hospital. He is also Chair of
the ACT palliative care network. He has academic
roles at Australian National
University and University of Technology Sydney. He has more recently submitted
a doctoral thesis entitled
“The ethics of decision making in dementia:
making sense of senselessness”.
418. Dr Chapman has provided, as part
of the Board’s investigation, a report in June
He considered all the notifier’s documents together with interview summary
statements obtained by AHPRA’s investigators
from those colleagues Dr
Tolman worked with on the OPU. They included statements from Dr Butcherine, Dr
Lees, Dr Cleary, Professor
Ashby, Dr Nicklason, Dr Dunbabin, Dr Chamberlen, Dr
Skelton and Professor Jose. He also considered letters from Dr Bakas and Dr
Morrissey to AHPRA. Dr Chapman also considered written responses from Dr Tolman
which included a written submission against immediate
action of 30 July 2013 and
her response to the notification dated 18 December 2013. Further documents as
listed on page 239 of the
Case Book were also considered by Dr
419. In his report Dr Chapman said he could not comment on Dr
Tolman’s practice generally but only in relation to the particular
cases he considered. Those cases included the twelve patients whose
circumstances were considered by the Panel. Their hospital
records were
provided to Dr Chapman. He also considered the records of six other patients
who were not the subject of consideration
by the Panel and his comments in
relation to those six patients are redacted from the material provided to the
420. In summary, Dr Chapman’s position with respect to the
cases he considered was Dr Tolman’s treatment approach often
position that a “comfort care” palliative approach was the only way
forward. He said the flexibility of managing
complex clinical situations in
patients with a number of issues, including the cases he considered, was not
apparent in the case
notes, nor in Dr Tolman’s written
421. Dr Chapman was concerned about the apparent lack of patient
involvement in discussions and decisions about care. He said in
relation to the
twelve patients he considered it was not clear why that was so. He says Dr
Tolman often had a “right way forward”
approach to the care of the
patient but that it was impossible to gauge the effect of this approach and
conviction on the perspectives
of families and patients. He notes it was
unfortunate Dr Tolman only documented the results of discussions rather than the
422. Dr Chapman discerned from his review of the patient
cases Dr Tolman’s approach with respect to palliative care was it was
Chapman was of the opinion this is not always the
most appropriate course and
this view was reflected in the views of others that some of Dr Tolman’s
decisions were contentious
and others potentially dangerous.
423. Dr Chapman
was also concerned Dr Tolman’s approach in palliative care was to cease
other medications which were not “comfort
care” medications which in
some of the reviewed cases may have caused more harm than good. Of greater
concern to him was the
lack of clear documentation of a diagnosis of dying to
support her decisions, which leads to the perception that these end of life
terminally focused approaches were assumed to be appropriate for all palliative
patients, regardless of their needs at the time
in question.
424. Dr Chapman
responded to Clinical Professor Bell’s report of 11 November
in his report of 4 February 2018
further report Dr Chapman follows the structure of Clinical Professor
Bell’s report which he says introduced each
clinical case, drew attention
to relevant parts of the Panel’s decision and then provided comment. Dr
Chapman reviewed Clinical
Professor Bell’s report, had regard to his
previous report and made further comment on Clinical Professor Bell’s
with respect to each patient. In some instances Dr Chapman has
conceded issues raised by Clinical Professor Bell. Dr Chapman has
also assumed
Dr Tolman’s evidence before the Panel, both verbal and documentary, has
been accurately summarised in the Panel’s
decision. Counsel for Dr Tolman
did not contend to the Tribunal that this was not so. What follows is Dr
Chapman’s view of
those materials which have also taken into account his
original report of June 2014 with respect to the twelve patients.
425. Dr Chapman says Clinical Professor Bell rightly says the
usual practice is for medical documentation to be iterative, with “salient
repetition included by more senior documentation rather than a complete
reproduction of all clinical evidence by each practitioner
encounter”. He says the usual practice is to summarise key elements so
that the meaning and appropriateness of a practitioner’s
interpretation and approach to management is apparent. He says as set out on
pages 18 and 19 of his original report, Dr
Tolman’s note on 8 July 2012 at
10:30 provides an assessment of the primary clinical problem and premorbid
quality of life
but little explanation as to why the wish of the patient’s
daughter for blood transfusions for her mother changed over the
span of one
hour, what “comfort care” should mean in the context of this
patient, or what was expected from that point.
He says information of that
nature would have made these notes clearer although he accepts those aspects may
have been covered within
the consultation with the patient.
426. Dr Chapman
says, as with the case of Patient 3, Clinical Professor Bell’s comments
for clinical events when she was
not the consultant in charge are contrary to the Panel’s position on this
point as set out
in its decision. He says whether her comments within her
subsequent oral evidence, or her role as Director of the OPU means that
retains responsibility for the actions of others within her unit is not a
decision for him to make.
427. Dr Chapman says although it was appropriate to
not focus on additional screening for geriatric syndromes of this patient at the
time Dr Tolman became involved these assessments may still have been relevant
during this patient’s admission. He says this
is clearly the case for an
assessment of delirium and falls may have been relevant to this patient’s
comfort and decisions
a physical examination would be usual and appropriate when a consultant
meets a patient and there is an expectation this would be documented.
Chapman notes that Clinical Professor Bell made no reference to paragraph 25.17
of the Panel’s decision which says:
the hearing, the medical practitioner reported the patient had a malignancy that
required no treatment. The type and
nature of the malignancy was not further
defined nor reference made in the notes.”
429. Dr Chapman notes he had previously reported, as had
Clinical Professor Bell, that a malignancy was not the most likely diagnosis
Patient 1. If Dr Tolman believed this was the case then this is contrary to the
diagnosis on the discharge summary. Dr Chapman
confirms as stated in his
earlier report it remained uncertain from the clinical record whether the
inference that Patient 1 was
likely to have cancer influenced Dr Tolman’s
clinical management or whether this was a factor which influenced how available
care options were presented to the patient’s daughter. He says these
observations appear to support the Panel’s finding
at paragraph 29.11
where the Panel state:
“As the medical notes
were incomplete, it is difficult to know how the family were guided and informed
to come a decision about
care or what options were given to them to consider.
During the hearing, the medical practitioner said that she did discuss,
communicate
and consult with others in contrast to the medical notes which were
silent on this issue. However, she also said during the hearing
that in respect
to this patient, nobody knew the problem, that there was no diagnosis. Whilst
abnormalities in the patient’s
condition were noted in the medical records
and investigations, there was no action by the medical practitioner to
facilitate a diagnosis,
a prognosis or a treatment plan. On this basis, the
Panel finds that the discussions and consultations with the family and patient
were unsatisfactory in that inadequate information would have been placed before
them prior to making a decision.”
430. Dr Chapman says further the diagnostic uncertainty
apparent from Dr Tolman’s oral evidence is not set out in either her
her team’s clinical documentation. Dr Chapman disagrees with Clinical
Professor Bell that there is no evidence to support
the Panel’s finding in
paragraph 29.12. He says additional clarification of this point has been made
above and in his earlier
report at pages 18 and 19. He repeats the degree of
responsibility Dr Tolman holds for the actions of the OPU staff and their
contribution
to gaps identified by the decision is not a question for him to
431. Dr Chapman goes on to say he disagrees with Clinical Professor
Bell’s suggestion that the “diagnostic decision-making
process” was clear in this case. As he says in his earlier report at
pages 18 and 19 and as outlined above, the influence
of the possible diagnosis
of cancer on clinical decision making is unclear from the medical records. He
goes on to say the Panel’s
decision at paragraphs 29.11 and 33.13 suggest
Dr Tolman remains uncertain as to what condition was being treated. Dr Chapman
Clinical Professor Bell rightly suggests that a clear diagnosis of a
“decline in function” was made and as described
Chapman’s earlier report the focus on comfort care was a clinically
appropriate decision. He goes on to say Clinical
Professor Bell’s
comments that additional investigations were inappropriate due to the
family’s stated goals of care,
and that no diagnosis could be reached
without them are also correct. Diagnostic certainty, as compared with clinical
is often unavailable in palliative care. He comments the tensions in
this case well highlight these difficulties. However he goes
on to say clarity
regarding the presumptive diagnosis and the potential approaches to this problem
would affect aspects of a comfort
care plan, and the advice given to the family,
including in respect of prognostication. He says for this reason, determining
documenting presumptive diagnoses in a palliative setting remains relevant,
and the diagnostic approach in this case is uncertain.
432. Dr Chapman notes
Clinical Professor Bell suggests “the statement that Dr Tolman failed to
assess the patient and implement
a care plan is wrong, the question that should
be asked is if the care plan was reasonable medical practice or not”. At
33.15 Dr Chapman notes the Panel’s decision suggests the patient
was not properly assessed and a “suitable management
plan” was not
formulated or implemented. Dr Chapman agrees with Clinical Professor Bell the
treatment decisions were “reasonable”
however he remains uncertain
what assessment led to those decisions. In particular he refers to paragraphs
33.15 and 33.16 of the
decision which suggest Dr Tolman believed there was only
one potential appropriate response to this clinical situation. In Dr
experience it is almost never the case there is only one
possible response to a clinical situation. Dr Tolman’s expression
perspective is troubling given the unclear presentation of Patient 1’s
situation to her family.
433. Dr Chapman also notes a care plan was
implemented prior to Dr Tolman’s care which seems to suggest her role was
due to this handover. However at that point he says the care plan
became Dr Tolman’s responsibility. He says this is emphasised
case by the immediate change to the care plan through the determination that
transfusions were not appropriate when Dr Tolman
discussed this issue with the
patient’s daughter.
434. Next Dr Chapman says he agrees with Clinical
Professor Bell that Dr Tolman’s clinical records and testimony within the
Panel’s decision, displayed how important she considered the
patient’s quality of life. He says in palliative care the
result of a
“comprehensive evaluation” often requires a clinician to recognise
prolonged physical assessments, screening
tools and investigations are
inappropriate. A balance must be struck between what is “best” in
terms of clinical assessment,
and what is “best” for the person at
that time. The clinical elements of this case support the fact Dr Tolman was
of these issues; however Dr Chapman says it remains uncertain what was
considered in resolving this way forward and the documentation
does not describe
these complexities clearly or adequately.
435. Dr Chapman says Clinical
Professor Bell appears to be suggesting the medical records indicate Dr Tolman
did not believe this
patient had cancer and therefore that did not influence any
outcomes. However Dr Chapman notes the Panel’s decision suggests
Tolman did indicate she thought this patient had cancer and this determined her
approach as
appropriate
page 19 of Dr Chapman’s previous report he says declining haemoglobin
suggests instability and potential further decline.
It does not suggest that Dr
Tolman should have acted on this. It does incorrectly imply Dr Tolman had
ongoing clinical responsibility
for this patient. As Clinical Professor Bell
says if the practice of the OPU was for patients to be handed over then after Dr
review on 9 July 2012 Dr Tolman was no longer directly
clinically responsible. Whether Dr Tolman is responsible for the actions
clinicians in her unit is a question Dr Chapman cannot answer.
437. In relation to this patient Dr Chapman agrees with
Clinical Professor Bell’s assertion the medical records should be viewed
as iterative documents. He says unnecessary repetition of what has already been
established is unhelpful and inefficient. Dr Chapman
says, however, a
clinician’s decision making is rendered explicable by the evidence used,
and documentation is a key element
of demonstrating this process. Dr Chapman
says while Dr Tolman was only involved late in this patient’s care he does
this in itself means she was not still responsible for documenting a
comprehensive assessment, even if that assessment was highly
reliant on what had
come before. As he says in his previous report at pages 22 to 25 there was
considerable diagnostic uncertainty
with this patient’s presentation and
the family’s expressed uncertainty was part of the reason for his prompt
at the OPU. Accordingly a comprehensive assessment, as part of a
considered and step wise approach to this patient’s care
438. Dr Chapman also agrees with Clinical Professor Bell’s
discussion of Patient 2’s hypercalcemia. Dr Chapman says this
to be due to osteolytic metastatic disease. Dr Chapman says this would provide
an explanation for the high phosphate,
a result which would have been unlikely
for hyperparathyroidism or humoral hypercalcaemia of malignancy. Dr Chapman
says prostate
cancer (suggested by the raised PSA) is an unusual cause of
osteolytic metastatic disease or hypercalcaemia. Dr Chapman says it
from the notes whether an investigation of the likely metastatic disease was
considered further than urology input. He
notes a reference to a CT of chest,
abdomen and pelvis (FT178400) which would have been an appropriate investigation
in this context
to determine a primary lesion although he was unable to find the
result of the scan. If a diagnosis was sought, assuming these lesions
hypercalcaemia) were due to prostate cancer based on the raised PSA was
inappropriate the additional investigations to explore
myeloma and the screen of
a CT CAP suggest the search was not left there. He says it is unclear from the
notes whether further investigation
on these points was discussed with the
patient and his family. Based on the patient’s clinical presentation,
identifying a
primary site for the cancer would have provided diagnostic and
prognostic clarity but may not have led to additional clinical interventions
becoming appropriate. That is this patient would not have been eligible for
palliative systematic cancer treatment if a cancer had
been formally
439. Dr Chapman agrees with Clinical Professor Bell’s
comments about decisions about whose role it is to document critical care
elements such as bereavement and family supports. This task often falls to
social workers or other non-medical clinicians despite
the clear holistic
benefit of these interventions. What was usual practice in Dr Tolman’s
unit would be best answered by her.
Whether she holds some responsibility for
how this was approached within her unit is to be determined by
440. Dr Chapman says “as a nephrologist Professor Bell comments
that the hyponatraemia was an isolated finding and not of concern.”
Chapman notes the patient did have multiple hyponatraemic readings detected from
15 October 2012 until 6 November 2012. There
were several scores moderately low
at less than 129mmol/L. Dr Chapman does not have Clinical Professor
Bell’s experience in
this area, however, in this clinical situation and in
association with the patient’s highly mobile renal function and raised
urea, he believes additional consideration of these issues with determination of
an osmolality would have been useful. A particular
focus on the patient’s
volume status, and what was being done to support this, is highly relevant.
Hyponatraemia is a known
side effect of mirtazapine.
441. Dr Chapman says
Clinical Professor Bell’s comments about Dr Tolman’s approach to
Patient 2’s hypercalcaemia
have merit. The investigations performed were
appropriate. Assuming a CT CAP was performed that was an appropriate escalation
assessment given the other negative results. At less than 3mmol/L the
treatment of hypercalcaemia should have been supportive with
attention to fluid
balance, drugs that contribute to a raised calcium and mobilisation if possible.
The advent of symptomatic hypercalcaemia
may have changed the approach and a
note is made in paragraph 13.7 of the Panel’s decision of the lack of a
clear approach
to delirium. Mild hypercalcaemia can contribute to delirium and
this would have been worth considering when determining a diagnosis.
Tolman’s comments at paragraph 13.8 of the Panel’s decision
“you would have to ask the team looking after him”
Chapman’s view, difficult to interpret in this context as it seems the
hypercalcaemia remains an area of clinical
relevance during the time Dr Tolman
was this patient’s treating clinician.
442. Dr Chapman says maximising
the comfort of patients is never inappropriate and it is often that
pharmacotherapy for comfort is
provided late and when a person is considered as
actively dying to the detriment of the patient and those around him or her. Dr
Chapman agrees with Clinical Professor Bell the provision of comfort care was
appropriate for this patient. The question then focuses
more on the goals of
that therapy and how the assessments to make sure that these goals were being
met were proceeded with. He says
a more complete discussion of some of the
complexities in this case appears at pages 24 to 25 of his previous report. He
says morphine
is not the preferred first line opioid analgesic in renal failure.
This patient’s last eGFR of 45 on 12 November 2012 (grade
3 or 3a renal
impairment) would put him at risk of opioid toxicity with morphine, however many
clinicians would still be happy to
use morphine in these circumstances.
However, Dr Chapman says the use of morphine in these circumstances would
require an explicit
attention to the possible toxicities associated with this
because of ongoing and predictable renal impairment. He says it is unclear
whether this was considered in this case.
443. Dr Chapman does not think
informed decision making only has relevance when a reversible problem is being
considered. He says
in palliative practice many decisions are made even when a
person is actively dying and all those involved in the decision need to
informed. He says Dr Tolman clearly indicates discussions with the family. As
previously documented in his report of June 2014
at pages 24 and 25 there is a
lack of clarity about specific choices of palliative approaches and what was
discussed with this patient’s
444. Dr Chapman agrees with
Clinical Professor Bell’s comments about the duration of renal impairment.
This patient’s
renal function was normal (in terms of eGFR) on 12 October
2012 and Dr Chapman is not aware of additional information to suggest
patient had renal impairment prior to this, other than in the context mentioned
by Clinical Professor Bell.
445. Dr Chapman confirms he does not have
concerns about access to comfort care with pharmacotherapy for those who require
there is no particular reason why use of a syringe driver to do this is
clinically different from other means. Despite this clinical
assessments of
some kind are required to determine goals will be achieved by any clinical
intervention which includes the provision
of comfort care.
446. Dr Chapman
disagrees with Clinical Professor Bell that this patient’s length of stay
or time under the care of others removed
the need for thorough assessment or
analysis of his needs when he was admitted under the care of Dr Tolman. The
long history makes
such a task more challenging but no less important. A
comprehensive assessment in this context does not require repetition of
that has been done before but does require clear consideration of
what has occurred and clarification of what uncertainties remain.
Chapman’s reading of paragraphs 35.7 to 35.9 of the Panel’s decision
suggests the issues raised seem broader than
those just relating to
hypercalcaemia.
448. Dr Chapman says this patient’s care could not have
been improved without an improvement in his swallowing. He accepts
Tolman’s comment this patient’s care had to include an aspect of
waiting to see whether things improved. A number
of other aspects of this
patient’s care have been identified which could have benefited from more
attention even while the
team was waiting to see whether his swallowing function
could resolve.
449. Clinical Professor Bell has suggested Dr Tolman was not
involved in this patient’s care and therefore little comment can
However, as discussed in Dr Chapman’s previous report at page 28, letters
from Dr Tolman suggests she was aware of
the case during this patient’s
admission and Dr Chapman assumed this to be the case in his previous report. He
report includes comments on many aspects of the management of this
patient. In addition he notes many of the matters referred to
in the decision
and cited by Clinical Professor Bell relate to how the ward, Dr Tolman ran as
director, responded to the difficulties
presented by this patient rather than
her own direct clinical input.
450. Dr Chapman says whether the decision to cease active
clinical intervention was “rapid” depends to an extent on why
was done. As he said in his previous report at pages 30 to 32, the concern was
the treatment was unduly burdensome than other
less burdensome options that were
available. If the issue was extending her life would be unwanted and
inappropriate, ceasing antibiotics
and life prolonging interventions is
potentially a highly reasonable and caring act. He says much of this depends on
how discussions
of these issues were conducted. Dr Duffield’s eventual
agreement with the plans supports its appropriateness, but as discussed
previous report Dr Chapman says there is a significant degree of controversy
regarding managing insulin with a comfort focus
in palliative
451. Dr Chapman says he disagrees with Clinical Professor Bell that
the possibility of improvement was irrelevant. It may have been
relevant to the
patient’s family and may have influenced their thinking. Because these
aspects of the case are not documented
he says it makes this more difficult to
452. As discussed in his previous report Dr Chapman has concerns
says there was limited evidence to suggest such interventions were required and
aggressive doses were used. He disagrees
with Clinical Professor Bell’s
suggestion it is ethically preferable to use medications for comfort regardless
of whether the
person seems comfortable during clinical assessment. Dr Chapman
says discomfort while dying is not universal and not everyone requires
and benzodiazepines. Palliative intervention should always be targeted towards
needs, and adequate assessment of those needs
is a critical part of the
provision of palliative care. He also notes the use of an aggressive approach
may be due to a wish for
sedation to avoid the assumed symptom burden of the
diabetic ketoacidosis and sepsis. Palliative sedation in anticipation of
discomfort is not the recommended approach. He discussed these
guidelines with respect to this practice in his previous report at
page 35. He
says there was no clarity within the patient’s records this was the
clinical direction that was being discussed
or adopted.
453. Dr Chapman says
he agrees the choices for care were reasonable and consensus was achieved among
all parties but he feels the
documentation around the content of these
discussions was inadequate. This particularly applies to Dr Tolman’s
first review
in the emergency department on 25 March 2012.
454. Dr Chapman
agrees with Clinical Professor Bell’s comments that at the point where
there was a confirmation the patient
was for comfort directed care further
investigation of reversal elements within her past medical history was unlikely
achieving this
Much of Dr Chapman’s concern is related to how informed the family were
they felt would be her
goals into the future. The letter from the family which Clinical Professor Bell
mentions clearly suggests
the family felt the care was appropriate. Dr Chapman
says he thinks it likely the clinicians and her family were in agreement about
her care needing to focus on comfort, and that interventions to lengthen her
life were inappropriate. It, however, remains unclear
from the medical records
what the content of some of the discussions that led to this shared view
455. Dr Chapman says, as discussed in his previous report, neither
morphine nor midazolam were inappropriate to use in this case.
He also says the
manner of the use was aggressive. Sedation was a predictable result and it was
uncertain whether this was the
456. Dr Chapman agrees with paragraph 15.1 of the Panel’s
decision that reversal contributors to this patient’s decline
consideration. He says there was no clear indication of a precipitant for a
subacute cognitive and functional change for
the patient on history, examination
or initial investigation. However, there was no clear documentation of the
contributor. He notes specific mention is made of
“anti-cholinergic” burden of medication by Dr Tolman though most of
the medications this patient was taking that may have precipitated cognitive
change were commenced during this admission. Dr Chapman
says there is a
potential for this patient’s cognitive change to have been contributed to
by his Prednisolone, his Piroxicam
or his Sertraline, although Dr Chapman has
assumed these were all long standing. As mentioned at paragraph 15.2 of the
decision falls were an evident geriatric syndrome early in this
patient’s admission and may have contributed to his decline,
but they were
not explored. A CT brain scan was organised for the patient but not until 13
March 2012 and it was not mentioned by
Dr Tolman as a consideration. The
possibility of constipation as a contributor was another under assessed issue.
Such clinical
issues, he says, are relevant both to the patient’s function
and clinical state, but also to his comfort and therefore were
matters which
were relevant to consider.
457. Clinical Professor Bell’s comments that
Dr Lees was the clinician in charge for the events in paragraphs 15.2 to 15.4 of
the Panel’s decision is true in part. Some of these issues relate to the
time when Dr Lees is the consultant in charge of
this patient. Whether Dr
Tolman retains responsibility for activity within her unit at the hands of other
clinicians, he says is
a determination to be made by others.
458. Dr Chapman
says Clinical Professor Bell’s comments that paragraphs 15.2 to 15.22 of
the Panel’s decision are not
compatible with the patient’s clinical
records is difficult to interpret. Dr Chapman thinks much of this evidence
come from Dr Tolman’s evidence to the Panel and is recorded as
such. Clinical Professor Bell suggests Dr Tolman had less direct
involvement in
this patient’s care than Dr Chapman considered to be the case at
paragraphs 32 to 36 of his previous report.
459. Dr Chapman says Dr
Tolman’s notes contain gaps that warrant discussion. He says that this
includes attention to reversible
contributors to the patient’s decline.
He notes at pages 34 to 45 of his previous report there were multiple other
that did not receive thorough documentation which include the reasoning
behind a move to parenteral pharmacotherapy, the choice of
agents, the need for
sedation, the use of non-pharmacological interventions for distress and how
involved the family was in these
considerations.
460. Dr Chapman says
Clinical Professor Bell’s comments about the involvement of the Coroner
are likely to be accurate. Dr
Chapman says unless there was clear suspicion the
decline resulted from the fall then Dr Chapman is of the view this would not
been of any interest to the Coroner. He says it could easily be claimed
this patient’s decline towards dying led to his fall
rather than the
alternative; although his need for sedating pharmacotherapy complicate this
461. Dr Chapman says Clinical Professor Bell’s comment about the
appropriateness of comfort medications for distress are valid
for people with
advanced dementia or delirium. However in this case, as Dr Chapman outlined in
his previous report at pages 34 to
37, there is the possibility the use of
benzodiazepines, and the later rapid escalation of morphine and midazolam
contributed to
his distress and his decline. This patient’s renal
impairment is particularly relevant. A potential disconnection between
Tolman’s advice and the family’s wishes were noted by Dr Chapman in
his previous report for example the events around
the re-initiation of midazolam
on 17 March 2012.
462. Dr Chapman said in his previous report at pages 34 to
36 there are a number of concerns in this case with respect to the approach
the use of analgesics. He says Clinical Professor Bell comments the use of
analgesics is appropriate in cases of this sort for
empiric management of pain,
and to reduce agitation in delirium or behavioural and psychological symptoms of
dementia. Dr Chapman
says the Panel’s comments that the escalation of
dosing was rapid without clear reference to a diagnosis of the cause of pain,
monitoring of effects of treatment with standard tools is relevant. He says
analgesic dosing depends on context, and the note
taking in this case makes it
difficult to know whether this aggressive approach was required. He also says
the usual guidelines
when opioid analgesics are required for BPSD management and
other analgesic interventions have been unsuccessful would recommend
dose of between 10-20mg of oral morphine equivalent used within a 24 hour period
(the higher limit if the patient is not
opioid naïve) which is considerably
less than the 30mg OME utilised in this case. Dr Chapman also refers to his
comments in
his previous report that the use of morphine, known to cause greater
toxicity and renal impairment, as an analgesic was not best
practice in this
case. He says it is plausible, but by no means certain, the use of morphine
(over a safer analgesic) may have added
to this patient’s agitation, and
if so it’s rapid escalation was adding further toxicity and discomfort
rather than improving
the situation. As discussed in his previous report, Dr
Chapman notes the early use of benzodiazepines, and ongoing urinary retention
may have also contributed to agitation in this case. Management of agitation in
a palliative setting for patients with dementia
is complex and whether attention
to these issues would have resulted in greater comfort or different outcomes, he
says, is speculative.
463. Dr Chapman disagrees with Clinical Professor
Bell’s position with respect to the comments made in the Panel’s
inappropriate in this case. Dr Chapman says capacity assessments
performed when there is a trigger for concern and when a decision is required.
This is due to the recognition that these
assessment imply a challenge to a
person’s status in society and therefore should be avoided when possible.
In addition, capacity
can and does change over time so assessment at the time it
is required is necessary. He says on the initial review by Dr Tolman
no clear “complex” decision that was required and still the
possibility the patient’s condition “and
capacity” may
improve, which raises questions as to why this assessment was performed so
early. He notes the Panel documented,
which was acknowledged by Clinical
Professor Bell, the documentation lacks detail as to the nature of the
contributing elements to
the assessment. Dr Chapman notes Clinical Professor
Bell’s comments about the clear evidence of this patient’s cognitive
impairment. However, cognitive impairment and decision making capacity are not
synonymous and predictable links between gross assessments
(such as the MMSE)
and capacity are highly controversial.
464. Dr Chapman then says Clinical
Professor Bell’s comments about Dr Tolman’s lack of responsibility
for the deficiencies
noted in paragraph 33.20 of the Panel’s decision has
merit. Much of the period to clarify this patient’s clinical status,
the potential contributors was likely when he was under the care of Dr Lees.
However it is uncertain what responsibility, if
any, Dr Tolman had as director
of the OPU in determining the quality of care for her colleagues. Despite this
observation Dr Chapman
says there are also limitations in the clarity and
consideration demonstrated as the patient’s care became more focused on
comfort. As discussed in this report and his previous report, the palliative
assessment, management and documentation in this case
from Dr Tolman was not
best practice.
465. Dr Chapman says Clinical Professor Bell’s comment
this patient was at higher risk of dying on presentation to hospital
absolutely accurate”. Dr Chapman notes he discussed in his previous
report at page 37 the appropriateness of utilising
antibiotics and further
investigation in this case depended largely on the goals of care and the
clinical determination of appropriateness.
He says there did not seem clear
documentation of the family’s concern that their wishes for clarification
of the reason for
her decline were not being met. Dr Chapman says this does not
denote that additional investigation or clinical intervention have
performed if they are deemed clinically inappropriate. However, he said it is
unclear from the case notes and Dr Tolman’s
evidence before the Panel
whether she thought these wishes were inappropriate and if that is the reason
they were not followed up.
466. While a small bowel obstruction as a
reasonable additional diagnosis to make for this patient it does not provide
satisfactory
explanation for her entire clinical picture. The patient’s
sepsis was clearly established from her presentation and her bacteraemia.
Chapman says continuing antibiotics was not necessary if they did not meet the
patient’s and family’s goals, or if
they were considered clinically
inappropriate by Dr Tolman but these aspects are not clear from Dr
Tolman’s notes in the clinical
record. In her written response to the
Panel mentioned at paragraph 21.23 Dr Tolman implies these considerations were
account; however, comments such as those in paragraph 21.18 of the
Panel’s decision that “she might have gotten better,
unexpectedly” suggests some uncertainty as to whether ongoing ward-based
treatments (such as antibiotics) may have been appropriate.
467. Clinical
Professor Bell’s suggestion the general medical unit contributed to the
difficulties facing this patient and her
family by not adequately managing her
situation does have merit. Her needs were complex and a more robust plan to
meet them would
have been of significant benefit upon her transfer to the
468. Clinical Professor Bell’s critique of the Panel’s
determination of the “premature closure of interventions”
valid. As discussed in his previous report at pages 37 to 38, escalation of
investigation and continuation may not have
changed any aspect of this
patient’s progression to death. However, there is uncertainty as to
whether ceasing antibiotics
was carefully considered and discussed based on the
evidence and in this respect the Panel’s concerns about the prematurity
cessation of interventions are valid.
469. Dr Chapman, like Clinical
Professor Bell, struggles with the comments made by the Panel at paragraph 34.9
of its decision. It
is “highly” unclear to him reading the clinical
record and Dr Tolman’s responses at the hearing which are produced
decision why she stopped antibiotics. It is also unclear whether this was due
to a misdiagnosis or knowledge the patient
was close to dying. It is also
difficult to know what the family’s understanding was, and how this
influenced their decisions.
This may have been clear to Dr Tolman and to the
family at the time, but it is difficult to interpret from the records.
medications for comfort including use of a syringe driver would have
been a completely reasonable step regardless of whether the
antibiotics were
ceased. Comfort care should be provided when required, not withheld until other
elements of care are deemed no
longer appropriate.
470. Dr Chapman agrees, as outlined at page 31 of his earlier
report, with Clinical Professor Bell’s perspective of the appropriateness
of palliation in this patient’s care when she was dying from renal failure
and sepsis with pneumonia. Dr Chapman says a number
of clinical entries
describe her clinical condition and Dr Tolman’s documented review on 3
July 2012 at 1800, is not inappropriate
in focusing on the broader intent of her
clinical plan in discussion with the patient’s family. Dr Chapman,
however, disagrees
with Clinical Professor Bell’s suggestion that due to
her condition the patient could definitively not engage in decision making.
Chapman says it is common for people with delirium and/or advanced cognitive
decline to meaningfully contribute to discussions
preferences. Despite this the patient’s goals seemed clearly understood
by her family. Ideal practice
would be to document what attempts were made to
involve the patient or alternatively why attempts were not made but this is not
common a practice as it should be. He makes no comment about Clinical
Professor Bell’s concern Dr Tolman may be being inappropriately
failures of the storage or collection of this patient’s
documentation.
471. Dr Chapman also agrees with Clinical Professor
Bell’s comments about further investigation. From a palliative care
perspective
Dr Chapman says additional investigation would only be appropriate
if it was felt this could lead to meaningful improvement in the
situation which is usually achieved through improving the patient’s
comfort. He did not think further assessment
or treatment of the CK would have
added to the patient’s comfort and nor did it seem this was information or
an approach that
would have comforted her family. He says the use of the
benzodiazepine Temazepam for agitation is an unusual choice in end of life
However he says significant variation exists in the use of benzodiazepines to
treat agitation in this setting particularly
for persons with dementia. The
co-prescription of Temazepam with midazolam suggests Dr Tolman was aware of the
potential difficulties
in using oral benzodiazepines in dying
472. Dr Chapman is more concerned about the use of morphine as a
primary analgesic in a person with acute renal failure. As was commented
Chapman’s original report with respect to Patient 5, standard practice
would be to utilise a safe opioid in renal function
such as Fentanyl or
Hydromorphone. He says while Clinical Professor Bell’s comments about the
safety of paracetamol in this
context are correct, multiple opioids that are
less safe in renal impairment (oxycodone and morphine) were also used. Use of
is standard for significant distress or discomfort in the end of life
setting and he disagrees with Clinical Professor Bell that
this patient’s
hypotension made Fentanyl less desirable than what was prescribed. Concerns
relevance when a person is actively dying and
opioid accumulation is less likely to be a concern. He says these issues may
been considered but not documented although the comment at paragraph 22.7
of the Panel’s decision that the “medical practitioner
that the patient could have picked up or could have been dead” challenges
this perspective somewhat.
473. Dr Chapman says Clinical Professor
Bell’s suggestion that other renally toxic medications charted were not
given is also
correct. These medications seem to have been charted after their
8:00am administration time (as suggested by the “x”)
and it is less
clear they were intentionally withheld. Dr Chapman agrees with Clinical
Professor Bell that Patient 7’s death
was a likely result from this
admission regardless of intervention. This does not, however, preclude the
validity of attempts at
improvement through the mechanisms discussed in the
Panel’s decision at paragraph 22.7. However it seems that it was comfort,
rather than improvement, that was the family’s goal. For this reason
those interventions were inappropriate in this context.
474. Dr Chapman says
he agrees with Clinical Professor Bell there were few realistic options
available in this case other than potentially
supporting the family to allow the
patient to die at home. This would have been difficult to safely achieve and
does not seem to
be a wish of the family. Dr Chapman does not think the lack of
documentation of this was outside the norm even if it was considered
475. Dr Chapman, however, disagrees with Clinical Professor Bell that
“terminal sedation” was the only option for care,
or even that this
was what was actually provided to this patient. Her only sedating medications
were provided as required, even
acknowledging the comments above about the
choice of agents. He also disagrees with Clinical Professor Bell there would
no benefit in attempting to engage the patient in conversation about
her experience or her preferences. A “rational”
decision may not
have been required or resulted, however, best care of a person suggests
attempting to engage the patient is always
good practice. This may have been
done but not documented.
476. With this patient Clinical Professor Bell suggests that
atrial flutter was an unrecognised contributor to this patient’s
decline. Dr Chapman acknowledges it was an additional potential contributor but
he says it is unlikely this was the sole issue.
Initial assessment and
management assuming the possibility of dehydration and occult sepsis was
reasonable in the circumstances.
Hyponatraemia can be supportive of a potential
diagnosis of volume depletion, depending on the mechanisms of loss. Dehydration
is also suggested by the elevated urea. Dr Chapman says it would have been
reasonable to consider that the atrial flutter may have
been triggered by the
patient’s volume status and potential sepsis. He says Clinical Professor
Bell’s suggestion that
atrial flutter may have had a significant impact on
this patient’s presentation is plausible but difficult to be certain of.
Given this diagnosis was not identified or acted upon (other than to treat the
potential underlying causes or to discuss) the ramifications
of a different
approach are unclear and Clinical Professor Bell notes later in his report it
seems to have resolved by 13 March 2012.
477. Dr Chapman agrees with Clinical
Professor Bell’s view that a “comprehensive assessment” was
not necessarily
required for this patient over the long weekend. However, Dr
Tolman’s documentation this patient did not have “capacity
decisions about complex matters such as accommodation, finances and Med
Rx” on 11 March 2012 implied an assessment
had been performed, and
documentation of a justification for these perspectives is routine practice. He
says a similar concern regarding
adequate documentation of potentially
appropriate clinical decisions was the decision to change MET status to
“no met calls”
by Dr Tolman on 11 March 2012. Both of these
examples were outlined in Dr Chapman’s original report at page 34. While
patient’s condition was seen by the team as stable from 12 March to 16
March 2012 his variable and uncertain bowel output with
periods of nausea and
vomiting was notable, particularly given his decline after 17 March 2012. Dr
Chapman notes Clinical Professor
Bell references the “Chapman report
indicates” and “records” within his report while quoting from
8.137 and 8.138 of the Panel’s decision which are summaries of
the clinical perspectives of Dr Tolman.
478. Dr Chapman notes Clinical
Professor Bell concludes the allegation “that the medical
practitioner’s record keeping
and documentation were unsatisfactory”
and she “failed to properly make a diagnosis or was inflexible in her
are unsubstantiated during this patient’s admission. Dr
Chapman says in response that while it is the Panel’s role to
whether the evidence warrants a response he suggests the clinical documentation
around the assessments to determine, and
the conversations to inform family
to whether or not Dr Tolman viewed or interpreted the x-ray taken in this case,
Dr Chapman refers to his earlier report at
page 35 where he says there is no
clear clinical evidence of Dr Tolman’s awareness of the x-ray report and
no-one was registered
as checking the result until 20 March 2012.
Chapman says constipation was certainly a differential diagnosis in this case,
although the
haematemesis and x-ray findings suggests against this being the sole diagnosis.
He says in the circumstances of this case a paralytic
ileus, upper
gastrointestinal bleed or small bowel obstruction as part of the initial
differential diagnosis would all have a poor
prognosis and they all suggest a
high likelihood of ongoing decline. However they would not “almost
certainly”, as opined
by Clinical Professor Bell, be fatal in the short
term and meaningful improvements in duration or quality of life may have been
Dr Chapman refers to his earlier report at pages 35 and 36 that
additional comfort focused management options were appropriate regardless
whether this was thought to be a potentially fatal event. He says multiple
options were available. He says as he earlier discussed
in his previous report
at pages 35 and 36 there was no clear documentation the haematemesis, a broader
differential than constipation,
or additional interventions available for the
patient were discussed with the family.
481. Dr Chapman notes Clinical
Professor Bell says the upper gastrointestinal bleed was minor given the
clinical signs and death due
to bowel obstruction followed. Dr Chapman agrees
with Clinical Professor Bell’s opinion of the clinical issues at play. Dr
Chapman says there is additional evidence an aspiration event for the patient
and a more significant upper gastrointestinal bleeding
however these were
pre-terminal events. He says while palliation was appropriate for this patient
as discussed in his earlier report
at page 35 it remains unclear whether
additional options to prevent additional discomfort (such as use of a proton
pump inhibitor
antiemetics or ranitidine therapy) were considered or even
discussed. He says given the acuteness of the patient’s late changes
is unclear whether he would have definitely benefited from such interventions
even if they had been instituted.
482. Dr Chapman agrees with Clinical
Professor Bell’s opinion in this case that the clinical documentation was
inadequate but
he goes on to say that he cannot comment whether or not, as
Clinical Professor Bell opines, this was common at the Royal Hobart Hospital.
Dr Tolman’s evidence to the Panel at paragraph 8.145 suggests she was
aware the situation was serious and that reversible
elements might be limited
but it is not clear whether this included a full description of the potential
causes for decline, or the
palliative interventions that were
483. Dr Chapman says Clinical Professor Bell’s perspective
of the issues in this case represent a failure of record keeping
may be correct.
Dr Tolman’s evidence that other differentials, and palliation
interventions (such as a nasogastric tube) were
considered but not documented
supports this. Further palliative interventions were appropriate to consider
and discuss but there
is no evidence within the record to say that they were.
Given the patient’s acute decline it is uncertain whether further
palliation interventions would have meaningfully affected his comfort even if
they were appropriate.
484. Dr Chapman notes Clinical Professor Bell’s opinion
is Dr Tolman’s involvement in this case was beyond criticism.
previously raised a number of concerns within his earlier report at pages 43 to
46 regarding this patient’s care.
This included uncertainties about what
was discussed within meetings between Dr Tolman and the family, why particular
clinical choices
were made including moving to “comfort care” and
choices around pharmacotherapy and a lack of detail within the clinical
on these issues.
485. In this case Clinical Professor Bell has reviewed the
clinical events and he makes note of inaccuracies he has detected in the
clinical approach of clinicians prior to the involvement of the OPU and Dr
Tolman. He quotes paragraphs 16.1 to 16.3 of the Panel’s
decision and
adds the ward round on 21 September 2012 suggested this patient was in worsening
respiratory failure and this was discussed
with the family. He then quotes
paragraph 16.4 of the Panel’s decision and says the case was discussed
with the family. Dr
Chapman says Clinical Professor Bell assumes the
daughter’s discussion with the family included this patient. He quotes
paragraph 16.8 of the Panel’s decision and suggests the
family’s distress at deterioration does not mean they have not
adequately informed. Clinical Professor Bell then notes that a syringe driver
chart was able to be found for the patient and
agrees with Dr Tolman’s
suggestion the main concern in this case was the care provided by Dr
McCallum’s general medical
team. Clinical Professor Bell believes at the
point of transfer to Dr Tolman no rehabilitative efforts could be successful
no additional clarification is provided with respect to the matters set
out in paragraphs 16.1 to 16.7 of the Panel’s decision.
486. Dr Chapman
refers to his views at pages 46 to 49 of his earlier report that he disagrees
with some aspects of Clinical Professor
Bell’s view of this case. Dr
Chapman says this patient was at high risk of clinical decline and it is likely
to have been
slowly occurring but he is less convinced that was clearly in
evidence on 23 September 2012. He repeats his earlier observations
report that he remains unclear about important aspects relating to the decision
to change the patient to receiving “comfort
measures”. In addition
to the lack of clarity around the patient’s prognostic change he is also
unsure about the approach
to ceasing “life-prolonging” medications
including oxygen, about the patient’s involvement in decisions about his
changing health or the approach to using palliative medications including
morphine, midazolam and glycopyrrolate.
487. Dr Chapman agrees with Clinical
Professor Bell’s views with respect to the distress of this
patient’s family members.
Dr Chapman says grieving people who are
watching their friends or family decline often need to discuss issues to do with
their loved
one’s decline many times. He agrees this does not necessarily
denote a failure of communication and often simply reflects
the distress of the
488. Clinical Professor Bell and Dr Tolman’s suggestion this
patient’s treatment by the general medical team was concerning
appropriate. Despite this Dr Chapman says there are concerns about this
patient’s care in the OPU.
489. Dr Chapman repeats his comment which is
comprehensively dealt with in his earlier report that there are concerns about
how decisions
were made and documented by Dr Tolman in this case. He notes
Clinical Professor Bell says on multiple occasions that palliative
(“terminal”) sedation was appropriate. Dr Chapman disagrees because
it is unclear what comfort was being provided through
sedation, it is unclear
that this was the clear goal that was discussed with the family and it was very
unclear this was what the
patient himself wished. If Dr Tolman believed the
patient lacked the capacity to be able to be involved in his own decision making
syringe driver some documentation of the capacity assessment
would have been
appropriate.
490. As he has previously commented in other cases, Dr Chapman
says ongoing clinical assessment, particularly of physical discomfort,
critical element of the provision of palliative care. He says care cannot be
directed towards comfort without ongoing, systematic,
documented assessment of
whether comfort is being achieved.
491. Dr Chapman says Clinical Professor Bell’s
description of the confusing discrepancy between the progress notes and the
chart is accurate however he disagrees with Clinical Professor
Bell’s interpretation of what occurred. Dr Chapman says medication
10.8 demonstrates a ceftriaxone azithromycin being given as a “stat”
order on 7 March 2012. Medication chart 10.6
demonstrates ceftriaxone
azithromycin prescribed by a clinician on 8 March 2012 and ceased the same day.
Presumably by Dr Tolman.
These antibiotics were recommenced on 9 March 2012 by
Dr MacIntyre who appears to be a member of Dr Lees’ team. This order
corresponds with Dr Lees review on 9 March 2012 when it is commented that the
family “does” want antibiotics. It seems
Clinical Professor Bell is
suggesting because doses of the (at that stage) antibiotics were not missed then
they were not “ceased”.
However, the continuity of antibiotic
provision was due to the input of Dr Lees’ team and not the intent
documented by Dr
Tolman on 8 March 2012. Dr Chapman notes he discusses this
event in his earlier report at pages 54 and 55 and other concerns relating
this decision by Dr Tolman including the extent of input of the family and the
uncertain reason for ceasing the antibiotics.
492. Dr Chapman repeats his
earlier comments, as discussed in other cases, the use of benzodiazepines and
opioids can be useful in
treating agitation in a variety of contexts for persons
with cognitive impairment. Likewise the use of opioids in particular can
useful to treat pain and dyspnoea; the latter of which this patient could have
conceivably been suffering from given the assumed
diagnosis of community
acquired pneumonia. Dr Chapman says it is uncertain from the notes from Dr
Tolman what was being treated
with these agents. As has been discussed above,
morphine is not a recommended opioid to use in patients with significant renal
impairment.
Clinical Professor Bell’s comments about the other
environmental aspects of comfort being provided for this patient are valid
Dr Chapman has assumed this would have been standard for all patients being
admitted to the OPU. He disagrees with Clinical
Professor Bell’s
assertion the antibiotics were not ceased, and, as discussed in his earlier
report at pages 54 and 55, there
is reason to believe antibiotics were an
appropriate aspect of “comfort care”. Likewise “comfort
care” needs
to be defined in references to the goals of the
patient’s network and family and it seems from the review on 9 March 2012
wanted this treatment to continue.
493. While this patient’s
ongoing decline and limited recovery from his acute condition were a potential
outcome it was too
soon on 8 March 2012 to have any confidence whether his daily
quality of life could be improved.
494. Dr Chapman notes the Panel said Dr
Tolman did not document a differential for the patient’s delirium and that
relevant. For instance, Dr Tolman’s cessation of the
patient’s antibiotics could have plausibly arose from her believing
not have clear evidence of an infection, rather than antibiotics not fitting her
belief of the goals of care. However, no
documentation which details what was
considered likely is available. Despite his lack of clarity Dr Tolman’s
comments about
the multi-factorial nature of this patient’s delirium are
well made. Delirium is often multi-factorial and a clear reversible
often not able to be found particularly within the contexts of managing people
with advanced illness.
495. Dr Chapman indicates the issues of initial
management of delirium have previously been discussed by him and are dealt with
relation to this case in particular at pages 54 to 55 of his earlier report.
He says the use of opioids and benzodiazepines can
clearly be appropriate,
however, the documentation in this case makes it difficult to determine whether
it was appropriate in this
instance. Clinical Professor Bell suggests the
patient was settled overnight due to these PRN medications though the patient
received a dose of haloperidol (1.5mg IV) at 2220 on 8 March 2012 as
charted by the ED doctor. Dr Chapman says antipsychotics are
a more assumed
first line intervention for delirium in geriatric medicine however usually at a
lower dose than was provided by the
ED doctor. This suggests the
patient’s settled night may have been slow to arrive, and may not have
been due solely to Dr
Tolman’s clinical approach. Dr Chapman repeats the
best “treatment” of delirium is to reverse the cause and for
reason it is difficult to interpret Dr Tolman’s plan for this patient to
no longer receive antibiotics given the records
which are available.
Chapman says Clinical Professor Bell documents there is clear evidence to say Dr
Tolman met with the patient and his family
and spent some period of time with
them. However, what is unclear is what Dr Tolman’s rationale for ceasing
the antibiotics
and whether this was a plan the family were aware of and
consented to. Clinical Professor Bell’s suggestion that the
recommencement
of antibiotics the following day was a rational decision by Dr
Lees and the family due to the patient’s clinical improvement
confusing. Clinical Professor Bell suggested many times that antibiotics in
this case were not ceased by Dr Tolman as there is
no record of doses being
missed. Suggesting the decision to recommence them was a rational response to
clinical change implies there
was a clear plan for their cessation.
Chapman says cessation of invasive interventions if they do not fit the goals of
a patient or family is an important aspect
of good goal focussed palliative
care. While it is plausible IV therapy could have been considered inappropriate
by the patient
and his family there is no evidence within the medical records to
suggest this is the case. As Dr Chapman discussed at page 54 of
his earlier
report Dr Lees’ response clearly implies the family did want antibiotics
to achieve their goals of care. While
the patient seemed less agitated based on
clinical descriptions the following day there is little to suggest his clinical
was otherwise remarkably different. As Dr Chapman has said previously
antibiotics were also a reasonable palliative measure for
the patient as an
infection was the most likely, easily reversible cause of his delirium.
498. With respect to this patient Clinical Professor Bell says
Dr Tolman could not have been informed about the fracture and accordingly
has been harshly judged as her clinical decisions were not “hasty”
but the result of too much trust in her junior
miscommunication.
499. In response Dr Chapman notes from the Panel’s
decision at paragraphs 18.3 to 18.7 Dr Tolman says she did not examine this
patient, assess her clinical status or comfort or read the case file prior to
discussing the course of management with her son.
Clinical Professor Bell lauds
Dr Tolman’s habit of early morning ward rounds in response to her seeing
this patient at 7:30am.
Dr Tolman’s notes suggest she was by herself when
discussing options with the patient’s son, and it may be this assessment
was done prior to her junior staff arriving. If these assumptions are correct
suggesting the issues with the patient’s care
resulted from the behaviour
of Dr Tolman’s staff, her trust in them, or their failure to inform her of
critical information
is inappropriate.
500. Dr Chapman says at page 56 of his
earlier report there are other aspects of Dr Tolman’s approach in this
case that deserve
comment. Dr Chapman challenges her assertion it was other
clinicians’ responsibility to have informed the patient’s
fracture diagnosis. His earlier report also comments on the evidence for
medical management of neck of femur fractures,
suggesting there is no clear
evidence that non-surgical management leads to better outcomes unless surgery is
clinically inappropriate.
501. Dr Chapman notes Clinical Professor Bell
concludes by making several key points in his assessment of these cases and
their review
within the Panel’s decision. Clinical Professor Bell
believes the Panel displays its ignorance of the hospital system and
nuances which arose in particular cases. He suggests Dr Tolman has been
attacked for incomplete assessments when such assessments
have been already done
by others. Clinical Professor Bell also suggest criticisms of Dr Tolman’s
communication are inappropriate
and not founded within the evidence.
Chapman in reply says he has attempted to make it clear that Clinical Professor
Bell’s perspective has provided important
insights into a number of issues
within the 12 cases dealt with in the Panel’s decision and Dr Chapman says
Clinical Professor
Bell has included valid critique of some elements of the
Panel’s decision itself. However, he says any misperception of the
in its decision does not alter the fact there are areas that are a focus for
concern. Dr Chapman also says that a part contributor
to Clinical Professor
Bell’s critique of the decision might be due to the Panel’s
necessary use of predetermined language
within the policies that define
specialist practice.
503. Dr Chapman confirms the views set out in his
earlier report that Dr Tolman’s commitment to patient care and her wish to
maintain the comfort of those with advanced illness is clearly evident. He also
says the observations within his second report relate
only to the evidence which
he has had access to however his conclusion, set out in his earlier report, is
there are multiple concerns
regarding Dr Tolman’s clinical practice as
demonstrated by the twelve cases. These concerns correspond with the
allegations
made against Dr Tolman in respect of her clinical practice which are
set out in the Panel’s decision. He goes on to say that
in his view the
Panel’s decision accurately describes those concerns and makes proper
findings with respect to them. At the
same time Dr Chapman acknowledges
Clinical Professor Bell’s valuable contribution in highlighting some of
the weaker or less
persuasive components of the Panel’s decision.
The Panel’s factual findings with respect to the
individual patients
504. The Panel found there was no written indication of the
daily multi-disciplinary team meeting review in the medical record. The
were scant on detail, particularly patient assessment and diagnoses. In this
case Dr Tolman noted a diagnosis of a likely
gastrointestinal bleed. No other
medical conditions were noted. Her verbal testimony included chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), cataracts and hemiplegia but she could not
recall any other diagnoses. COPD, bullous pemphigoid, left middle cerebral
stroke, hypertension, ischaemic heart disease and osteoarthritis were not
part of the diagnostic consideration but ought to have
been from a review of the
medical record.
505. Dr Tolman did not record a physical examination of this
patient. Prior and current treatments of medical conditions were not
Dr Tolman’s assessment. Other social determinants of health were not
506. Diagnoses and prognoses were not recorded. During the hearing
the Panel recorded Dr Tolman said the patient had a malignancy
that required no
treatment. The nature and type of malignancy was not further
507. Screening for geriatric syndromes such as falls, polypharmacy,
malnutrition and vitamin deficiencies and delirium were not
508. The Panel discussed with Dr Tolman the bullous pemphigoid and
its impact on the patient and her treatments. Dr Tolman explained
patient’s other conditions created such a poor quality of life that
comfort care was deemed necessary.
509. In the medical records clarity about
the use of azathioprine for bullous pemphigoid was lacking as the discharge
summary excluded
this medication but the discharge interim medication orders for
aged care facilities included it. Dr Tolman did not adequately explain
inconsistency to the Panel.
510. Discussion of evaluating anaemia was
dismissed by Dr Tolman when this was raised with her by the Panel.
urea and haemoglobin investigation were documented by Dr Tolman, she directed
that “no further blood tests”
were required. During the hearing she
commented that further testing would, in her view, have made no difference to
clinical care.
She said in respect of this patient nobody knew what the problem
512. When asked about the goals of care plan, Dr Tolman said it was
developed by Dr McCallum and Dr Skelton in conjunction with the
daughter. Dr Tolman indicated she had spoken to the daughter and discovered the
patient had a terrible life. She
said the daughter asked her to keep her mother
comfortable and the daughter’s impression was she was doing the right
513. Dr Tolman agreed she had prescribed this patient steroids. When
asked whether they were prescribed to control the bullous pemphigoid
records Dr Tolman did not answer that question directly. When asked whether the
high dose of steroids was to get rid of
the pain and discomfort experienced by
the patient she agreed and justified her decision by saying her orders were not
other doctors. The implication was steroids were used to palliate.
She felt her opinion was confirmed by Dr Chamberlen who saw
this patient in the
nursing home at a later date and said it was reasonable to palliate, to get her
better but did not change the
care plan Dr Tolman had
recommended.
514. During the Panel hearing Dr Tolman expressed disbelief it
was she who was before the Panel answering questions and not the other
involved in this patient’s care. She believed she was the only one
answering questions because she had written it down.
The Panel records she was
defensive in her responses.
515. When asked to reflect on whether the fact
she was being asked questions gave her cause for reflection she said she would
have done things differently.
516. Dr Tolman agreed it was a huge
responsibility being the director of the unit but she collaborated widely by
consulting the general
practitioner, the daughter and the care home. She noted
the story was common, that the patient’s quality of life was poor
she ought to have a dignified death.
517. The Panel, at paragraph 12.14 of
its decision, says complex geriatric patients such as those that inevitably make
their way to
an acute aged care ward are referred to a geriatrician for
comprehensive evaluation and treatment for their past, present and future
needs. The panel found Dr Tolman did not follow this approach adequately in
respect of this patient.
518. The Panel also found there was a lack of
documentation in the medical notes. Whilst the culture at the hospital,
according to
Dr Tolman, was one of poor note taking, in her case she appeared to
delegate the task to the least knowledgeable member of the team
and did not
ensure the notes were checked for completeness or accuracy.
519. The Panel
also found there as a lack of diagnosis prior to treatment. It found a
diagnostic decision-making process is necessary,
whether or not interventions
are appropriate, and needs to be recorded. The Panel suggests Dr Tolman
appeared to be making social
decisions in respect of care and not as a
diagnostician.
520. The Panel goes on to say that whilst abnormalities in the
patient’s condition were noted in the records and in the investigations
action was taken by Dr Tolman to facilitate a diagnosis, a prognosis or a
treatment plan. The Panel found Dr Tolman failed to
properly make a
521. As the notes were incomplete the Panel indicated it was
difficult to know how the family were guided and informed to come to
the Panel noted Dr Tolman said she did
discuss, communicate and consult with
others in contrast to the medical record which was silent on these matters.
However she said
during the hearing in respect to this patient, nobody knew the
problem, there was no diagnosis. Accordingly the Panel found the
discussions
and consultation with the family and patient were unsatisfactory in that
inadequate information would have been placed
before them prior to making
decisions about care and treatment.
522. In this case there was no evidence of a thorough geriatric
clinical examination including neurological evaluation undertaken
by Dr Tolman.
Nor was there an analysis of investigations as they related to the
patient’s condition and prognosis evident
in the medical
523. In addition the Panel says there was insufficient detail in the
medical records. Those records were either unsatisfactory in
documenting what
had taken place or were indicative of no thorough examination having taken place
in respect of this patient.
524. The Panel says there was no complete review
of this patient’s prolonged and complicated hospital admission with
to interventions and prognosis. Some social determinants of health from
cigarettes, drinking with lots of abuse and violence were
documented but other
social issues were not documented.
525. Discussion with Dr Tolman during the
hearing regarding the patient’s hypercalcaemia revealed no additional
information
towards the evaluation and treatment of the patient. The high
output ileostomy condition was not further evaluated by Dr Tolman
and nor were
lucencies in the shafts of both humeri and femora investigated or
526. The Panel records that during the hearing Dr Tolman detailed
support personnel to whom families were referred such as the hospital
grief counsellors, Alzheimer’s Australia website, carers groups and
telephone helplines. There is no evidence of
these referrals in the medical
527. The Panel also records that during the hearing reference was
made to Dr Tolman’s notes in relation to this patient. A
particular note
said “little prospects for recovery relate to time rather than to active
process”. Dr Tolman was provided
an opportunity to review the notes and
commented her observation was that this patient’s deterioration was not
going to happen
acutely but over time. In terms of how that related to the
patient’s care Dr Tolman thought the prospects for recovery were
likely if allowed time rather than performing a battery of tests. The Panel
noted this patient was suffering from a potentially
reversible medical condition
(low sodium) for which no diagnosis was made, nor treatment considered, and
which potentially may have
improved his prospects without major
intervention.
528. In relation to the patient suffering from delirium the
Panel says there was no evidence from the medical records or discussion
the hearing of an evaluation of its cause nor a team approach to interventions.
When asked during the hearing about delirium
pathway documentation Dr Tolman did
not provide a satisfactory explanation about its use, the location of the
documentation within
the medical record nor the circumstances surrounding
appropriate interventions.
529. When Dr Tolman was asked about the
patient’s high calcium levels and what was being done to address that
during the 11
or so days of care by her, she deferred to the treating team and
said “you’d have to ask the team looking after
530. The Panel noted Dr Tolman was evasive in her responses when
questioned about the commencement of benzodiazepines/opioid medications
patient and sought to defer such decision to the team or others.
531. When Dr
Tolman was asked about the syringe driver which was begun after 2 days of
subcutaneous fluids with no pain noted, Dr
Tolman replied that all of the team
had reviewed this patient and that included, in particular, Drs Skelton and
Hovinga. The patient
was deemed palliative, he was more unwell and his wife was
in some distress. The speech pathologist confirmed he still could not
532. Clinical assessment of pain to demonstrate the need for
increasing doses of medication in the syringe driver (as documented in
notes) was, according to the Panel, lacking. The need for this was dismissed by
Dr Tolman during the hearing. She told the
Panel the staff were very well
trained and this was not a requirement of their skill set.
533. During the
hearing Dr Tolman explained she had collaborated with the patient and family
concerning decisions about his treatment
however it was difficult to discern
this from the medical records. No evidence was found with regard to a full
disclosure of all
relevant diagnoses, prognoses, treatment options, support to
process the information or time to assimilate the details and accept
upon care pathway.
534. The Panel records Dr Tolman indicated the
patient’s daughters knew he was suffering but the patient’s wife did
quite understand the extent to which he was unwell. In deference to the
patient’s wife the subcutaneous fluids were given
to the patient. Dr
Tolman believed the doses of medications given were in accordance with his
symptoms. He could not swallow, was
suffering from liver failure and had
difficulty metabolising the medications.
535. While Dr Tolman had a
conversation with the patient during moments of lucidity there is no documented
record at all of what was
536. Dr Tolman signed the patient’s
death certificate and stated the cause of death was renal failure of 3 weeks.
found a review of the medical notes revealed the renal failure was
present for at least 5 years. In addition, shortly before the
death, an advanced trainee had postulated a number of medical diagnoses for this
patient which were not mentioned
on the death certificate.
537. The Panel
found the medical notes completed by Dr Tolman were unsatisfactory in detail and
there was a lack of diagnosis prior
to the decision to treat or not to treat.
The Panel noted it recognised intervention and investigations are sometimes not
at a particular point in palliation but it never the less was
concerned about the lack of evidence, either in the medical notes or
hearing which was indicative of a thorough clinical geriatric evaluation which
included examination, assessment, possible
investigation, diagnoses, treatment
and prognoses. The Panel says a specialist geriatric physician and director of
aged care would
be expected to accept and appropriately manage complex patients
with attention to the intersection of diagnoses, their management
and quality of
life, including but not exclusively comfort, pain and dignity. A ranking of the
priorities of treatment would ensure
all possible options have been explored and
given adequate time for treatment response. It would have also ensured the
family were
making an informed decision on behalf of the patient.
538. The Panel says specialist geriatric physician skills
expected of Dr Tolman were lacking in respect of this patient. In terms
patient’s assessment the history was recorded by several members of the
team with reference to the A&E notes as
being sufficient for a geriatric
assessment. Collateral history from the patient’s friend and general
practitioner, whilst
spoken about by Dr Tolman during the hearing, was not
contained in the records. The Panel was concerned there was a lack of
discussion,
consultation and communication with the patient and his family. A
geriatric consultation one year prior was not referenced in the
evaluation of
this patient. The clinical examination undertaken lacked a detailed
neurological examination. An evaluation and treatment
of an ataxic gait with
falls was not addressed. Nor was there an assessment for geriatric syndromes
such as falls, malnutrition,
benzodiazepine use, social isolation and any
interventions in the patient’s care. The admission sheet states the
patient was
admitted for neurodegenerative disease but there is no evidence of
further investigations or proposed treatments.
539. Delirium and poor food
intake were documented as possible confounding issues but it appears from the
record they were not further
investigated or treated. The delirium pathway was
not further defined or explained during the hearing. Whilst Dr Tolman referred
to protocols which were in place they were not found in the patient’s
medical record.
540. During the hearing Dr Tolman indicated her view of
palliative care was that a patient had 6 months to live. The aim was to give
the patient the best life possible, consider getting them home and if not, into
a care facility.
541. When she was asked whether the patient might have
picked up if given some food and some care and attention, Dr Tolman was adamant
that “nothing we did precipitated his death”. She insisted all
things would have been done for him, that he would have
been washed, had his
feet cleaned and given new clothes.
542. When asked about the goals of care
plan Dr Tolman explained the designation “palliative” meant the care
was to relieve
symptoms and to ensure the patient did not suffer and maintained
dignity. During the hearing it was not clarified whether this was
definition of the palliative approach nor whether this view was communicated to
the treating team which included the nurses.
However the section indicating
active management of conditions, which were to be designated and outlined by the
treating team, was
empty. The Panel noted it was concerned Dr Tolman’s
decision making was excessively hasty and not fully considered.
goals of care document indicated the goal on admission was that if further
rectal bleeding occurred then the patient was
for comfort care only. When asked
Tolman deflected
any responsibility for the actions of others “I
can’t speak for what other people wrote”. This suggested to the
Panel a premature closure of diagnosis, prognosis and treatment. The Panel
noted its concern Dr Tolman’s decision not to investigate
further was
excessively hasty and not fully considered, and she failed to properly make a
diagnosis of the patient’s condition.
544. In terms of capacity it was
noted in the A&E the patient was likely suffering dementia and had no
capacity with a possible
superimposition of delirium. Dr Tolman said it was not
her practice to write such limited opinions saying she would qualify the
comment. In terms of a capacity assessment she indicated she would take a good
history from the patient and from any family or friends,
conduct a physical
examination and investigations and that a determination may take 3 hours or 3
545. The Panel noted the medical records completed by Dr Tolman did
not support this view.
546. The Panel noted the general approach to capacity
assessments includes a trigger, engagement of the patient, information gathering
from collateral sources, education to learn required or needed information, and
a structured interview. A record of interview should
be made and if the patient
lacks capacity, a valid surrogate decision maker ought to be
547. The Panel notes these steps were not followed in respect of
this patient and the only indication concerning capacity is a note
on admission
the patient was labelled as not having capacity. The Panel found there was a
rapid and incomplete assessment of this
patient’s decision making
548. When asked about the documentation of the dementia or delirium
pathways for this patient, Dr Tolman was not able to refer to
a piece of paper
on file which set out the management of delirium. She said there would have
been a cognitive sign above the patient’s
bed to specify that any
treatment ought to be tailored to someone with fluctuating cognition, prompt him
to eat, ensure he was hydrated,
and that falls risks were attended.
Panel asked whether the OPU had a falls risk chart on the medical notes for each
patient but Dr Tolman was not able to answer
that question other than to say she
and her staff had attended talks on falls and were aware of hip protectors and
frequent checks
to prevent harm. She said the ward had a good score in terms of
falls. The actual approach to falls on the OPU was unclear during
the hearing
and the Panel found it difficult to ascertain whether the application of
principles surrounding falls had been followed.
550. The Panel found the
medical notes completed by Dr Tolman with respect to this patient were
unsatisfactory. The paucity of notes
brings into question her evidence that an
appropriate patient assessment had taken place.
551. In addition the death
certificate completed by Dr Tolman recorded the cause of death as myocardial
infarction when there was
no evidence of this condition in the medical
552. While the patient’s medical history indicated some flags
there was no assessment for geriatric syndromes that would be
expected of a
specialist. The basic examination, investigation and treatment protocol was not
evident either in the medical record
or during the hearing.
553. The Panel
found there was a rapid assessment by Dr Tolman that the patient lacked decision
making capacity which appears on review
the correct conclusion. However there
were no steps taken to discuss a valid surrogate decision maker.
554. This patient was 89 when taken by ambulance from Compton
Downs Nursing Home to the Royal Hobart Hospital on 24 March 2012 with
confusion, drowsiness and vomiting. She was known to have Parkinson’s
disease, insulin dependent diabetes and a
history of head injury and memory loss
consistent with dementia such that family members said she was often unable to
remember their
names. The nursing home transfer information stated she was
usually alert, walked independently in a walker and was independent with
She needed help with personal care.
555. The Panel notes at the Royal Hobart
Hospital treatment was commenced with antibiotics, intravenous fluids and
insulin for a presumptive
diagnosis of a urinary tract infection. A goals of
care plan completed on the day of admission described the agreed approach to
treatment as curative and restorative with limitations.
556. On 25 March 2012
a meeting between Dr Tolman and the family led to the decision to cease all
active treatment, including insulin,
antibiotics and fluids. A further meeting
the next day confirmed the family did not believe the patient would have wanted
to continue. A subcutaneous infusion of morphine and midazolam was
commenced and the next day the dose increased, although records
suggest pain and
agitation were not present.
557. The Panel found the decision by Dr Tolman to
cease all active treatment was a rapid decision made in the context of an acute
exacerbation of delirium that may have resolved with time. A urinary tract
infection was later established. There is no record
of a discussion of this
possibility with the family. Morphine was used without evidence of pain of such
severity to warrant it.
Morphine could have been expected to cause drowsiness
at the dose used, particularly as it was used with the sedative
558. While the medical record entry by Dr Tolman dated 25 March
2012 indicates an assessment identifying various medical issues was
there is no note or record to indicate any of those issues were addressed or
further evaluated for reversible interventions.
Notes of other team members
state the patient was requiring assistance with walking but was independent with
dressing and eating
which suggests a high level of functional performance in
residential care. Ceasing medications used to treat Parkinson’s disease
may have made eating and drinking difficult which may have led to her decline.
The patient was eating small quantities on 26 March
2012. There is a note by Dr
Tolman “please give plenty of break through” but it does not clarify
what symptoms were
being treated nor why “plenty” was
559. The goals of care were reported as being formulated by Dr
MacIntyre who would be reporting to Dr Tolman for oversight and confirmation.
Notes by Dr Tolman suggest full agreement in the care plan.
560. The Panel
found it difficult to determine whether a response by Dr Tolman during the
hearing that they had “suffered enough
regarding dementia, nursing home
and poor quality of life” applied to this patient or to all patients with
her health conditions.
Overall an individual approach to a patient and their
unique needs at the time of care provided by Dr Tolman was difficult to find
the medical notes, her written responses and the evidence she gave at the
hearing. It seems as though judgements about quality
of life were made
pre-emptively.
561. During the hearing Dr Tolman agreed there was some
conflict in respect of the patient’s wishes. The Advanced Care Directive
on file from 2010 from the nursing home indicates a request for active treatment
and the family’s wishes for palliative care.
It was inconsistent and
could not have been relied upon in decision making.
562. Dr Tolman indicated
the Goals of Care plan was completed by Dr MacIntyre and she did not have much
discussion with the family.
She said the family had told her there was not much
discussion with Dr MacIntyre other than if she is frail, she will have a poor
quality of life. Dr Tolman invited collaboration with the family and apparently
completed a new Advance Care Directive with the
aim of palliation although this
was not evident in the medical record for this patient.
563. When asked about
the syringe driver and medications directed via that method Dr Tolman said the
decision for constant infusion
was a consensus decision, not just her decision.
She readily agreed she took responsibility for that decision.
564. When asked
agreed it might have resolved. However
as the family indicated the patient had
done this a number of times, their view was that her quality of life did not
support the
treatment of the delirium.
565. Dr Tolman indicated when
considering comfort care over restorative care many patients did not die, but in
this particular case,
it was more likely she would. She said everybody wanted
comfort care for this patient. Dr Tolman said she would not unilaterally
life continuing treatment. She would only do that in conjunction with the
566. When asked about the starting dosages of 20mg morphine and 20mg
midazolam, Dr Tolman said the decision to begin those medications
was not made
by her. When she made such decisions she would always ask what the starting
doses were and make a decision with input
from the nursing staff.
Tolman did not believe these were high doses for subcutaneous injection. Nor
did she feel the patient was over sedated.
In her opinion the patient was
suffering due to a lack of insulin and her Parkinson’s medication. In
addition the patient
could not move. The morphine was an analgesic that helped
her feel comfortable.
568. Dr Tolman said there were many reasons to keep
this patient comfortable and there was nothing she knew now at the hearing which
would change that view.
569. When Dr Tolman was asked for her view on whether
it was okay for the family to decide whether to treat the delirium, continue
diabetes insulin and see if the patient got back to health, when there was a
significance chance of premorbid functioning, Dr
Tolman said the patient had a
poor quality of life, repeated episodes of hospital admissions concerning the
diabetes, that she had
dementia and had suffered enough. She thought it was
clear the family were overjoyed the patient’s suffering could be managed.
Dr Tolman was not convinced this patient might have returned to reasonable
functioning. She felt a more humanistic approach was
to treat her like a person
and not a patient.
570. The Panel found the medical notes in respect of this
patient were inadequate and unsatisfactory. They did not report relevant
details of clinical findings, information given to the patient and/or her family
and medication management.
571. Upon admission the patient was commenced on
antibiotics, with intravenous fluids and insulin for a presumptive diagnosis of
tract infection. The Goals of Care plan described the approach to her
treatment as curative and restorative with limitations. The
next day, a meeting
between Dr Tolman and the family led to a decision to cease all active
treatment, including antibiotics and fluids.
After a family meeting on the day
after that, a subcutaneous infusion of morphine and midazolam was commenced,
presumably on the
basis the family did not believe the patient would have wanted
her life to continue.
572. The Panel notes there is no record of a discussion
with the family of the test results that indicated the presence of a urinary
tract infection. There is no record suggestive of the presence of pain or
agitation warranting the use of morphine.
573. This patient presented to the Emergency Department at 0446
hours and was assessed by the emergency room doctor as having declining
mobility, falls and dementia requiring allied health input and consideration of
medication adjustment. At 1300 hours that day he
was assessed by Dr Tolman as
lacking capacity to make decisions. However exploration of reversible causes of
his decline as well
as a consideration of medication side effects or
interactions is not evident in the medical record. During the hearing Dr Tolman
discussed the anticholinergic burden of medications as being an important
consideration. However the Panel notes the medical records
do not reflect any
acknowledgement of the contribution by medications to the decline in the
patient’s condition. Cessation
of medications may have taken longer to
see the effect of any outcome.
574. Urinary retention and falls as two common
geriatric syndromes with many potential explanations and interventions were only
superficially by Dr Tolman. This was in spite of the OPU being
described by her as a comprehensive geriatric assessment ward where
multidisciplinary team members were required to perform a thorough assessment
and intervention. Troublesome delusions reported
by Dr Tolman during the
hearing of the patient being buried alive and in front of a firing squad were
not found in the medical record.
Treatment of those delusions was not clear but
the side effects of antipsychotic medications of shortening life and causing
was highlighted by Dr Tolman.
575. The daily review of every case and
review of all diagnostic tests is not evident in this patient as vitamin D
deficiency and
vitamin B12 insufficiency were not addressed, nor were the
abnormalities found on a CT brain scan. Exploration of back pain, empiric
treatment by the general practitioner with prednisolone and urinary retention
was superficial. If goals of the OPU, as described
above were for comprehensive
medical assessment with frequent reassessments for change by a senior geriatric
specialist keen to demonstrate
a high degree of intellectual rigor then these
goals were not met.
576. The death certificate indicated a lack of injury
despite the patient being found on the floor face down 6 days before death.
Guidance for junior doctors was not apparent. Geriatric pain scales, screening
for urinary retention and attention to bowel regimen
as part of a comprehensive
geriatric assessment on the OPU was neither evident in the medical records nor
did Dr Tolman confirm these
events occurred.
577. Opioid dosing commenced by
Dr Tolman on the sixth hospital day at a total of 5mg morphine which was quickly
accelerated to 25mg
in the syringe driver by the fourteenth day of the hospital
admission with 5mg as break through. The Panel found these dosages in
naïve patient were inappropriate especially given there was no assessment
of his pain nor a reference to the geriatric
pain scale which would facilitate
consistency in evaluating and treating pain. Renal function when assessed on
the third hospital
day was impaired (eGFR 32). A pharmacist’s input is
not evident.
578. The Panel also noted Dr Tolman was defensive in relation to
questions about this patient. The Panel was concerned about a lack
and reflection about these allegations on her conduct.
579. During the
hearing Dr Tolman said she could not recall the specifics of this patient but,
when given the opportunity, made no
reference either to her own notes or the
medical records which were made available to her. She mentioned the
patient’s dementia
but could not recall the other medical reasons for his
admission. She recalled the patient’s dementia was at the extreme end
the scale and his quality of life was very poor. He was experiencing delusional
pain, falling over, intermittently able to eat
and was experiencing delusions
and hallucinations. He had been an architect with a love of music and this man
had now gone.
580. When she was asked whether a delirium pathway was
undertaken, Dr Tolman said not for this patient. Generally she said old people
with dementia had a poor prognosis and their mortality was high and this was a
distressing time for the patient and their family.
Dr Tolman indicated her
approach was to determine whether it was delirium or dementia, look at the
precipitants (including the medications)
or reasons and reverse anything she
could, always in collaboration with the care team and the family. The aim was
to remove people
from their medication to try and normalise their life as much
as possible.
581. Dr Tolman said it was also important to consider the safety
of the patient and staff members. In regard to long term care plans,
explained, if it is a new thing, do what you can to get rid of the delirium.
But if it is on the back of a nasty dementia then
it is important to talk to the
family about what you are trying to achieve. The important thing was to
normalise the patient as
much as possible and treat the medical
582. If the patient is experiencing low grade delirium, Dr Tolman
would consider whether the patient had been eating. If not, she
would consider
withdrawing artificial feedings to give the patient some hope to get better and
perhaps get them out into the sunlight.
When speaking to the patients she
stressed it was important to give them hope especially when as a doctor you do
not know where
they are at.
583. Dr Tolman indicated that insofar as this
patient was concerned he had an eating problem, his quality of life was poor and
job was to reverse things where possible. One of the immediate issues of
concern was the urine retention and she indicated this
could have been the cause
of the delirium. When asked whether a catheter might have dealt with the
problem she responded by saying
it was a combination of factors which caused his
poor quality of life and that had driven his delirium and they did their best to
reverse them. She said it took time to work out what was really going
584. When asked why nothing was done to deal with this patient’s
urinary retention, Dr Tolman said the patient was taking bladder
tablets that
were anticholinergic on the advice of the pharmacist who attended the daily
multidisciplinary team meetings. She confirmed
the team was not really sure
what they were treating.
585. When she was asked about the use of steroids
and whether adrenal insufficiency was a part of his decline she responded she
not know. The patient simply was not eating and was experiencing urinary
586. When asked by the Panel why she thought the patient was at
end stage of dementia, usually indicated by hallucinations, Dr Tolman
she had formed that conclusion after talking with the family. They explained
the patient had experienced a rapid decline
in the 2 weeks prior to his
587. When asked by the Panel about the lack of a comprehensive
medical assessment for this patient, Dr Tolman responded by saying
that the MDT
(multi-disciplinary team) did all of those things, that in the end they simply
treated the symptoms. She indicated
the patient was very agitated and he was
suffering from delusions which were war related. It was a concern and
distressing for those
on the ward.
588. When she was asked about the approach
for this patient to reduce the risk of falls, she indicated she would assess the
physical and mental condition, the medications, consider a bed
alarm and more frequent nursing checks. In this case she said all
things would have been done although she agreed there was nothing in the medical
notes to corroborate this.
589. When questioned about the use of sedation Dr
Tolman said for this particular patient’s symptoms the fact that he was
by false beliefs and that others found his behaviour troubling,
sedation was warranted. She said “We gave him what he needed
comfortable”.
590. Dr Tolman pointed out her instructions “keep
him sedated” were different from terminal sedation and the withholding
591. When asked about other medications, Dr Tolman indicated the
patient was taking quetiapine as an antipsychotic and haloperidol
in the syringe
driver to deal with the psychosis. She was asked why there were no pharmacy
notes on the file and her response was
the pharmacist would have been at the MDT
meetings and would have been keeping an eye on the medications.
Tolman was asked whether or not the patient had undergone a neurological
examination and she said that was her responsibility
on admission. When asked
why there was nothing in the notes to reflect the fact that that examination had
been conducted she said
it should have been documented by the registrar or
intern. She said it was her job to do the higher order thinking and she enjoyed
teaching and showing young doctors the importance of a physical
examination.
593. The Panel found the medical notes for this patient were
“poorly lacking and unsatisfactory”. Many matters referred
were simply not recorded in the notes when they should have been.
Panel also found there was a precipitous acceleration of treatment and the
aggressive use of medications to sedate were inappropriate.
There was no
evidence in the medical records to suggest the presence of pain or to suggest
other reasons for the high dosages.
595. This patient was 82 years of age and had dementia, brain
stem ischaemia, hypertension, Type 2 diabetes and she was deaf. She
transferred from a nursing home to the Royal Hobart Hospital on 29 July 2012
unwell with a one week history of an agitated and
paranoid delirium. There was
evidence of infection on initial assessment, and antibiotics were commenced on
the likelihood that
this was respiratory. On the next day blood cultures were
strongly suggestive of an intra-abdominal infection and Dr Butcherine
antibiotic therapy accordingly, noting the cause of the sepsis was likely to be
in the abdomen, as it was tender. Notes
record the family’s concern about
596. Dr Tolman recorded a discussion with the family on 31 July
2012 in which she stated the problem as “probably adhesions”
records a plan to cease antibiotics and return to the nursing home when the
patient was stable.
597. Despite this family discussion there is no record of
a physical examination by Dr Tolman, nor any reflection of the diagnostic
possibilities, or acknowledgement of the implications of the
598. During the hearing Dr Tolman stated she had been aware of the
infection and had examined the patient and these issues had been
canvassed with
the family at the meeting referred to.
599. The Panel says the records are
substantially incomplete and this prevents any consideration of whether Dr
Tolman or the family
were aware of the kind or severity of the patient’s
illness. The possibility of other causes for the patient’s symptoms
not considered nor were the positive blood cultures for e coli and enterococci
or the high lactate level addressed.
600. The nurse’s notes from 30
July 2012 suggest the family’s desire for investigations but these were
not performed.
Antibiotics were ceased by Dr Tolman on 31 July 2012 because of
the assumption of adhesions and the patient was allowed to eat.
content of the family meeting, attendees and documentation of discussion points
were not evident in the medical records.
During the hearing Dr Tolman reported
she could not remember whether she discussed this with the family. She knew the
patient was
dying but how this was determined is not clear from the medical
records. Dr Tolman said she could die now or get better to do it
suggesting a premature closure on the interventions of a geriatrician that could
support a frail patient in whatever life circumstances
themselves.
602. The pathway to death by older patients is not always clear
nor progressively downward. When asked during the hearing Dr Tolman
explain the procedure for the Terminal Care Pathway other than to say that as
someone is dying you provide comfort for
the patient and family.
Tolman dismissed the use of the MET call as a second pair of eyes on the
patient’s care. Her view was it was better
to manage the patient’s
care so there were no emergencies or necessity for MET calls.
604. Dr Tolman
was asked why there was a discussion of transferring this patient to a nursing
sepsis and a recurrent bowel
obstruction this was end of life care. She responded by saying the patient
might have gotten better
unexpectedly. The Panel says this was not a realistic
response given Dr Tolman’s decision to stop the antibiotics.
questioned by the Panel Dr Tolman said in respect of this patient she did not
make decisions individually but that decisions
were made by the treating team.
She said Dr Butcherine had looked at the microbiology and thought the patient
was probably suffering
from sepsis. This had not been diagnosed or treated
prior to transfer to the OPU.
606. Dr Tolman met the family on the Monday
following the Saturday admission to the OPU. She told the Panel during that
meeting with
the family she recalled talking about delirium, what it meant,
taking a background history (which indicated the patient’s symptoms
back 40 odd years) and she noted the patient had many post-operative
complications and had been suffering confusion and delirium
for a very long
time. Dr Tolman advised the family that some of those conditions were
potentially reversible. The patient was morbidly
obese. She met with the
family to provide them with the options. In response the family said it was a
long term problem and the
prospects for curing her after 40 years were slim and
so they opted for comfort care.
607. The Panel asked whether Dr Tolman was
aware of the sepsis at the time of the family discussion and whether this was
with them but she could not recall. The Panel found there is no
evidence of the sepsis being discussed in the medical records.
antibiotics were commenced by Dr Butcherine on the Saturday. They were ceased
by Dr Tolman on the Monday. She was asked
for the clinical reason for her
decision which she did not directly answer. She told the Panel she discussed
with the family the
possibility of surgery to deal with the possible abdominal
adhesions or to treat the infection or sepsis.
609. When asked whether she
felt the patient’s end of life was imminent Dr Tolman responded by saying
she could continue the
antibiotics now and she might get better but she
questioned whether it was worth a potential of getting better over a decision to
keep her comfortable.
610. Dr Tolman made no attempt to diagnose the sepsis.
When she was asked whether it was essential to know what was going on in order
to make an informed decision whether to treat or not to treat she responded that
she looked to the family. She could have sent the
patient off to surgery, she
could have done more investigations but she felt it was more appropriate to
support the family. On that
basis she opted for a non-invasive approach to
care. She was asked why this determination and reasoning was not contained
the medical notes and her response was it was taken for granted.
611. When asked about the notes which indicated the patient was to be
discharged to a nursing home if stable when, at the very least,
there was some
knowledge of an abdominal catastrophe and that end of life care had been
initiated, Dr Tolman replied “she might
have gotten better,
unexpectedly”. The Panel commented this response seemed in direct
conflict with the decision to cease
the antibiotics.
612. The Panel asked Dr
Tolman about the Terminal Care Pathway which consisted of ten pages. She said
she did not have a full understanding
of the process. She was asked whether it
was used on all patients in the OPU and she said she did not know. She replied
her practice
was to institute it within a few days of a patient dying, that it
was to provide comfort for the patient and the family. She believed
doctor initiated process and completed by either the intern or registrar. She
could not answer whether it was a helpful
process to follow the patient
613. When asked who completed the doctor’s section of the
document, Dr Tolman responded that her job was to make decisions in
conjunction
with other team members.
614. The Panel asked Dr Tolman whether it was a role
of the OPU not to have any medical callouts. Her response was that was not the
case. Their strategy was to manage the patient care so that there were not
emergency callouts. She believed there was an overuse
of callouts within the
hospital that could be reduced by better management practices.
615. In her
written responses in respect of this patient Dr Tolman indicated that after she
had discussions with the family, the patient’s
general practitioner and
the residential aged care facility the decision was made that further
investigations would not be helpful
and would likely cause grief and suffering
to the patient. In addition the patient’s heart condition made the
prospect of
surgery unlikely. On that basis it was decided comfort care and
transfer back to the nursing home was appropriate. To that end
antibiotics were
ceased and comfort medications were commenced via the subcutaneous
616. Dr Tolman says the clinical decision to cease antibiotics and
commence comfort care was reached by the team in collaboration
with others and
was based on current best practice for an elderly demented woman in a
residential aged care facility with no quality
617. In respect to
the decision to cease antibiotics Dr Tolman says the administration of
antibiotics at the end of life for a person
with dementia is futile.
Panel found the medical records completed by Dr Tolman were substantially
incomplete and do not reflect the further information
provided by Dr Tolman in
response to the allegations. There is no record of examination by Dr Tolman, no
diagnosis, prognosis or
reasoning behind the treatment decisions
619. The Panel says it is difficult to assess whether the family
were making informed decisions about the treatment of the patient
particularly
in light of the cessation of antibiotics and whether the sepsis would have
resolved had they continued. The Panel notes
it was also difficult to know what
their wishes were given they were not recorded in the medical notes. The Panel
states good medical
practice involves taking steps to manage a patient’s
symptoms and concerns in a manner consistent with their values and wishes,
this case, those of the family as substitute decision makers.
620. The Panel
found the decision by Dr Tolman to cease antibiotics was a premature closure of
interventions that could have supported
a frail patient.
621. This patient was 92 years old when admitted to the Royal
Hobart Hospital from home with some days of weakness, falls, incontinence
shortness of breath. She was transferred to the OPU by Dr Tolman. Dr Martin
recorded Dr Tolman decided on her goals of care
as “not for code, not for
MET, comfort care, and ACAT, aiming for nursing home...” and that this was
discussed with the
patient’s son who was “happy for this
plan”. The patient was transferred to the ward at 1410 hours and at 1540
hours a differential diagnosis of dehydration, a possible left hip injury and an
acute pulmonary oedema or pneumonia was made and
a wide range of investigations
were performed.
622. Dr Tolman reviewed the patient at 1800 hours.
Investigations showed renal failure together with evidence of cardiac ischaemia.
Dr Tolman recorded that no fluids should be given, medications for comfort
should be given and life prolonging medications ceased.
The patient died at
0400 hours the following day. The death certificate appropriately recorded the
cause of death as renal failure.
623. The Panel determined on the information
available the patient was extremely unlikely to survive her illness and overall
her treatment
was appropriate.
624. The sole issue of concern is the lack of
documentation with respect to the patient’s mental and physical state. At
time of admission to the ward the patient was able to converse a little.
There was no record of her ability to engage in decision
making but the record
suggests it was very limited. There is no record of a physical assessment
outlining her medical conditions,
noting which are reversible and which are not
when she was examined by Dr Tolman.
625. In particular the causes and
treatment for the patient’s elevated CK level were not addressed. This
was likely the cause
of her renal failure and the cause of her pain. Temazepam
treatment for agitation is not the usual therapy.
626. The Panel said there
was no documentation by Dr Tolman nor any adjustment of medications given that
this patient was in renal
failure. The doses of medications Allopurinol and
paracetamol were excessive for an elderly patient with an eGFR of
627. During the hearing Dr Tolman said the patient could have picked up or
could have died. The medical records show no evidence
of assisting the patient
with medical care that could have assisted with her recovery even if this was
possible. Examples suggested
by the Panel were at trial of hydration, cease
renally toxic medications or use analgesics that are safe in renal failure such
628. The palliative pathway was commenced on admission because
“family unable to care for patient”. “Son (carer)
coping”. The Panel said it was difficult to determine from any written
response from Dr Tolman, from a discussion with
Dr Tolman before the Panel and
from the medical records whether other options to assist the son or the patient
were considered.
629. Clear evidence of any discussion with the patient about
her input into care was difficult to find.
630. Broadly this patient’s
problem appeared to be a combined cardio renal failure which is a common cause
of death. The elevated
CK was probably due to a cardiac infarct but it could
have been due to other muscle trauma. In itself it was not a cause of renal
631. In her written response Dr Tolman said the decision to aim for
comfort care was taken with all due care and after considerable
consultation
with those involved in the patient’s life.
632. Dr Tolman said it was
not appropriate this patient be written up for MET calls as it would only have
subjected her to more suffering
and would not have added to the length or
quality of her life. Once the blood results indicating renal failure were
received the
aim was for comfort care. She said there was no need to review or
otherwise actively manage the Goals of Care Plan.
633. The Panel found Dr
Tolman’s recording keeping and documentation were unsatisfactory.
634. This patient was 81 years of age when brought to the Royal
Hobart Hospital by ambulance from his home on 10 March 2012. His
son had found
him unconscious on the floor. His family reported progressive mental impairment
and poor appetite and loss of weight
over the preceding year. The admission
notes record he was emaciated and orientated only in place and person. He was
assessed as
being hydrated and that he may have a muscle injury due to his time
on the floor and that he was cognitively impaired. Testing suggested
infection, possibly of the urinary tract. A plan was made to provide
intravenous fluids and to treat him with antibiotics.
635. Dr Tolman saw him
the next morning before transfer to the OPU. She recorded she would
“review later” and that he
was not for MET calls.
636. Dr Tolman
met with the patient’s son the following day on 12 March 2012. She wrote
in the medical notes she did not believe
the patient had the capacity to make
“complex decisions such as accommodation, finance and medical
treatment”. She recorded
a plan to speak further to the family the next
day and to aim for a nursing home placement.
637. There is no evidence either
in the medical notes, written submissions of Dr Tolman or during the hearing
that a comprehensive
assessment as to decision making capacity was completed.
It, however, was clear to the Panel the patient was significantly
638. Dr Lees saw the patient on 15 March 2012 when he was
“mobilising well”. Nursing staff commented he was alert, confused
and comfortable. He was noted to be “waiting for nursing home
placement”.
639. On 17 March 2012 the patient vomited “coffee
grounds” material and was assessed by a junior staff member as being
either constipated, having a bowel obstruction or a perforated peptic ulcer as
he had generalised abdominal tenderness. An abdominal
x-ray was requested and
was interpreted by Dr Tolman as showing constipation and an enema was
640. Dr Tolman recorded a discussion with the family the next day
“all agree with nursing home placement” and they “understand
difficulty with bowels”. Explanation was apparently given about
constipation in relation to dementia. There is no indication
the family were
aware of the coffee ground vomit from 17 March 2012 nor of the further coffee
ground vomit which occurred on 18 March
641. On 19 March 2012 notes of
a ward round describe the patient as complaining of abdominal pain and of his
abdomen demonstrating
mild distension. Later that day a further complaint of
abdominal pain and of shoulder pain was made, shortly after which the patient
vomited faecal material and rapidly died.
642. In the Panel’s
discussions with Dr Tolman she stated she had personally examined the
patient’s abdomen, she had personally
discussed the abdominal x-ray with a
radiologist and she had been aware of the coffee grounds appearance of the vomit
but commented
nurses were very often mistaken about this. She agreed she had
not taken any steps to examine the vomit or have it tested for
643. During the hearing Dr Tolman advised the Panel she had discussed
the possibility of bowel obstruction with the family, she had
spoken with the
surgical registrar in relation to a nasogastric tube and to the patient’s
general practitioner. The occurrence,
content and outcome of these discussions
is not evident in this patient’s medical records. When she was asked for
clarification
she said she was seeing other sick patients.
644. The Panel
noted the x-ray of the abdomen showed evidence of a small bowel obstruction.
The history of coffee grounds vomiting
was suggestive of upper gastrointestinal
645. During the hearing Dr Tolman indicated she was aware of the
vomit but there was no written or other evidence that she considered
causes or other implications of that condition. Her notes of 18 March 2012 do
not mention coffee ground vomit, abdominal
x-ray results or any other clinical
examination or other possibilities other than constipation. There were no
alternative diagnoses
noted by Dr Tolman and no written instructions to nurses
regarding potential deterioration.
646. Dr Tolman did not alter the treatment
plan when the patient was noted to have pain in the abdomen. She prescribed
and benefibre and continued to treat the patient for constipation
with nurses given aperients and suppositories without notifying
647. During the hearing the Panel raised with Dr Tolman the possible
diagnosis of ischaemic bowel in the elderly. She said that condition
“hard to pick up” and she described the investigations as
burdensome. She said she might not have considered the
pain as much as the big
picture for this patient. The Panel says attention to the patient’s
details was lacking and would
be a determinant of a comprehensive geriatric
assessment.
648. Despite being the consultant geriatrician in charge of the
OPU Dr Tolman appeared to abdicate responsibility for this patient
649. She said “The treating team failed to identify bowel
problems, and during his admission it was often difficult to determine
he had had a motion or not. (at p.116). If there was a delay in the diagnosis
of the small bowel obstruction it is likely
that in the ward rounds on March 13
(Dr Lees), March 14 (Dr MacIntyre) and March 15 (Dr Lees) the issue of [the
bowels was not addressed. Dr MacIntyre is a junior registrar
and at the time was under the supervision of Dr Lees (at
650. Due to the responsibilities of running the unit, Dr
Tolman delegated the supervision of Dr Lees, who was the most junior of the
consultant geriatrician staff. She notes Dr Lees had limited exposure to acute
geriatric medicine during her one year of geriatric
training prior to commencing
on the OPU (at p.116). Nevertheless, as head of the unit, Dr Tolman recognised
her ultimate responsibility
for patients.
651. In response to questions
concerning the patient’s diagnosis and treatment Dr Tolman said she
thought the patient was constipated
or had an ulcer but that there was no
indication of any neoplastic conditions. When asked about the possible
alternate diagnosis
of a perforated peptic ulcer as noted by the intern, she
said she could not recall a vomit being described as grounds in the notes.
asked about the intern’s abdomen examination description of “low
level rigidity” she responded she was not
sure what that meant. She then
went on to say the patient had a long history of problems and things might arise
that would or would
not be treated.
652. Dr Tolman said she examined the
patient’s abdomen and she was looking to see if it was hard, tender,
whether there were
any bowel sounds and whether there was rebound. However she
conceded there was a lack of documentation about her examination and
assessment.
653. On reflection Dr Tolman said there may have been an impacted
bowel even though there was no gas in the rectum. Give the bowel
history she
thought it was a bowel obstruction. The patient was frail and there was a
possibility of cancer or a perforated ulcer.
654. When she was asked upon
reflection whether the diagnosis might have been ischaemic bowel, she replied it
would have been in the
differential but she would have expected more pain and
blood in the bowel. She said ischaemic bowel is hard to pick up but agreed
was common in geriatrics and she would be alert to such a diagnosis. She added,
however, the chance of ischaemic bowel was low,
the investigations were
burdensome for the family and the outcome was questionable. She thought it more
likely to be constipation.
655. When asked to reflect in hindsight on the
symptoms of faecal vomit through the nose and mouth and whether she stood by her
of constipation she replied “quite likely. The signs were more
consistent with that and not ischaemic bowel”.
656. The Panel found
attention to the patient’s details was lacking and should be a determinant
of a comprehensive geriatric
assessment. The Panel found as a result of the
failure to make an appropriate assessment Dr Tolman failed to formulate and
a suitable management plan. The Panel found she failed to properly
make a diagnosis and treatment decisions were not well founded
657. Further the Panel found there was no written evidence of a
conversation with the patient or the family about the possibility
obstruction or the more acute possibility of bleeding from the upper gut or the
substantial implications of this for prognosis
or therapy. There was no written
evidence of a consideration of more sinister conditions commonly in the elderly
such as ischaemic
bowel, perforation or bowel obstruction.
658. The Panel
found there was a paucity of documentation in respect of the medical records of
this patient when seen by Dr Tolman.
The Panel stated the purpose of medical
notes is to enable the next treating practitioner to clearly understand what has
in respect of each patient to ensure continuity of care. In the OPU
environment there was clearly a team based approach and therefore
have been crucial due to the number of health practitioners involved in each
patient’s care.
659. Generally while the importance of medical notes
was conceded by Dr Tolman in the hearing it became evident she either did not
make records or expected her team members to write them on her behalf. In
regard to this patient she conceded her medical notes
did not reflect all the
examinations she conducted, the diagnoses she made or the conversations she had
with family or other treating
practitioners. “I apologise. I
didn’t write it down. It was a Sunday. I was seeing other
660. During the hearing Dr Tolman said she had not only
taken a history from the son but she had also spoken to the patient and his
general practitioner. These consultations were not reflected in the notes. She
conceded she neglected to write them down and it
661. During the hearing Dr Tolman indicated she had further
discussion with the family about the complications from dementia, one
was bowel problems. She said the family wanted to place him in a nursing home
but she had told them that he would not like
it. However those discussions were
not reduced to writing.
662. The Panel said it appears from the medical
records this patient was under close scrutiny for his bowel, the family needed
know this, but were not informed on the full extent of his symptoms and
diagnosis. While Dr Tolman made note during the hearing
the family had not
complained, and that other practitioners were responsible for their own
inadequate notes, this did not abdicate
her responsibility to reduce her
examinations, diagnoses and discussions to writing.
663. The Panel found the
medical notes for the patient were inadequate and unsatisfactory. The Panel
also found Dr Tolman’s
conduct fell below the standard expected of a
medical practitioner of her experience as set out by the Code of
664. This 80 year old lady who was living in a nursing home was
admitted to the medical ward early in the morning on 17 May 2012 after
day of feeling hot and sweaty. She was found slumped in a chair and was
confused and disorientated. She was thought to
have an infective exacerbation
of COPD. Her past medical history included IHD, AVR, SAH, hypertension, chronic
back pain and bleeding
requiring transfusions.
665. The patient was seen
later in the morning of 17 May 2012 by Dr Lees and transferred to the OPU. Dr
Lees recorded the plan was
to change the goals of care to “comfort
care” (not for MET calls) and to start a syringe driver.
patient was reviewed at 1715 hours later that day by Dr Tolman who agreed with
the comfort focus and described the patient
as very unwell. She noted the
patient had a shiver and she diagnosed a possible urinary tract infection, a
plan for no more observations
or blood tests and to increase the midazolam in
the syringe driver. She suggested breakthrough medication and a family
667. The patient was reviewed on 18 May 2012 in the OPU ward round
which included Dr Tolman. The patient was noted to be sitting
out of bed and
comfortable. However the plan was to increase the doses of morphine in the
syringe driver from 10 to 20. The rationale
for doing this in a patient noted
to be comfortable (in both the medical and nursing notes) is, according to the
Panel, unclear and
not recorded although there are references to the replacement
of the patient’s previous medications.
668. The patient was reviewed at
1200 hours the following day on 19 May 2012. The plan was for comfort care with
the comment that
“[the patient] has declined over night.” The
nature of this decline is not made clear and may well have been a consequence
the increased doses of morphine and midazolam via the syringe driver during the
previous days.
669. The patient rallied and was discharged 6 days later on 24
670. In her written response as well as during the hearing before
the Panel, Dr Tolman maintained it was Dr Lees who had made the
main clinical
decisions regarding this patient which included the decision to wean her off the
syringe driver and to use methadone
671. Dr Tolman said in her
written response this patient was initially managed by Dr Lees and Dr
Butcherine. She said she was not
involved in the decision to commence terminal
care. She says the palliative care team under Dr Chris Edwards orchestrated the
relief regime.
672. When this patient improved the regime was
de-escalated. Dr Tolman says that after about 20 May 2012 the aim of care was
palliative rather than terminal as Dr Lees had anticipated. Dr Tolman
says she coordinated this and was in frequent contact with
the patient’s
673. The Panel noted on the discharge summary Dr Tolman is the
nominated consultant and Dr Lees makes no entries in the medical notes
May 2012. The Panel said this case demonstrates Dr Tolman’s preponderance
to deflect decision making responsibility
674. During the hearing
Dr Tolman said she had no independent memory of the patient and she was Dr
Lees’ patient. However,
when asked why it was that she and not Dr Lees
wrote up the Goals of Care Plan, Dr Tolman responded she knew the patient as she
cared for her during a previous admission for pneumonia.
675. In respect
of the decision to stop antibiotics, Dr Tolman says it was Dr Lees’
decision, not hers. Dr Chapman notes the
identification of bacteria on 18 May
2012 would have lessened the conclusion that acute dying was imminent. The
patient was sitting
out of bed, tolerating small amounts of fluid and presumably
feeling better with the antibiotics. However, Dr Chapman notes 3 days
usually be an insufficient period of time to cure a bacterial infection. He
presumes this finding was still being managed
symptomatically rather than with
curative intent.
676. While the use of antibiotics as palliation is a
contentious yet common practice, in this case both Dr Tolman and Dr Lees felt
the patient was acutely dying. In that setting discontinuing or initiating
antibiotics was reasonable. The Panel agrees with this
conclusion.
medical notes of the family meeting on 19 May 2012 do not explain what was
discussed to lead to a management plan of comfort
care and whether this included
an explanation that the patient’s confirmed infection was highly
678. Dr Tolman says she was aware at that time of the
patient’s reversible pathology but was also aware of her general poor
quality of life with frequent hospital admissions, an unsettled daughter and a
concerned general practitioner. She notes Dr McLeod
had been in contact with
her on a number of occasions although there is no reference to when this contact
took place. Dr Tolman
goes on to say the options were discussed with the family
and she supported Dr Lees’ decision for comfort care.
679. The Panel
noted the “options” were not expanded upon in Dr Tolman’s
written response.
680. The Panel made no findings in respect of the
allegations concerning this patient.
681. This patient was an 81 year old retired saw miller who had
been living at home with his wife. He was admitted to a medical ward
September 2012 with sepsis. His past medical history included pulmonary
fibrosis (requiring home oxygen), AVR, melanoma, BCC,
cataracts, IHD, CVAs, PMR,
AF and a lumbar crush fracture. He was treated with antibiotics, IV fluids, his
usual medications and
an increase in steroids.
682. He was reviewed by the
OPU registrar on 19 September 2012 and transferred to the OPU that evening. The
following day he was
seen by numerous allied health professionals with discharge
options being considered. The social work entry on 20 September 2012
hours indicates the patient was participating in these reviews.
September 2012 Dr Tolman recorded the patient is “Worse today” at
1030 hours without further elaboration.
There is a further note in the medical
with Julie...agrees v unwell...but he’s ready to
684. The Panel noted there is no record the patient was
involved in this discussion which is in apparent contrast to the medical records
which indicate the patient was able to talk about his food preferences and
dental plate concerns the previous night.
685. In her written response Dr
Tolman claimed the patient was discussed daily “by the team at our 9am
multidisciplinary meeting”.
The medical notes only record these meetings
with scant detail on Tuesday 25 and Wednesday 26 September 2012.
686. Orders
for a syringe driver with midazolam 15/morphine 10/glycopyrolate 1.2 were
written on 23 September 2012 by Dr Tolman with
an increase in dose to midazolam
20/morphine 20/glycopyrolate 1.2 the next day. The rationale for the increase
in dose was not recorded
in the medical notes.
687. During the hearing the
Panel enquired about morphine doses in an individual with poor renal function
and questioned the need
to escalate the doses. Dr Tolman saw the doses as
reasonable in the circumstances but did not provide further details for her
The Panel noted the patient was suffering from excoriation in his
groin/perianal areas but neither the notes nor Dr Tolman’s
comments during
the hearing indicated this was the source of the pain requiring subcutaneous
688. The Panel also noted in spite of claims the family had been
involved in discussions, the social worker recorded two instances
of the family
being distressed by the patient’s deterioration on 24 and 25 September
2012. He died on 26 September 2012.
689. While the medical notes for the
patient included paperwork to record outcomes of the multidisciplinary meetings,
the sections
for “medical concerns” were blank. As a result the
medical records were unclear about the pathophysiology of the decline
patient. Some entries suggest urinary tract infection/urosepsis but the death
certificate states aspiration pneumonia. A
clear understanding of the
patient’s diagnosis and treatment needs was difficult to
690. During the hearing Dr Tolman reported she identified the
patient’s deterioration and explained this to the family. The
records document comfort care. There are no details on what was explained to
the family concerning the patient’s condition.
691. During the hearing
Dr Tolman was asked about the decision to give medication via a syringe driver.
She avoided answering the
question and instead gave a summary of the
patient’s care from being under Mr McCallum on the ward before coming to
She explained how there was no record of any contact by Dr McCallum
with the family and no Goals of Care Plan done for the patient.
This patient
was very sick, he had a medical history of pulmonary fibrosis and he could not
breathe. He was also suffering from
kidney failure. He had been treated for
sepsis but there was no indication where. On his arrival in the OPU the whole
over the patient. Dr Tolman discovered excoriation on his bottom and
genital area as a result of his incontinence. She believed
he had prospects of
recovery however the family wanted the cessation of life sustaining medications.
The patient had previously told
the physiotherapists he thought he was
692. When asked about the decision to remove his oxygen Dr Tolman
responded she was intending to “play it by ear”. In
quality of life she thought that while the oxygen might make the patient feel
better he did not need to die with it on.
When asked whether he might feel more
comfortable with the oxygen given this lung problem she responded it would
depend. She said
the family seemed unhappy prior to his arrival in the OPU as
they did not know what was going on. There was an implication they
were happier
now as there was more communication between the treating team and the
693. When asked further about the syringe driver and the medication
charting process Dr Tolman said her practice was to look at the
chart each day.
When asked whether there was a separate syringe driver chart in addition to the
regular drug chart she simply responded
that it would be in the medical records.
Dr Tolman gave no explanation as to how this was used, and how a chart could be
to see whether dosages had been increased. The Panel could not find a
separate chart to track the amount of medication being administered
syringe driver. As a result there was no method of comparing the regular drug
chart with the administration of medication
via the syringe driver.
Tolman admitted that the taking notes by doctors on the ward was not ideal and
this was compounded by the MDT approach. Dr
Tolman discussed the handover
process as occurring twice daily and the MDT meetings occurring daily. She
indicated it was messy
early on when they did not document well but this had
been improved after this review by AHPRA.
695. The Panel found Dr
Tolman’s record keeping and documentation unsatisfactory. In terms of
patient assessment there was
no clear record of assessment, diagnosis and
treatment options. In terms of drug charting there was no clear record
maintained or
directed by Dr Tolman to ensure the next attending health
practitioner was aware of how much medication had been administered by
syringe driver compared with oral or other modes of medication administration.
In terms of the discussion with the family and
patient there was no clear record
as to the content or frequency of those conversations.
696. As a result of
the paucity of medical records the Panel said it would have been difficult for
other members of the treating team
to know what the family or the patient had
been told about his condition and treatment in order to supplement their
knowledge. While
Dr Tolman said during the hearing she had told the family
discussion, consultation and communication with the patient and his family.
There are two separate entries by the social worker
2 days prior to the
patient’s death which indicate the family was distressed by the
patient’s deterioration. There is
no indication in either the record or
from Dr Tolman how this condition was explained, particularly in the days
leading to his death.
697. When this patient was admitted to the OPU on 20
September 2012 there were discussions and records the patient was participating
in his medical reviews and that discharge options were being considered. On 22
September 2012 it was recorded the patient was able
to talk about his food
preferences and dental plate concerns. By 23 September 2012 Dr Tolman recorded
the patient was “worse
today” and that he was “ready to
die”. There was no record of a discussion with the patient about his
Dr Tolman was not able to elaborate further upon these matters
during the hearing. The Panel found there was a rapidity of decision
Dr Tolman to remove oxygen and to increase sedative medication with no apparent
reasoning or rationale for those decisions.
The Panel also found Dr Tolman
failed to properly make a diagnosis of this patient’s condition.
698. This patient was a 71 year old man living at home with his
wife. He was admitted to the medical ward on 8 March 2012 having
presented to
the Emergency Department on 7 March 2012 with increasing confusion on a
background of dementia. His file was marked
to indicate he was a private
patient of Dr Lees.
699. His past medical history included CKD (congenital
single kidney), CAD, hypertension, gout, asthma and Type 2 diabetes. He was
noted to have a 2 year cognitive decline assessed as being due to vascular
700. His medical admission noted a sudden onset of confusion
associated with loss of conversation and an inability to stand. The
causes which were considered were lacunar infarct, encephalopathy and chest
701. Dr Tolman was asked to see the patient and did so around the
middle of the day. Her notes describe a 6 month decline, suggestive
collateral history from the family, although this is not specified. The nursing
notes at 1220 hours record Dr Tolman
discussing the patient with his family.
The plan recorded was “comfort care, no antibiotics and no blood
tests”. The
consent of the family to this, if obtained, is not recorded.
No specific diagnosis was recorded, simply “new delirium multiple
702. Dr Tolman saw the patient later in the day with the
comment “not well, unsettled” and prescribed subcutaneous morphine
and midazolam PRN.
703. The patient was reviewed the following morning by Dr
Lees who recorded a diagnosis of pneumonia and delirium. In addition it
noted the family requested antibiotic treatment and further tests.
Panel noted this disparity in approach between Dr Tolman and Dr Lees. The Panel
said it appeared from the medical record
Dr Tolman ceased antibiotic treatment
in contradiction to the later request of the family. In addition the request
for further tests
was not undertaken until the patient was seen by Dr Lees on
ward rounds the following day.
705. The patient survived this episode in
hospital, albeit with ongoing problems, and was discharged to the rehab unit on
2012. He died some 8 months later.
706. The medical notes record
this patient was marked as a private patient of Dr Lees and in those
circumstances it is not clear on
what basis Dr Tolman was making
707. In her written response Dr Tolman comments on her decision
regarding the cessation of antibiotics in the following terms:
things turned out the family were offered no choices and his final 6 months seem
to have been pretty taxing for him and
708. This was reiterated at the hearing and could be construed
as a justification for ceasing active treatment because the patient’s
ongoing survival was burdensome.
709. During the hearing Dr Tolman stated she
was not a “medical kind of doctor”. Prior to this statement she
comfort care as not to include extensive investigations and not to
impose dangers on the patient. The concept of benefit to the
patient with
investigations to guide care was absent from her explanation. She touched upon
delirium as being “due to anything”
and multifactorial. The
execution of delirium assessments for patients reviewed was lacking.
Panel found the medical records completed by Dr Tolman for this patient were
inadequate. There was no record of an assessment,
diagnosis or prognosis.
There was no record of the discussion with the patient about his wishes. There
was little record of the
discussion with the patient’s family about his
condition and the options available. There was no record of the reasoning
the cessation of antibiotics.
711. During the hearing Dr Tolman said
she ceased the antibiotics as she thought some things needed to play out. She
did not recall
seeing pneumonia as a possibility on the chest x-ray. She said
delirium was not always caused by infection, that it could have been
anything, that it was multifactorial at best. In her written response she said
she believed the patient to have delirium
on the back of dementia with renal and
liver disease with a poor prognosis. She said the patient’s wife needed
time to come
to terms with his overall condition. She says she commenced
discussions about his delirium and his prospects for the future. She
ceased antibiotics as she considered there was little evidence for their use.
She says in her written response she stopped
the antibiotics after discussions
with the family, a comprehensive assessment of the patient, familiarity with his
medical records
and a holistic patient centred approach. She says there was no
defined infection to treat.
712. During the hearing Dr Tolman conceded she
did not write notes of the conversation with the family. She had prescribed
and midazolam with the descriptor that he was “not well,
unsettled”. She said she was not closing the door but he was
smoker, he suffered from kidney problems, back pain, shuffling gait, tremor,
incontinence and had lost 17kg in the last 6
months. She said the patient had
expressed the view he did not want to prolong things. Despite poor kidney
function he had refused
dialysis in the past. He had been a truck driver and
was fiercely independent. He and his wife lived in Richmond and his wife did
not drive. She said nursing home placement was always going to be
713. Dr Tolman described “comfort care” as not
involving extensive investigations. Once it was established a patient’s
quality of life was poor treatment was not imposed. She said the use of a
syringe driver did not mean a rapid escalation of the
end of life. It was a
good way to deal with certain problems, particularly in patients with dementia
and swallowing problems.
714. The Panel found Dr Tolman failed to adequately
discuss, communicate and consult with the family in relation to this
care. While she provided a written response that such detailed
conversation took place there is no record of it in the patient’s
records. In addition, on the issue of antibiotics, there is clearly a change of
consent between an agreement to antibiotics
(as noted by Dr Lees), a withdrawal
of that agreement (not noted but asserted by Dr Tolman) and the reinstatement of
that agreement
by Dr Lees. The Panel found that on balance those discussions
with the family conducted by Dr Tolman were inadequate.
715. The Panel found
Dr Tolman demonstrated diagnostic uncertainties regarding the cessation of
antibiotics. In her written response
to these allegations but not included in
the medical notes at the time, Dr Tolman indicated her diagnosis was delirium on
of dementia with renal and liver failure. She regarded the
patient’s prognosis as poor. In her view there was minimal evidence
the use of antibiotics. This is in direct conflict with Dr Lees.
716. This patient was 92 years old and was brought into the
Emergency Department from her nursing home on the evening of 8 March 2012
following a collapse and likely stroke. Her medical history included IHD,
hypertension, dementia, OA, AF and CKD. Her history of
falls was noted although
there was no report of a recent fall.
717. During the hearing by the Panel
the admission of this patient was discussed with Dr Tolman. It appears that
even though a fractured
hip (#NOF) was recorded in the admission documentation
this was neither communicated to Dr Tolman on handover nor read by her prior
the patient’s admission to the medical ward at 2030 hours. It also
appeared to the Panel there was no examination of the
patient by Dr Tolman or a
discussion with her about her reason for being at the hospital.
Tolman saw the patient again at 0730 hours the following morning on ward rounds.
This appears to be her only entry in the
medical notes. No reference is made to
the fracture. The focus of the entry appears to be a discussion with the
son, a comment about no active measures and a likely discharge
719. In her written submissions Dr Tolman said, and
she repeated this during the Panel’s hearing, she made an error in respect
of this patient. She admitted to failing to examine this patient and failing to
check the case notes prior to admission to the OPU.
720. During the hearing
note was made of the lack of consideration of falls and fractures given these
would be core concerns in the
geriatric patient population. The medical notes
mention the patient’s fall risk in several places.
721. Dr Tolman
relied significantly on the team to disclose all relevant details to her rather
than relying on her own specialised
expertise and examination. Whilst she
emphasised the importance in her own practice of “pulling the sheets down
look” at the patient and in teaching her registrars and
trainees, the reality of such examinations by Dr Tolman was not consistently
evident throughout the medical notes of the twelve patients considered. In
respect of this patient Dr Tolman was reflective of the
importance of an actual
physical examination.
722. The Panel found her decision making was
excessively hasty and not fully considered. As a result a fracture was nearly
prior to the patient’s discharge.
723. The Tribunal members have
considered the medical records in detail along with the opinions of Clinical
Professor Bell and Dr
Chapman together with those parts of the witness
statements we have identified and Dr Tolman’s response to the
notification.
The Tribunal is satisfied the findings made by the Panel which
are reproduced in paragraphs 504 to 722 are correct.
Did Dr Tolman Breach the Relevant Code of Conduct
Allegation 1: Dr Tolman’s record keeping and documentation
were unsatisfactory
724. The Good Medical Practice: Code of Conduct for Doctors in
Australia provides:
8.4 Medical
Maintaining clear and accurate medical records is essential for the
continuing good care of patients. Good medical practice involves:
Keeping accurate, up-to-date and legible records that
report relevant details of clinical history, clinical findings, investigations,
information given to patients, medication and other management in a form that
can be understood by other health
practitioners.”
725. We agree with the Panel’s comment that medical
records facilitate the continuity of patient care and are to be completed
time of the events or as soon as possible thereafter.
726. The Panel noted Dr
Tolman in her written responses denied her record keeping and documentation in
relation to the twelve patients
under review was inadequate or unsatisfactory.
She made reference to generalised comments by colleagues concerning her record
many of which referred to a time prior to the establishment of the OPU.
None of the testimonials provided by Dr Tolman made reference
to the medical
notes concerning the patients under review.
727. The Panel recorded that
during the hearing Dr Tolman made reference to examinations, potential diagnoses
and prognoses and discussions
with family members and colleagues which were not,
and should have been, included in the medical notes.
728. It is noted that
the Panel members (three of whom are medical practitioners, two of which are
specialists) had the benefit of
reading the medical notes of each patient and
the opportunity to seek clarification from Dr Tolman in person. Likewise two
of the Tribunal are medical practitioners and one of whom is a
specialist. Both medical members of the Tribunal have considerable
in the care and management of geriatric patients and both have been involved in
professional conduct proceedings in Victoria
and Tasmania. All members of the
Tribunal have had the benefit of reading the medical notes, have considered Dr
Tolman’s written
responses and her responses to questions raised by the
729. It is noted that during the Panel’s hearing Dr Tolman
indicated an intern or junior doctor would accompany her on rounds
responsibility for writing medical notes. Alternatively she said she simply
forgot to write everything in the notes as
she was busy.
730. According to
both Dr Tolman and Clinical Professor Bell the culture of the hospital was one
of poor note taking but she delegated
that task to the least knowledgeable
member of the team and did not ensure the notes were checked for completeness or
731. During the hearing before the Panel Dr Tolman outlined the
daily work of the OPU was to review every patient, their medical and
conditions, all their diagnostic tests and their discharge plans as well as the
medical notes of the team. These reviews
would take place at a daily
multidisciplinary team meeting. However what took place at those meetings was
rarely reduced to writing
and reviews were not evident in the patients’
medical records.
732. The Panel comments that as a specialist medical
practitioner in charge of the OPU the public would expect her medical notes and
documentation to reflect the seniority of her position and provide an example
for other members of the team to follow.
733. The purpose of medical notes is
to enable the next treating practitioner to clearly understand what has happened
in respect of
each patient to ensure continuity of care. The Panel comments
that in the OPU environment, where there was clearly a team based
approach, this
would have been crucial due to the number of health practitioners involved in
each patient’s care.
734. The Panel found Dr Tolman did not meet this
standard. Her medical notes did not report relevant details of clinical
clinical findings, investigations, information given to patients and
their families, medication and other management of the patients.
issue was identified in relation to Patients 1, 4, 8, 10 and 11. The Panel also
identified it as an issue in relation to
Patients 2, 5 and 7.
736. In relation to Patient 1 the Panel found the medical
records were inadequate and unsatisfactory. It found they were deficient
reporting relevant details of clinical history, clinical findings,
investigations and information given to the patient and/or
the patient’s
family. There was no indication of the multidisciplinary team meetings which
reviewed the patient in her medical
737. Complex geriatric patients
may be referred to the geriatrician for comprehensive evaluation and treatment
of their past, present
and future health needs. This approach, insofar as Dr
Tolman’s record keeping was concerned, was not evident. While a history
from the patient’s daughter around the functional performance of the
patient was recorded, prior and current treatments of
medical conditions and
social determinants of health were not recorded in the assessment. Screening
for geriatric syndromes such
as falls, polypharmacy, malnutrition and vitamin
deficiencies, and delirium were not recorded. There was no record of a physical
examination of the patient by Dr Tolman.
738. During the hearing Dr Tolman
reported the patient had a malignancy that required no treatment; however the
the malignancy was not further defined nor was reference made
to it in the notes. The notes were inconsistent concerning the use
medications between the Discharge Summary and the Discharge Interim Medication
Orders for Aged Care Facilities. Dr Tolman was
not able to explain these
inconsistencies.
739. Having reviewed this matter by considering the evidence
which we have identified in this decision as relevant and of weight we
with the Panel’s findings.
740. The Panel found the medical notes completed by Dr Tolman
with respect to this patient were unsatisfactory in detail and there
of diagnosis prior to the decision to treat or not to treat. The Panel
recognises intervention and investigations are
sometimes not necessary at a
particular point in palliation but it nevertheless was concerned about the lack
of evidence, either
in the medical notes or during the hearing of a thorough
clinical geriatric evaluation, including examination, assessment, possible
investigation, diagnoses, treatment and prognoses. A ranking of the priorities
of treatment would ensure all possible options have
been explored and given
adequate time for treatment response. It would have also ensured the family
were making an informed decision
on behalf of the patient.
741. Dr Tolman
signed this patient’s death certificate and said the cause of the death
was renal failure of 3 weeks. The Panel
found a review of the medical notes
revealed that renal failure was present for at least 5 years. In addition
shortly before death
an advanced trainee postulated a number of medical
diagnoses for this patient which were not mentioned on the death
certificate.
742. The Panel found Dr Tolman breached the standard of record
keeping and documentation with respect to this patient. Having reviewed
matter by considering the evidence which we have identified in this decision as
relevant and of weight we agree.
743. The Panel found the medical notes in respect of this
patient were inadequate and unsatisfactory as they did not report relevant
details of clinical findings, information given to the patient and/or her family
and medication management. Upon admission the patient
was commenced on
antibiotics, with intravenous fluids and insulin for a presumptive diagnosis of
a urinary tract infection. The
Goals of Care plan completed describe the agreed
approach to her treatment as curative and restorative with limitations. The
day, a meeting with Dr Tolman and the family led to a decision to cease all
active treatment, including antibiotics and fluids.
After the family meeting on
the day after that, a subcutaneous infusion of morphine and midazolam was
commenced, presumably on the
basis the family did not believe the patient would
have wanted her life to continue. There is no record of a discussion with the
family of the tests results that indicated the presence of a urinary tract
infection. There is no record suggestive of the presence
of pain or agitation
warranting the use of morphine. It found the standard had been breached.
744. Having reviewed this matter by considering the evidence which we have
identified in this decision as relevant and of weight we
agree with the
Panel’s finding.
745. The Panel found the medical records were inadequate and
unsatisfactory as they were deficient in reporting relevant details of
history, clinical findings, investigations and information given to the patient
and/or the family. In addition the death
certificate completed by Dr Tolman
indicated a lack of injury despite the medical notes revealing the patient had
been found on the
floor, face down, 6 days before death. The recording of
opioid dosing commenced by Dr Tolman on day 6 of the patient’s
hospitalisation
was not clear in respect of how much medication was given,
especially via the syringe driver. In addition the patient was also taking
quetiapine and haloperidol in the syringe driver. Despite this medication there
was no pharmacy notes on the file although the medical
practitioner assured the
Panel the pharmacist was keeping an eye on medications at the MDT
746. In relation to the medical records with respect to this
patient the Panel found they were not accurate and nor did they report
details of the clinical history, findings, investigations and medications. The
Panel found Dr Tolman breached this standard.
747. Having reviewed this
matter by considering the evidence which we have identified in this decision as
relevant and of weight we
agree with the Panel’s finding.
748. The medical records document a palliative pathway was
commenced on admission because the family were unable to care for this
and her son was not coping. The Panel found it was difficult to determine from
Dr Tolman’s written response, from
the Panel’s discussion with her
at the hearing and from the medical notes whether other options to assist the
son or patient
were considered. In addition there was no clear evidence of any
discussion with the patient about her input into care. Dr Tolman’s
failure to document these matters compounds the inability to understand what
matters were communicated, if at all, with the patient
and/or her family. The
Panel found Dr Tolman’s record keeping and documentation were
unsatisfactory and therefore she had
breached this standard.
749. Having
reviewed this matter by considering the evidence which we have identified in
this decision as relevant and of weight we
agree with the Panel’s
750. The Panel found the medical notes were inadequate and
unsatisfactory as they did not report relevant details of clinical history,
clinical findings, investigations, information given to the patient and/or his
family and the medical notes did not provide details
of medication or other
management. During the hearing before the Panel Dr Tolman stated she had
personally examined the patient
and discussed the abdominal x-ray with a
radiologist. She stated she was aware of the coffee grounds appearance of the
had taken no steps to examine it or to have it tested for blood. She
also stated she had discussed the possibility of bowel obstruction
family however these examinations and conversations are not recorded in the
patient’s medical records.
751. During the hearing Dr Tolman also
indicated she had spoken with the patient’s general practitioner and with
the surgical
registrar in relation to a nasogastric tube. The content and
outcome of those discussions is not contained in the medical records.
was asked to clarify this she stated she was seeing other sick patients and did
not record everything in the notes.
752. Whilst Dr Tolman conceded medical
notes were important for continuity of patient care the Panel noted it became
evident she either
did not make records or expected her team members to write
them on her behalf. While she expanded upon the medical notes in her
responses and in discussion with the Panel she conceded her notes did not
reflect all the examinations she conducted, the
diagnoses she made or the
conversations she had with family or other treating practitioners. She said,
“I apologise. I didn’t
write it down. It was Sunday. I was seeing
other patients.”
753. The Panel therefore found she had breached this
standard. Having reviewed this matter by considering the evidence which we have
identified in this decision as relevant and of weight we agree with the
Panel’s finding.
754. The Panel found Dr Tolman’s record keeping and
documentation was unsatisfactory because in relation to her assessment of
patient there was no clear record of her assessment, diagnosis and treatment
options. In terms of drug charting there was no
clear record maintained or
directed by Dr Tolman to ensure the next attending health practitioner was aware
of how much medication
had been administered via the syringe driver compared
with oral or other modes of medication administration. In terms of the
with the family and the patient there was no clear record as to the
content or frequency of those conversations.
755. Accordingly the Panel found
Dr Tolman had breached this standard with respect to this patient. Having
reviewed this matter by
considering the evidence which we have identified in
this decision as relevant and of weight we agree with the Panel’s
756. The Panel found the medical notes completed by Dr Tolman
for this patient were inadequate and unsatisfactory. There was no record
Tolman of a comprehensive assessment, diagnosis or prognosis. There was no
record of her discussion with the patient about
his wishes. There was little
evidence of discussions with the patient’s family about his condition and
the options available.
There was no record of the reasoning behind the
cessation of antibiotics.
757. Dr Tolman was asked to see the patient on 8
March 2012 when he was admitted to the OPU. The medical notes suggest Dr Tolman
gained collateral history about this patient from the family although this is
not specified. The nursing notes record Dr Tolman
discussing the patient with
the family.
758. The plan recorded was “comfort care, no antibiotics
and no blood tests”. If the family’s consent to this was
it is not recorded. It is unclear what information was given to the family or
the reasoning why comfort care was required.
No specific diagnosis was recorded
by Dr Tolman: “new delirium multiple factors”. There is no
explanation or rationale
for the cessation of antibiotics or the decision for no
further investigations.
759. The only note for the commencement of
subcutaneous morphine and midazolam PRN by Dr Tolman was the patient was
unsettled”. There is no explanation in the notes as to
why this medication was deemed necessary. By way of contrast the patient
reviewed the following day by Dr Lees who recorded a diagnosis of pneumonia and
delirium and indicated the family’s wish
was for antibiotics and further
760. The Panel therefore found Dr Tolman breached the standard.
Having reviewed this matter by considering the evidence which we
have identified
in this decision as relevant and of weight we agree with the Panel’s
Allegation 2: Dr Tolman’s decision making was excessively
hasty and not fully considered
761. The Panel noted that under the Code, good patient care
involves maintaining a high level of medical competence and professional
conduct. Good medical practice involves using insight and professional
judgement in a way that would meet the standards expected
by one’s peers
and by the community.
762. Under the Code care of a patient is of primary
concern. Good patient care includes:
“2.1.1 Assessing
the patient, taking into account the history, the patient’s views and an
appropriate physical examination.
The history includes relevant psychological,
social and cultural aspects.
2.1.2 Formulating and implementing a suitable management plan (including
arranging investigations and providing information, treatment
763. The Panel state good medical practice involves taking a
clinical history, making clinical findings, conducting investigations,
communicating with and providing information to patients and prescribing
medication and other care management as appropriate. It
also involves the
“2.2.4 Considering
the balance of benefit and harm in all clinical management decisions;
2.2.6 Providing treatment options based on the best available information;
2.2.7 Taking steps to alleviate patient symptoms and distress, whether or not
a cure is possible.”
764. This allegation was identified in relation to Patients 4
and 6. The Panel also identified it as an issue with respect to Patient
765. The Panel found the decision by Dr Tolman to cease all
active treatment was a rapid decision made in the context of an acute
exacerbation of delirium that may have resolved with time. The Panel found Dr
Tolman did not provide treatment options on the best
available information
(standard 2.2.6); did not consider the balance of benefit and harm in her
clinical management decisions (standard
2.2.4) and did not formulate and
implement a suitable management plan (including arranging investigations and
providing information,
treatment and advice) (standard 2.1.2). Upon the
patient’s admission treatment was commenced with antibiotics, intravenous
fluids and insulin for a presumptive diagnosis of urinary tract infection. A
Goals of Care plan completed on the day of admission
described the agreed
approach to her treatment as curative and restorative with
limitations.
766. On 25 March 2012 a meeting between Dr Tolman and the
patient’s family led to the decision to cease all active treatment,
including insulin, antibiotics and fluids. A further meeting the next day
confirmed the family did not believe the patient would
have wanted her life to
continue. A subcutaneous infusion of morphine and midazolam was commenced and
the next day the dosage increased,
although the records suggest that pain and
agitation were not present.
767. Morphine was used without evidence of pain
of such severity as to warrant its use. Morphine could have been expected to
drowsiness at the dose used, particularly as it was used with the sedative
768. A urinary tract infection was later established. There is no
record of a discussion of this possibility with the family. The
Panel found Dr
Tolman failed to inform the patient’s family of the nature of and need for
all aspects of their clinical management
(standard 3.3.3) and failed to discuss
with them the patient’s condition and the available management options,
including their
potential benefit and harm (standard 3.3.4).
769. While a
list of medical issues was noted in an entry dated 25 March 2012 none of those
issues were subsequently addressed nor
her conditions further evaluated for
reversible interventions. The Panel found Dr Tolman failed to adopt a
diagnostic approach to
identify reversible pathologies impacting on the
patient’s function (RACP) and failed to make an appropriate assessment of
the patient (standard 2.1.1).
770. Accordingly the Panel found this
allegation proved. Having reviewed this matter by considering the evidence
which we have identified
in this decision as relevant and of weight we agree
with the Panel’s finding.
771. The Panel found the premature closure of diagnosis,
prognosis and treatment was excessively hasty and not fully considered in
relation to this patient. It says there was evidence this patient had an
infection, most likely intra-abdominal. Antibiotics were
commenced by Dr
Butcherine and a nurse’s notes recorded the family desired further
investigations. The antibiotics were ceased
the next day by Dr Tolman. With no
record in the medical records to indicate an examination or any reflection of
the diagnostic
possibilities, Dr Tolman recorded a discussion with the family
that the problem is probably adhesions with a plan to cease antibiotics
Tolman said she knew the patient was dying but
how this was determined is not
recorded in the records. She reported the patient could die now or get better
to do it again. The
Panel found these actions were a premature closure on the
interventions of a geriatrician that could support a frail patient in whatever
life circumstances they found themselves.
772. The Panel also found Dr Tolman
failed to assess the patient with an appropriate physical examination (standard
2.1.1) and failed
to formulate or implement a suitable management plan (standard
2.1.2). The Panel found Dr Tolman failed to maintain adequate records
2.2.3). The Panel also found Dr Tolman failed to discuss with the
patient’s family the patient’s condition
and the available
management options, including their potential benefit and harm (standard
773. Having reviewed this allegation in respect of this patient by
considering the evidence which we have identified as relevant and
of weight we
agree with the Panel’s finding.
774. The Panel found Dr Tolman’s decision making was
excessively hasty and not fully considered. As a result of the failure
conduct a physical examination of this patient and to review medical notes a
fractured hip was missed by Dr Tolman prior to the
patient’s discharge.
Dr Tolman conceded she did not examine the patient nor review the medical file.
The Panel found her
decisions were excessively hasty and not fully considered
(standard 2.1.1 and standard 2.1.2).
775. Having reviewed this matter by
considering the evidence which we have identified in this decision as relevant
and of weight we
agree with the Panel’s finding.
Allegation 3: Whether Dr Tolman failed to adequately discuss,
communicate and consult with others
776. The Panel indicated the following at paragraph 29 of its
written decision: “In a geriatric setting, consultation with
the patient
and family involves a full disclosure of all relevant diagnoses, prognoses,
treatment options, support to process the
information, time to assimilate the
details and accept an agreed upon care pathway.”
777. The Code provides
decisions about healthcare and treatment should be a shared responsibility of
the doctor and patient and patients
may wish to involve their family, carer or
the Code, the term “patient” also includes substitute
decision-makers for patients who do not have the capacity
to make their own
Code also sets out that a good doctor-patient partnership involves encouragement
and support of patients to be well informed
make informed
addition the Code details the importance of effective communication. Good
medical practice includes:
“2.2.3 Maintaining
adequate records.
2.2.5 Communicating effectively with patients.
3.3.4 Discussing with patients their condition and the available management
options, including their potential benefit and harm.
3.3.5 Endeavouring to confirm that your patient understands what you have
3.3.6 Ensuring that patients are informed of the material risks associated
with any part of the proposed management plan.
3.3.7 Responding to patient’s questions and keeping them informed about
their clinical progress.”
781. Some patients (including those with impaired decision
making capacity) have additional needs. Good medical practice in managing
care of these patients involves:
“3.8.1 Paying
particular attention to communication
3.8.4 Being aware that these patients may be at greater
782. The Panel also had regard to the provisions in the Code
with respect to End of Life Care. In particular clause 3.12.7 provides:
“3.12.7 Striving to
communicate effectively with patients and their families so they are able to
understand the outcomes that
can and cannot be
783. The Royal College of Physicians, of which Dr Tolman is a
member, states specialists in geriatric medicine will have the following
• A geriatrician has expertise in the diagnosis and
management of complex and/or multifactorial internal medicine disorders
impacting on the cognition and functional status of the older person.
• A geriatrician adopts a diagnostic approach to the practice of acute
internal medicine in order to identify reversible pathologies
impacting on a
patient’s function, psychological and social wellbeing.
784. In addition a geriatrician is expected to:
• Assess, diagnose, treat and manage acute and chronic
illnesses in older people.
• Discern whether and when to order
diagnostic tests and interpret results.
785. Insofar as a lack of discussions with a patient and/or
family is concerned this issue was identified in relation to Patients
8, 10 and 11. It was also identified by the Panel in relation to Patient
786. As the medical notes were incomplete the Panel found it
was difficult to know how the family were guided and informed to come
decision about care or what options were given to them to consider. During the
hearing Dr Tolman said she did discuss, communicate
and consult with others in
contrast to what is disclosed in the medical records which are silent on this
issue. However, Dr Tolman
also said during the hearing before the Panel that in
respect of this patient, nobody knew the problem and there was no diagnosis.
While abnormalities in this patient’s condition were noted in the medical
records and investigations there was no action by
Dr Tolman to make a diagnosis,
prognosis or devise a treatment plan. Accordingly the Panel found the
discussions and consultation
with the family and patient were unsatisfactory in
that inadequate information would have been placed before them prior to making
787. The Panel found Dr Tolman failed to maintain adequate records
(standard 2.2.3). It also found she failed to assess, diagnose,
manage the acute and chronic illness of this patient (RACP) (standards 2.1.1 and
2.1.2). As a result she failed to communicate
effectively with the patient
and/or her family (standard 2.2.5), failed to discuss with the family the
patient’s condition
and the available management options (standard 3.3.4)
and failed to provide treatment options based on the best available information
(standard 2.2.6).
788. Having reviewed this allegation in respect of this
patient by considering the evidence which we have identified in this decision
relevant and of weight we agree with the Panel’s finding.
789. During the hearing Dr Tolman explained she had
collaborated with the patient and his family concerning decisions about this
treatment, however evidence of this in the medical records was
lacking. There was no evidence found with regard to full disclosure
relevant diagnoses, prognoses, treatment options, support to process the
information, time to assimilate the details and accept
an agreed upon care
pathway. The Panel therefore found Dr Tolman failed to maintain adequate
records (standard 2.2.3) and failed
to adequately discuss and communicate with
the family regarding this patient’s treatment (standards 3.3.3. and
790. Having reviewed this allegation in respect of this patient by
considering the evidence which we have identified in this decision
as relevant
and of weight we agree with the Panel’s finding.
791. The history taken from this patient was provided in the
Accident & Emergency Department upon admission. There was no further
geriatric assessment conducted by Dr Tolman when the patient came under her
care. Nor is there evidence in the medical records of
the collateral history
from the patient’s friend and his general practitioner which Dr Tolman
advised the Panel of at the hearing.
She says in her written response there was
no general practitioner contact with the patient since 2007 however the medical
indicate the patient had seen a specialist in the previous year. There
was no evidence either in the notes or during the hearing
Dr Tolman had reviewed
the patient’s file to determine these facts at the time and as a result
made contact and consult with
others involved in his care. The Panel found
there was a lack of discussion and consultation with those involved in the
792. The Panel found there was a failure to consult and
take advice from other professionals involved in this patient’s care
(standard 2.2.9). The Panel also found Dr Tolman failed to maintain adequate
records (standard 2.2.3).
793. Having reviewed this allegation in respect of
this patient by considering the evidence which we have identified in this
as relevant and of weight we agree with the Panel’s
794. In this case the palliative pathway was commenced on
admission because the family were unable to care for the patient and the
not coping. The Panel found it difficult to determine from any written response
from Dr Tolman and from her appearance before
the Panel and any medical notes
whether other options to assist the son or patient were considered. There is
also an absence of
clear evidence of any discussion with the patient about her
input into care.
795. The Panel found Dr Tolman failed to maintain adequate
records (standard 2.2.3). As a result it found she failed to discuss with
patient (and her son) the patient’s condition and the available management
options including the potential benefit and
harm (standard
796. Having reviewed this allegation in respect of this patient by
considering the evidence which we have identified in this decision
as relevant
and of weight we agree with the Panel’s finding.
797. There are notes in this case recording a discussion with
the patient’s son, daughter and their spouses indicating they
to a nursing home placement and they understood the difficulty with bowels.
However there is no evidence of any discussion
of a bowel obstruction with the
family when the patient vomited coffee ground material. There is no written
evidence in the notes
mention of her being aware of the vomiting or its implications, although
said during the hearing she was aware of the coffee ground vomit. The notes
record no conversation with the patient or the family
bowel obstruction or the more acute possibility of bleeding from the upper gut
or the substantial implications
of this for prognosis or therapy.
Panel found the discussions and consultations with the family were
unsatisfactory in that inadequate information would have
been placed before
them. They agree with the decision to aim for a nursing home placement for a
long term treatment of his dementia.
However there is no record or other
evidence they were informed about a possible bowel obstruction in order to be
given any choices
for treatment. In addition while Dr Tolman appeared to be
saying the patient did not want to go into a nursing home she bowed to
family to take steps to find a placement. While it appears clear from the
hearing before the Panel, Dr Tolman believed this
patient to be at end stage
dementia there was no evidence the family were informed of this. The family
endorsed the initial Goals
of Care plan on 10 March 2012 that indicated he would
be for restorative care with antibiotics, fluids and ward care. The second
written on 13 March 2012 was changed to palliative care with antibiotics but not
for MET calls. There is no evidence the family
were informed the patient was at
a palliative stage of care, nor are there any records of such a
discussion.
799. Dr Tolman failed to inform the family of the nature of and
need for all aspects of the patient’s clinical management (standard
and failed to discuss with the family the patient’s condition and the
available management options, including their
potential benefit and harm
(standard 3.3.4).
800. Having reviewed this allegation in respect of this
patient by considering the evidence which we have identified in this decision
relevant and of weight we agree with the Panel’s finding.
801. During the Panel hearing Dr Tolman reported she identified
the patient’s deterioration and explained this to the family.
Despite the
claims the family had been involved in discussions there were two social worker
entries in the medical notes which indicated
the family had been distressed by
the patient’s deterioration. There was also a reported note that
“he’s ready
to die” although no discussions with the patient
midazolam/morphine/glycopyrolate.
The Panel found on balance Dr Tolman did not
communicate adequately with the patient and/or his family. The Panel found Dr
failed to discuss with the family the patient’s condition and the
available management options, including their potential benefit
(standard 3.3.4).
802. Having reviewed this allegation in respect of this
patient by considering the evidence which we have identified in this decision
relevant and of weight we agree with the Panel’s finding.
803. The Panel found Dr Tolman failed to adequately discuss,
communicate and consult with the family in relation to this patient’s
care. While she has provided a written response that such detailed
conversations took place there is no record of it on this patient’s
medical record. In addition on the issue of antibiotics there is clearly a
change of consent between an agreement to antibiotics
(as noted by Dr Lees), a
withdrawal of that agreement (not noted but asserted by Dr Tolman) and the
reinstatement of that agreement
which was noted by Dr Lees. The Panel finds, on
balance, those discussions with the family conducted by Dr Tolman were in
804. The Panel therefore found Dr Tolman failed to maintain
adequate records (standard 2.2.3) and failed to adequately discuss and
communicate with the family regarding this patient’s treatment (standards
3.3.3 and 3.3.4).
805. Having reviewed this allegation in respect of this
patient by considering the evidence which we have identified in this decision
relevant and of weight we agree with the Panel’s finding.
Allegations 4 and 5: Whether Dr Tolman accelerated treatment
inappropriately and whether she sanctioned aggressive and inappropriate
medications.
806. The Panel dealt with these allegations together because
they concerned the same factual scenarios. This particular issue was
in relation to Patients 2, 5 and 10.
807. The Panel noted the Code says good
medical practice involves:
“2.2.3 Maintaining
adequate records.
2.2.4 Considering the balance of benefit and harm in all clinical management
2.2.6 Providing treatment options based on the best available information.
2.2.7 Taking steps to alleviate patient symptoms and distress, whether or not
a cure is possible.
2.1.1 Assessing the patient, taking into account the history, the
patient’s views, and an appropriate physical examination.
The history
includes the relevant psychological, social and cultural aspects.
2.1.2 Formulating and implementing a suitable management plan (including
arranging investigations and providing information, treatment
and advice).
2.2.3 Maintaining adequate
808. Working in a team does not alter a doctor’s personal
accountability for professional conduct and care provided. While
working in a
team the Code provides good medical practice involves:
“4.4.3 Communicating
effectively with other team members.”
809. Insofar as this patient is concerned there was no record
of a clinical assessment of pain to demonstrate the need for increasing
medication in the syringe driver. When Dr Tolman was questioned during the
Panel hearing about this she dismissed such
a requirement stating staff were
very well trained and this was not a requirement of their skill set.
Panel noted working in a team environment does not alter the doctor’s
accountability for the care provided to the patient
(standard 4.4). It found Dr
Tolman did not accept responsibility for the patient’s assessment of pain
and the consequent responsibilities
to adjust pain relief medication
accordingly.
811. The Panel found there was no assessment of pain by Dr
Tolman prior to the increase of pain medication (standard 2.1.1). It found
medical records were inadequate in providing information concerning pain and the
administration of pain relief medication (standard
812. The Tribunal
has reviewed this allegation with respect to this patient by considering the
evidence which we have identified in
this decision as relevant and of weight and
we agree with the Panel’s finding.
813. Opioid dosing was commenced by Dr Tolman on the 6th
hospital day at a total of 5mg of morphine which was quickly accelerated
in the syringe driver by the 14th day of the hospital admission with 5mg as
breakthrough. The Panel found these doses in
an opioid naïve patient were
inappropriate especially given there was no assessment of his pain nor a
reference to the geriatric
pain scale to facilitate consistency in evaluating
and treating pain. The Panel found there was reason or justification for the
rapid acceleration of treatment.
814. The Panel also found there was no
assessment of pain by Dr Tolman prior to the increase of pain medication
(standard 2.1.1).
It also found the medical records were inadequate in
providing information concerning pain and the administration of pain relief
medication (standard 2.2.3).
815. The Tribunal has reviewed this allegation
with respect to this patient by considering the evidence which we have
identified in
this decision as relevant and of weight and we agree with the
Panel’s finding.
816. Orders for a syringe driver with midazolam 15/morphine
10/glycopyrolate 1.2 are written on 23 September 2012 by Dr Tolman with
increase in dose to midazolam 20/morphine 20/glycopyrolate 1.2 the next day.
The reason for this increase in dose is not recorded
in the medical records.
There was no assessment of the patient’s pain or explanation why
increasing amounts of this medication
combination were deemed necessary. Dr
Tolman saw the doses as reasonable in the circumstances but did not provide
further details
for this opinion. The Panel noted this patient was suffering
from excoriation in his groin/perianal areas but neither the notes
Tolman’s comments during the hearing indicated this was the source of the
pain which required subcutaneous morphine.
There was no assessment of pain in
the medical record nor any reference to pain as a reason for increasing the
doses by Dr Tolman.
The only relevant entry is the patient was for comfort
care. The Panel found Dr Tolman’s decision to remove the patient’s
oxygen and to administer increasing doses of midazolam and morphine without
further reference was an inappropriate acceleration of
Panel found Dr Tolman failed to maintain adequate records concerning this
patient (standard 2.2.3) in respect to the reasoning
for the provision or
cessation of medical treatment. The Panel also found there was no recording of
the balance of benefit and harm
in the clinical decisions made (standard 2.2.4).
In addition the Panel found there was no assessment of pain by Dr Tolman prior
the increase of pain medication (standard 2.1.1).
818. The Tribunal has
reviewed this allegation with respect to this patient by considering the
evidence which we have identified in
this decision as relevant and of weight and
we agree with the Panel’s finding.
Allegation 6: Whether Dr Tolman was too quick to assess
patients as lacking decision making capacity.
819. This allegation was identified in relation to Patients 3,
5, 8 and 10. The Panel said the general approach to a capacity assessment
includes a trigger, engagement of the patient, information gathering from
collaterals, education to learn needed information, a structured
interview and a
record of the evidence. If a patient lacks capacity a valid surrogate decision
maker should be discussed.
820. The Code says good medical practice
“2.2.5 Communicating
effectively with patients.
2.1.1 Assessing the patient, taking into account the history, the
patient’s views and an appropriate physical examination. The
includes relevant psychological, social and cultural aspects.
2.1.2 Formulating and implementing a suitable management plan (including
arranging investigations and providing information, treatment
and advice).
2.2.3 Maintaining adequate records.”
821. The Panel noted that a reference to the term
“patient” in the Code also includes a substitute decision maker for
patients who do not have the capacity to make their own decisions.
822. Neither the medical records nor Dr Tolman’s evidence
at the hearing before the Panel indicated these steps were followed
of this patient. He was categorised as not having capacity on the admission
note with no further enquiry. While the
Panel found there was rapid assessment
by Dr Tolman that the patient lacked decision making capacity, which on review
be the correct decision, there were no steps taken to discuss a valid
surrogate decision maker.
823. The Tribunal has reviewed this allegation with
respect to this patient by considering the evidence which we have identified in
this decision as relevant and of weight and we agree with the Panel’s
824. The medical records in respect of this patient do not
indicate a capacity assessment or any of the above steps were taken. Dr
simply notes the patient lacks capacity to make decisions. While the Panel is
satisfied the patient did not have capacity
to make medical decisions it noted
the importance of such capacity assessments to be recorded in the medical
825. The Panel found Dr Tolman failed to maintain adequate records
(standard 2.2.3).
826. The Tribunal has reviewed this allegation with respect
to this patient by considering the evidence which we have identified in
decision as relevant and of weight and we agree with the Panel’s
827. The Panel noted it appears from the records the family had
the decision making capacity for this patient. Dr Tolman spoke to
patient’s son and recorded in the notes the patient did not have capacity
to make complex decisions with respect to things
such as accommodation, finances
and medical treatment. In discussions before the Panel she said she had also
spoken to the general
practitioner but there was no evidence of this in the
medical records. While no comprehensive assessment of decision making capacity
was undertaken the evidence suggests this patient was significant confused. No
finding was made in relation to this allegation.
828. The Tribunal has
reviewed this allegation with respect to this patient by considering the
evidence which we have identified in
this decision as relevant and of weight and
we agree with the Panel’s finding.
829. The Panel found the medical records did not record a
specific assessment as to capacity for this patient by Dr Tolman. Entries
other staff earlier in the admission indicate the patient giving yes/no answers,
being confused and being also able to politely
decline OT or physio treatment.
On the other hand his problems coping at home are well documented. There is
evidence Dr Tolman
communicated with the patient’s daughter.
Tribunal has reviewed this allegation with respect to this patient by
considering the evidence which we have identified in
this decision as relevant
and of weight and we agree with the Panel’s finding.
Allegation 7: Whether Dr Tolman failed to make a proper
diagnosis or was inflexible in her diagnosis.
831. A specialist geriatric physician and director of aged care
is expected to accept and appropriately manage complex patients with
to the intersection of diagnoses, their management and quality of life,
including, but not exclusively, comfort, pain and
dignity. Such a physician
would also be expected to rank the priorities of treatment and ensure all
possible options have been explored
and given adequate time for a treatment
832. The Code sets out the appropriate standard of providing good
care and it is as follows:
“2.1.1 Assessing
the patient, taking into account the history, the patient’s views, and an
appropriate physical examination.
The history includes relevant psychological,
social and cultural aspects.
2.1.2 Formulating and implementing a suitable management plan (including
arranging investigations and providing information, treatment
and advice).
2.2.3 Maintaining adequate records.
2.2.4 Considering the balance of benefit and harm in all clinical management
2.2.6 Providing treatment options based on the best available information.
2.2.7 Taking steps to alleviate patient symptoms and distress, whether or not
a cure is possible.
2.4.4 Giving priority to investigating and treating patients on the basis of
clinical need and effectiveness of the proposed investigations
treatment.”
833. In caring for patients towards the end of their life, good
medical practice involves:
“3.12.1 Taking steps
to manage a patient’s symptoms and concerns in a manner consistent with
their values and wishes.”
834. The Royal College of Physicians (RACP), of which Dr Tolman
is a member, states specialists in geriatric medicine will have the
• A geriatrician has expertise in the diagnosis and
management of complex and/or multi factorial internal medicine disorders
impacting on the cognition and functional status of the older person.
• A geriatrician adopts a diagnostic approach to the practice of acute
internal medicine in order to identify reversible pathologies
impacting on a
patient’s function, psychological and social wellbeing.
835. A geriatrician is expected to:
• Assess, diagnose, treat and manage acute and chronic
illnesses in older people.
• Discern whether and when to order
diagnostic tests and interpret results.
836. This allegation was raised with respect to Patients 2 and
9. The Panel also identified it was an issue with respect to Patients
837. The Panel found in relation to this patient there was a
lack of diagnosis prior to treatment. A diagnostic decision making process
necessary whether or not interventions are appropriate and needs to be recorded
in the medical notes. This was absent both in
the medical records of the
patient and in Dr Tolman’s evidence before the Panel.
838. Dr Tolman
recorded a single diagnosis for this patient. During the hearing before the
Panel she included three other conditions.
Upon review of the medical notes by
others, investigations and test results, the Panel identified a further five
possible diagnoses.
839. The Panel found Dr Tolman failed to adopt a
diagnostic approach to the practice of internal medicine in order to identify
pathologies impacting on the patient’s function (RACP). The
Panel also found she failed to assess the patient (standard 2.1.1)
and failed to
formulate and implement a suitable management plan (standard
840. When other potential diagnoses were put to Dr Tolman during the
hearing before the Panel they were dismissed as being overridden
prognosis of the patient’s poor quality of life that necessitated comfort
care. The Panel found Dr Tolman failed to
consider the balance of benefit and
harm in her clinical management decisions (standard 2.2.4).
841. Dr Tolman
was requested by the Panel to reflect on this case and she was asked whether she
would do anything differently. She
responded that she would not do anything
differently.
842. Dr Tolman appeared to be making social decisions in respect
of the care of this patient and not as a diagnostician. In addition
appeared to be offloading responsibility for the care to other members of the
843. The Panel noted doctors are expected to reflect regularly on
whether they are practising effectively and on what is happening
relationships with patients and colleagues (standard 1.4).
844. The Tribunal
has reviewed this allegation with respect to this patient by considering the
evidence which we have identified in
this decision as relevant and of weight and
we agree with the Panel’s finding.
845. The Panel found a thorough geriatric clinical examination
including neurological evaluation by Dr Tolman for this patient was
The Panel found as a result of the failure to make an appropriate assessment, Dr
Tolman failed to formulate and implement
a suitable management plan (standards
2.1.1 and 2.1.2).
846. An analysis of investigations as they related to this
patient’s condition and prognosis was not evident in the medical
847. In addition there was no complete review of his prolonged and
complicated hospital admission with regard to interventions and
prognosis. Dr
Tolman did not indicate during the hearing before the Panel or in her written
responses that such a thorough examination
or analysis had taken place. The
Panel found there was a failure to provide treatment options based on the best
available information
(standard 2.2.6).
848. The Tribunal has reviewed this
allegation with respect to this patient by considering the evidence which we
have identified in
this decision as relevant and of weight and we agree with the
Panel’s finding.
849. Dr Tolman freely admitted in the hearing before the Panel
the treating team were not really sure what they were treating. The
if a comprehensive medical assessment had been performed there would have been
some certainty about delirium and dementia.
Many investigations were simply not
followed through but more importantly there was no reasoning in the medical
records as to why
those decisions were made.
850. The Panel found Dr Tolman
failed to properly make a diagnosis. She failed to assess the patient (standard
2.1.1) and failed
to formulate and implement a suitable management plan
(standard 2.1.2). As a result, she failed to provide treatment options based
the best available information (standard 2.2.6) and failed to take steps to
alleviate patient symptoms and distress, whether or
not a cure was possible
(standard 2.2.7). She also failed to maintain adequate medical records
(standards 2.2.3 and 8.4).
851. The Tribunal has reviewed this allegation
with respect to this patient by considering the evidence which we have
identified in
this decision as relevant and of weight and we agree with the
Panel’s finding.
852. This patient, according to the Panel, had a reasonable
working diagnosis in infective exacerbation of COPD/bibasal pneumonia
medical ward admission. The medical records describe attendances on the patient
by Dr Butcherine and Dr Lees. Dr Tolman’s
view was this patient was
exclusively Dr Lees’ patient but that is not borne out by the notes
although it is clear Dr Lees
was involved in the family discussions and the
goals of care plan. Of concern is the clinical decision by Dr Tolman to
the doses of midazolam and morphine on the basis the patient was
“v unwell”. Her approach appeared to be a change from
management to terminal comfort care on the basis of an overnight decline, yet
the nature of the decline was not elaborated
upon either in the notes, Dr
Tolman’s written responses or during the hearing.
853. The Panel found
she was inflexible in her approach as demonstrated by the increasing doses of
medications for 3 days despite
reports the patient was comfortable, was eating,
drinking and even sitting out of bed. This patient rallied and the discharge
notes Dr Tolman as the nominated consultant. The Panel finds Dr Tolman
was substantially involved in the care of this patient.
854. The Panel also
found Dr Tolman failed to adopt a diagnostic approach to the treatment of this
patient in identifying reversible
pathologies impacting on the patient’s
function (RACP). The Panel found Dr Tolman failed to provide treatment options
on the best available information (standard 2.2.6).
855. The Tribunal
has reviewed this allegation with respect to this patient by considering the
evidence which we have identified in
this decision as relevant and of weight and
we agree with the Panel’s finding.
Allegation 8: Whether there were diagnostic uncertainties
regarding the cessation of antibiotics.
856. This allegation was identified in relation to Patients 6,
857. The Code says good medical practice includes:
“2.1.1 Assessing
the patient, taking into account the history, the patient’s views and an
appropriate physical examination.
The history includes relevant psychological,
social and cultural aspects.
2.1.2 Formulating and implementing a suitable management plan (including
arranging investigations and providing information, treatment
and advice).
2.2.4 Considering the balance of benefit and harm in all clinical-management
2.2.6 Providing treatment options based on the best available
information.
2.2.7 Taking steps to alleviate patient symptoms and distress, whether or not
a cure is possible.
2.4.4 Giving priority to investigating and treating patients on the basis of
clinical need and effectiveness of the proposed investigations
or treatment.
3.12.1 Taking steps to manage a patient’s symptoms and concerns in a
manner consistent with their values and wishes.
3.12.4 Understanding that you do not have a duty to try to prolong life at
all cost. However, you do have a duty to know when not
to initiate and when to
cease attempts at prolonging life, while ensuring that your patients receive
appropriate relief from distress.
3.12.7 Striving to communicate effectively with patients and their families
so they are able to understand the outcomes that can and
cannot be achieved.
4.4.3 Communicating effectively with other team
858. The Royal College of Physicians (RACP), of which Dr Tolman
is a member, requires specialists in geriatric medicine to have the
• A geriatrician has expertise in the diagnosis and
management of complex and/or multi factorial internal medicine disorders
impacting on the cognition and functional status of the older person.
• A geriatrician adopts a diagnostic approach to the practice of acute
internal medicine in order to identify reversible pathologies
impacting on a
patient’s function, psychological and social wellbeing.
859. A geriatrician is expected to:
• Assess, diagnose, treat and manage acute and chronic
illnesses in older people
• Discern whether and when to order
diagnostic tests and interpret results.
860. At an initial assessment on admission on 29 July 2012
there was evidence of infection and antibiotics were commenced on the likelihood
this was respiratory. The next day blood cultures were strongly suggestive of
an intra-abdominal infection and Dr Butcherine changed
antibiotics accordingly.
Dr Tolman recorded a discussion with the family on 31 July 2012 in which she
states the problem as “probably
adhesions” and records a plan to
cease antibiotics. There is no record of the examination of the patient by Dr
reflection on the diagnostic possibilities or an acknowledgement of
the implications of the sepsis.
861. During the hearing before the Panel Dr
Tolman said she was aware of the infection and she had examined the patient.
she did not recall whether she had discussed the acute infection issue
with the family. When asked for the clinical basis for stopping
antibiotics,
whether she thought the patient was dying, the Panel records Dr Tolman was
evasive. “Is she dying right here
and now or going on to get better and
have another bout?” When asked whether she thought the patient’s
life was threatened
immediately, she responded “I can give her antibiotics
now, it might get her better. Or is it worth a potential getting better
keeping her comfortable?”
862. When asked whether she attempted to make
a diagnosis on the cause of the sepsis, Dr Tolman responded by saying she did
whether it was sepsis or not. When asked whether she thought it was
essential to know what was going on in order to know whether
to treat or not
treat, she responded the family told her the patient had been in pain for over
40 years and the family had opted
for non-invasive treatment and comfort care.
Yet when she was asked about the acceptance of end of life care, she said that a
regarding transfer to a nursing home was had as the patient might
have gotten better unexpectedly.
863. The Panel found no diagnosis of the
sepsis was made. There is no evidence of a terminal care pathway which Dr
Tolman had said
would be instituted within a few days of somebody dying. The
cessation of antibiotics did not appear to be based on a formal end
of life care
plan but on a decision made by the family the patient was suffering from long
term pain and the prospects of curing
864. The Panel found Dr
Tolman failed to provide treatment options based on the best available
information (standard 2.2.6), failed
to take steps to alleviate patient symptoms
and stress, whether or not a cure is possible (standard 2.2.7) and failed to
adequate records (standard 2.2.3). The Panel said a geriatrician is
expected to adopt a diagnostic approach to the practice of acute
medicine in order to identify reversible pathologies impacting on a
patient’s functioning (RACP). In order for the
family to make decisions
on behalf of the patient they must be informed of the known facts. Dr Tolman
must therefore make a real
attempt to obtain all the facts, communicate them
effectively, acknowledge limitations and use them in conversation with the
to achieve an appropriate treatment decision.
865. The Tribunal has
reviewed this allegation with respect to this patient by considering the
evidence which we have identified in
this decision as relevant and of weight and
we agree with the Panel’s finding.
866. The Panel found the decision to not continue with
antibiotics against the diagnosis that this patient was dying was a reasonable
867. The Tribunal has reviewed this allegation with respect to this
patient by considering the evidence which we have identified in
this decision as
relevant and of weight and we agree with the Panel’s finding.
868. The Panel found it was unclear from the medical records on
what basis the decision was made by Dr Tolman to cease antibiotics.
are silent as to the family’s wishes regarding antibiotics. There was
conflict on this point between Dr Lees and
Dr Tolman. Dr Lees’ notes
clearly say the family wants antibiotics.
869. Dr Chapman makes the point at
page 327 (his first report), and the Panel agreed, “comfort care” or
symptom amelioration
of delirium is best achieved by removing the precipitant if
that is achievable and can be appropriately considered part of palliative
treatment in some circumstances. “Good comfort care in this situation
should certainly be seen to include a trial of antibiotic
870. The Panel notes that with a continuation of antibiotics
the patient’s condition improved and he was later discharged.
Panel found Dr Tolman failed to formulate and implement a suitable management
plan in continuing with the antibiotics (standard
2.1.2). Dr Lees made a
diagnosis of pneumonia and delirium and prescribed antibiotics. Dr Tolman said
during the hearing she did
not recall seeing pneumonia as a possibility on the
chest x-ray. Her written response (which was not included in the medical
was she believed the patient had delirium on the back of dementia with
renal and liver disease and a poor prognosis. It would appear,
although this
was not expressly said, this was the basis for the cessation of antibiotics and
the commencement of sedative medication
via a syringe driver. The Panel said it
was unfortunate the medical records made at the time do not reflect Dr
Tolman’s examination,
assessment, diagnosis, treatment and
872. The Tribunal has reviewed this allegation with respect to
this patient by considering the evidence which we have identified in
decision as relevant and of weight and we agree with the Panel’s
Allegation 9: Whether treatment decisions were well founded on
medical grounds.
873. This allegation was identified in relation Patients 1, 2
874. The Code says good medical practice includes:
“2.1.1 Assessing
the patient, taking into account the history, the patient’s views and an
appropriate physical examination.
The history includes relevant psychological,
social and cultural aspects.
2.1.2 Formulating and implementing a suitable management plan (including
arranging investigations and providing information, treatment
and advice).
2.2.4 Considering the balance of benefit and harm in all clinical-management
2.2.6 Providing treatment options based on the best available information.
2.2.7 Taking steps to alleviate patient symptoms and distress, whether or not
a cure is possible.
2.4.4 Giving priority to investigating and treating patients on the basis of
clinical need and effectiveness of the proposed investigations
or treatment.
4.4.3 Communicating effectively with other team
875. The Royal College of Physicians (RACP), of which Dr Tolman
is a member, states that specialists in Geriatric Medicine will have
following expertise:
• A geriatrician has expertise in the diagnosis and
management of complex and/or multi factorial internal medicine disorders
impacting on the cognition and functional status of the older person.
• A geriatrician adopts a diagnostic approach to the practice of acute
internal medicine in order to identify reversible pathologies
impacting on a
patient’s function, psychological and social wellbeing.
876. In addition, a geriatrician is expected to:
• Assess, diagnose, treat and manage acute and chronic
illnesses in older people.
• Discern whether and when to order
diagnostic tests and interpret results.
877. Complex geriatric patients such as those that make their
way to this acute aged care ward are referred to a geriatrician for
comprehensive evaluation and treatment of their past, present and future health
needs. This specialist approach, the Panel found,
was lacking in respect of
this patient. While abnormalities in her condition were noted in the medical
records and investigations,
there was no action by Dr Tolman to facilitate a
diagnosis, a prognosis or a treatment plan prior to treatment. A diagnostic
making process is necessary, whether or not the interventions are
appropriate, and needs to be recorded.
878. The Panel found Dr Tolman failed
to assess, diagnose, treat and manage this patient or to discern whether and
when to organise
diagnostic tests (standards 2.2.1 and 2.2.7).
Tribunal has reviewed this allegation with respect to this patient by
considering the evidence which we have identified in
this decision as relevant
and of weight and we agree with the Panel’s finding.
880. Dr Tolman noted this patient had “little prospects
for recovery relate to time rather than active process”. She
explained in
the hearing before the Panel the patient’s deterioration was not going to
happen acutely but over time, and his
prospects of recovery were more likely if
allowed time rather than doing a number of tests and investigations. When asked
high calcium levels and what was being done to address this during the 11
or so days of care Dr Tolman deferred to the treating team
“You’d have to ask the team looking after him”.
Panel was not satisfied that the treatment decision which was effectively
“wait and see” was well founded on
medical grounds. The Panel found
Dr Tolman failed to assess, diagnose, treat and manage this patient or to
discern whether and when
to order diagnostic tests (standards 2.2.1 and
882. The Panel also found Dr Tolman failed to communicate effectively
with other team members. Working in a team does not alter a
personal accountability for professional conduct and the care provided
(standards 4.4 and 4.4.3).
883. The Tribunal has reviewed this allegation
with respect to this patient by considering the evidence which we have
identified in
this decision as relevant and of weight and we agree with the
Panel’s finding.
884. The Panel found the attention to the patient’s
details was lacking and should have been a determinant of a comprehensive
geriatric assessment. There was no evidence Dr Tolman undertook appropriate
assessments, diagnoses, prognoses or treatment options.
There was no evidence
as a senior geriatric consultant she reviewed the treating teams notes to
formulate the best management plan
for the patient. The Panel found as a result
of the failure to make an appropriate assessment, Dr Tolman failed to formulate
implement a suitable management plan (standards 2.1.1 and
885. The Panel also found Dr Tolman failed to adopt a diagnostic
approach to the practice of acute internal medicine in order to identify
reversible pathologies impacting on the patient’s functioning, contrary to
the specialist standard expected of a geriatrician
by the RACP. The Panel found
Dr Tolman failed to comply with the standards 2.2.4 and 2.2.6.
Tribunal has reviewed this allegation with respect to this patient by
considering the evidence which we have identified in
this decision as relevant
and of weight and we agree with the Panel’s finding.
DISPOSITION
887. At paragraph 37 of its decision, the Panel found, given
its findings, Dr Tolman had behaved in a way that constitutes unsatisfactory
professional performance. Section 191(1)(b)(i) of the Schedule to the National
Law permits a panel, after hearing a matter about
a registered health
practitioner, to make that decision.
888. Unsatisfactory professional
performance of a registered health practitioner is defined in s5 of the Schedule
to the National
Law as meaning:
knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised by, the practitioner
in the practice of the health profession
in which the practitioner is registered
is below the standard reasonably expected of a health practitioner of an
equivalent level
of training or experience.”
889. Clearly that determination was open to the Panel on the
evidence it had before it, and which it took into account, and the findings
made. The Panel’s determination in that regard was not, in our view,
impugned by any of the additional evidence placed
before the Tribunal from
Clinical Professor Bell, Dr Barbato and Dr Walker. In our view the finding is
supported by the careful,
detailed and objective analysis of Dr Chapman in his
further analysis of the patients’ records and in his very careful analysis
of Clinical Professor Bell’s evidence.
890. Accordingly the Tribunal
finds the Panel’s finding in this regard was the correct and preferable
result in respect of the
matters to which the Panel’s decision
891. Where a panel decides a registered health practitioner has
behaved in a way that constitutes unsatisfactory professional performance,
s191(3) of the Schedule to the National Law permits the panel to do one or more
of the following:
“(a) impose
conditions on the practitioner’s...registration, including, for example,
in relation to a practitioner –
(i) a condition requiring the practitioner to complete specified further
education or training within a specified period; or
(ii) a condition requiring the practitioner to undertake a specified period
of supervised practice; or
(iii) a condition requiring the practitioner to do, or refrain from doing,
something in connection with the practitioner’s practice;
(iv) a condition requiring the practitioner to manage the
practitioner’s practice in a specified way; or
(v) a condition requiring the practitioner to report to a specified person at
specified times about the practitioner’s practice;
(vi) a condition requiring the practitioner not to employ, engage or
recommend a specified person, or class of persons;
(b) for a health panel, suspend the practitioner’s or student’s
registration;
(c) for a performance and professional standards panel, caution or reprimand
the practitioner.”
892. Section 191(4) of the Schedule to the National Law
“If a panel decides
to impose a condition on a registered health
practitioner’s...registration, the panel must also decide
a review period
for the condition.”
893. In this case the Panel determined it would reprimand Dr
Tolman under s191(3)(c) and impose a number of conditions on her registration
under s191(3)(a) which were as follows:
“1. The medical
practitioner must provide to the Medical Board of Australia (the Board) in
writing within seven (7) days of
these conditions being
name and address of each and every place(s) of employment as a medical
practitioner; and
each employer is aware of the conditions imposed on the practitioner’s
registration.
medical practitioner must notify the Board within seven (7) business days of any
change in employer in accordance with condition
medical practitioner must attend a face to face meeting with Professor Paul
Komesaroff (Vic) within two (2) months from the date
the conditions are imposed
for the purpose of developing an educational session plan (in conjunction with
any other professional
colleagues he nominates) that will include, but not be
limited to, the following areas:
Medical Record Keeping (documentation)
End of Life Care
Capacity Assessments
Medication use in palliative care
Diagnostic processes in aged care
Ethics and Professional Boundaries; and
Appropriate consultation and communication with patients, families and other
health care professionals.
medical practitioner must provide a copy of the Panel Notice of Decision to
Professor Komesaroff (and any other professional colleagues
involved in the
education sessions) to assist with developing the educational session
practitioner must submit the educational session plan as proposed by Professor
Paul Komesaroff (and any other professional colleagues)
to the Board for
approval prior to commencement.
practitioner must complete the educational session plan within twelve (12)
months from the date she receives written advice of
the Board’s
twenty eight (28) days of the completion of the approved educational session
plan, the practitioner must submit a report written
by Professor Komesaroff (and
other professional colleagues) including but not limited to whether the
practitioner has satisfactorily
engaged in the further education and training
and has satisfactorily completed the identified learning needs noted in the
educational
session plan.
twenty-eight (28) days of the completion of the approved educational session
plan, the practitioner must submit a written summary
addressing what she
believes she has learned from her engagement with Professor Komesaroff (and
other professional colleagues) with
specific focus on the identified learning
needs noted in the educational session plan.
the Board is not satisfied the practitioner has satisfactorily completed the
education program, the Board may require the practitioner
to undertake further
education as directed.
twenty-eight (28) days of receipt of the written notice of the Panel’s
decision to impose conditions, the practitioner
must nominate a mentor for
approval by the Board. The nomination must include:
a. evidence the mentor agrees to the nomination;
b. the mentor’s curriculum vitae.
11. The proposed mentor must:
registered as a registered medical practitioner with specialist registration as
a physician in geriatric medicine; and
to be in a close collegiate, social or financial relationship with the
practitioner.
the proposed mentor not be approved by the Board, the practitioner must nominate
another mentor within fourteen (14) days of
the Board’s decision,
otherwise as per the requirements of conditions 10 and 11.
seven (7) days of receipt of the written notice of the approval of the mentor by
the Board, the practitioner must provide the
mentor with a copy of the
conditions imposed by the Panel and a copy of the Panel Notice of Decision and
provide evidence to the
Board of compliance with this condition.
twenty-one (21) days of receipt of written notice of the approval of the mentor
by the Board, the practitioner must submit
a twelve (12) month mentor program as
agreed with the mentor for approval by the Board, detailing the activities to be
in the course of the mentoring including expected outcomes.
mentoring must commence within twenty-eight (28) days of the practitioner being
notified by the Board of the approval of the mentoring
plan and the expected
practitioner must meet with the mentor initially in person and thereafter either
in person, or by electronic means if appropriate,
at a frequency to be
determined by the mentor, but not less than one (1) hour per calendar month for
a period of twelve (12) months.
mentoring is to include but not be limited to reinforcing the acquisition and
maintenance of up to date knowledge and skills in
geriatric care (including, but
not limited to, decision making and the development of management plans for end
of life, and for acute
and chronic medical conditions) in conjunction with her
educational session plan.
practitioner must facilitate ‘360 degree reviews’ of two (2) current
or recent patient cases every three (3) months
from the date the mentoring
commences for the mentor to review.
practitioner must submit three (3) comprehensive geriatric assessments for
current or recent patients every three (3) months from
the date the mentoring
commences for the mentor to review.
practitioner must provide progress reports written by the mentor to the Board
addressing but not limited to comments on the relevant
360 degree reviews and
comprehensive geriatric assessments. These reports are to be received at the
following times:
three (3) months from the date the mentoring program commences, or on receipt of
a request, whether written or verbal, from
the Board (or Manager of
Notifications);
the end of the mentoring relationship (for whatever reason);
the mentor (or any third party known to the mentor) has a concern regarding the
practitioner’s health, conduct, competency
or fitness to practise the
profession.
the mentoring relationship terminate (for any reason) the practitioner must
provide a new nomination to the Board in the same
terms as conditions 10 and 11.
Such a nomination must be made by the practitioner within fourteen (14) days of
her becoming aware
of such a termination.
twenty-eight (28) days of the completion of the approved mentoring plan the
practitioner must submit a written summary demonstrating:
a. that she has met the objectives of the mentoring;
she will now incorporate what she has learned from the period of mentoring into
her practise of medicine.
the Board is not satisfied that the report demonstrates that the practitioner
has met the objectives of the mentoring, the Board
may require the practitioner
to undergo further mentoring as directed.”
894. In addition the Panel’s decision contained the
following further two sections entitled “Important Notes” and
“Review Period”. Those sections of the decision were in the
following form:
An AHPRA Director or Manager of Notifications is authorised, in consultation
with the Chair of the Board, to approve the education
program, mentor and mentor
program in accordance with conditions 5, 10, 11, 13, 14 and 21.
An AHPRA Director or Manager Notifications is authorised to request reports
written by the mentor in accordance with condition 20.
The practitioner must provide all documentary evidence to the Board within
the timeframes specified in the conditions.
The Board and AHPRA are authorised to contact the education provider and
mentor in relation to these conditions.
The requirements of the conditions are in addition to the
practitioner’s continuing professional development requirements for
registration as a medical practitioner.
Definition of employment - practitioners who are independent contractors are
considered to be “employed” by the entities
which engage their
services and/or where they practice the profession.
The practitioner is responsible for all costs associated with the
requirements of these conditions.
These conditions will remain in force until such time that they are set aside
on appeal or the Board agrees to their amendment or
Failure to comply with these conditions may be a ground for health,
performance or conduct action to be taken by the Board against
practitioner.
Review Period
Under section 191(4) of the National Law the panel has determined that these
conditions be reviewed by the Board at the expiration
of twelve (12) months from
the date their imposition.”
895. By virtue of orders made by this Tribunal on 2 May 2016 Dr
Tolman has been relieved from compliance with these conditions as
stayed but she was subject to the following added conditions which operated from
2 May 2016:
“1. The medical
practitioner, to the extent she has not already done so, is to
(a) inform in writing each and every hospital and aged care facility in which
the practitioner presently engages in practice or presently
intends at some time
to engage in practice as a medical practitioner of the conditions imposed on the
practitioner’s registration
including advice that the operation of those
conditions had been stayed by order of the Health Practitioners Tribunal until
time as the applicant’s appeal against the imposition of those
conditions is determined; and
(b) provide to the Board in writing the name and address of each such
hospital and aged care facility; and
(c) provide to the Board evidence that she has complied with condition
the event that at any time hereafter the medical practitioner intends to engage
in practice at any hospital or aged care facility
for which the Board has not
already been notified under condition 1(b) she must, before engaging in practice
at such hospital or
(a) inform in writing such hospital or aged care
facility of the conditions imposed on the practitioner’s
registration;
(b) provide to the Board the name and address of such hospital or aged care
facility; and
(c) provide to the Board evidence that she has complied with condition
896. The Board has asked the Tribunal to confirm the
Panel’s decision pursuant to s202(1)(a) subject to the modifications made
to that decision by the Tribunal by virtue of its orders of 2 May 2016. The
Board has also submitted the Tribunal should order removal
of the stay imposed
by the Tribunal’s order of 2 May 2016.
897. Dr Tolman wishes to be
heard with respect to penalty before that is determined. This was so because it
was submitted the terms
of the findings are relevant to penalty. The
Tribunal’s findings are in very similar terms to that of the Panel. The
according to her counsel, for hearing the practitioner as to penalty
therefore does not exist. In addition, Dr Tolman has previously
been given the
opportunity to fully put her case to the Panel. The Tribunal’s role is to
determine whether the Panel’s
decision was, in regard to all aspects of
it, including penalty, the correct and preferable result; it is not to embark on
898. The Panel, on finding Dr Tolman had behaved in a way
that constitutes unsatisfactory professional performance, had two options
s191(3)(c) which was either to caution or reprimand Dr Tolman. In making orders
under the National Law it is important to
understand the Tribunal’s
primary purpose is protection of the public and the Tribunal makes orders with
the purpose of maintaining
standards of and public confidence in the medical
profession. As the Court said in Craig v The Medical Board of South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
purpose of disciplinary proceedings is to protect the public, not to punish a
practitioner in the sense in which punishment
is administered pursuant to the
criminal law. A disciplinary tribunal protects the public by making orders
which will prevent persons
who are unfit to practise from practising, or by
making orders which will secure the maintenance of proper professional
A disciplinary tribunal will also consider the protection of the
public, and of the relevant profession, by making orders which
will assure the
public that appropriate standards are being maintained within the relevant
profession.”
899. The ordinary meaning of the words “caution”
on the one hand and “reprimand” on the other leads the Tribunal
the conclusion that a reprimand is an official rebuke for past conduct whereas a
caution is a reminder to take care in the future
and not to repeat the conduct.
In our view a reprimand can cause more serious consequences. In Peeke v Medical
commented on a submission to the effect that to impose a reprimand was to
trivialise a serious lapse in professional standards.
In reply his Honour said
he did not agree a reprimand is trivial. It may be inappropriate or inadequate
in many circumstances,
but a reprimand to a professional person has the
potential to result in serious adverse implications. In Honey v Medical
Practitioners
Board of Victoria
[2007] VCAT 526
the Tribunal said the following
“In our view, the order to reprimand will have
the salutary effect of underscoring the seriousness of the doctor’s
It will remind him lest he is tempted again. It will flag to others
practising the profession of psychiatry that the behaviour he
has engaged in is
to be condemned. And it will give some comfort to members of the public that
behaviour of this sort, when uncovered,
will be outed for what it is-a flagrant
violation of the fundamental principles of the doctor patient
relationship.”
900. We agree with the comments in the cases set out in
paragraph 899. In our view given the nature of the allegations and the findings
made a caution would trivialize Dr Tolman’s conduct whereas a reprimand
would not. A reprimand is therefore appropriate.
901. In relation to the
conditions the Panel directed they be reviewed by the Board at the expiration of
12 months from the date of
their imposition. They required the development of a
supervised educational plan and a program with a mentor. The educational plan
was to cover the areas in condition 3 whereas the mentoring program consisted of
the matters set out in conditions 17-20. Given
the findings of the Panel which
this Tribunal has endorsed we do not believe the conditions are unwarranted.
They might be onerous
but their purpose is to secure the maintenance of proper
professional standards. We believe their imposition will achieve that
902. The Tribunal therefore confirms the Panel’s decision
pursuant to s202(1)(a) of the Schedule to the National Law. The stay
the Tribunal on 2 May 2016 with respect to the operation of the Panel’s
conditions is lifted. That stay was granted
on the conditions set out in
paragraph 895. The removal of the stay also removes those conditions. It is
not appropriate those
conditions remain given the reference therein to the stay
which has been lifted. In addition those conditions operate in a similar
to the first two conditions imposed by the Panel. Finally, we note the
conditions imposed by the Tribunal when the stay was
granted were not part of
the Panel’s decision.
CHAIRPERSON
List of documents that the Medical Board of Australia
seeks to rely on
Notification dated 13 June 2019
13 June 2013
Letter from Associate Professor Alan Sandford
12 June 2013
Letter from Dr Catherine Yelland to the RHH, CEO Ms Jane Holden as
supplement to the Aged Care Review
12 December 2013
Letter from Dr Andrew Gangell
24 July 2014
Letter from Dr Martin Morrissey
24 December 2013
Statement by Prof Michael Ashby
24 December 2013
Summary of AHPRA interview with Dr Kylie Butcherine
14 February 2014
Summary of AHPRA interview with Dr Alison Cleary
27 November 2013
Letter from Dr Joanna Bakas to AHPRA
06 December 2013
Summary of AHPRA interview Dr Andrea Lees
11 December 2013
Summary of AHRPA interview with Dr David Dunbabin
14 November 2013
Summary of AHPRA interview with Dr Frank Nicklason
14 November 2013
Summary of AHPRA interview with Dr Scott Chamberlen
17 February 2014
Summary of AHPRA interview with Dr Janina Skelton
08 January 2014
Summary of AHRPA interview with Prof Matthew Jose
22 November 2013
Letter from Dr Jane Tolman to Tas Board of the Medical Board of
17 December 2013
Curriculum Vitae of Dr Michael Chapman
Curriculum Vitae of Dr Jane Tolman
28 April 2014
Independent report by Dr Michael Chapman
Medical Board of Australia, Good Medical Practice: A code of Conduct for
Doctors in Australia
18 March 2014
Letter to Performance and Professional Standards Panel from Dr Jane Tolman
- not able to locatable this document
03 June 2016
Response A: being to the Notification, document 1.
0lJune 2015
Response B: being to letter from Dr Catherine Yelland , document 3.
01 June 2015
Response C: being to letter of Dr Gangell, document 4.
01 June 2015
Australian and New Zealand Society for Geriatric Medicine:
(a) Position Statement no 3. Geriatric Services in General Hospitals Revised
(b) Position Statement no 16. Palliative Care of the Older Persons 2009
(c) Position Statement No 22. Frailty in Older People 2011.
Royal Australasian College of Physicians: Supporting Physician's
Professionalism and Performance - A Guide for Physicians in Australian
Zealand 2012.
Independent Practitioner report by Dr Michael Chapman
List of documents that Dr Jane Tolman seeks to rely on
Letter from Dr Jane
Tolman to the Medical Board of Australia
17 December 2013
Opinion from Dr Michael Barbato
29 July 2016
CV Dr Michael Barbato
Opinion from clinical Associate Professor Stuart Walker
18 January 2017
CV Associate Professor Stuart Walker
Report of Clinical Professor Anthony Bell
20 May 2015
Updated letter from Clinical Professor Anthony Bell
Received by AHPRA 01 Sep 16
Consideration of the Cases before the Performance and Professional
Standards Panel decision relating to Dr Jane Tolman.
11 November 2017
CV Clinical Professor Anthony Bell
There were only a few
testimonials which fell into this category.
See paragraph 26.5 (first
occurring) of the Panel’s decision at page
See paragraphs 26.13-25.18
on pages 75-76, paragraphs 29.11-29.12 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
25.36-25.38, paragraph 29.22 and paragraph 31.7 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
29.13-29.14 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
25.19-25.23 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
25.40-25.43 and paragraphs 31.9, 32.8 and 33.20 of the Panel’s
See paragraph 34.9
of the Panel’s decision.
See paragraphs 25.39 and 29.15-29.16 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
25.24-25.28 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
25.29-25.30 and paragraph 31.11 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
25.31-25.35 and paragraph 29.24 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
26.5-26.10 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
26.11-26.12 of the Panel’s
See paragraph
26.13 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
29.11-29.12 of the Panel’s
See paragraph
29.22 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
29.13-29.14 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
29.15-29.16 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
29.17-29.19 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
29.20-29.21 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
29.23-29.24 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
31.5-31.7 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
31.8-31.9 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
31.10-31.11 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
32.7-32.8 of the Panel’s
See paragraph
32.5 of the Panel’s
See paragraph
32.6 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
33.12-33.18 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
33.7-33.8 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
33.19-33.20 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
33.9-33.11 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
34.5-34.9 of the Panel’s
See paragraph
34.10 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
34.11-34.14 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
35.5-35.6 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
35.7-35.9 of the Panel’s
See paragraphs
35.10-35.11 of the Panel’s
See paragraph 27
Behavioural and
psychological symptoms of
See paragraph
See paragraph
See paragraph
Evidence Act
Page 269 of the medical
Tolman v Tasmanian
Board of the Medical Board of Australia
[2018] TASHPT
His comments in this
regard are with respect to Patient 11.
See the Panel’s
Decision at paragraph 9.2, first bullet point; paragraph 9.6, eighth bullet
point; Appendix A, Items 20 and
199 and Appendix B, Folder B Items 1 and
See Case Book at pages
254-255 and 400-403.
Case Book at pages 254-255.
See Case Book page 591.
See Case Book page 649.
See Case Book page 649.
See Case Book page 649.
His letter of 11 April 2013 which was before the Panel is evidence of this.
See Case Book page
See Case Book pages
587-588; 589.
See Case Book
page 588, last paragraph.
See Case Book pages
See Case Book page
See Case Book
pages 391-422.
paragraph 25.17 on page 76 of the Panel’s
See paragraph
26.10 of the Panel’s
Tribunal interprets as acute haematemesis.
of the Code which
is entitled “Shared
Decision-Making”.
of the Code.
s3.2.5 of the Code.
This is covered in 2.23 at
the commencement of this paragraph. We infer the Panel meant to refer to 2.1.3
Facilitating co-ordination
and continuity of
Unreported 19 January
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.4 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter