URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMC/2025/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Re X [2025] TASMC 2 (2 April 2025)
[2025] TASMC 02
MAGISTRATES COURT OF TASMANIA
(CHILDREN’S
[2025] TASMC 02
SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT FOR EDUCATION, CHILDREN AND YOUNG
X (The Child)
KY (Parent 1)
ET (Parent 2)
DELIVERED ON:
2 April 2025
HEARING DATE:
4 March 2025
Deputy Chief
Magistrate Stanton
CATCHWORDS:
Courts and judicial system – Judges – Recusal or
disqualification – Prejudgment or bias
R v Lusink; ex parte Shaw
(1980) 55 ALJR
Johnson v Johnson (No 3)
[2000] HCA 48
(2000) 201 CLR
Livesey v New South Wales Bar Assn
[1983] HCA 17
(1983) 151 CLR
REPRESENTATION:
Representative for the
Solicitors:
The Secretary:
Office of the
Director of Public Prosecutions
Philip Welch
Number of Paragraphs:
Serial No: 2/2025
File No. 70791/2021
RE X (The Child)
REASONS FOR DECISION STANTON DCM
2 April 2025
secretary of the Department of Education Children and Young People has applied
for the extension of a care and protection order
in respect of X to the age of
18 and a variation of that order to give guardianship to the secretary.
X’s mother is ET. His
father is KY.
has objected to me conducting the hearing of that application on the basis that
I have a conflict of interest.
is unrepresented and based on the material he has filed on the substantive
application and his submissions I understand the basis
of his objection is not a
conflict of interest but apprehended bias because I have previously sentenced
him for family violence offending.
I heard submissions in respect of the application that I recuse myself it was
accepted that I had sentenced KY on 10 May 2023
to imprisonment for a period of
10 months in respect of many family violence and other offences. It was not
clear, at least to me,
whether I had found him guilty of any offences after he
had pleaded not guilty.
have subsequently viewed the record of proceedings sheets for the complaints in
respect of which I sentenced KY on 10 May 2023 and
listened to my oral reasons
for decision in respect of the charges, in respect of which KY pleaded not
guilty on the same complaints.
various court records indicate that I sentenced KY on 10 May 2023 for the
following matters where KY pleaded guilty:
5 breaches of a
family violence order;
65 breaches of
an interim family violence order;
59 breaches of
bail conditions by breach of an interim family violence order;
possessing a bestiality product;
driving whilst
disqualified;
driving with
alcohol present in his body contrary to
Road Safety Alcohol and Drugs Act 1970
unregistered motor vehicle and using a motor vehicle with no premium cover;
one charge of
respect of the matters where KY pleaded not guilty I conducted a hearing on 21
March 2023. On 27 March 2023 I found a number of
those charges not proved
but I found the following charges proved:
charge of common
assault by grabbing ET by the face;
breach of the
family violence order by that assault;
breaching the family violence order by saying
“I will run through your
house with a lot of ammunition”
, constituting a threat.
did not give evidence in respect of any of those charges. I was therefore not
required to assess his credibility as a witness.
Nonetheless,
in sentencing KY I received an extended pre-sentence report.
relevance to this application, that report referred to KY’s exposure to
family violence as a child, his record of family
violence offending in the
relationship with ET, and that he was a high risk of future family violence
sentencing KY, I characterised his conduct as manipulative and controlling. I
referred to the need for specific deterrence and
referred a number of times to
the persistent nature of KY’s offending. Of significant relevance to this
application I said
that the persistent nature of the offending involved blatant
defiance and meant that KY’s prospects of reform were somewhat
also said that I thought KY’s relationship with ET should be prevented for
her long-term safety. I made a family
violence order preventing any contact
with ET for a period of five years, except for purposes relating to
The principles
overarching principle is that I should not hear and determine this matter if, in
all the circumstances, the parties or the public
might entertain a reasonable
apprehension that I might not bring an impartial and unprejudiced mind to the
resolution of the questions
involved in it:
Livesey v New South Wales Bar Assn
[1983] HCA 17
at 293-294.
is to be tested by considering what a fair-minded lay observer would think about
Johnson v Johnson (No 3)
[2000] HCA 48
(2000) 201 CLR 488
per Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow and
Hayne JJ and Kirby J at [53].
of degree are involved:
Livesey v New South Wales
referring to
R v Lusink; ex parte Shaw
(1980) 55 ALJR 12
per Aickin J at 16.
reasonable apprehension of bias will exist where a judge sits to hear a case
after expressing clear views either about a question
of fact which constitutes a
live and significant issue in the subsequent case or about the credit of a
witness whose evidence is
of significance on such a question of fact:
v New South Wales Bar Assn
above at 300.
of the factual matters to be considered in this case is KY’s family
violence offending against ET. I sentenced KY in respect
of much, but not all,
of that offending. It is also true that I found him guilty of a relatively
minor assault which breached a
family violence order and a threat to run through
ET’s house with ammunition which also breached that order.
can be accepted that KY as a party and an objective bystander would have a
reasonable apprehension that I would have a concluded
view about the extent and
detail of KY's family violence offending. A reasonable apprehension of
prejudgment as to the existence
of that extensive history of family violence is
therefore clearly established.
the mere fact of prejudgment is not sufficient to require me to recuse myself.
As stated in
above at 300, that prejudgment must be in respect of
a live and significant issue.
my view, there is a distinction to be drawn between a matter of material
significance and a live and significant issue. In order
to be a live and
significant issue in the proceedings the matter must be one which is reasonably
capable of being the subject of
some dispute.
effect to that distinction, although KY’s extensive history of family
violence offending is clearly a matter of material
significance in this case, it
cannot be said to be a live and significant issue in the proceedings because
there is no basis upon
which it can realistically be disputed.
KY's evidence in this case largely assumes the existence of that history. It is
focussed on the future being principally directed
at demonstrating that he has
changed as a result of education he has undertaken and the desirability of a
father having a relationship
with his child.
the existence of prejudgment in respect of KY's history of family violence
offending is established, I do not consider that
is prejudgment in respect of a
live and significant issue in the proceedings because no other finding in
respect of that history
would be open on the evidence.
that is not the end of the matter.
real relevance of KY's history of family violence offending in this case is how
it speaks to the risk of future family violence
offending by KY which could
affect X's interests. To be blunt, that involves consideration of the
application to this case of the
proposition that past conduct is a reliable
indicator of future conduct.
the risk of future family violence offending by KY would be seen by an objective
bystander and by KY to have been a relevant
consideration in respect of a number
of relevant sentencing objectives including specific deterrence and the
protection of ET, when
I sentenced him on 10 May 2023.
material I received in sentencing KY indicated he was a high risk of future
family violence offending. It could be reasonably
apprehended, not
inaccurately, that I had formed a pessimistic view about that risk. Indeed, I
expressed that view in sentencing
KY. I found that his prospects of reform were
remote. That is sufficient to establish actual prejudgment on that issue.
only remaining question is whether or not that prejudgment is in respect of a
live and significant issue in the proceedings.
KY’s risk of future family violence and prospects of reform are a matter
of material significance in this case. They
are also a matter of dispute.
Secretary and if I understand her position correctly, Ms Eaton, contend that
KY's history of family violence demonstrates a risk
for the future that requires
an order for guardianship to be made until X is 18 years of age. That
essentially involves the contention
that there is no real prospect of
seeks to establish that he has changed and will be able to sustain that change
in a manner which would justify ongoing contact
with X and even establishing X
in his care in the future, so that a care and protection order to the age of 18
years is not appropriate.
my view, it is inevitable that any magistrate seeing KY's record of prior
offending would form a tentative view that it provided
strong support for the
position of the Secretary and X's separate representative in respect of the risk
of future family violence
offending by KY.
Nonetheless,
I am not satisfied that KY's position is so unarguable that the question of his
future risk of family violence and prospects
of reform is not a live and
significant issue in the proceedings. KY’s position, albeit perhaps not a
strong one, is arguable.
a robust approach to applications of this sort is justified to avoid undermining
the usual listing practices and procedures
of the court, the authorities, and
indeed commonsense, suggest erring on the side of caution when the position is
doubtful. That
is the approach Ms Eaton urged upon me.
caution is even more necessary when the reasonable apprehension of prejudgment
is clear, that prejudgment exists in respect of
a material matter in the case
and the only question is whether favourable assessment of future risk of family
violence and prospects
of reform is arguable.
have considered whether the nature of these proceedings as an inquiry where the
best interests of the child is paramount might affect
the conclusion on this
application. I don’t think it does. X’s best interests involve
considering the desirability of
a relationship with his father and the risk of
being exposed to family violence perpetrated by his father which is the same
whether considered in light of X’s best interests or any desire
of KY to create and maintain a parental relationship with X.
recusal will inevitably lead to delay which is unfortunate, there is no
suggestion of any specific prejudice arising from
that delay. Even if there
were, such prejudice would be the price paid for procedural fairness otherwise.
is not a case where necessity requires me to hear the matter.
Magistrates Brown and Cure have also found the defendant guilty of family
violence offending, I understand Magistrate Hughes
has not done so, and in any
event arrangements could be made for a magistrate from another region to conduct
the hearing if that
was required.
all of those reasons I am satisfied it is appropriate for me to recuse myself
from hearing this matter.
to any submissions from the parties I would propose to arrange for the matter to
be listed for hearing before Magistrate Hughes
Launceston.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (117 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter