URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASHPT/2020/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:16:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia v Naomi Erends [2020] TASHPT 4 (21 July 2020)
[2020] TASHPT 4
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL
Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia v Naomi Erends
[2020] TASHPT 4
NURSING & MIDWIFERY BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
ERENDS, Naomi
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
26 May 2020 and by written submissions
DELIVERED ON:
21 July 2020
DECISION OF:
Chairperson Clues
CATCHWORDS:
Nurse practitioner - professional misconduct - misusing
position to use employer’s prescription pad -forging employer’s
signature on his prescription pad to prescribe medication for herself and her
family members – prescribing Schedule 8 medication
without authority.
Health Practitioners Tribunal Act
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
2009, ss193(1)(a)(i),
196, 140, 156(1), 169, 5.
Code of Professional Conduct for Nurses in Australia (8 May 2013-28
February 2018), NMBA Code of Conduct for Nurses, in effect since
Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia v Smith
[2016] SAHPT
; Craig v Medical Board of South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
[2001] 79 SASR 545
; Nursing &
Midwifery Board of Australia v Sanger
[2020] VCAT 201
; Nursing & Midwifery
Board of Australia v Pannell
[2019] SACAT 42
; Nursing & Midwifery Board of
Australia v Barrell
[2017] TASHPT 3
; Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia
[2019] SAHPT 1
; Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia v Mundy
; Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia v Frost
[2018] SAHPT 14
Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia v Mallet
[2018] VR 109
; Physiotherapy
Board of Australia v Hapel
[2020] NTCAT 4
; Nursing & Midwifery Board of
Australia v Black
[2015] VCAT 1232
; Medical Board of Australia v Lee
DETERMINATION: The respondent is found guilty of
professional misconduct and appropriate sanctions imposed.
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
B. McTaggart SC
Solicitors:
J. Shears, Australian Health Practitioner Regulation
Respondent:
P. Harris, Wallace Wilkinson & Webster
[2020] TASHPT 4
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. By application dated 31 January 2020, the Nursing &
Midwifery Board of Australia (the Board) referred to the Tribunal a matter
a registered health practitioner (the respondent) and sought a decision from the
Tribunal in accordance with
Health Practitioners Tribunal Act 2010
(Tas) (the Act).
2. The matter was referred to the Tribunal pursuant to
s193(1)(a)(i) of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law 2009 (the
National Law) with respect to the conduct of the respondent which it asserts
amounts to professional misconduct.
3. The respondent in these proceedings is a 41 years of age.
She is married and has 2 children. From 2000 until 2006 she worked as
registered nurse, including intensive nursing care. In 2009 she completed her
Masters (Nursing Practitioner) with QUT
and achieved nursing practitioner
endorsement from Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (AHPRA) in
2012. From 2010 until
2016 she worked as a nurse practitioner in chronic
disease management alongside Dr Greg Pitt. From 2016 until 2019 she worked as
nurse practitioner in chronic disease management with Dr Roland McCallum for 3
days per week and Dr Georgina Stilwell for 1 day
per week. These specialists
were based at Hobart Cardiology and Medical Specialists Suite in Argyle Street,
4. On 1 August 2018 the respondent received authorisation under
Poisons Act 1971
to possess, prescribe and supply certain schedule 2, 3
and 4 substances whilst holding the position of nurse practitioner with Dr
McCallum and Dr Stilwell (A3).
Allegations
5. The allegations of
professional misconduct are particularised in the Board’s application (A1)
as follows:
Respondent commenced practising as a Registered Nurse on or about 15 January
2001. From 2012 until 8 March 2019 the
Respondent held an endorsement as a
Nurse practitioner which allowed her to prescribe some medications in accordance
Poisons Act 1971
(Tasmania). Prior to 8 March 2019, the Respondent had
been practising at Hobart Cardiology and Medical Specialists, primarily in
area of chronic disease and obesity management.
17 April 2017 and 18 February 2019 the Respondent stole 30 prescriptions, forged
30 prescriptions, uttered 6 prescriptions
when she knew them to be forged or
unlawfully altered and prescribed 5 restricted substances without
Further Particulars
The Respondent stole a prescription pad belonging to a Hobart medical
specialist with whom she worked and wrote out prescriptions
in the name of the
medical practitioner for herself and her family
28 May 2019 the Respondent pleaded guilty in the Magistrates Court of Tasmania
to 71 charges corresponding with the conduct alleged
in paragraph 2. A
conviction was recorded against all charges and the matter was adjourned for a
period of three years upon the
Respondent undertaking to appear before the court
if required to do so and be of good behaviour for the period of the
adjournment.
conduct referred to in paragraph 2 occurred whilst the Respondent was practising
as a Nurse practitioner in Tasmania.
8 March 2019 the Respondent was suspended as a registered Nurse practitioner
following a decision of an Immediate Action Committee
established by the
Applicant. Her registration remains suspended as at the date of filing this
Application.”
6. As at the date the application was filed the Board sought
the following pursuant to s196 of the National Law:
(a) A determination that the conduct amounts to professional
misconduct; and
(b) A reprimand; and
(c) Suspension of the
practitioner’s registration for a specified period, to be confirmed;
(d) Further sanctions to be confirmed.
7. The allegations made by the Board against the respondent
were admitted save for in paragraph 2 the respondent admits she prescribed
(not 5) restricted substances without authority, namely Endone. Also, the
respondent says she used a prescription pad belonging
to a Hobart medical
specialist (Dr McCallum). She denies that she stole it. She says that he gave
it to her to assist him with
his practice.
8. The respondent admits that her
conduct warrants a finding of professional misconduct.
9. At the hearing of
this matter it was agreed that:
(a) The respondent should not have pleaded guilty to charges
70 to 75 that related to being an authorised nurse practitioner prescribing
without authority. Those charges relate to medications she was authorised to
prescribe on her own prescription pad.
(b) Apart from the 11 prescriptions of
Endone, the respondent had authority to prescribe all of the medications that
she did, but
not on Dr McCallum’s prescription pad.
The Respondent’s Relationship with Dr McCallum
10. Dr McCallum is a registered endocrinologist and general
physician with his main areas of interest being diabetes, insulin pumps,
loss and testosterone replacement. The respondent started working with Dr
McCallum in or around 2016. At this time she was
a registered nurse
practitioner who was licensed to prescribe some medications, request pathology,
radiology and refer clients to
specialist care.
11. At the time of the
conduct that is the subject of these proceedings the respondent worked 3 days a
week with Dr McCallum and one
day a week with Dr Stilwell at the Hobart
Cardiology and Medical Specialist Suite in Hobart.
12. During the time the
respondent was working with Dr McCallum she developed a close relationship with
him. She became his “right
hand”. The relationship became
intimate. The boundaries in the relationship became blurred and her judgement
became clouded.
It was in this setting that the respondent wrote prescriptions
on Dr McCallum’s prescription pads for herself, her husband,
her mother and her sister-in-law.
13. In a report from the respondent’s
treating psychiatrist, Dr Auchincloss, dated 6 March 2019 (A11), she says that
saw the respondent on 26 February 2019 she told her she had just
experienced the worst week of her life. The respondent told Dr
Auchincloss
working as her employer’s practice nurse, for 2 or 3 years at his request
signing requests for MRIs, writing prescriptions and
completing diabetes driving assessments in his name. She said this was to help
him with his paperwork. She assumed that his approval of these activities meant
that they were ultimately his responsibility, not
hers, but has now been
arrested, charged with fraud and lost her
14. The respondent further told Dr Auchincloss that:
“She always thought her
employer would protect her as she was in love with him and she would do anything
for him. She feels
betrayed by him, as he denied any knowledge of her
activities. She is now devastated to find herself in this position and very
that she will be deregistered as a nurse and lose a professional role
which has always been important to her.”
15. Dr McCallum had his own prescription pads in his name which
he predominantly stopped using from 31 July 2018 when he moved to
electronic prescriptions from his computer. The prescription pads with his name
on them were stored in a cupboard at
the respondent’s
16. The respondent says that whilst at work she generated
prescriptions in Dr McCallum’s name for his patients both electronically
and on the prescriptions pads. In her role the respondent says that she did a
lot of Dr McCallum’s work including writing
the letter “R” on
his signature space on prescriptions and other forms.
17. In a letter to
AHPRA dated 30 September 2020 (R11) the respondent says Dr McCallum regularly
authorised her to forge his signature,
she says “even in front of patients
he would say ‘scribble my initial please’”. The respondent
is what he taught me to do and asked of me daily. Instead of taking the time to
say no, I thought I can do that for you.
This saved Dr McCallum time and
allowed him to see triple the number of patients in a day that he could have
seen without my assistance.
All logins were organised and kept by me, Dr
McCallum never knew any logins and one of my major roles was to gather his
radiology, triage and carry out physical assessments on his patients,
so that he could conduct a five minute consultation knowing
all the necessary
pathology requests, treatments and patient education had taken place. I was his
right hand and often the hand
that got his work done during many times he was
absent or could not remember his patients’ consultations. The way we
together is like we were two people working as one. It was powerful and
effective; however, boundaries were never established between
myself and Dr
McCallum and that has led to the extensive allegations that I simply had to
18. In the same letter the respondent admits that Dr
McCallum’s “script pads were always in my possession”. She
says that Dr McCallum came to her when he needed one. She also worked from home
organising scripts and pathology and referrals for
Dr McCallum.
from Endone, the respondent had authority to prescribe the medications that she
did for her family, but she was not authorised
by Dr McCallum to use his
prescription pads to prescribe medications for her family members who were not
his patients.
20. By way of explanation for her conduct the respondent states
in her “Response to health assessment” dated Friday, 23
August 2019
(R10) that:
McCallum’s constant validation of my work gave me a false sense of
security, that unfortunately I didn’t question.
I trusted Dr McCallum and
I looked up to him tremendously, a specialist physician I trusted, a colleague,
mentor and friend. To
me he was on a pedestal and I would have done anything
I concede that within this professional relationship I lost my sense of self,
and my values as an independent practitioner. I was
not independent, I was Dr
McCallum’s right hand, and we worked closely 1:1 with every client. I
interpreted that his validation
of me meant that the responsibility would fall
on him not me if I were to be asked about the signatures. This is the gravest
in my entire life and career. He would rely on me for all logins being
radiology or pathology, and I would spend hours in my day
getting results for
his next patient for him.
I have full knowledge of the legal and ethical boundaries as a nurse, I
simply believed Dr McCallum’s knowledge of and support
of signing his
initial meant that I was doing this for him to help him and others, and I
didn’t see my behaviour as criminal.
I would have never foreseen a loss
of job, loss of reputation and destruction of my life from doing this, or there
would have never
been any conduct of the sort. This comes down to a grave lack
of sound judgement on my behalf, and I will never reoffend if I have
and privilege to become a nurse again in the
Prescriptions written for the respondent and her family
21. The respondent did tell the police that she knows there is
an “ethical blur” in writing out prescriptions to her family
on her own prescription pad. It is not illegal.
22. During submissions the
Board conceded that the respondent was authorised to prescribe schedule 2, 3 and
4 drugs and the only medication
she prescribed that she was not authorised to do
so was Endone. She prescribed this medication on a eleven occasions. She was
authorised to prescribe that medication to herself or her family members on
Dr McCallum’s prescription pad or forge his signature.
The Respondent
23. In 2017 the respondent underwent spinal surgery. After
surgery she was prescribed Endone by her specialist, Mr Hunn. She prescribed
Endone on two occasions for herself in 2017 and she later prescribed diazepam
5mg, codeine/ibuprofen x 30 for herself.
The Respondent’s Husband
24. The majority of prescriptions written by the respondent on
Dr McCallum’s prescription pad were for her husband. He had
spinal surgery and was prescribed Endone as well as other medication by his
general practitioner after that surgery. All
of the medication had previously
been prescribed to her husband by his general practitioner.
The Respondent’s Mother
25. The respondent’s mother has a bad hip. The
respondent prescribed Endone and Valium for her mother. She wrote these
prescriptions
because her mother was going away and she wanted to ensure that
she had access to medication in case something flared up whilst away.
The Respondent’s Sister-in-law
26. The respondent’s sister-in-law suffers from bipolar.
The respondent was authorised to prescribe diazepam.
The Respondent’s Daughter
27. The respondent wrote out a prescription for Pain Stop for
her daughter. She was authorised to prescribe that medication.
Immediate Action Taken
28. According to the “Facts For Prosecutor” (A9),
the respondent’s conduct of writing prescriptions for her family
under the name of Dr McCallum came to an end on 19 February 2019. On that date
the pharmacist from Claremont Plaza contacted
police to report that the
respondent’s husband was in the pharmacy with a prescription for Endone
which the pharmacist believed
was forged. Dr McCallum’s name appeared as
the prescriber on the prescription. Staff stated they had telephoned Dr
and he advised that he had written the
prescription.
29. Subsequently, Dr McCallum was interviewed by police and
under caution he stated that:
• Neither the respondent nor any of her family members
were his patients.
• He had been in a sexual relationship with the
respondent around July, August, September of 2018.
• He was not aware
of the respondent taking any medication.
• He stopped using the old
style prescription pads about 6 months previously and was now generating
prescriptions on the computer.
• He had received a text from the
respondent saying she had written a script for her husband because he had
seriously injured
his neck. She had prescribed Endone and asked if it was okay.
He agreed on this occasion it was okay.
• The text message was shown to
police and was received at 9:18am on 19 February 2019. It read “John
ready for you also
hope ok I did a script for Endone this am Chris hurt neck.
Can’t get into doc, is that ok?”
• He received a call from
Claremont Pharmacy (who had queried the legitimacy of the prescription) and he
stated he had written
it out. This was the first occasion he had been asked to
• He did it in good faith even though he had not written it
out himself.
• He lied to make it easy for the respondent and thought
it was genuine. He was trying to be sympathetic.
• When he was shown
the prescription he stated the handwriting looked like the
respondent’s.
• He did not realise the respondent had his old
prescription pads and was using them.
• Potentially he may have written
out a script for the respondent for Endone after her surgery.
30. The police, together with a representative from the
Pharmaceutical Services Branch (PSB), attended Dr McCallum’s rooms with
by the respondent on that date she was charged
with the offences that she
pleaded guilty to in the Magistrates Court on 28 May 2019.
31. As a result of
the respondent’s admissions which included stealing, forging and uttering
prescriptions, including prescriptions
for declared restricted substances and
narcotic substances, on multiple occasions, the respondent’s authority to
possess, supply
and prescribe certain scheduled substances during the course of
her professional practice as a nurse practitioner was revoked as
February 2019. At the same time the respondent was advised by the Acting Chief
Pharmacist that the opinion had been formed
that her actions constituted
notifiable conduct under s140 of the National Law and therefore a mandatory
notification would be made
to the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation
Agency (AHPRA).
32. As a result of receiving the notification the Board took
immediate action under s156(1) of the National Law to suspend the
respondent’s
registration.
33. The Board formed a reasonable belief
that because of the respondent’s health and conduct she posed a serious
risk to persons
and it was therefore necessary to take immediate action to
protect public health or safety.
34. In its reasons for decision, the Board
formed its reasonable belief based on the following:
• Her abuse of and/or dependence on schedule 8
medication.
• The extreme measures, including allegedly criminal
behaviour, taken by her to access schedule 8 medication for personal use
use by various members of her family.
• The respondent’s history
relating to substance abuse and her unrestricted registration.
admissions with respect to forging prescriptions on Dr McCallum’s
prescription stationery.
• Her alleged extramarital affair with Dr
• Forging Dr McCallum’s signature on paperwork for
mutual patients (e.g. hospital admission forms and referral for diagnostic
testing), and sometimes using Dr McCallum’s login details for the practice
medical software.
• Having possession of one of Dr McCallum’s
prescription pads in her own residence.
• Prescribing medication as a
nurse practitioner for a number of family members and friends.
35. In addition to suspending the respondent’s
registration the Board also required the respondent to undergo a health
under s169 of the National Law.
The Health Assessment
36. On 13 May 2019 the respondent was assessed by Dr Nicolle
Ait Khelifa at the Board’s request.
37. In Dr Khelifa’s report
dated 5 June 2019 (A6) she noted the following:
• The respondent reported no history of illicit drug use
and no intravenous drug use with one deliberate overdose which occurred
October 2018 upon the ending of her relationship with Dr McCallum when she
discovered that he was in a relationship with another
woman who was pregnant.
She reported to Dr Khelifa that at the time she was “intoxicated with two
bottles of champagne after
attending a funeral she reported that she attempted
to commit suicide by taking a ‘couple of Endone and some Duromine’.
She received care overnight at the Royal Hobart Hospital until being discharged
in the morning when she sobered up. There have
been no other self-harm attempts
and she reports no current suicidality.”
• Dr Khelifa reported
“a significant family history of mental health and substance use disorder.
She has had treatment
from her psychiatrist Dr Stephane Auchincloss since 2008
with a diagnosis with borderline personality disorder with predominant features
of emotional dysregulation and intense relationships and bulimia.” She
was undergoing treatment and taking medication to assist
• Dr Khelifa concludes her report as follows:
identified a broader issue of lack of clarification of her boundaries as a nurse
practitioner. Further refresher of medical
ethics prior to returning to work as
an RN may be beneficial and working under supervision of an experienced
colleague. This would
require careful consideration due to her experience under
Dr McCallum’s supervision.
In this context with her ongoing engagement with comprehensive treatment of
personality vulnerabilities to include individual treatment
with her treating
psychologist and psychiatrist, and DBT course, my impression is Mrs Erends could
continue to practice in the nursing
profession with conditions. I would
recommend no access to medications with the potential for abuse for at least 2
years and ongoing
monitoring for unsanctioned drug use with hair follicle
38. Of note, Dr Khelifa formed the opinion in June 2019 that
the respondent could continue to practice in the nursing profession with
conditions including a refresher of medical ethics, working under supervision of
an appropriate experienced colleague, no access
to medications with the
potential for abuse and ongoing monitoring for unsanctioned drug use with hair
follicle testing. The suspension
remains in place over twelve months after Dr
Khelifa prepared that report.
The Respondent’s Submissions of Mitigation
39. At the hearing I was provided with two letters that the
respondent had provided to the Board in mitigation of her conduct. The
titled “Response to health assessment” dated 23 August 2019 (R10)
and the second is a letter to AHPRA dated
30 September 2019 (R11).
first document (R10) the respondent submits the following:
• She underwent a hair and urine screen which was clear
of any medication other than Panadol.
• She refutes that she suffers
from any drug dependence or addiction.
• The only time that she used
schedule 8 and 4 medications was around the time that she underwent spinal
• Whilst working with Dr McCallum he authorised her to sign
his initial and he relied upon her for all logins of his computer
for radiology
or pathology for a patient.
• The incident that occurred in October
2018 that Dr Khelifa described as “an attempt to commit suicide” was
cry for help”. She has not attempted any self-harm since then
and she has ceased drinking alcohol. She also participated
in dialectical
behaviour therapy (DBT) to manage the symptoms associated with her borderline
personality disorder.
• She accepts that she should have required her
family members to see their treating general practitioner to obtain the
she prescribed for them. Her serious mistakes resulted from helping
family members.
41. In the second document (R11), the respondent fully accepts
responsibility for her conduct. She says:
have suffered greatly from my mistake, my naivety and my gullibility in the
trust I had in my mentor and best friend at the
time Dr McCallum. I hold myself
entirely accountable for my actions. Initially I believed Roland was
responsible. It took my some
time to recognise that it doesn’t matter
what the cause of my behaviour and misconduct was, or what led up to it, but the
I had to accept that no matter what Dr McCallum’s part in all this was,
I am responsible for my own conduct. I was not the
same person as he, (which I
believed in my work role I was the extension of his right hand) and this took
some processing initially.
For me to now say yes, I am separate to Dr McCallum,
and I am accountable has been a big step in radically accepting my actions
despite the environment in which I carried them out.
Looking back if I could change my conduct I would. Every day I wish I could.
My heart desires forgiveness from the Board, and I plead
that you will see my
shame and apology in this document.
My misconduct never should have happened, nor did it need to happen. My
family and I should have simply seen our GP. I made a major
judgement and it has cost me everything this
42. In the same document the respondent says that after she was
suspended from working as a registered nurse she had two choices;
the first was
to feel sorry for herself and indulge in self-pity. The second was to stand up
and believe in herself and get on with
her life. She chose the second path.
Since the respondent’s suspension she has:
• Studied a Certificate of Fitness and from August 2019
has worked as a fitness instructor. This fulfils her need to care for
and assist them achieve good health outcomes.
• She has sought the help
of her psychiatrist, Dr Auchincloss, and has completed a dialectical behavioural
therapy course (DBT)
which has allowed her to become aware of her own
vulnerabilities that she suffers from as a result of living with a borderline
personality
disorder (BPD).
• She has learned that as a nurse, she is
not a doctor or a doctor’s assistant and that she has her own set of
and boundaries that are beyond her employer, even if her employer is a
specialist physician.
Professional Misconduct
43. At the hearing I was also provided with a number of codes
of conduct and ethics applicable to nurses. The most relevant document
case is the Code of Professional Conduct for Nurses in Australia (8 May 2013-28
February 2018) (A15). Conduct Statement
8 in that document, clauses 3 and 4
state as follows:
have a responsibility to maintain a professional boundary between themselves and
the person being cared for, and
between themselves and others, such as the
person’s partner and family and other people nominated by the person to be
in their care.
fulfil roles outside the professional role, including those as family members,
friends and community members. Nurses are aware
that dual relationships may
compromise care outcomes and always conduct professional relationships with the
primary intent of benefit
for the person receiving care. Nurses take care when
giving professional advice to people with whom they have a dual relationship
(e.g. a family member or friend) and advise them to seek independent advice due
to the existence of actual or potential conflicts
44. Further the NMBA Code of Conduct for Nurses that has been
in effect since 1 March 2018 (A17) states, under the heading of 4.1
Professional
Boundaries that:
“Avoid sexual
relationships with persons with whom they have currently or had previously
entered in a professional relationship.
These relationships are inappropriate
in most circumstances and could be considered unprofessional conduct or
professional misconduct.”
45. It is clear that the respondent breached the above Code of
Ethics and Code of Conduct for Nurses.
46. The respondent took advantage of a
position of trust and confidence placed in her as a nurse practitioner, not to
abuse the access
she had to Dr McCallum’s prescription pads and logins for
his computer. Her conduct involved prescribing schedule 8 medication,
Endone which is a drug of dependence that she was not authorised to prescribe,
particularly to herself or her family members
or by forging Dr McCallum’s
47. The respondent’s conduct was substantially below the
standard reasonably expected of a registered nurse of her standing
experience. The respondent’s conduct falls within the definition of
“professional misconduct” as defined under
s5 of the National Law.
The respondent’s conduct warrants a professional misconduct
48. What orders should follow a finding of professional misconduct
on the facts of this case? The purpose of the orders are the protection
public rather than the punishment of the practitioner. The purpose of orders
made in disciplinary proceedings where there
has been a finding of professional
misconduct is to protect the public; to maintain proper professional standards
and to assure the
public that proper standards are being maintained in the
profession and thereby to uphold public trust and confidence in it (Nursing
& Midwifery Board of Australia v Smith
[2016] SAHPT 4
the case of Craig v Medical Board of South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
[2001] 79 SASR 545
CJ stated at 553:
purpose of disciplinary proceedings is to protect the public, not to punish a
practitioner in the sense in which punishment
is administered pursuant to the
criminal law. A disciplinary tribunal protects the public by making orders
which will prevent persons
who are unfit to practice from practising, or by
making orders which will secure the maintenance of proper professional
A disciplinary tribunal will also consider the protection of the
public, and of the relevant profession, by making orders which
will assure the
public that appropriate standards are being maintained within the relevant
profession.”
50. In determining what orders should be made, the Tribunal
must have regard to the seriousness of the conduct, the risk of harm to
respondent’s family members caused by her misuse of controlled medication
which by their nature are capable of causing
serious adverse effects,
particularly when not being used under the direction and supervision of a
medical practitioner.
51. Although there was no serious harm to the
respondent’s family members for whom she prescribed medication, there was
potential for serious harm to occur.
52. The orders made ought to take
into account the questions of specific deterrence, general deterrence, and
preservation of the reputation
of the nursing profession. General deterrence is
most important because it tells other members of the nursing profession that
preservation of the reputation of the profession similarly
so. Nursing is a
well-respected profession and the public should be able to have confidence that
members of the profession are people
of the highest integrity. To erode the
reputation of the profession is a very serious matter which has the potential to
the confidence of the public in the profession (see Nursing &
Midwifery Board of Australia v Sanger
[2020] VCAT 201
relation to the question of specific deterrence, the Tribunal must assess the
respondent as a person and consider what has
occurred since the relevant conduct
took place; that is whether she has taken ownership of the problem and whether
she has done anything
to assist herself.
54. Prior to working for Dr McCallum
the respondent had an excellent work history. She worked as a registered nurse
at various places
between 2000 and 2010. She worked as a nurse practitioner
with Dr Pitt from around 2010 until she commenced working with Dr McCallum
Dr Stilwell. Dr Pitt provided the respondent with a personal reference. The
respondent’s conduct was confined to working
as a nurse practitioner with
Dr McCallum. There was no similar conduct whilst she worked as a nurse
practitioner with Dr Pitt or
Dr Stilwell.
55. The respondent does suffer from
a borderline personality disorder. She has undergone a course of therapy to
assist her with that
condition. She is not now and has not been drug dependent.
She has ceased drinking alcohol and there has been no further attempt
self-harm since October 2018. That attempt occurred as a result of her
relationship with Dr McCallum ending and finding out that
he was in a
relationship with someone else who was pregnant to him.
56. The respondent
became caught up in an unfortunate set of circumstances with Dr McCallum where
the professional boundaries became
blurred. Whilst I accept that Dr McCallum
may have allowed the respondent to exceed her authority in his practice with
his patients there is no evidence that he authorised her to prescribe
medication for herself or her family members by forging his
signature on his
prescription pads, particularly schedule 8 medication.
Consequences of the Respondent’s Professional
57. As a result of the respondent’s conduct she lost her
job. She had no income from March 2019 until August 2019 when she
qualified personal trainer earning around $750.00 per week. Whilst working for
Dr McCallum she earned in the vicinity of
$2,200.00 per week. The respondent
has suffered a significant financial detriment.
58. As a result of the
respondent’s conduct it may be very difficult for her to obtain a job in
the nursing profession.
59. On 3 April 2020 Dr Mark Veitch, Director of
Public Health and delegate for the Minister for Health for the purposes of
Poisons Act 1971
sent a notice to the respondent advising that her right
to possess and administer schedule 8 and schedule 4 declared restricted
was revoked. She was advised that a delegate for
of the Act may
consider an application to restore her rights to possess and administer schedule
8 and schedule 4 declared restricted
substances after a documented extended
period of well supported personal and professional stability (A10).
the respondent was charged she was apparently ‘marched out’ of her
workplace by the police. Convictions have
been recorded with respect to all
charges. The respondent is required to be of good behaviour for a period of 3
years. If she reoffends
there is a possibility that a jail sentence could be
imposed. After the court proceedings she was publicly shamed. She was named
The Mercury newspaper and she lost the confidence of her work
colleagues.
61. In the respondent’s letter to AHPRA dated 30 September
2019 (A11) she says:
was put in the local newspaper in Hobart and shamed in public. Not only as a
nurse, but as a person suffering mental health
issues and as a wife and mother
in a troubled marriage. It has taken me months to understand my mistakes and
attempt to move forward
and forgive myself. I have lost a career, a job I
valued and loved more than myself, colleagues [sic] respect and professional
This has been the hardest year of my
62. The respondent is remorseful and embarrassed by her
conduct. She has not “sat on her hands”. She has retrained and
found alternative employment.
63. Other factors in the respondent’s
favour are that she has no prior disciplinary or criminal history, she has
with the police and the Board since the investigations into her
conduct commenced, she has undergone a positive health assessment,
engaged in appropriate treatment for her borderline personality disorder, she
has retrained and found alternative employment
and she engaged legal counsel to
assist her with the criminal proceedings and these disciplinary
proceedings.
64. The action taken to immediately suspend the
respondent’s registration as a nurse has served to provide protection to
public for the last 16 months.
65. Whilst the orders imposed by the
Tribunal should not serve to punish the respondent, they do need to operate to
deter her and
other nurses, to ensure that the seriousness of this type of
conduct is recognised and hence not undertaken.
66. The orders made should be
proportionate to those imposed for similar conduct. In regard to this point,
the Tribunal was referred
to a number of authorities, namely: Nursing &
Midwifery Board of Australia v Pannell
[2019] SACAT 42
; Nursing & Midwifery
Board of Australia v Barrell
[2017] TASHPT 3
; Nursing & Midwifery Board of
Australia v Tan
[2019] SAHPT 1
; Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia v
[2012] SAHPT 5
; Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia v Frost
; Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia v Smith
[2016] SAHPT 4
Nursing & Midwifery of Board of Australia v Sanger
[2020] VCAT 201
& Midwifery Board of Australia v Mallet
[2018] VR 109
; Physiotherapy Board
of Australia v Hapel
[2020] NTCAT 4
; Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia
[2015] VCAT 1232.
The Appropriate Sanction
67. In determining the appropriate sanction, I accept the
“respondent’s submissions on the authorities”. I repeat
1 and 2 of those written submissions:
Appropriate Sanction
The appropriate sanction is to be considered at the time of imposing the
sanction and not by reference to the date of the conduct:
Medical Board of
Australia v Lee
[2019] TASHPT 3
Suspension is appropriate where the Tribunal is satisfied that, upon
completion of the period of suspension, the practitioner will
be fit to resume
practice: Medical Board of Australia v Lee at [53].
According to the psychiatrist who conducted the health assessment, Dr
Khelifa, Ms Erends was fit to resume practice in early June
2019 subject to
conditions that she has no access to medications with the potential for abuse
for at least 2 years and ongoing monitoring
for unsanctioned drug use with hair
follicle testing [the imposition of these conditions is conceded].
As Ms Erends understands the errors of her ways and is remorseful it is
desirable to make available to the public the special skills
she possesses:
Medical Board of Australia v Lee at [54(i) and (j)].
The Application
When the application was filed on 31 January 2020 the Board
determination that the conduct amounts to professional misconduct;
2. A reprimand;
of the practitioner’s registration for a specified period, to be
4. Further sanctions to be confirmed”
[underlining is mine]
Therefore, at the time the Board considered suspension and not cancellation
and disqualification appropriate, it was to confirm the
length of suspension it
was to apply for. Despite nothing adverse to Ms Erends arising since that time
the Board now seeks cancellation
of registration and disqualification from
applying for 1-2 years, in addition to the suspension of approximately 15 months
Erends has already served.
The penalty sought by the Board is:
given the circumstances of this case;
when compared with other decisions of the Tribunals;
when considering the penalty sought by the Board in other cases;
Unnecessary
to protect the public.
The Alleged Tariff or Range
It is submitted by the Board that the tariff or range of suspension and/or
disqualification [it seeks disqualification] for stealing
and uttering
prescriptions is in the order of 2 to 3 and ½ years. The submission is not
made out by the cases referred to by
The suggested tariff or range is way more than the range discussed in Nursing
& Midwifery Board of Australia v Pannell
[2018] SACAT 42.
Pannell is one of
the cases which were supplied by the Board following the hearing but to which no
reference is made in its written
submissions.
Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia v Barrell
[2017] TASHPT 3
In Barrell the applicant (same Board as the applicant in this) joined in
seeking orders that involved no period of suspension nor
disqualification in the
case of registered nurse found guilty of professional misconduct.
The misconduct of Mr Barrell was greater than that of Ms Erends as
took a prescription pad; [1(a)]
prescriptions on the names of patients by gaining access to their confidential
records and using the information he obtained;
[1(d) and (e)]
Supplied some
prescriptions for others to utter and then shared in the drugs they obtained;
Received from
the presiding Magistrate a four month term of imprisonment but wholly suspended
for multiple counts of stealing, forging
and uttering; [7]
this case) Initially only made limited admissions to the police (but 4 days
later confessed); [15-16]
The conduct
was obviously to feed an addiction; [16 at bullet point 3]
Mr Barrell was suspended by the Board on 15 July
2015. The hearing proceeding approximately 1 year and 9 months later, on 3
The Tribunal found that the orders jointly sought by the parties were
consistent with the seriousness of the conduct and the paramount
purpose of the
National Law to protect the public and reputation of the profession. They were
not excessive and served these objectives
rather than punishment of the
respondent practitioner: [34].
The applicant joined in seeking the orders that were made
appropriate by the applicant after it has received the report of the health
assessment in respect of the respondent...,
upon the removal of the suspension
imposed by the applicant on the respondent’s registration..., his
registration be immediately
subject to a condition that for a period of 12
months from the date of removal of the suspension the respondent is to undertake
and alcohol screening...
The Board has made no attempt to distinguish Barrell
from the present case thereby justifying the penalty sought by it in this
68. In the case of Nursing & Midwifery of Board of
Australia v Pannell (supra) at [49] the Tribunal considered some similar matters
dealt with recently by the South Australia Health Practitioners Tribunal
regarding registered nursing practitioners who had pleaded
guilty to drug
related offences. Those practitioners were all registered at the time of the
disciplinary action and the periods of
suspension from practice imposed on some
of them varied between 3 to 5 months. The cases referred to were Nursing &
Board of Australia v Mundy (supra), Nursing & Midwifery Board of
Australia v Frost (supra) and Nursing & Midwifery Board
of Australia v Smith
69. I consider the respondent was caught up on an unfortunate
set of circumstances, she has taken positive steps to alleviate the
issues that
led to her conduct that is the subject of this application.
determining what orders should be made I accept the Board’s submissions
that the respondent’s dishonesty occurred
over a period of almost 2 years
and that but for detection it would probably have continued. She forged Dr
McCallum’s signature
on his prescription pad and accessed his computer.
She wrote prescriptions for her family who were not patients under the care of
Dr McCallum and she prescribed Endone which is a schedule 8 drug of
71. I also have regard to the fact that the respondent has had her
registration suspended since 8 March 2019, which is a significant
accept the submissions made on her behalf with respect to the significant
adverse impact this conduct has had upon her
and the steps she has taken to
reconstruct her life. I accept that the prospect of the respondent reoffending
is low. Further,
I note that the sanctions imposed in these matters are not
intended to be punitive and should be proportionate to sanctions imposed
similar conduct.
72. Upon the finding that the respondent’s conduct, as
conceded by her, is professional misconduct the Tribunal makes the following
(a) The respondent is reprimanded;
respondent’s registration as a health practitioner is suspended for a
further period of 3 months from the date of this
(c) The following
conditions are imposed upon the respondent’s registration for a period of
twelve months from the date of the
removal of the suspension:
(i) the respondent must undertake (at her own expense) and
successfully complete a program of education, approved by the Nursing &
Midwifery Board of Australia and including a reflective practice report, in
relation to ethical and legal responsibilities of registered
nurses, including
those relating to medication management.
(ii) the respondent must only take
substances prescribed, approved, or administered by a nominated treating
practitioner(s) and such
nominated treating practitioner(s) may not be a
relative, friend, professional colleague or in a contractual or financial
relationship
with the respondent;
(iii) on return to practice as a registered
nurse, the respondent must commence random urine drug screening (UDS) and hair
for drug screening (hair analysis) in accordance with AHPRA’s
protocol for UDS and hair analysis (the protocol) in force at
the date these
conditions are imposed and then amended from time to time;
respondent must pay all or any reasonable expenses associated with the
compliance of these conditions except as otherwise
provided for in these
conditions;
(v) the respondent must provide a copy of these conditions to a
person who occupies a position of authority in any entity through
whom she is
employed, contracted or otherwise engaged to provide nursing services and ensure
that the person provides to the Board
or its delegate written confirmation that
these conditions have been sighted.
73. I have not imposed a condition in relation to the
respondent’s rights to possess and administer Schedule 8 and Schedule
Declared Restricted Substances as these rights have been revoked by Dr Mark
Veitch on 3 April 2020 and they can only be restored
upon an application made by
the respondent “after a documented extended period of well-supported
personal and professional
stability.” (A10)
74. The wording of the
conditions are set out in the Schedule of Conditions annexed to this order. I
will hear the parties for clarification
of the wording of these orders if
A. M. Clues
CHAIRPERSON
Undertake a program of education
1. The respondent must undertake and successfully complete a
program of education, approved by the Nursing and Midwifery Board of
and including a reflective practice report, in relation to ethical and legal
responsibilities of Registered Nurses, including
those relating to medication
management.
2. Within 28 days of the notice of the imposition of these
conditions, the respondent must, on the approved form (HPN24), nominate
approval by the Board an education course, assessment or program (the education)
addressing the topics required. The respondent
must ensure:
(a) The nomination includes a copy of the curriculum of the
(b) The education consists of a minimum of 3 hours.
3. The respondent must complete the education within 6 months
of the notice of the Board’s approval of the education.
4. Within 28
days of the completion of the education, the respondent is to provide:
(a) Evidence of successful completion of the education.
(b) A report demonstrating, to the satisfaction of the Board, that the
respondent has reflected on the issues that gave rise to this
requiring they undertake education and how the respondent has incorporated the
lessons learnt in the education into the
respondent’s
Undertake breath alcohol testing and/or urine and hair drug
respondent must only take substances prescribed, approved, or administered by a
nominated treating practitioner(s) and such nominated
treating practitioner(s)
may not be a relative, friend, professional colleague or in a contractual or
financial relationship with
the respondent.
For the purposes of this
condition ‘substance’ is defined as any illicit substance as well as
any pharmacist only, prescription
only and any controlled drug medication as
contained in Schedule 3, 4 or 8 in the Standard for the Uniform Scheduling of
Medications
and Poisons (the SUSMP) as amended from time to time and as
published at
http://www.tga.gov.au/publication/poisons-standard-susmp
urine drug screening (UDS) and hair analysis for
drug screening (hair analysis)
in accordance with AHPRA’s protocol for UDS and hair analysis (the
protocol) in force at the
date these conditions are imposed and then amended
from time to time.
respondent must commence UDS and hair analysis at Group One frequency or as
otherwise advised by AHPRA and must continue to attend
at this frequency until
the Board approves otherwise.
21 days of the notice of the imposition of these conditions, the respondent must
provide to AHPRA:
(a) Acknowledgement, on the approved form (HPF6),
that he understands the requirements of the protocol as it pertains to urine and
hair drug screening and he is aware of AHPRA’s monitoring of this
(b) The details, on the approved form (HPF6), of all current substances that
have been prescribed or administered to or approved for
him, along with the
prescribe, approve or administer
substances.
Notice to Senior Person
Within 7 days of return to practice as a registered nurse, the respondent
must provide to AHPRA, on the approved form (HPC), the contact
details of a
senior person, such as the Director of Medical Services, Director of Nursing,
Senior Practice Manager, Senior Manager,
Senior Partner, Proprietor, Owner, or
equivalent (the Senior Person) at each current place of practice. In providing
the respondent acknowledges that:
1. AHPRA will contact the Senior Person and provide them with a
copy of the conditions on the respondent’s registration or confirm
the Senior Person has received a copy of the conditions from the respondent;
2. The respondent will be required to provide the same form:
(a) within 7 days of the commencement of practice at each
and every subsequent place of practice; and
(b) within 7 days of each and
every notice of any subsequent alteration of these conditions.
of compliance
All costs associated with compliance with the conditions on his registration
are at the respondent’s own expense.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (204 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter