URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASADT/2021/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Reason v State of Tasmania (Department of Police and Emergency Management) & Anor [2021] TASADT 2 (9 June 2021)
[2021] TASADT 2
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
Reason v State of Tasmania (Department of Police and
Emergency Management) & Anor
[2021] TASADT 2
STATE OF TASMANIA (DEPARTMENT OF POLICE AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT)
HICKMAN, Genevieve
HARRISS, Peter
MEWIS, Mark
MARTIN, Tony
HARRISS, Peter
WILKINSON, Phillip
PLAYSTED, Caroline
REFERENCE NO(S):
A/2015/30, A/2015/31, A/2015/33
DELIVERED ON:
9 June 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
s78, s99(2)(b)
DECISION OF:
Tribunal Member Wilkins
CATCHWORDS:
Application to dismiss – failure to comply with
directions – delay – explanation for delay – prejudice –
“just and appropriate”
[2011] TASADT 7
Costello v Tasmania Police
[2012] TASADT 9
The Closer Settlement Board v Thomas
[1982] TASRp 18
(1982) Tas R
Anti-Discrimination Act
DETERMINATION:
Complaints dismissed for want of prosecution.
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant:
In person, B Reason
Respondent:
[2021] TASADT 2
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. There are three referrals before the Tribunal in relation to
complaints made by the complainant to the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner
in relation to alleged discrimination and other proscribed behaviour under the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
(the Act). The complaints are in relation to
issues arising from the complainant’s employment with the Department of
and Emergency Management (Tasmania Police).
2. The history of the
complaints has been lengthy and convoluted. There have been very many directions
conferences and directions
3. The first complaint was made to the
ADC in October 2010. I will refer to this as the original complaint. Four
respondents were
named, being Tasmania Police and three employees of Tasmania
Police. The complaint was investigated by the ADC and referred to the
for inquiry.
4. As a result of a conciliation conference in October 2012, the
complainant withdrew her complaint against two of the named respondents.
respondents remaining were Tasmania Police and an employee of Tasmania Police.
Thereafter, the referral progressed towards hearing.
5. On 7 April 2014, the
complainant made another complaint to the ADC. I will refer to this as the
second complaint. The respondents
to the second complaint were Tasmania Police,
and a number of other employees of Tasmania Police. The employees of Tasmania
who were named as respondents were different to the respondents named in
the original complaint. The complaint was made in relation
to the behaviour of
the respondents from the time that the original complaint had been made to the
ADC, and the complainant said
she had been victimised by the respondents because
of the original complaint.
6. The ADC rejected part of the second complaint,
but referred the balance of the second complaint to the Tribunal for inquiry.
7. The complainant referred the part rejection of the second complaint to
the Tribunal for review. By a decision of the Tribunal
on review, one aspect of
the second complaint was sent back to the ADC for investigation. That aspect of
the second complaint (that
had been sent back to the ADC by the Tribunal) was
thereafter referred by the ADC to the Tribunal for inquiry.
8. Thus, it can
be said that although there were two complaints made to the ADC, there are three
referrals before the Tribunal. The
first referral relates to a complaint about
alleged discrimination prior to 2011. The other referrals relate to complaints
alleged victimisation in the period April 2013 to April 2014.
event, at a directions conference before the Tribunal on 31 March 2015, a
Tribunal Member directed that the hearing of all
those matters would take place
10. On 19 December 2015 a directions conference was held before the
Chairperson of the Tribunal. After discussions between the parties
progression of the matters, and confirmation that all parties wanted the matters
to be heard together, the Chairperson made
a number of directions. The first of
those directions was that the complainant, within 28 days would provide proofs
of evidence/witness
statements in relation to two witnesses, whom the
complainant intended to call to give evidence at the hearing, in relation to the
second complaint.
11. No witness statements were filed in compliance with the
12. On 1 September 2017 the Registrar of the Tribunal wrote to the
complainant’s advocate, who was the complainant’s husband.
Registrar noted that the direction for provision of witness statements had not
been complied with, and enquired whether it was
intended to pursue the
complaints.
13. The complainant’s advocate responded and, in part,
advised that it was intended to pursue the complaints. I will set out
details about that response on behalf of the complainant below.
directions conference was listed for 20 November 2017. At the directions
conference, the solicitor for the respondents made
an application for the
complaints to be dismissed for failure to comply with the direction of the
Chairperson in December 2015 in
relation to the provision of witness statements,
and failure to otherwise prosecute the complaints. Notice of this application
been forwarded to the complainant and her advocate by letter from the
respondents’ solicitor dated 14 November 2017.
15. It is the
application to dismiss the complaints that is before the Tribunal.
The application to dismiss: submissions on behalf of the
respondents
16. Counsel for the respondents, Mr Miller, applied for the
dismissal of the complaints in accordance with
of the Act, which
Tribunal may dismiss a complaint at any time if it is satisfied that...
(b) dismissing the complaint would, for some other reason, be just and
appropriate.”
17. In support of the application, Mr Miller made the following
submissions:
• The original complaint had been made in relation to
matters occurring between 2008 and 2010. The original complaint had been
to proceed to hearing in April 2014.
• The second complaint was made to
the ADC on 7 April 2014, in relation to events from the time that the original
had been made.
• An application for dismissal of proceedings
had been foreshadowed by Mr Miller in a directions conference on 20 November
The complainant was therefore on notice about the respondent’s
position that it would contemplate applying for dismissal of
proceedings under
• There had been a failure to comply with the provision of
witness statements as directed. If the potential witnesses were
relied upon, the complainant had failed to inform the Tribunal
accordingly.
• The complainant and her advocate were familiar with the
Act, and the operations of the Tribunal. They could have contacted
the Tribunal
to advise that witness statements were not going to be provided, so that the
referrals could progress. They also knew
they could have contacted the Tribunal
generally at any time to progress the referrals, and failed to do
• In relation to the question of prejudice, Mr Miller submitted
that the effluxion of time since the events that were the subject
complaints was such that witness memories would be adversely affected. Three of
the respondents had retired from their employment
with Tasmania Police since the
time of the first complaint, and one particular respondent had suffered a
significant illness over
a protracted period in 2014 which had the potential to
adversely affect her capacity to recall events.
18. Mr Miller referred to the decision of the Tribunal in B v C
[2011] TASADT 7
where there had been failure by the complainant to comply with
directions issues by the Tribunal, and the complaint was dismissed
in accordance
of the Act. The Tribunal Member in his reasons for decision in that
case observed:
• It was nearly 5 years from the time of the events
complained of “the memories of witnesses will have dulled with the
effluxion of time”.
• Although acknowledging the
complainant’s apparent cognitive impairment, he had failed to prosecute
the complaint with
any or any sufficient diligence.
• There was no
evidence from the complainant to support his case, and it was unlikely that
there would be. “There is
a valid public interest in ascertaining whether
there has been proscribed discrimination, but that needs to be balanced against
interests of the respondents accused of discrimination in circumstances
where it does not appear an inquiry can be held within a
reasonably time to
fully ventilate claims made against them.”
19. Mr Miller also referred to the Tribunal decision in
Costello v Tasmania Police
[2012] TASADT 9
where the Tribunal Member, in
referring to
term ‘just and appropriate’ and similar phrases such as ‘just
and convenient’ and ‘just and
reasonable’ are commonly used in
statutes. It is intended to allow a wide discretion. It is intended that in
the exercise
of the discretion all relevant circumstances should be taken into
account, not simply the position of a single
20. In the case of Costello, the lack of particularity in terms
of the complainant’s case was considered to be a significant
factor in the
Tribunal’s exercise of the discretion to dismiss the complaint.
Miller submitted that similar considerations would be relevant to the exercise
of the discretion here. He submitted that there
had been several requests for
particularisation in relation to the original complaint that had finally only
been provided by the
complainant “adopting” the matters set out by
the ADC in her referral report to the Tribunal.
22. Mr Miller also
submitted that the complainant had provided no good reason for her failure to
prosecute her complaints.
Submissions on behalf of the complainant
23. The complainant and her advocate, both provided submissions
to oppose the application to dismiss.
24. Mr Reason, on behalf of the
complainant, submitted that there had been no failure to comply with the
Chairperson’s direction,
as witness statements could not be obtained from
the potential witnesses, and there was therefore nothing that could be
25. He submitted that the lack of progress in the complaints lay
with the Tribunal’s failure to take any steps to progress the
proceedings
since the last directions conference.
26. The complainant, on her own behalf,
said that she had a knee replacement procedure in February following the
directions conference
in December 2015, and that her eldest son had been
diagnosed with cancer which necessitated a course of treatment involving
chemotherapy
for several months. She “didn’t think of it”,
meaning the Tribunal proceedings.
27. The complainant also said that the
Chairperson, in December 2015, had ordered conciliation in relation to the
matters that were
raised in her second complaint, which had never
eventuated.
28. The complainant conceded that she should have been aware of
the Tribunal procedures, but also said that she and her advocate “believe
that we are not the ones giving the orders” and that “we can’t
tell the Registry what to do”. She said the
lack of action since the last
directions conference was the fault of the Tribunal Registry, and that she had
been “waiting
with bated breath” for the Registry to advise the
current position.
29. Mr Reason submitted that all directions had been
complied with by the complainant. He also said that he had spoken to the
of the Tribunal in 2016 and informed the Registrar that they had no
more witnesses, other than those the Tribunal had already been
informed about.
He said that he had not put this conversation in writing.
Communications between the complainant and the Tribunal
30. In response to the letter from the Tribunal dated 1
September 2017, which is referred to in paragraph 12 above, the
complainant’s
advocate sent an email to the Tribunal on 11 September 2017.
The email, in part, said:
is nearly 2 years since the last ADT directions hearing that any communication
was received concerning the above matter
and understandably a surprise.
The direction mentioned could not be complied with as the further witness to
be called has refused to answer to acknowledge communication...
I formally advise that we will not be filing any further witness statements,
however intend on pursuing the complaints to hearing
and to further litigation
if necessary.”
31. On Tuesday, 26 September 2019 the complainant’s
husband sent another email to the Tribunal, directed towards the Registrar.
email said:
“I refer to your
message left on my answering machine of last week.
I have only returned from my business trip interstate and was unable to
translate parts of the message, due to some inaudible content.
What I could make of the last portion was I think – ‘have no
witness statements’ – ‘pursue the complaint’
‘what are my next steps’ or words to the effect of.
Firstly, I have no intention of discussing the complaints of sensitive nature
over an open communication, which I consider the message
contained – phone
Secondly, I will always ask for a paper trail to record any discussions
pertaining to the complaints.
Thirdly, if I have translated your message correctly, my reply
have filed with the Registry previously all witness statements to be used at
have no further witness statements to file with the Registry to be used at
will be pursuing the complaints to hearing and the witnesses and their
statements already filed.
complainant does not take or advise of the next steps, the ADT does.
ADT Member at the last directions ordered the next step on the day and this has
failed to eventuate.
The remarks here are only in line to what I have
translated from the garbled message and if that is not correct then you are
to enlighten me further.”
Section 99(2)
32. The exercise of the Tribunal’s discretion whether to
dismiss a complaint under
is not fettered by particular rules, but by
consideration of the overall justice of the situation, and will turn on its own
facts and circumstances on each occasion.
33. Usually, the
question of what is “just and reasonable” will include consideration
of matters such as the length of
the delay involved, the conduct of the
defendant, and the competing questions of prejudice to either party. In some
circumstances
there may be an issue of whether delay on the part of the
complainant ought to be more properly considered to be delay by the
complainant’s
solicitors. In this instance, that question does not arise
because the complainant’s advocate and support person is her
Consideration
34. On the basis of the complainant’s advice that one
potential witness had declined to respond to communications on behalf
complainant (although the situation in relation to the other potential witness
has not been made clear), and that no further
witness statements were to be
filed, I accept the complainant’s position that there was not a failure to
comply with the Tribunal’s
direction relating to the filing of additional
witness statements within 28 days of 9 December 2015.
35. There is no basis
to dismiss the complaints for failure to comply with the Tribunal’s
36. However, the application to dismiss on the basis of a want of
prosecution needs to be determined.
37. The complainant has provided an
explanation for delay in prosecuting her complaints arising from her own
surgical procedure in
February 2016, and her son’s illness and need for
treatment over a period of several months, although it is not clear exactly
that occurred.
38. However, this explanation does not cover the entire period
between December 2015 and September 2017 at the point where the Tribunal
enquired whether there was any intention to pursue the complaints.
witness statements or proofs of evidence were going to be filed in accordance
with the Tribunal’s direction, it would
have been expected that the
complainant would have advised the Tribunal that the complainant’s
position that it intended to
provide additional witness statements had changed,
and advised that it was no longer intended to call those foreshadowed witnesses.
40. The 28 days to provide the witness statements would have expired in
early January 2016, which was well before the time that the
complainant was
having her knee operation.
41. I reject the assertion that the
complainant’s advocate provided advice to the Registrar of the Tribunal in
2016 by telephone
that there were to be no additional witnesses called (and
consequently no further witness statements). I think Mr Reason must be
in his recollection. There are three reasons for this; firstly, the Tribunal
file discloses no record of any conversation
between the Registrar and Mr Reason
at any time following the directions hearing in December 2015. Secondly, Mr
Reason’s two
items of email correspondence to the Tribunal dated 11
September 2017 and 26 September 2017 make no mention of any telephone discussion
with the Registrar about this issue, and the email of 11 September 2017
specifically advises that there had been no communication
received in relation
to the complaints. Thirdly, Mr Reason, in his email of 26 September 2017
indicated that he had no intention
of discussing the complaint over “an
open communication” and that phone contact was for non-confidential
matters. He
also indicated that he would always ask for a paper trail to record
any discussions pertaining to the complaints. No request for
any written
confirmation of a discussion with the Registrar in 2016 was made by Mr
42. It was also submitted that the lack of action since the
directions conference in December 2015 was the fault of the Tribunal Registry,
that the complainant was waiting to hear from the Registry for the entire time,
and that the complainant and her husband were of
the view that they were not
able to “tell the Registry what to do”.
43. The submission on
behalf of the complainant that the delay in pursuing her complaints was also
because she “could not tell
the Registry what to do”, and was
“waiting with bated breath” for contact from the Registry is not an
explanation
that excuses the delay.
44. It can be seen from the
Tribunal’s file in relation to the referrals before it that the
complainant and her advocate have
participated fully in Tribunal proceedings
since the original complaint was referred for inquiry, and are conversant with
and Tribunal processes. To suggest they did not believe it was their
place to contact the Tribunal to enquire what was happening,
because it was not
up to them to tell the Registry what to do is not credible. This is
particularly in circumstances where the Tribunal
files disclose there are
occasions where the complainant or her advocate have contacted the Registry to
request that a directions
conference be convened to ventilate particular issues
they have raised.
45. In this regard, I note that in an email on 8 July 2013
the complainant’s advocate raised issues relating to the
respondents’
evidentiary material, and said in that email:
would request that an earlier Directions Conference be set to bring these
matters to attention.”
46. Further, in an email on 6 May 2014, the complainant raised
an issue to do with what was said to be a failure of the respondents
with a Tribunal direction and issues where proofs of evidence provided on behalf
of the respondents were described variously
by the complainant as
‘questionable’, ‘suspect’ and
‘unacceptable’. She went on to say “I
recommend that a
Directions Conference be called whereby we will present my case for the matters
raised within”.
47. I am therefore not satisfied that the complainant
has provided an adequate excuse for the entirety of her delay in prosecuting
complaints following the directions conference before the Tribunal on 9 December
The respondents’ conduct
48. It is clear that the respondents, similarly, took no steps
to bring the complaints on. However the responsibility for prosecuting
complaint lies with the complainant. The respondent has no obligation, in the
absence of action by a complainant, to do anything
other than let the proverbial
sleeping dog lie. As Neasey J. observed in The Closer Settlement Board v Thomas
[1982] TASRp 18
[1982] Tas R 179:
can easily be envisaged in which, after the pleadings are completed the
defendant, preferring the case to expire rather
than proceed, does nothing; the
plaintiff does nothing either, and the case lies for a substantial period
apparently and in fact
inert. A defendant then according to circumstances might
have a strong case to dismiss for want of
prosecution.”
49. I am not of the view that there is any conduct by the
respondent in their lack of action relating to the complaints from the
conference on 9 December 2015 that would mitigate against the
application to dismiss that has been made on their behalf.
50. The conduct that is the subject of the complaints goes back
until at least 2009, insofar as the original complaint is concerned.
The conduct
that is complained of in relation to the second complaint goes back until the
time that the original complaint was made
– that is, late 2010. The parts
of the second complaint that have been referred to the Tribunal involve matters
that occurred
between April 2013 and April 2014.
51. Three of the respondents
have retired from their employment with Tasmania Police. The Tribunal file
discloses that the Tribunal
and the complainant were apprised of this at a time
prior to the directions conference on 9 December 2015. One of the respondents
has experienced a significant adverse health event.
52. Counsel for the
respondents did not advise the Tribunal that the respondents who had retired
from Tasmania Police were not able
to be contacted, or were otherwise unable to
give evidence. The submission that there would be an adverse effect on
capacity to
recall events for the particular respondent who had suffered the
adverse health issue, whilst quite possibly correct, appeared to
be put as a
matter of supposition rather than specific information. However, the deleterious
effect of the passing of time generally
on the capacity of witnesses to recall
events is a matter of human experience and well known not only in the legal
system. A court
or tribunal may, as frequently occurs, take into account the
effect of the effluxion of time upon witnesses’ memories when
considering
general questions of prejudice.
53. In that regard, the nature of the
complainant’s case may be relevant. Where a case is founded upon the
existence and terms
of documentation, delay may engender little prejudice,
because the essential evidence remains unchanged. Where a case relies upon
witness recollections of conversation and events, adverse effects because of
delay may be have substantially more significance as
memories fade and become
distorted with the passage of time.
54. In relation to the original
complaint, the adoption by the complainant of the ADC’s referral report by
way of particulars
of her claim, disclose that allegations against the remaining
respondents include allegations in relation to things that were said
complainant, inferences the complainant drew from things that were said about
other people, tone of voice used, actions (including
things like head-shaking
and eye-rolling) and inferred motivations for respondent behaviour.
two referrals to the Tribunal arising from the second complaint involve
allegations of victimisation, said to result from
the original claim. Matters
that are raised in the referrals include a requirement for the complainant to
apply for leave to attend
Tribunal proceedings in relation to her original
complaint, transfer from working at the Police Academy at Rokeby to Hobart,
relating to work processes for the complainant following the transfer
to Hobart, alleged lack of appropriate work tasks and alleged
non-compliance
with her work plan.
56. The Tribunal file discloses that in a Directions
Conference on 9 December 2014, a direction was made by a Tribunal Member that
the complainant provide a witness statement in relation to her second complaint,
as well as additional documents that she intended
to rely upon in relation to
that complaint. That direction was complied with. The witness statement provided
by the complainant included
re-statement of many of the matters raised in her
second complaint which are not part of the referrals. The allegations about
victimisation
appear to be significantly based on the complainant’s
beliefs about why the respondents acted in particular ways.
57. Documents
referred to in the second complaint and the complainant’s witness
statement were provided also. The documents
confirm some of the factual matters
that are referred to by the complainant – for example, that the
complainant was advised
that she would be required to seek leave to attend the
Tribunal hearing in relation to the original complaint, and that she was
required to transfer from the Police Academy at Rokeby to Hobart in early 2014
(said to be because her office at the Academy was
required as a result of an
organisational restructure). No other witness statements have been filed in
support of the second complaint.
The Tribunal has been advised that no other
witness statements will be filed.
58. By the time of the Directions
Conference before the Tribunal Chairperson in December 2015, the matters raised
in the second complaint
were in relation to things that had occurred up to two
and a half years previously. As I have set out above, the complainant did
advise the Tribunal that her position had changed and she no longer intended to
file additional witness statements in relation
to the original complaint. By the
time the Registry, upon enquiry in the absence of any communication from the
complainant, was advised
in September 2017 that the complaints were intended to
be pursued, it was almost seven years from the time the original complaint
made, and nearly three and a half years from the time of the second complaint.
59. The complainant and her advocate were aware that the referrals in
relation to both complaints had been ordered to be heard together.
They had been
active participants in the proceedings before the Tribunal up until that time,
and apparently had no hesitation in
complainant’s position and raise issues that they had identified. The
complainant permitted
her complaints to fall into abeyance. For reasons that
have not adequately been addressed, the complainant and her advocate failed
take any steps to progress the complaints that were before the Tribunal for a
period of nearly two years.
Determination
60. Given the delay in the progression of the referrals which
was, for the most part, unexplained, and the consequential effect on
memories as a result of the effluxion of time, and particularly the capacity to
recall salient events and conversations,
I have determined that it would be
“just and appropriate” under
of the Act to dismiss the
complaints before the Tribunal, on the basis that the complainant failed to
prosecute her complaints with
sufficient diligence.
respondents’ application for dismissal of the complaints for want of
prosecution is upheld.
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (136 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter