URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMACT/2017/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:17:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Brook v Motor Accidents Insurance Board (Ref No. 14/2016) [2017] TASMACT 2 (14 July 2017)
[2017] TASMACT 2
MOTOR ACCIDENTS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
STEPHEN BROOK V MOTOR ACCIDENTS INSURANCE BOARD
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
June 2017 and by written submissions
received on 13 July 2017
DELIVERED ON:
14 July 2017
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Chairperson Webster
CATCHWORDS:
law- statutory compensation in respect of
motor vehicle accidents- jurisdiction of Tribunal- privilege-waiver
Motor Accidents (Liabilities & Compensation) Act
Accidents (Liabilities & Compensation) Regulations
Accidents Compensation Tribunal Regulations
Commissions of Inquiry
Tasmanian Water and Sewerage Corporation v Resource Management
and Planning Appeal Tribunal
[2013] TASSC 52
Mann v Carnell
[1999] HCA 66
DSE Holdings Pty Ltd v Intertan Inc.
[2003] FCA 384
(2003) 127 FCR 499
Kentish Council v Bellenjuc Pty Ltd
[2011] TASSC 58
ASIC v Southcorp
[2003] FCA 804
Atkinson v T & P Fabrications
DETERMINATION:
The Tribunal has power to make an order in the terms
sought in paragraph (b) of the amended application. Permission to inspect the
documents in question is refused as there has been no wavier of privilege.
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Slater & Gordon
Respondent:
Ogilvie Jennings
[2017] TASMACT 2
Chairperson Webster
INTRODUCTION
1. On 25 July 2016 the applicant filed this referral pursuant
to s28(2) of the Motor Accidents (Liabilities and Compensation) Act
Act) in which he indicated he was aggrieved by the failure of the respondent to
make any payments by way of scheduled benefits.
2. It appears from the face
of the referral that his complaint is the respondent has failed to make payment
of disability benefits
in respect of attendant care or domestic services
gratuitously provided to the applicant from 2 November 2011 to the date of the
Tribunal’s determination of this referral. An extension of time is also
sought pursuant to clause 8(2) of Part 1 of Schedule
1 of the Motor Accidents
(Liabilities and Compensation) Regulations 2010 (the Regulations) for a period
of 5 years from the date
any gratuitous services were provided before 1 July
2015. The reason for the use of 1 July 2015 is that there is a letter on file
from the applicant’s solicitors to the Tribunal of 6 December 2016 in
which it is alleged that a claim was first made by the
applicant for the payment
of disability benefits pursuant to clause 5 of Part 6 of Schedule 1 to the
Regulations on 1 July 2016.
There was no response to that claim and accordingly
this referral was filed. A copy of that claim is also on file.
3. From other
documents on file I note the applicant was injured in a motor vehicle accident
on 6 June 2011 when his vehicle collided
with an oncoming vehicle. The driver
of the oncoming vehicle died in the accident. The applicant suffered serious
injuries including
burn injuries which affect his right arm, chest, abdomen,
face and back. He also suffered respiratory compromise, a right tibial
fracture, left fourth, fifth and sixth rib fractures, multiple left hand
fractures, a fractured left wrist, lacerations to
the left leg and possible
brachial plexopathy. The referral indicates the applicant has instituted
proceedings in the Supreme Court
for damages arising out of this motor
4. This decision concerns an application made by the applicant by
letter of 19 June 2017 which is in the following terms:
within a period of 7 days the Motor Accidents Insurance Board produce for the
inspection of the legal practitioner
for the Applicant the following
(a) The medical report of Dr Lodewicus Du Plessis, consultant neurologist and
rehabilitation physician, dated 16 June 2014;
(b) The medical report of Dr Tram Anh Bui, consultant physician in
rehabilitation medicine, dated 23 July 2013;
(c) The medical report of Mr Max Wearne, consultant orthopaedic surgeon,
dated 20 August 2012;
(d) The medical report of Dr Derek Stanley-Clarke, consultant orthopaedic
surgeon, dated 30 September 2013;
(e) Letters of referral from Ms Leigh Mackey, Ogilvie Jennings Lawyers, dated
27 July 2015 and 25 July 2016 to Ms Verity Coulter,
occupational
therapist.”
5. When this application was heard I was advised by counsel
that there had been agreement with respect to the documents identified
paragraphs 1(b), (c) and (d) of the application set out in paragraph 4 and
therefore a determination was only required with respect
to paragraph 1(a) and
(e) of the application.
6. As this Tribunal is a creature of statute it is
trite that it only has a power to make the orders sought by the applicant if
is a statutory power enabling it to do so. Unlike the Supreme Court, it
has no inherent power. Submissions were therefore sought
on this point at the
outset of the hearing. Counsel for the applicant had not turned his mind to
this issue so he was granted leave
to provide written submissions with respect
to this aspect of the matter within 14 days. The application proceeded on 29
on the assumption the Tribunal had the power to make the orders
sought. Counsel for the applicant’s written submissions with
the preliminary point were received on the 13 July 2017. Counsel for the
respondent was given an opportunity to provide
submissions in response but chose
not to do so.
7. This referral was the subject of a teleconference on 10
August 2016. On 16 December 2016 directions were made with respect to
service by the respondent of any and all statements of expert evidence in its
possession and upon which the respondent intended
to rely and the teleconference
was then adjourned to not before 31 March 2017 to enable a scheduled assessment,
which the respondent
had organised, to take place. When this referral came back
before the Tribunal on 27 April 2017 the respondent was directed to serve
and all statements of expert evidence upon which it intended to rely within 21
days and the referral was then to be set down
for mediation. This application
has been made before the matter has proceeded to mediation.
8. In compliance
with the direction made on 27 April 2017 the respondent delivered eight medical
reports to the applicant. These
included five reports from Dr du Plessis dated
20 May 2014, 2 April 2015, 21 September 2015, 10 November 2016 and 5 January
together with three reports from Ms Coulter dated 18 September 2015, 19
October 2015 and 22 November 2016.
9. The reports which are relevant to the
application as originally framed in paragraph 4 are the reports of Dr du Plessis
May 2014, 2 April 2015 and 10 November 2016 as well as the reports of
Ms Coulter dated 18 September 2015, 19 October 2015 and 22
November 2016. Those
reports were provided with the application. As the parties had resolved their
differences with respect to
the reports in paragraphs 1(b), (c) and (d) of the
application, the report of Dr du Plessis of 20 May 2014 was no longer relevant.
This is because the report sought in paragraph 1(a) of the application
post-dated this report.
10. The parties accepted that the following were
applicable to this case:
• The onus is on the party asserting a privilege to
establish that privilege;
• That the privilege with respect to the
documents sought by the applicant was conceded but the applicant submitted that
had been waived; and
• The burden of establishing wavier of
the respondent’s privilege fell upon the applicant.
11. Ordinarily in a dispute with respect to whether or not
documents are privileged either a description is provided to the decision
or they are offered for inspection. In this case counsel for the respondent
provided me with copies of the documents which
were sought in paragraphs 1(a)
and (e) of the application.
THE PRELIMINARY POINT
12. The applicant sought, in his written submissions, to amend
the application made in his letter of 19 June 2017 by abandoning that
application and seeking the following orders:
(a) That within 7 days the respondent produce to the
Tribunal pursuant to s22(1)(b) of the Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995:
(i) The medical report of Dr Lodewicus Du Plessis, consultant
neurologist and rehabilitation physician, dated 16 June 2014;
(ii) Letters
of referral from Ms Leigh Mackey, Ogilvie Jennings Lawyers, dated 27 July 2015
and 25 July 2016 to Ms Verity Coulter,
occupational therapist.
(b) That, subject to any lawful claim of privilege, the
practitioners for the applicant be allowed to inspect the documents referred
in order (a) above.
The applicant noted the respondent had already complied with
the first order sought by providing the documents to the Tribunal at
the hearing
and so all that was left to determine was the second order. As the respondent
chose to make no submissions in reply the
application to amend the application
in the terms proposed by the applicant in his written submissions is
13. The Tribunal is authorised to regulate its own procedure: r13 of
the Motor Accidents Compensation Tribunal Regulations 2009. It
is also vested,
pursuant to s12(7) of the Act, with certain powers that are provided in Part 3
of the Commissions of Inquiry Act
1995 which include the power to require
production of the documents the subject of the amended application: see s22 of
Given the functions and power of a Commission pursuant to that Act, I
infer that it was, at the very least, the intention of Parliament,
this Tribunal with similar powers to obtain all relevant information it required
in order to determine a referral which
it is obliged, as a matter of law, to
determine. However, in proceeding in this manner it is accepted the Tribunal is
bound to ensure
procedural fairness to the parties which must mean by inference
the ability to permit the practitioners for the applicant to inspect
documents the subject of the amended application so long as the respondent has
no lawful claim of privilege. This position is
consistent with authority which
suggests that Tribunals have implied powers which, subject to statutory limits,
permit the exercise
of powers that are incidental and necessary to the exercise
of express powers: Tasmanian Water & Sewerage Corporation v Resource
Management & Planning Appeal Tribunal
[2013] TASSC 5
otherwise would mean in this case the Tribunal could call for the documents the
subject of the amended application but not
determine whether there had been a
waiver of privilege with respect to them and therefore it would not be in a
position to grant
the applicant access to the documents in circumstances where
there had been a waiver of that privilege. It would therefore be prevented
affording procedural fairness to the parties. Accordingly I determine this
Tribunal has power to make the second order sought
in the amended
application.
DETERMINATION
14. As is clear from the decision of Mann v Carnell
(1999) 201 CLR 1
, a party who is entitled to claim legal
professional privilege is taken to have impliedly waived that privilege if the
party engages
in conduct which is inconsistent with the maintenance of
confidentiality. The assessment of whether conduct is inconsistent with
maintenance of that confidentiality is “informed by considerations of
fairness”. Put another way, in DSE Holdings
Pty Ltd v Intertan Inc.
[2003] FCA 384
(2003) 127 FCR 499
Allsop J. (as he then was) said the
issue of wavier arises when “the party entitled to privilege makes an
assertion (express
or implied), or brings a case,...which necessarily lays open
the confidential communication to scrutiny and, by such conduct, an
inconsistency arises between the act and the maintenance of the confidence,
informed partly by the forensic unfairness of allowing
the claim to proceed
without disclosure of the communication.” This passage was cited with
approval by the Full Court of the
Federal Court in Commissioner of Taxation v
Rio Tinto Ltd
[2006] FCAFC 86
(2006) 151 FCR 341
15. As Porter J.
said in Kentish Council v Bellenjuc Pty Ltd
[2011] TASSC 58
“Accordingly,
after Mann v Carnell the determining factor "is the inconsistency between the
relevant act of the holder of the
privilege and the maintenance of the
confidence that is essential, not a broad balancing process based on fairness",
although fairness
remains a relevant consideration in the assessment of
inconsistency.”
16. A summary of the relevant principles is set out in the
judgment of Lindgren J. in Australian Securities and Investments Commission
Southcorp Limited
[2003] FCA 804.
Those principles have been referred to in
subsequent cases on many occasions and were set out in Porter J.’s
judgment in Kentish
Council v Bellenjuc Pty Ltd (supra). The summary set out in
[21] of Lindgren J.’s judgment is as follows (with references
“1 Ordinarily the
confidential briefing or instructing by a prospective litigant's lawyers of an
expert to provide a report
of his or her opinion to be used in the anticipated
litigation attracts client legal privilege:
of documents, whether the originals are privileged or not, where the copies were
made for the purpose of forming part of confidential
communications between the
client's lawyers and the expert witness, ordinarily attract the privilege:
generated unilaterally by the expert witness, such as working notes, field
notes, and the witness's own drafts of his or
her report, do not attract
privilege because they are not in the nature of, and would not expose,
communications:
disclosure of the expert's report for the purpose of reliance on it in the
litigation will result in an implied waiver
of the privilege in respect of the
brief or instructions or documents referred to in (1) and (2) above, at least if
the appropriate
inference to be drawn is that they were used in a way that could
be said to influence the content of the report, because, in these
circumstances,
it would be unfair for the client to rely on the report without disclosure of
the brief, instructions or documents;
privilege cannot be maintained in respect of documents used by an expert to form
an opinion or write a report, regardless
of how the expert came by the
may be difficult to establish at an early stage whether documents which were
before an expert witness influenced the content of
his or her report, in the
absence of any reference to them in the report.”
17. As to those principles, Porter J. said the following in
Kentish Council v Bellenjuc Pty Ltd (supra):
“31 I would apply the
principles set out to the necessary extent, subject to the one reservation that
Lindgren J made no reference
to Mann v Carnell (above). White J made the point
in relation to paragraph number 4 of the summary in New Cap Reinsurance Ltd (in
liq) v Renaissance Reinsurance Ltd
[2007] NSWSC 258
The question is not merely whether the materials were used in such a way that
they could be said to influence the content of the
report, ‘but whether it
could be said that they influenced the content ... in such a way that the use or
service of the report
would be inconsistent with maintaining privilege in those
materials, such as, where it would be unfair for the party to rely on the
without disclosure ...’. See also Watkins v State of Queensland (above)
per Jerrard JA at 578 – 579 [14].
is the use of the privileged material to ‘influence the content’ of
the report or proof which is the critical factor
in Lindgren J's paragraph
number 4. That same expression was used in Dingwall v Commonwealth of Australia
[1992] FCA 627
(1992) 39 FCR 521
, Sandvik Mining (above)
adopting Lindgren J's summary; and also by Crawford J (as he then was) in Jessup
v Gorjup unreported serial
no 139/1997 referring to
18. Porter J. then goes on to explain that the connection
between the instructions and the proof or report which is necessary for
of privilege has been described in various ways. He concludes with the
following at [36]:
“In whatever manner it
is expressed, the notion is, I think, clear enough. Leaving aside for the moment
consideration of compulsion
and voluntariness, there is a sufficient level of
inconsistency with the maintenance of privilege if there has been reliance on
privileged information as a basis or foundation of the opinion, or
incorporation of it so as to make it part of the
Has Privilege Been Waived in this Case?
Submissions
19. In this case, counsel for the applicant submitted that of
the six principles set out in Lindgren J.’s summary, principles
were applicable to this case. He noted that compulsion was an important part of
the reasoning of Porter J. in Kentish Council
v Bellenjuc Pty Ltd (supra)
because that case concerned a consideration of rules 515 and 516(2) of the
Supreme Court Rules 2000 and
in essence the argument boiled down to the question
of inconsistency of conduct looked at in the light of fairness and the impact
those rules. There is no such compulsion in this case.
20. In addition to
the privileged material influencing the content of the report or proof which has
been delivered and that being
inconsistent with the maintenance of privilege
because it would be unfair to his client in those circumstances for privilege to
counsel for the applicant also relied upon the following passages of
Porter J.’s decision at [52] and [54]:
an expert witness statement is based upon privileged material and the expert has
not noted the assumptions of fact
upon which the opinion is based the privilege
will be lost with the delivery of the report, but where the assumptions of fact
set out the privilege is not waived...
the associated material is necessary for a true understanding of the report or
proof, or where the picture may be misleading
or partial only if the associated
material is not produced, waiver will be implied...”
21. It is in important that the remainder of [52] is
reproduced. It is as follows:
“On that basis, the
Council would fail in this case, although that is not the complete end of the
matter. The question of fairness
needs to be considered in the assessment of
inconsistency.”
22. In relation to this case, counsel for the applicant
submitted that on page 1 of the reports of Dr du Plessis of 2 April 2015 and
November 2016, he says the following:
“Having reviewed the
available records and file data, interviewed and examined Mr Brook, I now submit
a detailed medical report
in answer to your
23. The only direct reference to the report of 16 June 2014 in
the report of 2 April 2015 appears on page 2 where Dr du Plessis says
“I previously did a
full report on Mr Brook on 20 May 2014 followed by a supplementary on 16 June
24. In addition, in the report of 10 November 2016, Dr du
Plessis makes mention of the report of 16 June 2014 by listing it on page
one of a number of reports which had been made available to him and then on page
7 under the heading “Review of File Material”
he says, inter
supplementary report on 16 June 2014 and reassessed Mr Brook again on 26 March
2015. No additional file material
was available at that particular
25. Counsel for the applicant submitted that the reports of 2
April 2015 and 10 November 2016 do not set out the factual assumptions
which Dr du Plessis’s opinions are based. If he had said, for example,
that he had assumed x rather than I refer to report
x then this application
would not be necessary. Although hamstrung by not having the benefit of reading
the report of 16 June 2014,
it was submitted by counsel for the applicant that
the contents of the reports of 2 April 2015 and 10 November 2016 were influenced
by the report of 16 June 2014 and that the applicant needed to be provided with
that report in order that a complete picture of the
respondent’s case
could be obtained so that there could be accurate cross examination of Dr du
Plessis at the relevant time
and so that proper advice could be provided by
counsel to his client.
26. In relation to the briefing letters of Ms
Coulter, I note she refers to them in her three reports in the following
• Functional Capacity Evaluation Report dated 18
September 2015 at page 2 under the heading “History” the report
to the assessment, the following reports were provided and
• Letter of referral from Ms Leigh Mackey, Ogilvie
Jennings Lawyers, dated the 27 July 2015;
• Report prepared by Dr Peter
Sharman, occupational physician, dated 26 March
• Occupational Therapy Assessment Report dated 19 October
2015. The first paragraph of this report sets out the fact that Mr
referred to Verity Coulter for an occupational assessment by Leigh Mackey of
Ogilvie Jennings Lawyers. Ms Coulter notes
the request was made for an
occupational therapy assessment to be undertaken to determine Mr Brooks’s
current functional status,
and the effects of his injuries and subsequent
limitations on his functional tolerances. Under the heading
“Introduction”
which appears at the foot of page 1 of the report Ms
Coulter notes the following at the top of page 2:
list of the reports reviewed prior to this assessment and report are included in
Appendix A.”
If one turns to Appendix A, that is headed:
“Reports reviewed
prior to the assessment:”
Listed under that heading are a number of medical reports but
it also includes the following entry:
“Letter of referral from Ms Leigh Mackey, Ogilvie
Jennings Lawyers, dated the 27 July 2015;”
• Occupational Therapy Assessment dated 22 November 2016.
This report commences with the following sentence:
you for your correspondence dated 25 July 2016. A list of reports reviewed
prior to the provision of this document,
have been included in Appendix
Appendix One is headed:
“Reports reviewed
prior to the assessment:”
Under that heading two medical reports are listed after the
following entry:
“Letter of referral
from Ms Leigh Mackey, Ogilvie Jennings Lawyers, dated the 25 July
27. The thrust of the submission with respect to the letters
sought by the applicant was that the two letters had been reviewed by
in preparing her reports. It was submitted that the comment at page 10 of the
report of 19 October 2015 in the following
“On the basis of the
completed on 20 August
and the subsequent review of the medical reports as
listed in appendix A, the following recommendations are made in response to your
specific questions.”
was an anomaly because the letter of 27 July 2015 was referred
to in Appendix A and must have been relied on in answering the questions
report although it was not mentioned in that passage. An alternative
explanation for that comment, of course, is that Ms
Coulter did not rely on Ms
Mackey’s letter of 27 July 2015.
28. In addition, with respect to the
report of 22 November 2016, I was referred to page 5 where Ms Coulter
note that the equipment as recommended in my report dated 19 October 2015 has
since been provided.”
29. On the basis of this comment, it was submitted that there
was a higher degree of reliance on the briefing letter of 25 July 2016
the information with respect to the provision of the equipment recommended in
her report of 19 October 2015 must be information
that was provided in that
letter. Such facts inform the content of this report. In essence it was
submitted that the briefing letters
were required to properly understand the
reports and for the reasons previously submitted in paragraph 25 that was only
30. Counsel for the respondent submitted that once I considered the
documents which are the subject of this application, it will be
clear that there
is no evidence of reliance by Dr du Plessis on his report of 16 June 2014 in his
reports of 2 April 2015 and 10
November 2016 and there is no reliance, which
could either be inferred or imputed, by Ms Coulter on her two briefing letters
reports of 18 September 2015, 19 October 2015 and 22 November
31. The assertions made by counsel for the applicant, it was submitted,
of references to the relevant documents amounting to reliance
could not be
sustained if the reports were considered closely. In relation to page 7 of the
report of Dr du Plessis of 10 November
2016 under the heading “Review of
File Material” it was submitted that Dr du Plessis sets out in a very
thorough manner
the material which he has reviewed and if one looks at page 8,
for example, he quotes a passage from Associate Professor Love’s
It was a reasonable inference to draw then that if a passage from a previous
report was relevant to Dr du Plessis’s
opinion, then he identifies the
relevant passage. It was pointed out that no such passage has been identified
from his previous
report of 16 June 2014. It was also noted insofar as Dr du
Plessis is concerned, he makes it very clear at the outset of each of
reports that the information obtained in his report comes from his interview
with Mr Brook unless he otherwise specifies, i.e.
if information comes from a
relevant source other than Mr Brook, then it was submitted he clearly notes that
32. It was submitted by counsel for the respondent that both Dr du
Plessis and Ms Coulter have been very thorough and have simply
identified what
materials have been put in front of them but she submitted that neither of them
relied on the respective documents
which the applicant seeks, that there was no
unfairness in the maintenance of privilege by the respondent and the maintenance
that privilege does not hamper the applicant and his advisors from being able
to reasonably understand the opinions of both Dr du
Plessis and Ms Coulter and
the basis upon which those opinions were arrived at.
Evaluation of the Submissions
33. Having considered the documents I have concluded that the
respondent has not impliedly waived its privilege with respect to any
Accordingly the permission sought by the applicant in paragraph (b) of the
amended application to inspect the documents
referred to in paragraph (a) is
refused. My reasons follow.
34. As stated by Porter J. in Kentish Council v
Bellenjuc Pty Ltd (supra) privilege in respect of a brief of instructions to an
is not lost by the mere delivery of the report or proof of evidence of
that expert. At [27] and [28], Porter J. says the following:
“27. ...Even
a mere reference to a privileged communication is not necessarily inconsistent
with the maintenance of the privilege
so as to amount to an implied waiver.
Something more is required.
As Aldous LJ in Bourns Inc v
[1999] 3 All ER 154
at 166 put it, ‘there
must at least be reference to the contents and reliance.’
there has been reliance on or incorporation of parts of privileged
material...the question is whether it is inconsistent for
a party to rely upon,
and so to waive privilege in respect of one part of the materials, without also
being taken to have waived
privilege in respect of the other: British American
Tobacco Australia Services Ltd v Cowell
[2002] VSCA 197
(2002) 7 VR 524
35. Accordingly a mere reference to the privileged material
does not result in a waiver of that privilege. Consideration of whether
there is an inconsistency between a respondent’s conduct in serving the
various proofs and maintaining the privilege
is required.
36. Insofar as the
report of Dr du Plessis of 14 June 2014 is concerned I have considered the
contents of that report and the contents
of his reports of 2 April 2015 and 10
November 2016 carefully. The contents of his report of 16 June 2014 is not
mentioned in any
way let alone in an oblique way in his subsequent reports of 2
April 2015 and 10 November 2016. Therefore I conclude there has not
reliance on or incorporation of any parts of the report of 16 June 2014 in the
reports of 2 April 2015 and 10 November 2016.
Accordingly it is not
inconsistent for the respondent to maintain privilege with respect to that
report. It is clear that no unfairness
can arise given that the report of 16
June 2014 deals with a completely different subject matter to the reports of 2
April 2015 and
10 November 2016. I agree with the submissions of counsel for
the respondent that in noting the report of 16 June 2014 in his subsequent
reports, Dr du Plessis is simply being thorough.
37. Likewise, having
considered the contents of the briefing letters to Ms Coulter of 27 July 2015
and 25 July 2016 I have come to
the same conclusion. There is nothing in either
of those letters upon which Ms Coulter has relied, or incorporated in her
reports of 18 September 2015, 19 October 2015 and 22 November 2016
and upon which she has based her opinion or which could be said
to influence the
content of her reports. In particular there is no information in the briefing
letter of 25 July 2016 which advises
Ms Coulter that the equipment mentioned in
her report of 19 October 2015 had been provided. See paragraphs 28 and 29 above.
Accordingly
there is nothing inconsistent with the respondent maintaining
privilege with respect to those briefing letters because there is no
on the respondent relying on the reports which have been delivered without
disclosing the briefing letters.
38. The case of Atkinson v T & P
Fabrications
(2001) TASSC 38
is apposite here. In that case Dr Ian Sale, the
well-known consultant psychiatrist, indicated in his report he had studied a
from the second defendant. That report was provided to the plaintiff
in lieu of Dr Sale’s proof of expert evidence and the
subsequently requested a copy of the second defendant’s statement. The
defendants declined to provide that statement
on the basis that it was
privileged. The plaintiff therefore applied to the Court for an order that the
defendants provide a copy
of the statement. In that particular case, while Dr
Sale referred to the second defendant’s statement in his report, it
from an examination of it, that the statement was not relied upon by Dr
Sale in the formulation of his opinion. That position was
in fact confirmed by
evidence received from Dr Sale. Accordingly it was held that privilege had not
been waived with respect to
the second defendant’s
39. Although I do not have evidence from Dr du Plessis and Ms
Coulter confirming the position, it is quite clear having read and considered
the report of Dr du Plessis of 16 June 2014 and his subsequent reports of 2
April 2015 and 10 November 2016, that he has not relied
in any way on the report
of 16 June 2014 in preparing his reports of 2 April 2015 and 10 November 2016.
The same can be said for
the briefing letters of Ms Coulter when those letters
are examined in light of the contents of her reports of 18 September 2015,
October 2015 and 22 November 2016.
40. Accordingly there has been no waiver
of privilege with respect to the documents the subject of the amended
application and therefore
the permission sought by the applicant to inspect
those documents is refused.
CHAIRPERSON
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (175 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter