URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCCA/2024/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Diplomat Dan v State of Tasmania [2024] TASCCA 9 (19 August 2024)
[2024] TASCCA 9
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (COURT OF CRIMINAL
Diplomat Dan v State of Tasmania
: DIPLOMAT DAN
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Estcourt J, Jago J, Martin AJ
Criminal law – Appeal and new trial – Particular circumstances
not amounting to miscarriage – Misdirection or non-direction
judge did not err in law or in factual basis for rulings during the trial, in
summing up or the memorandum provided
to the jury – No miscarriage of
Aust Dig Criminal Law [3470]
Criminal law – Appeal and new trial – Miscarriage of justice
– Particular circumstances not amounting to miscarriage
irregularities – Allegation that trial Court lacked jurisdiction –
Court held to have had jurisdiction
to try indictment and appellant was lawfully
in charge of the jury – No miscarriage of justice.
Aust Dig Criminal
Criminal law – Appeal and new trial – Particular grounds of
appeal – Conduct of trial judge – Allegations
of corruption and
misconduct by trial judge, prosecutor and jury held to be without any foundation
– Appeal dismissed.
Aust Dig Criminal Law [3516]
Criminal law – Appeal and new trial – Particular circumstances
not amounting to miscarriage – Improper admission
or rejection of evidence
– Evidence of appellant's guilt clearly admissible and completely
overwhelming – No miscarriage
of justice.
Aust Dig Criminal Law
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Director of Public
Prosecutions
Judgment Number:
[2024] TASCCA 9
paragraphs:
Serial No 9/2024
File No 1876/2024
DIPLOMAT DAN v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
Serial No 9/2024
File No 1876/2024
DIPLOMAT DAN v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
August 2024
The appellant was convicted, after being found guilty by a jury, of two counts
of assault and four counts of committing an unlawful
act intended to cause
bodily harm.
He has appealed against his conviction by two notices of appeal, the first
filed on 25 June 2024 and the second on 28 June 2024.
The two notices of appeal are attached to these reasons. The Court has not
attempted to summarise or paraphrase the grounds set
out in those two notices as
to do so might rob them of their full import.
The following summary of the facts of the case is taken from the learned trial
judge's comments on passing sentence:
"Although charged under the
name Daniel Victor Gandini, he strongly prefers to be known as 'Diplomate Dan'.
In order to minimise tensions
I took the unusual course throughout the trial of
referring to him as 'Dan' and addressing him as 'Dan'. I will continue to do
in these sentencing comments.
The charges relate to events that took place on 7 and 8 July 2021 at the home
of Dan and his wife at Port Sorell. For sentencing
purposes I will need to make
some findings of fact in relation to the relevant events and Dan's state of
mind. I may make findings
of fact adverse to him only if I am satisfied of such
facts beyond reasonable doubt. I may make findings of fact favourable to him
satisfied of such facts on the balance of probabilities.
Dan was due to appear before a magistrate on Friday 9 July 2021 on a charge
of driving whilst disqualified. He feared that he would
lose his driver's
licence. In my view his mental health was not good. He was very distressed
and was putting an enormous amount of
effort into preparing for it. His wife gave evidence that he and she had a
heated discussion
stood in front of her, that he was very agitated, that he raised his voice
her, and that he used two fingers to push into the left side of her chest. Count
1 on the indictment was a charge of unlawfully
assaulting his wife by pushing
her to the chest. The jury found him guilty of that charge. It is clear that
they accepted Mrs Gandini's
evidence, and so do I.
Mrs Gandini gave evidence that on the morning of Thursday 8 July she and Dan
were talking about preparing documents for the court
appearance, that he started
to become frustrated about a document that he was not happy with, that he became
quite short and snappy
with her, and that he went to the kitchen, returned with
a glass of water, threw it over her and their daughter, and then stood very
close to her with the glass in his hand, put it up to her head so close that it
was nearly touching her, and said that he wanted
to drive the glass through her
head. Count 3 on the indictment alleged that he unlawfully assaulted her 'by
pouring water over her
head and threatening to hit her in the face with the
glass'. The jury found him guilty of that charge. Clearly they accepted Mrs
Gandini's evidence in relation to that incident, and so do I.
Mrs Gandini thought she might need to go somewhere safe and call for help.
She took her mobile phone and went outside. Dan locked
her out. She tried to get
back inside, without success. The couple have two children who were then aged 5
and 3. The 5 year old boy
opened a door and both children came outside. Mrs
Gandini found herself in a situation where she did not have her car keys or her
wallet, and was still in her dressing gown and nightshirt. She and the children
waited in her car in the carport for a long time.
Dan had been seeing a psychologist named Michael Marriott. Eventually Mrs
Gandini phoned Mr Marriott, said something to him about
Dan's mental health
deteriorating, and told him that he had barricaded himself in the property and
locked her and the children out.
He suggested that she call the police.
After that phone call, Mr Marriott phoned the Devonport Police Station and
spoke to a police officer. He said that Dan was his client,
that he had lost the
plot and locked himself in his house, that he had armed himself, with a knife he
thought, and that he was quite
a paranoid individual. He said that Dan had
become increasingly disturbed and paranoid and distressed, that he did not think
harm his wife or his children, that they were all in the car, and that
Dan had the keys to the car inside the house.
Shortly after 9am Mrs Gandini phoned 000. She told the operator that Dan had
barricaded himself inside the house with weapons, that
he was having a mental
breakdown, that he had locked her and the children out of the house, and that
she did not have her car keys
and could not leave.
A little later a police officer phoned Mrs Gandini. They spoke together for
14 minutes, by which time a number of police officers
had arrived at the corner
of her street. During that call Mrs Gandini said that Dan had knives, that he
was talking about blowing
up the shed, that he was really unwell mentally, and
that he was probably going to kill people. She said that he had shut all the
windows, locked all the doors, and locked all the gates so that she could not
even get into the back yard. She said that he had
security cameras at the front
of the house and would be watching. She quoted him as saying, 'I'll be ready for
war if anyone comes
to get me.' The police officer told Mrs Gandini that police
were coming in cars from Devonport, Latrobe, Sheffield and Railton.
The first police officer on the scene was Constable Ford. He arrived at
9.21am. Mrs Gandini and the children walked to the corner
of their street and
met him and other officers there a few minutes later. He asked Mrs Gandini a
series of questions. He found
out that Dan was in the house alone, and that he
had knives but no firearms. He asked whether there was any fuel or fertilizer in
the house and Mrs Gandini said that both were there. She did not know whether
the fuel was diesel or petrol or what the fertilizer
was. Constable Ford had
grown up in the country and was familiar with a practice whereby farmers blew up
tree stumps using a mixture
of diesel fuel and fertilizer. He asked Mrs Gandini
whether her husband had any mining experience, and she confirmed that he had.
Constable Ford formed the view that there was the potential of a man with mining
experience using fertilizer and diesel fuel to
cause an explosion.
A very large number of police officers arrived at the scene. They all
remained at a safe distance from the house. They formed a cordon
around it. They
got the residents in neighbouring houses to evacuate their homes. Two officers
took Mrs Gandini and the children
to a local park where one of then commenced
obtaining a statement from her. The main road into Port Sorell was blocked. A
forward command post was set up. Road spikes were deployed in case Dan
tried to drive away. Officers with specialist qualifications
as negotiators
arrived and attempted to contact Dan. Officers from the Special Operations
Group arrived from Hobart, Launceston
and Bicheno. The Bomb Response Squad and a
drone operator also arrived.
It took some time for the negotiators to make contact with Dan. He had no
legal obligation to speak to them, and initially chose not
to. Ultimately there
was some communication with him during the afternoon by telephone and by text
message. He made it clear that
he was not willing to come out of his house.
As a result of information provided by Mrs Gandini and made known amongst the
officers on the scene, police officers reasonably suspected
that Dan had
committed a family violence offence by assaulting Mrs Gandini. As a result they
had the power to enter the premises
where Dan was, search for him there, and
arrest him, pursuant to
Family Violence Act 2004
authorised them to use reasonable force.
Mr Marriott, the psychologist, went to Port
Sorell in the evening and spoke to Dan by telephone a number of times. Dan still
not come out of the house. Ultimately senior officers decided upon a plan
to disable the security cameras, blow open the front door
using a small
explosive charge, and arrest Dan. At about 9.20pm four officers approached the
residence and smashed the security cameras,
using a ladder to reach the highest
one. Shouting was heard from inside the residence. The explosive charge was
placed at the front
door. It was subsequently detonated. There was evidence
that Dan was known to be at a safe place inside the house when it was detonated,
but Dan disputed that evidence saying that he could not be seen inside the house
because all the blinds were down and the doors were
closed. After the
destruction of the door Dan came through the front doorway and confronted four
officers from the Special Operations
Counts 4, 5, 6 and 7 alleged that Dan 'with intent to disfigure and/or do any
grievous bodily harm and/or resist or prevent the lawful
detention of himself,
cast or threw hydrochloric acid and/or sulphuric acid which is a corrosive
fluid' at the four officers. There
was a separate charge in relation to each
officer. The jury found him guilty of all four of those charges. Plainly they
were satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that Dan threw a quantity of acid at the
four officers, and that he intended at least one of the consequences
those charges.
One of the officers, Constable Scott, who was standing at the front of the
group, gave evidence that he saw Dan appear with a container
and throw a liquid
at them once, that some of the liquid went into his right eye, and that he could
feel burning to his face, and
that the vision to his right eye was severely
impacted. Two of the other officers said that they saw Dan throw the liquid at
go back inside, return, and throw liquid at them a second time. The fourth
officer, Senior Constable Bennett, did not give evidence
of seeing Dan throw the
liquid a second time, but he did say that he moved back with Constable Scott in
case the liquid landed on
him. I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Dan
threw a second quantity of liquid towards the officers. However, of the two
officers who described the second throw, one said that the liquid reached them
and the other said that it fell short. I am not satisfied
beyond reasonable
doubt that the second quantity of liquid reached any of the officers.
After throwing the liquid, Dan went back inside the house briefly, but then
came back out. Some officers fired projectiles that were
described during the
trial as "less lethal ammunition", hitting him and causing him to fall to the
ground and sustain a minor injury.
He was arrested and detained. Up to that
point none of the officers had told him that they wished to arrest him for
assaulting his
The four officers at whom Dan threw the liquid were all wearing protective
clothing, including goggles, balaclavas, Kevlar sleeves,
gloves, ballistic
vests, and camouflage jackets. They were carrying ballistic shields.
Some of those items were damaged by the liquid that Dan threw. Parts of some
items were burned or began to melt. It is clear that
the liquid thrown was a
corrosive fluid, as alleged in the charges. I need not make a finding as to
whether it was hydrochloric
acid, sulphuric acid or both. The proposition that
it was sulphuric acid appears to have originated from an entry in Constable
hospital records. Samples from the carport floor and the loungeroom
carpet were analysed by a forensic scientist and determined
by her to contain
hydrochloric acid. An open container with a label saying 'Hydrochloric Acid' was
found in the house, but its contents
were not analysed. The weight of the
evidence suggests that the corrosive fluid was hydrochloric acid.
For sentencing purposes, I need to make findings as to what Dan intended when
he threw the liquid. Each charge asserted three possibilities
to disfigure and/or do any grievous bodily harm and/or resist or prevent lawful
detention'. Although Dan was in a
very upset state, it must have been plain to
him that the goggles and clothing worn by the four officers would make it very
and possibly impossible, for the acid to cause them any physical
harm. I think it far more likely that he was trying to scare them
away when he
threw the acid, rather than trying to disfigure them or cause really serious
injuries. I will sentence on the basis
that Dan apprehended that the officers
were likely to be wanting to arrest and detain him, that such detention would
have been lawful,
and that he intended to resist or prevent his lawful detention
by throwing acid at them. That is consistent with the verdict of
Although the crime created by s 170(1) of the Criminal Code is called
'Committing an unlawful act intended to cause bodily
harm', the wording of the
subsection permits a jury to find a person guilty of that crime when that
person's intention is not to
cause bodily harm, but to resist or prevent lawful
arrest or detention. It was however an ingredient of each of the four crimes
charged that Dan cast or threw a corrosive fluid at a person."
On the six charges the appellant was sentenced to 3 years 6 months'
imprisonment with effect from 24 March 2023. He was not to
be eligible for
parole until he had served 21 months of that sentence.
After hearing the appellant's oral submissions, supplementing what may be
regarded as submissions contained within the notices of
appeal, and a number of
documents he had filed in support of two bail applications and the appeal
itself, the Court dismissed the
appeal without calling on the respondent. These
are the Court's reasons for so doing.
As can be seen, the two notices of appeal contain grounds ranging from a lack
of jurisdiction on the part of the Court, errors of
law on the part of the trial
judge, jury misconduct and a conspiracy between the judge and the jury and
counsel for the State. In
addition, on the hearing of the appeal, the Court
permitted the applicant to raise arguments about lack of evidence and
fabrication
of evidence by the appellant's wife and his psychologist and by
police officers and about factual inconsistencies in the evidence,
all of which
would ordinarily be regarded as arguments that the verdicts were unsafe and
unsatisfactory.
The Court also allowed the appellant to raise an asserted error of law on the
part of the trial judge in directing the jury that
police had the power to enter
the premises where the appellant was, search for him there, and arrest him,
pursuant to
Family Violence Act
A reading of the almost 1000 pages of the transcript of the trial satisfied the
Court that the trial judge did not err in law or
in the factual basis for his
rulings made during the course of the trial, nor in his summing up or the
memorandum that he provided
the jury. In particular the Court was satisfied that
the judge was correct in law when he directed the jury as
"Now, before I go there – before I go into self
defence and defence of a dwelling house, I need to explain things to you about
the police powers. In fact, this relates back to whether his – whether
Dan's arrest and detention would have been lawful or
was lawful if he was
resisting an attempt to arrest and detain him. At this point, I'll take you to
page three of the memorandum,
and I need to give you some information about the
Family Violence Act 2004
I've quoted from it in paragraph 13. The provisions that I've set out there
in paragraph 13 give police officers in certain circumstances
the power to enter
premises and the power to arrest a person. So I'll just read out some provisions
Family Violence Act
, subsections (7), (7A) and (7B).
If a police officer reasonably suspects that a person has committed family
violence, the officer, without warrant and using such force
as is reasonably
necessary in the circumstances, may –
(a) enter any premises on which the officer reasonably suspects the person
may be found; and
(b) search those premises for the person; and
(c) arrest the person.
For the purpose of exercising his or her powers under this section, a police
officer may authorise any other person, including another
police officer, to
assist the police officer as is necessary in the circumstances.
So four people can enter, search and arrest if there's a reasonable suspicion
of family violence.
A person authorised under subsection (7A) to assist a police officer may use
such force as is reasonably necessary in the circumstances
to so assist.
Okay. The – so the first question, or the first thing that needs to be
considered, if you look at the beginning of – the
early words of
subsection (7).
If a police officer reasonably suspects that a person has committed family
Then certain things can happen. Now, what's family violence, all sorts of
things constitute family violence. If a man assaults his
wife that's family
violence for the purposes of the
Family Violence Act
. You don't need to know
anything more about what else might constitute family violence. So the –
if a police officer suspected
that Dan had assaulted his wife and if that
suspicion was reasonable then there's a power of entry and a power of arrest and
for a warrant. But the amount of force used must be no more than is
reasonably necessary.
Now there's another provision in the
Family Violence Act
that I refer to in
Where a police officer reasonably suspects that a person has committed family
violence, the officer my arrest that person without
subs(1). So it's again a question of whether an officer suspected
that Dan had assaulted his wife and if so whether that suspicion
reasonable.
Paragraph 15 deals with provisions in the
Family Violence Act
be done with a person who has been arrested:
When a police officer has arrested a person without a warrant in relation to
a family violence offence, that person may be detained
for various purposes
including determining any charge or charges that should be laid, carrying our a
risk screening assessment, or
bringing the arrested person before a court.
So obviously if the police were going to arrest they were going to detain
him, for some length of time, doesn't matter how long. So
the question is, if
you come back to that point about resisting lawful detention, was it his
intention to resist arrest and detention
was the anticipated arrest and
detention 'lawful arrest and detention'? It was lawful if there was a reasonable
suspicion that he'd
committed family violence. Now the evidence is that
Catherine Gandini gave details of what had happened including the glass of water
incident to Senior Constable Bobby Gray. He passed that information on. Officers
said that they had beliefs or suspicions about him
having committed family
violence. It's open to you to infer that they were aware of at least the fact
that there was an allegation
of an assault, if not the details of the assault
– if not three assaults. But then that would warrant – that would
one or more officers, without force – sorry, without warrants, and
using no more force than was reasonably necessary, to enter
onto the premises.
Now I'm not talking about the blowing up of the door. You might very well
conclude that that was going too far,
that that was not reasonably necessary.
But these four charges relate to an incident in the garage. They don't relate to
into the house. I keep calling it a garage – it's a carport.
Dan has been explaining from time to time through the trial that the High
Court has said things about people going onto private property
and that he's put
up a sign that makes a difference to that. And he was right. If you think about
it, anybody who lives in a house
with a front door that's set back from the
front boundary is the owner of private property. Generally speaking, visitors to
are welcome to walk up to the front door and knock on the door, and the
law about that, going back centuries, is that as a general
rule, visitors to a
residence have what's called an implied licence, in other words, implied
permission from the owner or occupier
to walk up to the front door for –
if they're there for lawful purposes. The same applies if you making a three
and you need to turn into someone's driveway and drive the front of
your car a little way into their driveway in order – a
little way onto
their property in order to complete your turn. There's an implied permission, or
an implied licence that allows you
to do that. But, its private property, and
that means that the landowner can put up a sign making it clear that the usual
doesn't apply, and that's what Dan's done. His sign tells visitors
that they're not allowed past the front boundary without permission.
Family Violence Act
supersedes any such arrangement. The
Family Violence Act
overrides the ordinary common law rights of a landowner to the extent that the
provisions that I've explain – that I've set
out in this memorandum, in
certain circumstances, give police officers to enter premises, to enter upon
premises, and arrest a person
who's reasonably suspected of committing a family
violence offence.
So, if the four officers reasonably suspected that – or if the four
officers or their ringleader, for want of a better word,
or that their lead
officer, commanding officer – if the – if there was a belief that
Dan had committed family violence
by assaulting his wife, or of suspicion that
he'd assaulted his wife, and if that suspicion was reasonable, then those men,
were intending to arrest him, had the lawful right to go into the
carport without a warrant and to arrest him there. So it's a matter
for you. Was
he intending to resist lawful arrest and detention?"
There can be no question but that the Court had jurisdiction to try the
indictment and that the appellant was lawfully in charge
of the jury, and the
assertions as to jury misconduct and a conspiracy between the judge and the jury
and counsel for the State are
simply without any foundation on the record of the
trial or in any evidence before this Court. In so saying the Court has not lost
sight of the following exchange between the appellant and the trial
"HIS HONOUR: Now, I understand that there are, there were two
or three jurors running late, but as there's something to discuss I
thought I'd
sit first and see how we go when we're finished discussing. Before I invite
submissions there's one thing I need to say
and that is that one of the
diagrams that was tendered where a witness was asked to draw the positions of
people was drawn on a
piece of paper that had typing on the other side. I've
directed my Associate to substitute a photocopy that will go to the jury so
whatever was on the other side they don't see. Now, Dan, I believe you wanted to
raise something?
ACCUSED: Yeah, a couple of things. You haven't brought up that governor,
Governor Green that you work for, you haven't brought up
his dependency. So, I'm
not dependent on Governor Green. Obviously, you're one of his dependencies. I
don't work for your company.
So, I need a list of who his dependencies are. So
that's part of my argument because that's part of your authority and he only
you authority to work in your streams and estuaries.
There's also the name, so, identification. You've decided to capitalise on my
name on this memorandum. That's not my name, and there's
fraud in that document.
Now this is part of my argument that the instruments that's been used by the
State, the documentation have
a name on there that's similar to mine, but it's
not my name and it's already been proven in an affidavit. Now you're attempting
to overrule something that already stands as truth in law, the State's brought
no evidence to counteract that affidavit. So I'd appreciate
that the State of
Tasmania v Gandini, that name's not my name, okay, so on the indictment it has
to be made clear of identification
purposes, that the ID that they've used, part
of my argument, it's not my identification. So it's actually not me and the
provided no evidence of identification accept for hearsay through a
system that they have that other people have put evidence on.
So there's been no
evidence of identity and I've provided evidence that the State's wrong who they
believe I am.
HIS HONOUR: Alright, first of all the only reason I mention Sir Guy Green, is
that he was the Governor in the year 2000 and he swore
me in when I became a
judge. I don't know what you're referring to when you request a list of his
dependencies. He's a retired Governor,
he hasn't got any dependencies in any
sense that are in any way significant. So I won't be giving you a list.
ACCUSED: Well I'm only going off what you give me as evidence that you had
some sort of authority, and this is who gave you authority,
some Governor Green.
And you said he's – the piece of paper that you gave me, was you have
authority over his dependencies.
So I don't know who his dependencies are, I'm
not his child and I'm not ward of the State. So you're claiming you have
over Governor Green's dependencies, I'm not his dependencies. The
State's provided no evidence that I am dependent on Governor Green,
in fact it's
the opposite way around. The corporate state of this land that's taken over, I'm
on Palawa land at the moment, has come
and seen me each fortnight. And then each
year they took over 60 thousand dollars, so you were actually dependent on me,
I'm not dependent on anyone, so whoever his dependencies are, you need
to provide them. They provided no evidence that I'm dependent
on this Governor
Green and obviously he's someone whose on your ship, so you only have authority
over people who are on your ship,
in your estuaries, 'cos you're on external
territory at the moment, you're in Palawa country, okay and I'm a diplomat of
Palawa country.
So you know that and you had no authority to come on to land and
kidnapping.
Now you're using presumption that you have some sort of authority in Palawa
country, but you only have authority in the State of Tasmania,
which is your
corporation. So you have authority, and I don't mean any disrespect, you have
full authority over your employees of
your company. I completely give you that.
But for me I'm not an employee of your company and Governor Green, obviously he
dependencies which is part of his company, and you are only meant to be
looking after his dependencies. And I have no authority –
HIS HONOUR: Well look – look I'll interrupt you, you're not going to
persuade me – you're not persuading me to change
my mind. I'm going to
tell the jury that this is a properly constituted Court and if you want to tell
them otherwise, I won't try
to stop you, but I'm going to tell them that this is
a properly constituted Court and that they have to apply the law as I explain
to them, and I'll tell them that although you don't acknowledge that you are
– you have the name Daniel Victor Gandini,
the char – the State has
charged somebody and that the State says that you're the person who's described
in the indictment
as Daniel Victor Gandini, and that they should proceed on the
basis that that name is intended to refer to you, or –
ACCUSED: That's presumption that I've already rebutted, so –
HIS HONOUR: Well –
ACCUSED: - that's the problem.
HIS HONOUR: - you can – I'll let you tell them that, but I'm not going
to give rulings along the lines that you've –
ACCUSED: So, you're going to assist the –
HIS HONOUR: - you're seeking from.
ACCUSED: - you're going to assist the State, so that's what you're doing,
you're assisting the State with evidence that I've already
provided to
contradict what they're saying, and then you're going to assist them –
that's what you're doing, you're assisting
the State, you're working with
another arm of government to overthrow a lawful thing that I've put in place to
show you facts, and
then you're going to overthrow those facts with
HIS HONOUR: Well, if you want to tell the jury that, I'll let you, but
ACCUSED: Thank you.
HIS HONOUR: - you better – I don't agree."
It is accepted that one juror declared a potential conflict after he had sat
for about a week of the trial, but he was excused and
the jury inquired of in a
perfectly familiar and proper way, as the following passage from the transcript
demonstrates:
"HIS HONOUR: I've received a note from a juror named
Craig Ellis. Would you stand up please, Mr Ellis? It appears that Mr Ellis is
acquainted with the wife of the next witness, and I've decided that I'll be very
cautious about this and I'll discharge him from
service on this jury and at this
sittings, so, Mr Ellis, you're discharged. I ask you to leave your seat, go back
to the jury room
and you're free to go, you don't need to return, thank you.
JUROR: Thank you, your Honour.
HIS HONOUR: I'll just ask the remaining members of the jury panel, have any
of you spoken to – have you been told anything by
Mr Ellis that might have
any impact on your decision in this case? If so, raise one hand. There are no
hands. Alright, we'll continue.
Mr Sherriff?"
As to the appellant's arguments about lack of evidence and fabrication of
evidence by his wife and his psychologist and the police
officers involved, and
assertions by the appellant, all
of which were either before the jury whose
obvious findings cannot be regarded as perverse, or they involve mere suspicion
and speculation
on the part of the appellant, as in the case of the content of
the telephone call between the appellant's wife and Mr Marriott, or
existence of any conspiracy between them to fabricate the allegations against
the appellant.
Overarching all of this is that even if there were inconsistencies and or prior
inconsistent statements in the evidence of some
witnesses, these were all
exposed to the jury and were questions for the jurors to determine. And even if
the trial judge erred in
any evidentiary ruling in any way asserted by the
appellant, no miscarriage of justice could have arisen in this case. The clearly
admissible evidence of guilt against the accused was completely
overwhelming.
ANNEXURES AS REFERRED TO IN PARAGRAPH 3
OF APPEAL DATED 25 AND 28 JUNE 2024
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (131 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter