URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASSC/2007/45.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:39:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
K B and R B v The Guardianship & Administration Board [2007] TASSC 45 (18 July 2007)
[2007] TASSC 45
K B and R B v The Guardianship & Administration
[2007] TASSC 45
GUARDIANSHIP & ADMINISTRATION BOARD (THE)
ATTORNEY-GENERAL FOR THE STATE OF TASMANIA
SUPREME COURT OF
DELIVERED ON:
21 June 2007
HEARING DATE:
14 March 2007
CATCHWORDS:
Procedure – Supreme Court procedure – Tasmania – Appeals other
than from a judge of Supreme Court – Nature
of appeal – Hearing to
revise guardianship order.
Aust Dig Procedure [282]
Mental Health – Guardians, committees, administrator, managers and
receivers – Other matters – Guardianship and
Administration Board
(Tasmania) – Capacity – Need for appointment of administrator of
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Aust Dig Mental Health
REPRESENTATION:
Appellants:
R McTaggart
First Respondent
Submitted to the jurisdiction of the
Second Respondent:
Solicitors:
Appellants:
Mackie Crompton
Second Respondent:
Director of Public Prosecutions
Judgment Number:
[2007] TASSC 45
paragraphs:
Serial No 45/2007
File No LCA 61/2006
K B and R B v THE GUARDIANSHIP & ADMINISTRATION
and THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL FOR THE STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT SLICER J
21 June 2007
1 K B, a resident of the United Kingdom, is the grand-niece through marriage of
B who, on 8 February 2006, signed an instrument
appointing K B as her
attorney in accordance with the
Powers of Attorney Act
("the Act").
R B, is a grand-nephew, and had been residing temporarily with B during the
period 2005 to 2006 and is an "interested
person" within the meaning of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
("the Guardianship Act"). He
came to Tasmania in March following the commencement of the proceedings which
have resulted in this
History and nature of the
proceedings
2 B was born in Poland in 1928 and came to Australia in 1960 and married the
brother of the paternal grandmother of the appellants.
B has no children and
was widowed in 1984.
3 In November 1995, B granted an enduring power of attorney to S, who was an
original applicant in portion of these proceedings.
Her conduct as the
appointee has been impugned and remains a matter of contention. An officer of
the Public Guardian was the original
applicant to these proceedings, commenced
under the Guardianship Act, and which have resulted in this appeal.
4 On 2 October 2005, B was admitted to the Launceston General Hospital
suffering from a variety of symptoms, some of which were
consistent with
salmonella poisoning. On 18 October whilst hospitalised, B appointed S as her
enduring guardian and another person,
J B, as an alternate. The instrument of
appointment was witnessed by Dr Jan Radford, B's general medical
practitioner.
5 Trouble arose within the circle of friends, acquaintances and others
associated with B. Varying accusations of fitness and propriety
of conduct were
made at times by and against different persons. Central to those events were S,
who became subject to other proceedings,
and E BN, who became a party to a
tenancy agreement made with B. It is not necessary to consider in detail the
varying accusations,
statements of belief and the like, except where they touch
directly on any appointment or revocation of instruments made under the
orders made under the Guardianship Act.
6 On 30 January 2006, during a meeting at B's home, Mrs BN accused S of
impropriety in dealing with B's financial affairs and arranged
for B to leave
her residence and return to stay at Mrs BN's home. Following that meeting,
S advised the Guardianship Board ("the
Board") of her concerns.
7 On 3 February 2006, a solicitor wrote to the Board advising it of his
concerns about a purported attempt to revoke the appointment
of S as attorney in
November 1995. By an instrument of the same date, B, stating herself to be of
sound mind, revoked the enduring
power of attorney granted to S in 1995. The
revocation was registered on 16 February 2006. In an undated document,
addressed to
S, B referred to a communication made on 31 January 2006 that she
no longer wished S to be involved in her personal affairs.
8 On 8 February 2006, B signed an instrument granting K B
enduring power of attorney. The form of acceptance is signed but remains
undated. That instrument was registered on 21
February 2006.
9 On 9 February an officer of the Public Guardian applied for an emergency
order under the Guardianship Act referring to the October
admission to hospital
and medical opinions stating that B "has dementia". The officer also stated her
belief that "there would need
to be a section 28 in the order to be able to move
the said person back to their [sic] own home". That application was addressed
the Board, with a copy supplied to the Public Guardian. The Board made an
emergency order on 14 February substituting the Public
Guardian for the enduring
guardians. On the following day, B executed a further instrument revoking the
power of attorney granted
to S in November 1995. Counsel for the appellant says
in his outline that this document was registered on 16 February, although
stamp of the Recorder suggests that it was an instrument dated 3 February (PA
13040) which was registered (appendix J of report)
on that day at the same time
as the appointment of K B as her "enduring attorney".
10 On 18 February B signed a tenancy agreement with E BN, Mrs BN's daughter
already referred to, relating to the residential property.
The terms of that
agreement formed part of the reasons given by the Board in making orders which
are the subject of this appeal.
The terms of the tenancy agreement
(1) a term of two years commencing on 18 February
(2) payment of a weekly rental of $5;
(3) payment of rates, other statutory charges and for repairs to be the
responsibility of the owner;
(4) power to the tenant to sublet the premises;
(5) an additional clause providing:
"16 If for any due reason tenant is ask [sic] to vacate premisses [sic] by
the landlord or title holder the landlord will pay out
the total cost up to
$300.00 pw for new rental to the 18
of February 2008."
11 It is an understatement to observe that the terms of the tenancy agreement
were disadvantageous to B.
12 On 23 February the Public Guardian made a further application that an
officer of the Board be made guardian. The basis of that
application was stated
to be a disability identified as "dementia". The application provided a short
history of the dealings between
the applicant K B, S, Mrs BN and others
preceding the making of the application. Correspondence between two treating
medical practitioners
was attached to the application. On 24 February, S
purported to assign her enduring power of attorney to the Public Trustee,
to the Act, s32. On that day the Board revoked the appointment of S
and Mrs BR, made in October 2005, as enduring guardians. On
27 February 2006,
the Board made an emergency administration order appointing the Public Trustee
as administrator, pursuant to the
Guardianship Act, s65(4).
13 On 28 February, B arrived at a nursing home for two weeks' respite care.
Between that day and 11 March, many persons and institutions
became involved in
assessments, meetings, contact arrangements, cancelled appointments, periods of
restricted access, and differing
expressions of concern. Those events involved
police, the Public Trustee, various agencies, medical practitioners, agency
representatives,
Advocacy Tasmania, case workers, lawyers, friends and
acquaintances. On 2 March, S applied, pursuant to the Guardianship Act,
and (3), for:
(1) a declaration that the power of attorney
granted to K B on 21 February 2006 was invalid on the basis that "... the donor
have capacity to understand the nature and effect of the document";
(2) acceptance (or declaration of that acceptance) that she (S) did not wish
"to continue to act under enduring power of attorney
70/2497 22/11/1995";
(3) an order appointing the Public Trustee the administrator of the property
14 On 11 March, R B arrived in Tasmania from the United Kingdom. On that day B
was "removed" from the respite care home. Nursing
staff reported that B had
been kidnapped and a note of the incident records "... Staff tried to stop,
doors of car locked and staff
members nearly run over trying to stop. They have
rung the Police." Mrs BN and R B had been present at the time of that incident
on 11 March. R B had continued to reside at B's home up until the date of the
15 On 24 March, the emergency guardianship order was renewed and three days
later the administration order extended. The hearing
took place on 16 June. As
of that date, the position of the "interested parties" can be summarised
(1) Mrs BN believed that S had misappropriated money
belonging to B. Police were involved in the investigation of that allegation
and a prosecution commenced.
(2) S believed that Mrs BN had taken advantage of B's medical condition and
would remain a threat to her financial security.
(3) R B believed that the Public Guardian wished "to put B into a nursing
(4) The Public Trustee was concerned about the terms of the tenancy agreement
entered into between B and E BN and the existence of
a subtenant (who was the
daughter of Mrs BN), a matter not previously disclosed.
(5) The Public Guardian was concerned about the general capacity of B to look
after herself, the opening of a new bank account on
6 March, and the possible
influence of others in relation to her financial affairs.
16 The Board was involved in the exercise of responsibility and power governed
by two enactments. It had before it:
(1) a grant of power to S
given on 22 November 1995;
(2) a revocation of that grant by an instrument made on 3 February 2006;
(3) a grant of power to K B by an instrument dated 8 February 2006 but not
registered until a later date, namely 14 February 2006;
(4) a further revocation of the grant of power to S given on 22 November
1995, by an instrument dated 15 February 2006;
(5) a grant of power or appointment as guardian to S and another, made on 18
October 2005;
(6) an assignment by S to the Public Trustee of the power of attorney granted
on 22 November 1995;
(7) an application for an emergency guardianship order made by, or on behalf
of, the Public Guardian on 9 February 2006;
(8) an order the Board made on 24 February revoking the appointment of S and
another as guardians;
(9) an application by S made on 3 March 2006 seeking a declaration of
invalidity of the appointment of K B as attorney, made on 8
February, and the
appointment of the Public Trustee as administrator.
17 The Board dealt with the varying instruments and applications for the use of
statutory powers in the following manner:
(1) It conducted a
hearing at which five of the parties or interested persons were represented by
counsel. The material placed before
the Board showed that at least three other
legal practitioners had been involved in the provision of legal advice to
various persons
interested in the proceedings.
(2) It received evidence in the form of witness statements provided on behalf
of the appellants, reports and documentation provided
by officers of the Public
Guardian and Public Trustee, medical reports, records and assessments provided
by the Public Guardian,
and a medical assessment tendered on behalf of the
appellants. It permitted questioning of witnesses during the course of the
(3) On the basis of that material, and having heard competing admissions:
(a) The Board determined that B was not, as of the date of the hearing, "in
need of a guardian". In doing so it had regard to the
advice of the Public
Guardian that she did not seek to maintain the application. The effect of that
determination was that the emergency
orders made on 14 February and 24 March
were not extended. It had already revoked the appointment made on 18 October
2005 of S and
Mrs J B as enduring guardians by its order on 24 February
(b) The Board upheld the validity of the grant of the power of attorney made
on 22 November 1995.
(c) The Board determined that the appointment of K B as the grantee of the
power of attorney made on 8 February 2006 did not comply
with the Act,
s30(2)(a), in that at the time of its making B did not "understand the nature
and effect of the documentation".
(d) The Board determined that the revocation made on 16 February 2006
(registered on 21 February) was invalid in that at the relevant
donor lacked the mental capacity to do so.
(e) The Board made no order as to the revocation of power made in the
document dated 3 February 2006. Since that document was registered
21 February, it may be that only one of the two documents was treated as
applicable, since PA 13040 and PA 12039 were both registered
on 21 February,
although the former PA 13040 is shown as registered on 16 February.
(f) Consistent with determination (b) above that the 1995 grant was validly
made and its revocation invalid, the Board nevertheless
revoked the original
grant on the grounds that:
(i) it was not in B's best interests to continue with the grant of power;
(ii) at the relevant times, B was unable to make reasonable judgments in
respect of her estate and was in need of an administrator.
The relevant time
would be the date of hearing, although the Board was entitled to pay regard to
the events of February in reaching
that conclusion.
(g) The Board determined that the Public Trustee be appointed as
administrator with the powers and duties conferred by the Act, Pt7,
dismissed the application for the appointment of a guardian, but found that
there was a need for an administrator of B's
finances. The request for the
appointment of a guardian was withdrawn by the Public Guardian and given that B
had returned to her
tasks, that there was no "existing need" for the appointment of a guardian.
in relation to the need for the appointment of an administrator, the Board
determined:
"50 For the purposes of the test of capacity in
section 51(1)(b)
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
the Board takes into account the
same medical opinions and the above observations of Mrs [B's] behaviour in the
hearing and concludes
that by reason of a disability, Mrs [B] is not capable of
making reasonable judgments with respect of matters relating to her estate.
The Question of Need for an
Administrator
51 In respect of the issue of
whether Mrs [B] is in a need of an administrator, the Board is satisfied that
she is. No doubt Mrs
[B] is an inherently very generous person, but the Board
is not satisfied that that explains why she entered into an oppressive tenancy
agreement. An administrator acting in her best interest would need to
investigate the validity and feasibility of that agreement
and also whether it
is in the best interests of the estate to have tenants, [R B] and any person
sublet under Ms BN's agreement,
living there rent-free.
52 Further, in a variety of documents and in a number of different ways Mrs
[B] has recently given financial authority to at least
three individuals,
possibly four, and for the purposes of accountability there needs to be a single
source of authority. It is a
complex estate, most particularly because of an
outstanding allegation of stealing. Given that the various accusations involve
substantial
sums of money, there will need to be an impartial person who can
research the relevant records and provide assistance to the police.
53 The Board is concerned that the skill and memory deficits that Mrs [B]
experiences and the numbers of people with authority to
access her accounts
leave her significant estate vulnerable to financial abuse or exploitation.
55 Day-to-day management of the estate will
include payment of household expenses, protection of the assets from persons who
seek to exploit Mrs [B] and making decisions on maturing
investments.
56 Representatives from The Public Trustee made submissions about the
preference for appointment as an administrator over appointment
and directions
under an assigned enduring power of attorney. These included the need for clear
authority in any period of 'fluctuating'
capacity and having agreed periods for
reporting and review. The Board accepted these submissions and considered the
appointment
of an administrator to be appropriate as opposed to giving
directions under the pre-existing power of attorney (PA 70/2496
had been assigned to the Public Trustee.
Appropriateness of an Administrator
Board acknowledged that Mrs [B] wished to appoint [R B] under yet another
proposed power of attorney. Given that the Board
has found that she lacks the
requisite capacity to execute a new instrument, the Board considered the
alternative proposal of appointing
[R B] as administrator. This reflects the
wishes expressed by Mrs [B] a number of times during the hearing.
58 For the purposes of
section 54(1)(d)(ii)
of the Act, the Board considered
[R B] is unsuitable as a potential administrator because he is a non-paying
tenant in her home and
therefore has a pecuniary interest in the management of
her estate. Such an interest presents a conflict of interests for a potential
administrator. Further, his stay in Australia is presently limited to a
one-year Visa and although there may be means for extension,
this poses some
difficulties for the consideration of a three-year appointment."
Detailed reasons were provided by the Board on 3 August 2006 in accordance with
Basis of appeal
18 The appellants seek to set aside the declaration concerning the appointment
of K B dated 8 February 2006, the declaration concerning
the instruments of
revocation registered on 16 and 21 February 2006, and the order appointing
the Public Trustee as administrator.
The timing of the making and registration
of the documents is relevant to the question of any assignment of power to the
Trustee and the status of S in any consideration of the purported
revocation of the power of attorney to K B made on 3 March.
19 The appellants advance five bases for their challenge to the determination
of the Board, namely:
(1) that it lacked the power to make the
orders whilst an enduring power of attorney was in force and that S had no right
to challenge
that appointment (grounds 1 and 1A);
(2) that the Board was not entitled in law to find that B did not have the
mental capacity to grant an enduring power of attorney
(grounds 8 and 10);
(3) that the Board was not entitled in law to find that B was unable by
reason of disability to make reasonable judgments in respect
of her estate
(grounds 2, 3, 4, 5 and 10);
(4) the Board erred in law in appointing the Public Trustee as administrator
in the light of evidence that R B was capable of undertaking
that position
(ground 7);
(5) that the Court ought grant leave to bring further grounds of appeal
(grounds 11 to 16). Those grounds seek, in effect, to agitate
questions of fact
and exercises in discretion raised by the preceding grounds 2 to 10.
20 The appellants did not pursue grounds 6, 9 and 17.
power and/or jurisdiction
21 Grounds 1 and 1A as amended state:
"1 The Board erred in law
in holding a hearing in accordance with Div 1 of
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1995
to review an enduring power of attorney on
application by an attorney pursuant to
Powers of Attorney Act
when the applicant S, was not an attorney when she applied.
1A The Board erred in law in appointing the Public Trustee as administrator
of the estate of [B] when by
Guardianship and Administration Act
it was not competent for the Board to make that order when there was an
enduring power of attorney dated 8 February 2006 (PA13041)
22 The Board conducted concurrent hearings of applications under different
statutes and for the appointment of a guardian under
the Guardianship Act, Pt4,
and declarations concerning enduring powers of attorney pursuant to the Act.
The matters were linked
and evidence received on each application was relevant
to, and admissible on, the other. Given that eventually the Board made no
appointment of a guardian, no substantive question of the power of the Board
arises in that regard. However it is necessary
to consider the effect of each
application on jurisdiction and the making of emergency orders.
23 An application for an emergency guardianship was made on 8 February 2006
which included a request for the making of an order
permitted by the Act, s28.
S had been granted a power of attorney in November 1995 and appointed as an
enduring guardian on 18 October
2005. At that time Dr McDonald had assessed B
as medically competent to make the appointment. Notwithstanding the purported
of the power of attorney on 3 February 2006 and the execution of a
further document of appointment of a resident of the United Kingdom
February 2006, not registered until 16 February, the emergency guardianship
order made by the Board on 14 February followed
the application made on 9
February 2006 which activated the jurisdiction of the Board. Any act undertaken
by the resident of the
United Kingdom in furtherance of the instrument dated 8
February had no legal effect until registration on 16 February, two days
the making of the "emergency order". None of the ensuing assignments,
revocations or applications, altered that position.
The Guardianship Act,
s15(d), defines the functions of the Public Guardian as
"(d) ... to protect the rights and interests of
persons with a disability;
(g) to investigate, report and make recommendations to the Minister on any
matter relating to the operation of this Act"
and requirement by s17:
The Public Guardian may investigate complaints and allegations
concerning the actions of a guardian or administrator or a person
purporting to act under an enduring power of attorney.
If requested to do so by the Board, the Public Guardian must
investigate and report to the Board in relation to a matter the subject
inquiry before the Board."
24 It was entitled through a delegated officer to apply to the Board for an
order appointing a full or limited guardian in respect
of a person with a
disability who is of or over the age of 18 years (s19). The terms of the
application made on 9 February clearly
show that an officer had commenced an
investigation to protect the interests of B before that date. The Board
possessed jurisdiction.
Here the appellants confuse "jurisdiction" with power.
Even if the Board lacked jurisdiction or power as of the date of the grant
registration of the power of attorney on 8 February, it was entitled to make its
emergency order on 14 February 2006. As and
from that date at least, it was
entitled to determine whether, at the time of its making, the donor B understood
the nature and effect
of the instrument (the Act, s30). It does not matter if
essentially the Board decided not to appoint an enduring guardian since
then entitled to have recourse to the provisions of the Guardianship Act at the
request of the Public Guardian and/or the
Public Trustee following the making of
the emergency administration order made on 27 February and received on 27 March
in accordance
with the Guardianship Act, s65.
25 At the time the hearing commenced on 16 June 2006, the Board had
(1) to determine the validity
of any instruments made by B in February 2006 under the provisions of the
(2) to revoke any existing orders made under the Guardianship Act;
(3) to appoint an enduring guardian;
(4) to appoint an administrator with powers afforded by the Guardianship Act,
26 The emergency guardianship order was renewed on 24 March 2006 and the
emergency administration order on 27 March. The matter
was listed for hearing
on 11 April to accommodate the request by the appellants for the provision of a
report from a Polish-speaking
doctor. A report was not produced. The second
hearing date, 19 May, was vacated at the request of counsel for the appellants
enable B to be examined and a report from a Victorian specialist, Dr
Mendelson. The hearing was conducted on 19 June, by which time
the emergency
orders had expired. However counsel for the appellant had given an undertaking
during the course of his application
for adjournment, that the appellants would
comply with the terms of those orders until hearing. The same member of the
had made the order of 26 February constituted the Board on 19
27 The Board did not have unfettered power and was required to consider the
various statutory provisions of complementary statutes,
but was entitled to
appoint an administrator through the operation of both the Act (through the
operation of the Guardianship Act,
s51(4)) and the Act itself. Statutory power
afforded to an administrator by the Guardianship Act, s56, would supplant any
of attorney. To that extent, impugnment of the revocation or declaration
of validity of the purported grant of power through the
instrument made in
favour of K B would have little, if any, practical import. The Guardianship
Act, s53, provides:
Where a proposed represented person has granted an enduring
power of attorney under section 11A of the
Powers of Attorney Act 1934
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
, it is not competent
for the Board to make an administration order in respect of his or her estate so
long as the enduring power
of attorney is in force unless the order is made
If any such enduring power of attorney relates to part only of the
estate of the proposed represented person, the Board may make
an administration
order relating to any part of the represented person's estate that is not
subject to the enduring power of attorney.
Notwithstanding subsection (1), any action taken by a person
purporting to act under an administration order before he or she has
an enduring power of attorney is valid and
effectual."
28 The Board had jurisdiction and was entitled to hear both matters
concurrently. It made an order under Pt8 which relevantly provides
In the exercise of its powers under this section
the Board may make an administration order in respect of the estate
of a person who is the donor of an enduring power of attorney
in force under
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
, if he or she is of or over the
age of 18 years."
29 It is for these reasons that I ruled, during the course of the hearing, on
the preliminary matters that the Board had both jurisdiction
30 The power to make an administration order is limited by the Guardianship
Act, s53. But the existence of an enduring power of
attorney does not prevent
the making of an administration order where an order is made in accordance with
Pt8. Here such an order
had been made. In addition the Board had power, once
it had declared the enduring power of attorney made in February, invalid, to
make an administration order.
31 Grounds 1 and 1A are dismissed.
Mental capacity and
32 Grounds 2, 3, 4, 5 and 10 state:
"2 The Board erred in law in
that no reasonable Tribunal could, on the material before it, determine that [B]
was in need of an administrator;
3 The Board erred in law in that no reasonable Tribunal could, on the
material before it, determine that the appointment of an administrator
the best interests of [B] ;
4 The Board erred in law in that no reasonable Tribunal could, on the
material before it, determine that the needs of [B] could not
be met by other
means less restrictive on her freedom of decision and action than the
appointment of an administrator;
5 The Board erred in law and no reasonable Tribunal could, on the material
before it, when making orders appointing the Public Trustee
as administrator
with the powers and duties conferred by Div4 of Part 7 of the
Guardianship
& Administration Act
1995 determine that those orders were the least
restrictive on the freedom of decision and action of [B] as is possible in the
circumstances;
10 The Board erred in law in not placing any particular weight upon the
statements by lay witnesses because it found the question
of [B's] capacity is
essentially a legal question which relies upon medical evidence."
33 B, aged 79, was born in Poland and came to Australia in 1960 when she
married B B. Her husband died in 1984 and she has lived
in Launceston since
1960. In October 2005, B was admitted to hospital suffering from salmonella
poisoning and bronchopneumonia.
A person, who turned out to be E BN, the
daughter of Mrs BN, who has played a significant part in these proceedings and
whose conduct
in relation to the financial dealings with money and property of B
has been a cause of concern, presented to the hospital a document
which gave her
authority to make medical decisions for B. The hospital staff, on receiving
advice that there was no valid appointment,
suggested that S take on the
responsibility of guardianship. An enduring power of attorney was executed and
registered on 18 October
34 The Board was required to consider B's mental capacity (the Act, s33(2)) and
inability to make reasonable judgments by reason
of disability (the Guardianship
Act, s51). It had ample and cogent evidence to determine those matters as it
did. The Board dealt
with those issues in the following
"29 The Board had the following medical opinions: A
letter from Dr Razay, General Physician and Senior Lecturer in Geriatric
to Dr Radford, GP, dated 25 August 2005 concludes that Mrs [B] has
dementia, possible Alzheimer's type, and discusses a deterioration
in her memory
in the past 2 years. He follows up this opinion in a letter dated 15
December 2005 showing some improvement in memory
and her testing on immediate
recall had improved from 18/30 to 21/30.
30 A letter from Dr Radford dated February 2006 states:
'I have cared for Mrs [B] for nearly 2 decades and in that time have watched
as her cognitive abilities have declined to the stage
of the present. She has
grown more demented over the past few years with paranoia often as a feature.
She has been reviewed by
Dr Razay, our local memory disorders expert, and he
agrees with me that Mrs [B] has significant dementia. I believe her condition
is such that she cannot make important decisions about her own care. Her
ability to manage her finances is included in this statement'.
31 On 29 March 2006, the Board faxed to Dr Radford a series of questions
referable to the tests in
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
seeking her opinion, those questions and her answers (underlined and in
parentheses) provided on 5 April 2006 were as follows:
'In your opinion as at February
1 Did Mrs [B] have the ability to
appreciate the nature and extent of her property? (
2 Could Mrs [B] have understood that she could have specified or limited the
powers given to her attorney or given her particular
instructions as to its
3 Could Mrs [B] have understood that, as a result of executing that
document, her attorney would have full control over her property
(eg sell real
estate, pay bills, open and close bank accounts) in the event that she loses
4 Could Mrs [B] have understood that, with capacity, she could vary or
oversee the use of the power or revoke the power?
5 Could Mrs [B] have understood that the power she gave her attorney would
continue once she lost capacity and that she would not
be able to oversee or
supervise the power at that stage?
32 Pursuant to a direction in the emergency order appointing the Public
Guardian, the guardian obtained an assessment by Dr Emma Jane
McCrum, Doctor of
Psychology, clinical neuropsychology, in March and April 2006. She administered
a test known as the
Rowlands Universal Dementia Assessment Scale
which is a screening tool for dementia designed to minimise the impact of
culture and education. On the basis of that and
other assessments, Dr McCrum
concluded that a diagnosis of dementia was feasible. She also concluded:
'The cognitive profile indicates it is likely that Mrs [B] will be unable to
adequately consider major life decisions, ie evaluate
the positive and negatives
and analyse future consequences. A definite diagnosis of dementia can only be
given on autopsy; however,
loss of skill gives an indication of dementia when no
medical cause can be found. These results do suggest a loss of skills, there
no medical cause noted in medical notes thus a diagnosis of dementia would be
reasonable however it is difficult to differentiate
between a diagnosis of the
Alzheimer's type (DAT) or Frontal lobe dementia.'
33 Because it had been suggested that Mrs [B] had made a substantial
improvement after ceasing a particular medication, Dr McCrum
re-assessed Mrs [B]
on or about 1 June 2006 but reported to the Public Guardian that on that date
she had found no reason to change
her opinion.
34 Despite an adjournment being granted to obtain such a report, no report by
Dr Kulinski was submitted to the Board.
35 On 8 June 2006, Associate Professor George Mendelson reported via the
Board's standard Health Care Professional Report and a supplementary
report. Assoc Prof Mendelson is a consultant psychiatrist and a consultant in
pain medicine. He concluded that Mrs [B]
is not a person with a disability, but
experiences a normal loss of memory function consistent with her age, a
condition he called
'benign senescent forgetfulness'. In the standard questions
in the Health Care Professional Report, Assoc Prof Mendelson reported
[B] could operate a bank account, pay bills and budget 'with assistance'.
36 Assoc Prof Mendelson and Dr McCrum commented on each other's reports
noting deficits in the other's opinions, such comments were
surprisingly
37 Mr Mackie submitted to the Board that, although Assoc Prof Mendelson's
opinion deviated significantly from all other opinions before
the Board, the
Board should prefer his opinion for two key reasons. Firstly, that he spoke
directly to Mrs [B] in Polish and, secondly,
that he was more highly specialised
than other practitioners who had provided reports.
38 With respect to the first distinction, there has been no explanation
provided to the Board as to why, if as asserted there has
been no cognitive
decline, a person who has conducted 40 years worth of friendships and financial
transactions in English is now
reliant upon a Polish language interpreter or a
Polish speaker to effectively participate in medical appointments and the
of the Board."
35 It dealt with the differences in the opinions and conclusions reached by the
treating medical practitioners and Dr Mendelson
in its statement
"43 The Board accepts that Professor Mendelson is eminently
qualified and may well have made an accurate assessment of Mrs [B's] capacity
that day for all the questions that he asked her in a single appointment.
However Doctors Radford and Razay made their assessments
over significantly
longer periods of time and with the opportunity to account for fluctuations in
capacity over time.
44 Doctor McCrum made her assessments over time and using a technique (RUDAS)
that minimises the effect of cultural barriers. She
undertook a follow-up
assessment but did not deviate from her original finding.
45 The Board is satisfied that, given that Drs Radford and Razay knew Mrs [B]
for significant periods at or before the time of executing
the relevant
instruments related to the powers of attorney, their opinions have the most
evidentiary weight for the purposes of
Powers of Attorney
. Accordingly the Board prefers their opinions to Assoc. Prof.
Mendelson's. Their opinions are complemented by the assessments and
report by Dr
36 In addition, it formed its own opinion based on its observation of B as a
witness, stating:
47 In making its finding about capacity for the purposes of
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
, the Board also took into
account Mrs [B's] behaviour in the hearing. Questions asked of Mrs [B] elicited
answers or responses that
were not relevant or not appropriate to the question.
For instance when asked where her gold bullion was presently held, she answered
'Social Security?' When asked whether she had any investments, she said 'Money
in the bank'. Neither answer was correct.
48 While there may be explanations for her inaccuracy, she clearly had only a
limited understanding of who was managing her cash
and investments and where
they were. More importantly, she also did not show a proportionate degree of
concern about the fact that
she did not know who was managing her assets and
where they were. This seems inconsistent given the recent allegations promoted
by Mrs [BN] that Mrs [S] who previously managed all assets for her, has stolen
tens of thousands of dollars from her. It also seems
inconsistent with
assertions by Mrs [BN] about the level of distress that Mrs [B] has
experienced as a result of that alleged
Disability and findings
37 Grounds 2, 3, 4, 5 and 10 do not raise issues of law. They attack the
conclusions. Grounds 2 and 3 are patently wrong on the
facts presented to the
Board. B was vulnerable and had been the victim of financial transactions which
advantaged others. Ground
4 is simply a repetition of the general legislative
provision relating to matters of medical treatment, financial control, powers
direction, enforcement, physical restraint and movement, removal consent and the
like (eg, the Guardianship Act, ss27, 28, 30,
38 No such coercive powers were ordered. The powers given to the Public
Trustee were protective of her financial assets and income.
Grounds 4 and 5
ought be dismissed. Ground 10 lacks merit. The Board simply placed little
weight on the evidence of persons who
had been but short term and transient
observers. Casual and general observations did not weaken the detailed evidence
of officers
of the Guardianship Board, treating doctors, medical records and the
concern identified by Mr Verrell, the Senior Estate and Trust
the Public Trustee. Ground 10 is dismissed.
Appointment of
Public Trustee
39 Grounds 7 and 8 state:
"7 The Board erred in law in that no
reasonable Tribunal could, on the material before it, have concluded that [R B]
was unsuitable
as administrator;
8 The Board erred in law in that no reasonable Tribunal could, on the
material before it, determine that the Enduring Power of Attorney
February 2006 is invalid."
40 The Act, s33(4)(a), refers to the Public Trustee as an appropriate
substitute attorney if, by reason of urgency, it decides to
suspend the
operation of an enduring power of attorney. The Guardianship Act, s54(1)(a),
names the Public Trustee as an appropriate
institution to act as an
administrator of the estate of a person. It was necessary to have a
professional and competent institution
to investigate the financial affairs of B
and dealings conducted in her name. Events proved such an investigation to be
appropriate.
On 27 February it had appointed the Public Trustee as an interim
administrator pursuant to an emergency administration order pursuant
powers granted under the Guardianship Act, s65(4), and reviewed that order on 24
March. It had received detailed and competent,
if disturbing, advice from
officers of the Public Trustee at the hearing of the concurrent matters. It had
acted to protect the
interests of B. The question is not whether the second
appellant was unsuitable to act as an administrator, but whether it was
for the Public Trustee to protect the income and assets of a
vulnerable person. But given the ground of appeal, it is appropriate
Court to specifically uphold the findings of the Board. It was open for the
Board to find that the second appellant was
"unsuitable as a potential
administrator". The Board relevantly
The Question of Need for an
Administrator
51 In respect of the issue of
whether Mrs [B] is in a need of an administrator, the Board is satisfied that
she is. No doubt Mrs
[B is an inherently very generous person, but the Board is
not satisfied that that explains why she entered into an oppressive tenancy
agreement. An administrator acting in her best interest would need to
investigate the validity and feasibility of that agreement
and also whether it
is in the best interests of the estate to have tenants, R B and any person
sublet under [BN's] agreement, living
there rent-free.
52 Further, in a variety of documents and in a number of different ways Mrs
[B] has recently given financial authority to at least
three individuals,
possibly four, and for the purposes of accountability there needs to be a single
source of authority. It is a
complex estate, most particularly because of an
outstanding allegation of stealing. Given that the various accusations involve
substantial
sums of money, there will need to be an impartial person who can
research the relevant records and provide assistance to the police.
Appropriateness of an Administrator
Board acknowledged that Mrs [B] wished to appoint [R B] under yet another
proposed power of attorney. Given that the Board
has found that she lacks the
requisite capacity to execute a new instrument, the Board considered the
alternative proposal of appointing
R B as administrator. This reflects the
wishes expressed by Mrs [B] a number of times during the hearing.
58 For the purposes of section 54(1)(d)(ii) of the Act, the Board considered
[R B] is unsuitable as a potential administrator because
he is a non-paying
tenant in her home and therefore has a pecuniary interest in the management of
her estate. Such an interest presents
a conflict of interests for a potential
administrator. Further, his stay in Australia is presently limited to a
one-year Visa and
although there may be means for extension, this poses some
difficulties for the consideration of a three-year appointment."
41 The first aspect of suitability was whether the second appellant had the
skills and resources to properly investigate the circumstances
surrounding the
tenancy agreement and its validity, and to conduct an examination of the
financial resources, especially given that
a number of persons had been given
authority to operate the bank account. On 27 February 2006, the date of the
appointment of the
Public Trustee, the sum of $3,450 was withdrawn from B's
account with the Commonwealth Bank on an authority made in favour of the
appellant residing in the United Kingdom and Mrs BN. The sum of $1,000 had been
withdrawn six days previous. Both sums were
said to have been applied towards
household accounts. There was good reason for the Board to be concerned about
the probity of these
withdrawals. The opening of a separate bank account by Mrs
BN on 6 March, after Mrs BN had been made aware of the appointment of
Trustee as administrator and the subsequent direction to Centrelink to pay B's
pension into that account, was quite properly
a matter of concern and increased
the need for professional control of B's financial affairs. For these reasons
alone it could be
said that the second appellant would be an unsuitable
appointment. But there were additional negative and compelling reasons for
conclusion. The second appellant, the great-nephew of B's late husband, had not
seen her since he was 10 years old. He arrived
in Tasmania on 11 March and was
present on the day when B was removed from the respite facility in circumstances
which caused alarm
to the staff of the institution and B's case officer. The
evidence was that he travelled straight from the airport to the institution.
The following exchange with the Chairperson of the Board would not have
instilled any confidence in the Board that he had formed
an independent view of
B's circumstances:
"MS SMITH: So who made the request for you to come?
R B: My sister asked me to cover over here.
MS SMITH: And what date did you arrive?
R B: I arrived here – I landed here on March the 11
MS SMITH: That date's significant in the documents that we have because it's
also the date of what's been described as a kidnap
of [Mrs B] from the
Scottsdale Respite Centre. [Mrs B] moved from the Respite Centre on that day.
Were you involved in that?
R B: I went straight from the airport to the Manor nursing home, whatever.
MS SMITH: So what did that involve? You went to the Manor and what
R B: Well we basically invited her if she would like to come home with us, you
know. Back to her home and she agreed she would
42 Within three days he had become a signatory to B's account. He was living
at B's home, but had not contributed to household
expenses, regarding himself as
a guest. He had no source of income in Australia. His visa was for 12 months
and due to expire in
March 2007. B stated incorrectly at the hearing that she
believed that her great-nephew was a lawyer. In evidence he stated he
to Australia at the request of his sister on 11 March. He had taken B to
Melbourne for the purpose of a medical examination
in relation to B's mental
state and capacity. He stated that he was helping B "in exchange for staying at
her place" and that the
form of that help was "to keep her company and to deal
with phone calls as they arise. To help out with cooking, maybe, and some
cleaning but there's not to be done there [sic]". In relation to the question
of his expertise, especially given the missing money,
the terms of the tenancy
and the concerns held by investigating officers and the Public Trustee, the
second appellant advised:
"Well I managed my own household budget so I imagine it's much the same. In
fact it is the same, as far as I can
43 The Board was entitled on the evidence to conclude:
the purposes of section 54(1)(d)(ii) of the Act, the Board considered [R B] is
unsuitable as a potential administrator because
he is a non-paying tenant in her
Such an interest presents
a conflict of interests for a potential administrator.
Further, his stay in Australia is presently limited to a one-year Visa and
although there may be means for extension, this poses some difficulties for the
consideration of a three-year appointment."
Leave to appeal
44 The Act, s40(1) and (2), provides:
An appeal to the Court from a determination of the Board may be
brought by the donor of a power, the attorney or a person
appeared, or was entitled to appear, before the Board at the relevant hearing;
who, with the leave of the Board, would have been entitled to
appear before the Board at the relevant hearing.
An appeal may be brought
on a question of law, as of right;
on any other question, only with the leave of the Court."
45 The Guardianship Act, s76, is stated in similar terms, although subs(3)
provides for a different time schedule in cases when
reasons have been provided
in accordance with that Act, s78. The appellants were persons who come within
the provisions of the Act,
s40, and, given the conduct of a concurrent hearing,
within the ambit of the Guardianship Act, ss73(2)(a) and 76. The
Attorney-General
was given leave to intervene in these proceedings and joined as
a respondent by an order of this Court made on 4 December 2006.
46 The Court accepts the primary contention of counsel for the Attorney that
the appellants must establish a "seriously arguable
case of error in a finding
central and not merely peripheral to the determination":
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal
[2006] QSC 39
(2006) 2 Qd R 279).
consider the meaning of the various statutory provisions and whether conclusions
relevant to those provisions were open to
the Board, or whether findings were
unsustainable or unsubstantiated on the evidence. I will follow the approach
taken by the Full
Protective Security Pty Ltd v Bedelph
[2004] TASSC 128
13 Tas R 354.
This is not a rehearing.
47 Here the appellants seek leave to have grounds 11 to 16 considered as
additional ones permitting examination of conclusions at
large. Leave ought not
be granted unless they replicate an error of law identified in the grounds which
the appellants claim can
be argued as of right.
48 Grounds 11 to 16 state:
"11 The Board erred in determining
that [B] was in need of an administrator;
12 The Board erred in determining that the appointment of an administrator
was in the best interests of [B];
13 The Board erred in determining that the needs of [B] could not be met by
other means less restrictive on her freedom and action
than the appointment of
an administrator;
14 The Board erred when making the orders appointing the Public Trustee as
administrator with the powers and duties conferred by Div4
of Part 7 of the
Guardianship
Administration Act
1995 when those orders were not
the least restrictive on the freedom of decision and action of [B] as is
possible in the circumstances;
15 The Board erred in concluding that [R B] was unsuitable as
administrator;
16 The Board erred in determining that the Enduring Power of Attorney dated 8
February 2006 is invalid;"
49 Ground 16 of the application for leave is ambiguous and not specifically
argued on the hearing of the appeal. In his written
submissions in support of
the claim of lack of jurisdiction, counsel contended that "the declaration of
invalidity did not result
in the power ceasing to have force. For that to occur
the power needed to be revoked". An alternative interpretation of the meaning
of this ground is that the Board was not entitled to find that the evidence and
circumstances permitted a finding that B "did not
have the mental capacity to
make it" as provided for by the Act, s33(2)(a)(i). If the meaning is the former
then the ground is not
sustainable. The Act specifically refers to a
declaration of invalidity because the precondition of capacity vitiated its
The Board may suspend the operation of an enduring power of attorney
(s33(4)) and may revoke by the appointment of an administrator
(s33(3)), or vary
its terms (s33(2)(a)). But a declaration of invalidity remains an option
specified by statute. If the ground
is intended to raise the latter, then it
has been dealt with in the consideration of ground 8.
50 Leave is refused in respect of grounds 11 to 16.
51 Grounds 11 and 12 simply restate dissatisfaction with the outcome. It was
the property of B which required protection. There
were serious allegations
that some of her money had been misappropriated, the terms of the tenancy
whereby a family member of a person
who claimed to be a friend and have B's
interests at heart was oppressive and could never be justified on any
reasonable, let alone,
commercial, basis, and accounts submitted for payment
when examined by the Public Trustee, showed the claim to be $5,000 more than
could be justified. At least three persons had access to the bank accounts of
B, an elderly woman with declining memory, but who
retained a "trusting" and
"generous" disposition. She was a person vulnerable to the self-interest of
52 Grounds 13 and 14 are meaningless. The powers granted to the Public Trustee
were there provided for by statute, the Guardianship
Act, s56. No alternatives
other than the appointment of the second appellant as administrator were
proposed. Given that there was
good reason to doubt whether he could properly
fulfil the duties required of an administrator in relation to the financial
and no definite indication that he could remain in Australia, there were
no other viable alternatives. These grounds do no more
than repeat the wording
of the statute, without reference to the circumstances of this case. Ground 15
is a repetition of ground
7 and has been already dealt
53 The application for leave to appeal is dismissed. The appeal generally is
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (105 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter