URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMC/2024/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Holloway v Smith [2024] TASMC 9 (13 August 2024)
[2024] TASMC 09
MAGISTRATES COURT OF TASMANIA
Holloway v Smith
[2024] TASMC 09
SMITH, Barry
HOLLOWAY, Joe Gehamopa
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
DECISION OF:
CATCHWORDS:
Landlord – tenant – Residential Tenancy Legislation –
payment of rent – obligation on tenant as to paying
rent in absence of
agreed method or place of payment
Landlord – Tenant – Residential Tenancy Legislation - ordering of
possession – requirement that court be satisfied
that reason for serving
notice to vacate has genuine and just
Procedure – Civil proceedings in state – tenancy courts –
judgments and orders – amending, varying and setting
aside judgments and
orders – orders made in absence of a party – direction to set aside
order for vacant possession –
relevant factors
Residential
Tenancy Act
Magistrates Court (Civil Division) Rules
Supreme Court Rules
Magistrates Court (Civil Division)
Matrimonial Causes Act
Blowfield v
Centacare Evolve Housing Limited
[2024] TASSC 27
Taylor v Taylor
[1979] HCA 38
[1979] 143 CLR 1
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
[1853] EngR 566
[1853] 155 ER 1529
Leahy v Canavan
[1970] Qd R
Harrison v Petkovic
[1975] VicRp 7
[1975] VR 79
Taylor v Taylor
[1979] HCA 38
Cameron v Cole
[1944] HCA 5
[1944] 68 CLR 571
Singh v Singh
[2006] WASC 182
Magnate Projects Pty Ltd v Youma Constructions (No 2) Pty
[2005] NSWCA 331
Vacuum Oil Pty Ltd v Stockdale
[1942] NSWStRp 31
[1942] 42 SR
Bailey v Marinoff
[1971] HCA 49
Workers Rehabilitation
and Compensation
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Tenants Union of
Respondent:
Terracall and Associates
Paragraphs:
Serial No. 09/2024
File No. M/2024/1192
BARRY MAXWELL SMITH
(Applicant)
JOE GEHAMOPA HOLLOWAY (Respondent)
REASONS FOR DECISION BROWN, M
13 August 2024
Introduction
respondent on the application before me, Mr Holloway, is the owner of a house
situated at 553 Ansons Bay Road at St Helens, a
large rural property. The
applicant is currently living in that house. The applicant on the application
now before me, Mr Smith,
had been an employee of the respondent working on the
rural property that he owned and one larger property further down the east
is common ground that it was a condition of Mr Smith’s employment that he
be provided with residential premises being the
house on the land at 553 Ansons
Bay Road for his use. On the evidence, that was to be rented at the rate of
$250.00 a week, such
amount being paid fortnightly by the mechanism of $500.00
being held back from his wages.
understand that on 13 January 2024, Mr Smith was involved in some sort of motor
vehicle accident on a public street whereby he suffered
significant injuries. I
infer he asserts this accident arose out of or occurred in the course of his
employment. He was transported
to the Royal Hobart Hospital where he stayed for
some days. He was eventually discharged back to his home. It is Mr
case that he was then visited by his landlord/employer’s
representative, a Mr John Beasley, who terminated his employment and
that he had a week to move out of the premises. This verbal notice was not an
operative, lawful termination of his tenancy.
This advice from Mr Beasley was
not explored in evidence before me. On Mr Smith’s case he was soon after
paid his final pay
on about 20 January 2024 which turned out to be an
underpayment on his version of events.
being given a week to leave the premises, he remained on the premises. He did
not pay any rent. He remains living there
to date. He has not paid rent since
he ceased to receive wages.
any version of the evidence on 24 April 2024 Mr Smith was served with a notice
to vacate under the
Residential Tenancy Act
. That notice to vacate
is in evidence. For completeness I note that it contains the information
required by the
Residential Tenancy Act
, namely the name of the
tenant, the name of the owner, the residential premises to which it related, the
details of the reason for
which the notice was served, the date on which the
notice takes effect and the date on which the document was served. That
bears the name and signature of the landlord/employer. It also bears
the name and signature of a Johnathan David Beasley and a John
Hague, as being
the persons who served that on Mr Smith on behalf of the respondent. That
notice is also dated 24 April 2024 and
it alleges that Mr Smith was, by
that date, in arrears of rent in the sum of $3,000.00, that is, he was in an
arrears by some 12
weeks by then, no rent having been paid since 29 January
is no dispute that the amount of the arrears of rent referred to was correct and
that those arrears remain unpaid to date. It
is also clear that no rent has been
paid since the service of that notice.
is further not in issue that on 31
May 2024 Mr Beasley again served
Mr Smith, this time with an application filed in the Magistrates Court for an
order for vacant possession
based on Mr Smith not paying the rent and not
vacating the premises by the date specified in the notice. The application for
possession was listed for hearing on 17 June 2024 at the court at 73
Charles Street, Launceston at 9:30 a.m. Therefore Mr Smith
was served with
that notice of hearing seeking to evict him from his home by personal service by
his employer’s representative
Mr Beasley some 17 days before the time and
date the matter was listed for hearing.
application for the order for vacant possession was heard by me on 17 June 2024
at 9:30. Mr Smith did not appear and an order
for vacant possession was made
later that day requiring vacant possession be delivered to the owner by 12 noon
on 26 June 2024.
This application
the making of that order on 21 June 2024 (so only some four days after the order
was made) Mr Smith filed an application
by his solicitors with the court seeking
to set aside that order relying on the
Magistrates Court (Civil Division)
, r 10(b) and the
Supreme Court Rules,
seeking that that order be set aside. Further, that application also relied on
this court’s “implied jurisdiction”
to set aside final
judgments. The application also sought an urgent order staying the order for
vacant possession previously granted
pending determination of this application.
Mr Smith was the respondent to the substantive application, he is the
applicant on the application at hand so I will refer to
him as the applicant and
I will refer to Mr Holloway as the respondent to avoid confusion.
Smith’s application was initially listed on an urgent basis on 25 June at
which time I was advised that the application was
to be opposed by Mr
Holloway’s counsel. I then made directions about the filing of affidavit
material, stayed the order for
vacant possession and adjourned the matter for
hearing to 16 July at 9:30.
I received fulsome submissions on behalf of the respondent Mr Holloway, together
with submissions in response by Mr Smith’s
counsel from the Tenants Union
of Tasmania.
The applicant’s position on the
application
applicant on this application argues that pursuant to the decision of Blow CJ in
Blowfield v Centacare Evolve Housing Limited
[2024] TASSC 27
that I have
the power to set aside my order for vacant possession, despite it being a final
judgment of the court on the twin bases
referred to in that case.
also contends that as there has been no delay in the bringing of the application
following a making of the order, that he has raised
an arguable defence to the
claim for an order for vacant possession and that, there being no specific or
general prejudice to the
respondent landlord if I were to set aside the judgment
and permit the substantive application proceed as a defended hearing, then
should exercise the discretion I have to do so.
The respondent’s submissions
his comprehensive written submissions the respondent essentially took issue with
all the applicant’s contentions. Mr Wells
for the respondent submitted
that I do not have power to set aside the order for vacant possession by virtue
of the interaction of
Magistrates
Court (Civil Division) Rules
r 10(b) and the
Supreme Court Rules
r 570(2). He contended
that Blow CJ's remarks as to that are not the ratio of the case but rather that
obiter dicta
which does not bind me. He submits, in essence,
that his Honour was in error in that expression as to the law in that
submitted that I have no such implied power and that the
Magistrates Court
(Civil Division) Rules
r 112 displaces or removes any presumption that
such implied power exists.
further submitted that even if I do have such a power, that power does not arise
in this case because such a power can only arise
where a party is not given a
reasonable opportunity of appearing and presenting his case and that the
applicant here was given that
opportunity. He contends that the
applicant’s failure to take that opportunity arose through no fault of the
respondent but
rather was entirely due to the fault of the applicant himself.
As such, he submits that the power to set aside does not arise here.
further submitted that if I do have such a power (either pursuant to the
abovementioned
Supreme Court Rules
Magistrates Court (Civil
Division) Rules
or by way of an implied power) and that even if the exercise
of the power is governed by the considerations suggested by the applicant,
I should not set aside the order for vacant possession because the
applicant’s reasons for not appearing do not provide
a reasonable excuse
for so failing.
respondent principally relied on
Taylor v Taylor
[1979] HCA 38
[1979] 143 CLR 1
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
203 CLR 172
in this regard.
the hearing of the application Mr Wells also submitted that even if the
applicant was able to satisfy me that he was not given
a reasonable opportunity
to attend the hearing and his absence from the hearing was not due to his own
fault that such an order setting
aside should nevertheless not be made if there
is no real question to be tried. (See
at [12] per Gibbs J and at
[21] per Stephen J; see also
Allesch v Maunz
Discussion as to the “
first issue here is whether I am bound by Blow CJ’s decision in
Blowfield v Centacare
. On a proper reading of that decision the
submission that I am not bound by it is without foundation and I reject it. It
in no way be properly suggested that his Honour’s remarks there as
to the existence of the discretion, whether it be pursuant
to the rules or being
an implied power, were remarks made incidentally, in passing or “by the
way”. Nor could it be
said that those remarks were in any way unnecessary
to the decision in question and therefore not precedential. They were not
or collateral to his Honour’s decision, rather they were
central to it. As such, the decision being one made by a superior
court within
this jurisdiction, I am bound by it.
having said that, I accept that a close reading of counsel’s submission as
to the issues raised regarding the correctness
or otherwise of his
Honour’s decision are far from unmeritorious. His Honour’s decision
does represent something of
an unexpected extension of the extent of the
court’s implied powers and the powers it possesses by extension under the
I also note that of course the position eventually settled upon by his
Honour in that case was not one advanced by either party
in argument.
said that I must, of course, proceed on the basis that
Blowfield v
was properly decided. The respondent’s submissions in that
regard are really for another court.
The evidence on this
application
support of his application Mr Smith has filed an affidavit that relevantly
deposes as follows as to his non-appearance at court
on 17 June, on the
application for an order for vacant possession:
mistakenly of the belief that the matter was listed in Launceston on 17 July
instead of 17 June. This is the explanation
for my non-attendance at court
last Monday and why I did not engage a legal representative to appear on my
(6) If I had properly realised it was listed on 17 June I would have
certainly attended. I had sought legal advice prior to 17 June
and it was my
intention to engage a solicitor from the Tenants Union of Tasmania to appear on
behalf when closer to the date that
I thought the court was on.
(7) I do suffer from various health concerns and this has had an impact
on my short-term memory.
(8) I acknowledge that I made a mistake by missing the court listing and
it is regrettable I have made a mistake with the court date.
However, it was
certainly not my intention to miss court and I believe that I have an arguable
case and a right to be heard”.
to the matter of rent, his affidavit provides as
“(11) The issue with rent is more complex than it
may first appear.
(12) My residential tenancy agreement was tied to my employment with the
applicant as a bulldozer operator. I was dismissed around
19 January this year
after suffering a workplace injury. I am currently challenging that dismissal
through the Fair Work Commission.
(13) During the period of my employment I would get a fortnightly salary,
the applicant would take my fortnightly rent directly from
my salary. When the
applicant dismissed me from my employment and I was no longer getting a salary
from him, that meant no rent
could be paid to him.
(14) Yet at no time have I ever been given any bank details or any
alternate mechanism to pay rent to the applicant. There was never
residential tenancy agreement in place and I have no way of approaching the
applicant personally to offer him rent. It
is my understanding he lives either
interstate or overseas.
(15) The applicant has been trying to get me out of my tenancy since my
dismissal and I do believe he is trying to ensure I cannot
make rent payments to
make it look like I’ve fallen in rental arrears.
(16) I understand, despite the various disputes going on between the
applicant and I, that I continue to receive the benefit of living
premises and I need to pay rent for that. I will do that once I am given that
opportunity”.
fact that notice to vacate, based as it was on non-payment of rent over the
period alleged, being correct and accurate is not
in dispute. Nor is there any
argument about service or there being some formal deficiency in the notice.
application is a minor civil claim so pursuant to the provisions of the
Magistrates Court (Civil Division) Act
Part 5, Division 5, these
proceedings,
, are not strictly governed by the rules of
evidence. I also have a power to elicit evidence by inquiry from the parties
and witnesses
myself. Proceedings in minor civil claims are also to be
conducted with as little formality and technicality and with as much expedition
as is proper in the case. (See
Magistrates Court (Civil Division) Act
that being the case, at the commencement of the hearing I alerted the parties,
particularly the applicant, to the proposition
that a tenant has, where there is
no place specified for the payment of rental in a residential tenancy agreement,
an obligation
to seek out the owner and to pay the rent to him or her there. In
Houghton v Johnson
[1853] EngR 566
[1853] 155 ER 1529
at [1531] at [1532], Martin B said
as follows:
“We are therefore of opinion, that a covenant
for the payment of rent, at the time and in the manner as reserved, when no
place of payment is mentioned, is analogous to a covenant to pay a
sum of money in gross on a day in certain, in which case it is
incumbent upon
the covenantor to seek out the person to be paid, and to pay or tender him the
money, and for the simple reason, that
he has contracted to do
Leahy v Canavan
[1970] Qd R 225; and
[1975] VR [79] at [83].
concern was that there was nothing in the affidavit material before me
indicating that the applicant had made any effort whatsoever
to pay rent once
his employment was terminated, either directly after termination, after he was
served with the notice to vacate
weeks later, after he was served with the
application for the order for vacant possession or even after the hearing of
that application.
suggested, in essence, to counsel that based on that line of authority that the
applicant’s application was doomed to fail
in the absence of any
indication of any such efforts having been made, no matter what test applied to
the exercise of the discretion
to set aside the order. Counsel for the
applicant considered the matter and took some instruction. He then advised that
to proceed with his application and eventually sought to lead some
further evidence from his client as to the matter of non-payment
of rent and the
like. The applicant then gave oral evidence, at some length, before me.
oral evidence was that he was employed on the property as a bulldozer operator
and farmhand and that he had the house “with
his job”, that his rent
was charged $250.00 a week payable and that each fortnight $500.00 was held back
from his wages to
pay same. He told the court about his accident. He asserted,
I infer, that that arose out of and in the course of his employment
and that he
should have received weekly payments of compensation afterwards, but that he did
not. He was vehement about all this
and clearly angry about all this. He told
the court at length and repeatedly that his employer did not have workers
compensation
insurance and that its motor vehicles were not even insured or
registered. He asserted that after returning from hospital after
vehicle accident that he was visited by Mr John Beasley (the person who served
him with both the notice to vacate and with
the application for orders for
vacant possession later on) at the house. He asserted that he was sacked that
day and told he had
a week to get out of the house. He then went on to say that
he was then paid some days later on about 20 January of this year, although
was underpaid. I infer this was the last time he was paid wages.
underlined that he was never given any bank details in relation to his rent. He
rather confusedly said repeatedly that he requested
Mr Beasley to provide him
with a “separation certificate” so he could “get
Centrelink”, but that he never
got one. This was another source of real
anger it seems. Much of his evidence and cross-examination was given in an
aggressive and
argumentative way and it was very hard to follow. He was plainly
extremely agitated about his non-receipt of weekly payments of
compensation and
his assertion that his employer was not covered by a policy of workers
compensation.
asserted that he had tried to contact the respondent about the rent. When he
went into detail about that he said that he had a
number of postal addresses for
his employer. One of them was at 83 Honour Avenue in Piccadilly in Queensland.
He offered no other.
He asserted that he had sent what I understand to be a
request for a separation certificate to that address but had not got a response.
He asserted that he had sent items there by registered mail which had not been
collected. He asserted in cross-examination that
he had no way to approach or
Beasley about the matter
of rent, he asserted that he did not know where
Mr Beasley came from or anything about him. He suggested that he
didn’t even
know Mr Beasley existed until he arrived at the address after
the applicant returned from the hospital in Hobart. When asked specifically
cross-examination about efforts he had made to contact his employer about rent,
he vociferously asserted that all correspondence
with his employer was in the
hands of his lawyers (not from the Tenants Union but his workers compensation
lawyers). When pointedly
asked if that communication actually involved the
matter of rent payments, he in effect did not answer that but simply repeated
everything was done by letter. I viewed his responses in that regard to be
entirely artful.
accepted that when he worked on the property his manager was a Geoff Rice. Mr
Rice had lived at the premises in question until
the defendant moved in
whereupon Mr Rice moved to a larger new address at another farm run by the
employer near St Helens. It is
plain from the answers to the questions asked of
the applicant that he has made no inquiry of Mr Rice as to how it is that he
evidence before me that he has not asked any other employee
of the respondent
employed on either farm as to how it is that he might seek out his employer
issue. He has made no effort to speak to
Mr Beasley – noting that he gave the applicant the notice to vacate which
raised the issue. He produced no material from his workers compensation
solicitors whereby he made any effort whatsoever to ascertain
how it is he was
to pay his rent. I was in no way satisfied that any of his registered post
mailings had anything to do with the
matter of rent at all. The applicant was
plainly fixated on the issues of his injuries, his desire for a separation
certificate
and getting workers compensation coverage. He even refused to accept
that the respondent had received his mail when Mr Wells, counsel
respondent, produced some of it. All this evidence should be seen against the
assertion from the applicant that he knew he
needed to pay rent and that he
wanted to pay it.
at the completion of his evidence, I asked the applicant some further questions
to the surprise of all, that he
not only got the house through his employment, but that he
“also got it
through Harcourts Real Estate in St Helens”
. He went on to say that
they had advertised the property before he rented it and that before he moved in
he got the keys from them.
No mention of any of this had been made at any point
either in his evidence or his affidavit until that point. He was not
re-examined
any effort whatsoever to contact the real estate agent as to
the matter of rent
at any time after he ceased to receive pay.
The test to be
applied to on this application
noted above, counsel for the applicant submitted that I should exercise a
discretion to set aside the order for vacant possession
if I am satisfied that
the defendant has provided a reasonable excuse for his failure to appear in
court and if he has an arguable
defence to the application for vacant possession
on the material before me.
relied on the decision of Chief Magistrate Geason in
Blowfield v Centacare
Evolve Housing Limited
(a decision of 28 Jun 2024 in matter number
2024/M5240) which is of course the decision on the application which Ms
Blowfield brought
following Blow CJ’s decision as referred to above. That
application proceeded by way of an agreement that the application should
heard and determined pursuant to the court’s implied jurisdiction as
discussed by Blow CJ and it was further an agreed position
that to set aside the
order for vacant possession the court needed to be satisfied that the applicant
could demonstrate a
prima facie
case or an arguable defence on the merits
and that she was able to provide a reasonable explanation for her non-appearance
the magistrate.
test applied by the learned Chief Magistrate in that case is one commonly said
to be applied in applications to set aside interlocutory
judgments. Similar
considerations apply on applications to extend time and the like, so that
formulation is a familiar one. No
submission was made that a different –
perhaps more refined – approach to that consideration was required before
respect, having had the benefit of argument, I disagree with her Honour to some
extent. However, I note that in that case her
Honour’s attention was
entirely focused on the issue of how it was that the applicant failed to attend
court. Her explanations
case the court was therefore left with no explanation as to her failure to
attend to oppose the order sought. That being the case, a court is left in the
simple position that, absent an explanation which
is credible and reasonable,
the only inference to be drawn is that the applicant intended not to appear to
defend the matter. Her
Honour did not get to the issue of the alleged defence,
so her characterisation of the test was, it seems for good reason, also really
just shorthand.
respondent’s counsel submits that the court’s implied power to set
aside the order here is dependant on the application
of the High Court’s
decision in
Taylor v Taylor
[1979] HCA 38
[1979] 143 CLR 1.
That is correct.
involved the setting aside of orders made under the
Matrimonial
(Cth). Because of the fault of the respondent’s
solicitors no answer was filed to a petition and the respondent was never
advised by any means of its hearing date. On the hearing date the matter
proceeded in the absence of the respondent and orders in
favour of the applicant
court accepted what Rich CJ said in
Cameron v Cole
[1944] HCA 5
(1944) 68 CLR 571
“It is a fundamental principle of natural justice,
applicable to all courts, whether superior or inferior, that a person against
whom a claim or charge is made must be given a reasonable opportunity of
appearing and presenting his case”
. Gibbs J noted that
“...since the appellant in fact had no notice of the hearing, the court
had inherent power to set the order aside”
Mason J (with whom Aikin J agreed) expanded that formulation at
[16] to include the power arising in both circumstances where the
party had not
been served and also
“when the absence of the party is due to no fault
on his part”
formulation provides an essential plank in the respondent’s submission
that the discretion to set aside the order here
does not arise because the
failure of the defendant to appear and defend the application for vacant
possession was entirely his own
fault. Unlike
here the applicant
was served with a notice of hearing which clearly told him of the hearing date.
He asserts he intended to attend
court and intended to get assistance from the
Tenants Union about it as his “workers compensation lawyers” did not
on these matters and they suggested he do that. He asserts he misread
the notice and believed the hearing was in July, not June.
It is clear that once
he realised the order had been made that he immediately took steps regarding the
matter consistent with his
desire to defend the application by contacting the
Tenants Union and bringing this application.
subsequent to
have themselves used a somewhat different
formulation as to the matter of non-appearance which do not limit the exercise
of the discretion
only to cases where non-appearance is through no fault of the
applicant. In
Singh v Singh
[2006] WASC 182
Simmonds J held in
discussing the proper exercise of the discretion recognised in
“applicant needs to establish, on the balance of probabilities,
the facts relevant to the explanation for the failure of the
defendant to appear
at the trial”
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
referred to the need to establish that the failure to appear has been
“adequately explained”
. In the New South Wales Court of
Appeal Handley JA used that same language in
Magnate Projects Pty Ltd v Youma
Constructions (No 2) Pty Ltd
[2005] NSWCA 331
where his Honour cited Jordan
CJ in the earlier case of
Vacuum Oil Pty Ltd v Stockdale
[1942] NSWStRp 31
[1942] 42 SR
“The present is not a case in which
judgment was signed by default through some procedural omission on the part of
the defendant
or his legal advisers. The action followed the ordinary course,
except that its coming on for trial was delayed through dilatoriness
on the part
of the defendant. It is one in which, the action coming on for trial in its
ordinary place in the list, no one was present
in Court to conduct it for the
defendant, and it therefore proceeded in his absence. In such a case, when the
plaintiff is in no
respect in default, a new trial will not be granted save in
very special circumstances: Chitty's Archbold, 10th ed., 1457; 12th ed.,
In every such case the Court has an inherent and unfettered, though judicial,
discretion, in the exercise of which it will,
however, necessarily consider (a)
whether any useful purpose would be served by setting aside the judgment, and
(b) how it came about
that the applicant found himself bound by a judgment
regularly obtained: Evans v. Bartlam [1937]AC 473 at 482. As a general rule
(although not necessarily in every case, if some reason exists for departing
from it: Collins' Book Depot Pty Ltd v. Bretherton
[1938] VLR 49
; Austn. Digest (1934-1939) 1859,
the Court requires an affidavit showing prima facie that the defendant
has a good defence on the
merits: Evans v. Bartlam
[1937] AC 473
at 480, 488-9, and also an
explanation of his absence which shows that justice requires that in the
circumstances it should be excused.
And if there has been gross negligence on
the defendant's part, the Court will be the more disposed to require at least a
clear case of merits to be shown, to incline it to
interfere: Nash v. Swinburne 3 M&G 630 at
632; Weitzel v. Friedenreich
; Austn. Digest 376.”
long predates
and must where necessary, be read
in the light of it. However, subsequent cases demonstrate that the discretion
recognised in
should not simply be exercised by application of a
mechanistic approach confined to the precise language used in that case. Rather
the discretion is one which should focus on the aggregate position of the party
aggrieved by the order to ascertain if a miscarriage
of justice has occurred
such that the order judgment should be set aside and a new trial or hearing
ordered. The principal factor
to be kept in mind is that parties should be
afforded a chance to put their evidence and arguments to the court and have the
decided on its merits. If a party is denied that opportunity, and they
genuinely wanted to do so, the discretion arises.
reason why an applicant fails to appear is obviously relevant here. Courts,
litigants and the community have a legitimate interest
in the finality of
decisions not being detracted from in ordinary circumstances:
[1971] HCA 49.
A conscious decision to simply not attend would not
suffice. A decision not to attend for tactical purposes in the litigation would
not suffice. A conscious decision not to attend followed by a change of heart
much later may be unlikely to satisfy a court. The
utilisation of this
discretion as a
means of appealing out of time would not
suffice. A long delay in seeking to set aside the judgment may also be relevant,
if the other party (or even a third party) has altered its position
following to the judgment. The list of explanations or reasons
non-appearance is probably endless and no purpose is served by a magistrate
attempting to comprehensively list what might or
might not be a
“reasonable explanation”.
none of the types of improper or unreasonable explanations fall to be
considered. The applicant got the date wrong. These things
happen. The
applicant was not challenged that anything more artful or sinister had occurred.
Rather, his mistake about the date
was accepted as genuine and the fact that it
was his error and his alone was the focus of the respondent’s position.
end of the day, I am really left with the position that the applicant
plainly wanted to defend the claim for vacant possession, intended
to get advice
to do so, mistakenly thought he had a deal of time to do so and, once he
realised his error, he quickly sought to address
it. As long ago as
even what Jordan CJ there described as
negligence”
by the applicant was not necessarily a bar to the
availability of the remedy to him. In that sense the requirement that there be
“reasonable explanation for non-appearance” does not equate to there
being a need for the reason for not appearing
to be reasonable in the sense that
a careful, prudent person of reasonable intelligence and experience would never
make it. The
test is not so high. It is only reasonable to accept that people
simply make mistakes – unsophisticated people like the applicant
well as very experienced and intelligent people. The applicant was battling
injury, had seemingly lost his job, was under
pressure regarding Centrelink
entitlements and his entitlements under the
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act
as well. He was dealing with lawyers about that. His
mistake was entirely his own, but it is well explicable. Importantly I am
entirely satisfied he was consistent in his desire to oppose the order. For
those reasons I do not accept the respondent’s
submission that simply
because the failure to attend was the applicant’s fault entirely that the
discretion does not fall to
be exercised in this case. In my view the discretion
is triggered. To that extent the applicant has discharged the onus on him.
the balance of what I have described as the aggregate position of the applicant
on this application still needs to be carefully
considered. In that regard I
accept that the matter of prejudice to the respondent must be considered. Here
that is not urged on
me as being a factor militating against the exercise of the
discretion.
nature of the litigation, it’s complexity (or otherwise) is to be
considered. In many cases the complexity of the litigation,
the extent of the
issues and the centrality of credit may tend to favour the exercise of the
discretion. This is not a complex matter.
The issue really at play here, on the
merits, in terms of the respondent’s substantive case and on the
applicants is a very
limited one. The respondent’s case is not one based
on credit or fine judgments. It is plain on its face. The applicant was
respondent’s tenant. He was required to pay rent. Rent was not paid. As a
result a plainly valid notice to vacate was
properly served on the applicant. He
failed to remedy the breach before that notice took effect. He has paid no rent
since. He was
served with the application for vacant possession arising from the
completeness in my view the test to be applied pursuant to the court’s
implied power and that applicable under r 570(2)
should not differ. The rule is
expressed as a discretion. All the same considerations necessarily apply
whatever the basis relied
on. There would be no sense in approaching the matter
differently or treating either the rule or the implied power as being broader
narrower than the other.
Discussion as to the discretion
have effectively discussed the issue of the applicant’s failure to attend
the initial hearing and his explanation for that
above. I am satisfied that his
failure to attend does not preclude me setting aside the order in question.
real issue here is the applicant’s claim that he did not pay the rent
because he did not know how or where to pay it and
that he had no reasonable
means to ascertain how to do so – i.e. that he had done all he reasonably
could to comply with the
obligation cast on him as referred to in paragraph 27
above. If he could do so then it would not be
“genuine and
to rely on non-payment in order to validly ground the service of
a notice to vacate and the application for vacant possession based
on that. The
applicant’s counsel did not take issue with that.
evidence before me supporting that assertion was given in some detail and
cross-examined on at some length on this hearing. The
applicant was well aware
of the importance of that issue. On proper consideration, the evidence
supporting that was non-existent
and really came down to the applicant’s
bald assertion that he
“couldn’t communicate”
respondent so he therefore could not pay rent. He was given the opportunity to
say and produce anything he could in support
his evidence the applicant was at pains to say that he knew he should pay rent,
that he wanted to pay it and that he could pay
it. However, on his evidence he
plainly had not explored how and where to pay by any and all of the following
Mr Beasley (noting that he had represented the respondent in sacking the
applicant weeks before) when he served the notice to
vacate; and
do so with Mr Hague at the same time (bearing in mind his very obvious ill will
towards Mr Beasley); and
taking any steps at all thereafter to find or communicate with either of them
thereafter about it; and
raising it with his former direct supervisor Mr Rice who lived nearby; and
simply sending a cheque or money order to the registered address/s that he was
aware of; and
writing to that address seeking advice about how to pay his rent; and
his workers compensation lawyers to attempt to find that out; and perhaps most
obviously of all
of Harcourts Real Estate – who had advertised the house for rent and who
gave him the key in the first place –
is no evidence the applicant did any of these things. Any “arguable
defence” here is nothing more than the applicant
steadfastly insisting
that he had no means to contact the respondent when there were so many ways he
could easily have tried but
is very plain is that the applicant is very angry with the respondent and has an
enormous grievance against him because of his
injuries and his subsequent issues
respondent to give him
a “separation certificate” to allow him to
receive Centrelink benefits. His anger about all that was palpable. His
attitude about all of that is extremely adversarial. It is plain that this
rancour has played a role in what I am satisfied was
his wilful blindness as to
paying his rent and his strident and baseless assertions that he had no way open
to him to pay it.
onus is on the applicant to establish that, if I upheld this application, a
rehearing of the substantive application might mean
that a different result
would follow. He has not done so. Rather I am affirmatively satisfied after
hearing substantial evidence
and argument about this issue that no different
result could flow if I set aside the order. Put another way, I am in no way
that what Jordan CJ referred to in
clear case of merits”
has been shown here. Even if all the other
features necessary to activate the discretion are present it is not enough to
effectively
simply stridently assert a defence which has no prospect of success
on a rehearing.
at the end of these reasons I return to the simple, central position that the
defence to the substantive claim in this litigation
is doomed and therefore this
application – as interesting as the submissions and arguments were –
is likewise doomed.
those reasons the application is dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (189 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter