URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASHPT/2019/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gloria Swetnam v Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia [2019] TASHPT 8 (24 December 2020)
[2020] TASHPT 8
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL
Gloria Swetnam v Nursing and Midwifery Board of
[2019] TASHPT
SWETNAM, Gloria
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
27 June 2019
DELIVERED ON:
24 December 2020
DECISION OF:
Deputy Chairperson Wilkins
CATCHWORDS:
Board’s decision to impose conditions on nurse
practitioner’s registration – “conduct unsatisfactory”
– review of decision – Facebook posts by practitioner –
responses by practitioner to proposed action – whether
irrelevant material
taken into account – whether conditions imposed excessive.
DETERMINATION:
The Board’s decision is affirmed
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation
[2020] TASHPT 8
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. The applicant is a registered nurse. On 4 January 2018, the
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (“AHPRA”)
a confidential notification in relation to two Facebook posts which had been
made by Ms Swetnam, the first on 18 December
2017, and the second on 31 December
2017. Ms Swetnam was advised of the notification, and invited to provide a
response to that
notification to the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia
(“the Board”), to be taken into account as part of the Board’s
assessment of the notification. Ms Swetnam responded, and thereafter followed
notices from AHPRA to Ms Swetnam on two occasions,
being 10 May 2018 and 20 July
2018, that because the Board had formed the view that Ms Swetnam had engaged in
unsatisfactory conduct
under s 178 (1) of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (“the National Law”), the Board was proposing to
particular action on each occasion. As part of those notices as to proposed
action, Ms Swetnam was invited to respond to the
action proposed by the Board
prior to a final decision being made, and Ms Swetnam did, on each occasion,
2. Ultimately, the Board decided under s179(2)(b)(i) of the National
Law to impose conditions upon Ms Swetnam’s registration
that required her
to complete further education in relation to use of social media and
communication in the workplace.
3. It is this decision of the Board that Ms
Swetnam has referred to the Tribunal for review.
Background leading up to Board’s decision
NOTIFICATION
4. The confidential notification lodged with AHPRA was said to
have been brought on the basis that the notifier had reasonable belief
public social media posts made by Ms Swetnam brought the nursing profession into
disrepute with the public. The notification
referred to and provided copies of
Facebook posts:
“Gloria Swetnam
identifies herself on her Facebook page as ‘Registered Nurse at Wilfred
Lopes Centre’ (see image
Her first post is date and time stamped 18 December 2017 at 0320 hours. The
globe icon next to 3:20 a.m. means this is a public post,
i.e. it can be seen by
anyone on Facebook.
The words Gloria Swetnam wrote in her 18 December 2017 post are:
‘I have recently discovered that I am a bully because I dare tell the
truth. If that makes me a bully so be it. I will continue
to be a voice for
the truth even if it upsets those who are in the wrong.
I have been lied about and never once did I call someone a bully. But tell
the truth about the liar [emoji] then all of a sudden
they are the
I have never felt so good [emoji] since I was able to express the feelings
of myself and my most of my colleagues. Little Napoleon
and your Josephine I
will gladly be your Waterloo.
The truth will come out and you will rue the day you lied about me. Karma
is real and I have patience.’
Gloria Swetnam’s second post is date and time stamped 31 December 2017
at 1358. The globe icon next to 1:58 p.m. means this
is a public post, i.e. it
can be seen by anyone on Facebook.
The words Gloria Swetnam wrote in her 31 December 2017 post are:
‘I prefer vindictive bitch. Cross me and your days are numbered. One
way to or another I’m gonna get ya! I’m
gonna get ya, get ya, get
5. An image of the introductory part of Ms Swetnam’s
Facebook page, which identifies her as a registered nurse at Wilfred Lopes
Centre, together with images of the two posts referred to forms part of the
notification. The image of the post from 31 December
2017 also includes an
indication that Ms Swetnam is “feeling determined”, as well as the
words: “Your result: 1001%
Asshole. You often do not hold back, and show
no mercy when crossed”.
RESPONSE TO NOTIFICATION
6. Ms Swetnam was invited by AHPRA to respond to the
notification for consideration by the Board. It is apparent from Ms
response, dated 1 March 2018, that she believed she knew the
identity of the person who had made the confidential notification in
relation to
her, and that he was a work colleague of hers with whom there appears to have
been a degree of interpersonal and/or workplace
conflict. Her response was as
continues to be a serial complainer. My posts on Facebook had nothing to do
with him. He has tried every conceivable way to discredit
He is a malicious trouble maker. I am already under investigation with no
resolution and this is just another act of his to vilify
The Wilfred Lopes Centre is currently undergoing an independent investigation
because of the numerous complaints
has lodged since his hiring.
20 confidential letters have been handed out. I am excitedly waiting to have my
The only workplace bully we have is
I can’t even do a
Facebook personality test without it being about him. He complained to my union
and they said they saw
no harm in the postings. I will post up the actual
statements I made about
I think AHPRA should review its complaint procedures. It isn’t fair
that some malcontent can place your career in jeopardy.
I work for the DHHS and
if they felt there was a problem with my practice they should have contacted
you. Not a person with no
real nursing experience who never bothered with the
protocol of the establishment to begin with.
has no one to
answer to. It just isn’t fair.
I have never had a problem with my nursing practice in my 35 years of nursing
until the Wilfred Lopes Centre had the misfortune of
permanent contract without a probationary period.
Gloria Swetnam”
7. The above response was forwarded to AHPRA by Ms Swetnam via
email at 10:56:41 am. At 11:21:58 am, AHPRA received from Ms Swetnam’s
email address an email string containing communications between herself and her
union, the CPSU. The email chain commences with
an email from Ms Swetnam to her
union dated 14 February 2018 which contains the following:
“Hello, I have received
a letter that
has made more allegations against me saying I have
bullied and harassed him. An independent investigator will be contacting me
the allegations.
in actual fact is the real bully. I am
awaiting a phone call to set up an appointment with the investigator.
I will need a support person because I don’t think I can use
since he is being investigated also.
My nerves are fragile at the moment because I am newly menopausal and it is
taking all my resilience not to knock
into the next week. He is a
narcissistic power hungry impotent little man who has never achieved anything in
his own life and tries
to bring down those he believes don’t value him
because he is after all God’s gift to mankind and medicine.
18 months experience as a care assistant and he has the audacity to tell
level 4 nurses that they have mishandled a situation that
doesn’t’ fully understand in the first place. I know he’s
reporting another nurse to APHRA
As you can tell I have a lot of anymosity
towards C. with just
cause. My own investigation with APHRA
continues. I can honestly
say I hate this man but I have never bullied him. Telling the truth these days
is apparently bullying.
Hopefully the investigator can see through his false
allegations.
I want to change jobs but I refuse to leave while he is wielding his self
styled power.
Thank-you for your assistance. Kindest regards, Gloria
INVITATION TO RESPOND TO PROPOSED ACTION (MAY 2018)
8. On 10 May 2018 AHPRA wrote to Ms Swetnam and advised her
• On 15 March 2018, the Board considered the information
it had received, including
(a) Confidential notification received 4 January 2018
including Ms Swetnam’s Facebook posts;
(b) Ms Swetnam’s response
received 1 March 2018; and
(c) Exchange of emails between Ms Swetnam and
Community & Public Sector Union.
• The Board had formed a view that her professional
conduct was or may be unsatisfactory and was proposing to caution her in
specific terms which included refraining from making comments via social media
that might be interpreted as inappropriate by peers
or the public. The Board
noted from the Facebook page images included with the confidential notification
that Ms Swetnam was clearly
identified as being a registered nurse employed at
the Wilfred Lopes Centre, and further noted that she did not dispute that she
was the author of the Facebook posts in question.
• The Board was
satisfied that the post on 18 December 2017 related to Ms Swetnam’s
workplace, as she made reference to
her colleagues within the post. The Board
considered also that it was likely the post on 31 December 2017 related to her
“given its close proximity in time”.
• The Board
was of the view that both Facebook posts conveyed an intimidating tone and
although nobody was named, it appeared
clear to the Board that Ms
Swetnam’s intention was to send a negative message to a person and/or
group. It was the Board’s
view that using social media in this manner was
inappropriate and contrary to Principle 3.4 of the Nursing and Midwifery Board
Australia’s Code of Conduct.
• The Board had also considered
Ms Swetnam’s response and exchange of emails with the CPSU and noted that
Ms Swetnam had
identified the person she believed had made the notification, and
without any confirmation as to that went on to complain about that
person, not
only in her response to AHPRA, but also in her email to the CPSU. It was noted
“the Board is of the view that
your communication about the person you
identified in this instance was unwarranted and unacceptable and might be
indicative of a
pattern of conduct by you”.
• Ms Swetnam had the
opportunity to make a written or verbal submission to the Board, which the Board
would consider before
deciding whether to take the proposed action, that is to
caution Ms Swetnam. Ms Swetnam was advised that the Board would consider
submission that she might make before proceeding to make any further
TO PROPOSED ACTION (MAY 2018)
9. Ms Swetnam responded to AHPRA via email dated 21 May 2018.
In evidence before the Tribunal she said that her union had some input
provision of that response, in that the union had toned down her initial
response which had been drafted in anger. The
content of that settled response
was as follows:
“I am extremely
disappointed with the findings of the investigation . Whilst notification was
made to you confidentially, I
believe I know the individual who lodged the
complaint and I feel I have been unfairly treated. A complaint was made to my
and this should have been investigated and reached a conclusion prior
to any further action. Naturally I am not privy to your internal
processes, but
I would hope that you enquire what action has been taken at the workplace to
resolve or raise issues. The angst arose
as a result of an email chain which I
have attached. I have removed the names of the people the emails were sent to
and placed them
in order for you. You will note that I received a warning form
my Director of Nursing about being careful with my correspondence.
In my response to the investigation I did not dispute my being the author of
the Facebook post in question as I believe I was making
general references with
regarding the personality quiz. I acknowledge that in hindsight, discussing
colleagues in my post may have
been inappropriate.
Any emails I sent to my union was confidential. Please advise how you came
into possession of the email correspondence. My privacy
rights should allow me
to ventilate to my union representative my feelings without suffering
repercussions.
I have issued an SLRS
[Safety Reporting and Learning System]
concerning ongoing harassment from this colleague.
Respectfully submitted,
Gloria Swetnam”
10. The documents sent with the email to AHPRA were as
• Email chain commencing with an email from the person
previously referred to in this decision as Mr C., and appears to be an
from Mr C. to his work colleagues in general relating to health and safety
representatives in the workplace. Mr C. comments
in the email that he is
pleased that there are now six more health and safety representatives, as he has
been the sole person in
that position since being declared elected in
• The next email, undated, is from Ms Swetnam to Mr C. to the
effect that he was not popularly elected to the health and safety
representative
role and used subterfuge to get his position, and that a petition has been
signed by staff to have him removed.
• Further, there is an email from
Mr C. to Ms Swetnam on Friday 15 December 2017 at 11:04 am (apparently 20 mins
or thereabouts
after the immediately preceding email from Ms Swetnam)
characterising her immediately preceding email, and other behaviour, as bullying
and requesting that she not contact him again.
• The next email is one
which appears to be a general one to employees at the workplace where Mr C.
encourages anybody who received
the earlier email from Ms Swetnam and who feels
that their health and wellbeing have been placed at risk by the content and tone
of that email to report that immediately in writing.
• The next email,
undated, is one to Mr C. from a work colleague who is a clinical nurse which
condemns Ms Swetnam’s email
and supports Mr C.
• The next email
is from Ms Swetnam to the aforementioned clinical nurse, dated 17 December 2017
at 3:54 am, disputing the things
said by the clinical nurse in her email, and
reinforcing Ms Swetnam’s own position. She reiterates that she is
speaking the
truth, and that Mr C. is not respected or liked by his
co-workers.
• Finally, an email from Mr N., Ms Swetnam’s acting
manager, on Tuesday 19 December 2017, to Ms Swetnam. Mr N. refers
Swetnam’s email to all staff at 10:35 pm on Friday 15 December 2017, and
refers to a copy of the email sent by Ms Swetnam
to Mr C. on the following
night. Mr N. refers to a lawful and reasonable direction issued to Ms Swetnam
on 18 July 2017 in relation
to appropriate workplace behaviour. He notes that
her actions on 15 and 16 December are potentially in breach of the lawful and
reasonable direction, and further directs her not to email or contact Mr C. and
further, not to use the email system to make derogatory
comments about Mr C. or
any other staff members. Mr N. goes on to remind Ms Swetnam of her
responsibility in relation to publishing
appropriate comments in relation to
Facebook. He invites her to contact him if she wishes to discuss his
TO RESPOND TO PROPOSED ACTION (JULY 2018)
11. On 20 July 2018 AHPRA wrote to Ms Swetnam, providing notice
of proposed action and inviting her response. The letter from AHPRA
advised her
that the Board had considered:
• Confidential notification received 4 January 2018
including her Facebook posts.
• Her response to the confidential
notification received 1 March 2018.
• Exchange of emails between Ms
Swetnam and her union.
• Ms Swetnam’s submission in relation to
the proposed caution dated 21 May 2018, including copies of email correspondence
between herself and various colleagues on 15 and 17 December 2017.
12. The correspondence from AHPRA went on as follows:
Board noted your Facebook page clearly identifies you as being a registered
nurse employed at the Wilfred Lopes Centre.
The Board further noted you do not
dispute you are the author of the Facebook posts on 18 and 31 December
Board referred to principle 3.4 from the Nursing and Midwifery Board of
Australia’s Code of Conduct (“the Code”),
‘Bullying and harassment’, particularly 3.4 (c) which states,
‘Nurses must understand social media is sometimes
used as a mechanism to
bully or harass, and that nurses should not engage in, ignore or excuse such
behaviour’.
Board noted the Social Media Policy (SMP) adopted by the Nursing and Midwifery
Board of Australia states that when using social
media, “health
practitioners should remember that the National Law, their National
Board’s code of ethics and professional
conduct.....apply” and that
further, whether an online activity is able to be viewed by the public or is
limited to a specific
group of people, health professionals need to maintain
professional standards and be aware of the implications of their actions,
all professional circumstances.
Board noted the Code makes it clear to nurses that their conduct outside of the
workplace is also relevant to the Board in circumstances
where such conduct may
be considered to undermine the good standing of the nursing profession. Such
circumstances include where
a practitioner conducts themselves in a manner that
is inconsistent with the Code and/or the Code of Ethics and any other relevant
policies, standards of guidelines.
Board is satisfied your post on 18 December 2017 at 3:20am relates to your
workplace as you make reference to your “colleagues”
post. The Board considered it is likely your post on 31 December 2017 at 1:58pm
also relates to your workplace given
its close proximity in time.
Board is of the view that both Facebook posts convey an intimidating tone and
although you have not named a particular person
and/or group, it appears clear
to the Board that your intention was to send a negative message to a person
and/or group. In the
Board’s view, using social media in this manner is
inappropriate and contrary to the Code.
Board considered your response and exchange of emails with CPSU. The Board
noted despite this notification having been made confidentially,
you identified
a person you believe made the notification. Further, the Board noted without
confirmation as to whether the notifier
was in fact the person you identified,
you go on to complain about that person in your response and berated him in your
CPSU. The Board is of the view that your communication about the
person you identified in this instance was unwarranted and unacceptable
might be indicative of a pattern of conduct by you.
primary role of the Board is to protect the public in relation to practitioners
who, while practising the profession, engage in
professional practice that is
unsatisfactory and so has, or is likely to have, an adverse impact on the safety
of the public.
Board is satisfied your actions in this instance were contrary to behaviour
expected of nurses and were in breach of the Board’s
Social Media Policy
and Code. After having considered your response to the confidential
notification dated 1 March 2018 the Board
is concerned about your insight and
understanding of the potential impact using social media in such a manner can
have on members
of society.
Board carefully considered your submission in response to the proposed caution
dated 21 May 2018 including email correspondence
attached to same. Your
submission has caused the Board to have further concerns about your general
communication, particularly the
Board noted:
communication by email with various staff members on 15 and 17 December 2017
concerns the same person identified and berated
by you in your email
correspondence with CPSU (outlined at reason 8);
communication by email with various staff members on 15 and 17 December 2017 was
unwarranted and improper; and
decision to disclose the aforementioned email correspondence to AHPRA in attempt
to explain and/or justify your comments on Facebook
on 18 and 31 December 2017
is indicative of a significant deficit in insight.
Board is of the view that your communication with various staff members on 15
and 17 is contrary to principle 3.3 of the Code
headed ‘Effective
communication’, particularly 3.3 (e) which states, ‘to communicate
effectively, nurses must be
non-judgmental and not refer to people in a
non-professional manner verbally or in correspondence/records, including
refraining from
behaviour that may be interpreted as bullying or harassment
and/or culturally unsafe.’
Consequently
the Board formed the view that your communication is or may be below the
standard reasonably expected of a registered
health practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience.
the Board’s concerns regarding your inappropriate use of social media and
your communication, the Board considered that
the appropriate course of action
in this instance is to propose to impose conditions on your registration,
requiring you to undergo
a program of further education and training to address
both of these issues.”
13. Ms Swetnam was then given details about what she needed to
do to make submissions in relation to the proposed action contemplated
RESPONSE TO PROPOSED ACTION (JULY 2018)
14. Ms Swetnam, on 27 July 2018, responded as follows:
“This investigation
process has caused me a substantial amount of distress over the past
I believe that the action AHPRA proposed to take in unacceptable and not
proportional to the alleged conduct.
My conduct consisted of writing a singular Facebook post. The second
Facebook post is not about
. The second Facebook post relates to
a personality test I completed and used
[lyrics of a particular song]
a jovial manner. It was not my intention that this post be directed at Mr C.
nor did I think that Mr C. should perceive that
the post was about him.
I vehemently deny any insinuation that I am a bully. It is my belief that
did not like being challenged. His response to the workplace
email made him look foolish. After approaching my acting director
and my union....(which I believe is inappropriate considering that he is not a
), I assume he contacted AHPRA with the Facebook
postings using confidentiality. I feel that I should be allowed to know who my
is so that I can adequately defend the allegations against me. I feel
that since I am not privy to this information, I am being
denied procedural
fairness in the investigation process. If
did not post those
Facebook messages then someone else has been reading my notifications because
the exact same wording can be seen
in previous allegations he has made against
me. It is my submission that the Board’s proposed actions against me are
unacceptable
and disproportionate to my conduct.
The actions proposed will have significant consequences on my professional
reputation and career. As mentioned above, this investigation
has caused me a
great deal of distress and I continue to hold concerns about the process. I
have felt I had to try and prove my
innocence from the start of this
investigation with the only support I have received is from my Union which has
subsequently been
used against me.
It is also worth noting that I have never had a mark on my record for this
kind of behaviour. I feel as though I have been vilified
for a singular
Facebook post. Additionally, the correspondence between myself and my Union
representative should not have been used
against me and I believe that the Union
has already contacted AHPRA in relation to this.
It is worth noting that
himself is currently under
investigation by the Tasmanian Health Service for numerous complaints made
against him by the Wilfred Lopes
Centre staff. I believe that the Board should
take this into consideration as it indicates a pattern of behaviour in treating
and my colleagues in a poor manner which I believe contributed to my
decision to write the initial Facebook post.
For my behaviour, I would be willing to accept a caution in lieu of the
Board’s proposed action. I hope that the Board recognises
that I am not a
bully and I would like to put this investigation behind me, move forward and
continue with my career.”
THE BOARD’S DECISION
15. By letter dated 31 August 2018 AHPRA notified Ms Swetnam of
the Board’s decision to take action, which was to impose conditions
registration requiring her to complete further specified education in relation
to appropriate and responsible use of social
media, and effective communication
in the workplace. A number of supplementary conditions were imposed to
facilitate the requirement
to undertake education as directed, and the costs
associated with compliance were to be at Ms Swetnam’s expense.
Swetnam was advised that the decision to impose conditions on her registration
had been made having considered all known information
• Confidential notification received 4 January 2018
including her Facebook posts
• Her response to the confidential
notification received 1 March 2018
• Exchange of emails between herself
• Her submission in response to proposed caution dated 21 May
2018 including copies of email correspondence between herself
and various
colleagues on 15 and 17 December 2017
• Her submission in response to
proposed conditions dated 27 July 2018
• Email from her union
representative dated 25 July 2018
17. The correspondence from AHPRA went on to set out the
Board’s findings and reasons for decision:
Board noted your Facebook page clearly identifies you as being a registered
nurse employed at the Wilfred Lopes Centre.
The Board further noted you do not
dispute you are the author of the Facebook posts on 18 and 31 December
Board referred to principle 3.4 from the Nursing and Midwifery Board of
Australia’s Code of Conduct (“the Code”),
‘Bullying and harassment’, particularly 3.4 (c) which states,
‘Nurses must understand social media is sometimes
used as a mechanism to
bully or harass, and that nurses should not engage in, ignore or excuse such
behaviour’.
Board noted the Social Media Policy (SMP) adopted by the Nursing and Midwifery
Board of Australia states that when using social
media, “health
practitioners should remember that the National Law, their National
Board’s code of ethics and professional
conduct.....apply” and that
further, whether an online activity is able to be viewed by the public or is
limited to a specific
group of people, health professionals need to maintain
professional standards and be aware of the implications of their actions,
all professional circumstances.
Board noted the Code makes it clear to nurses that their conduct outside of the
workplace is also relevant to the Board in circumstances
where such conduct may
be considered to undermine the good standing of the nursing profession. Such
circumstances include where
a practitioner conducts themselves in a manner that
is inconsistent with the Code and/or the Code of Ethics and any other relevant
policies, standards of guidelines.
Board is satisfied your post on 18 December 2017 at 3:20am relates to your
workplace as you make reference to your “colleagues”
post. The Board considered it is likely your post on 31 December 2017 at 1:58pm
also relates to your workplace given
its close proximity in time.
Board is of the view that both Facebook posts convey an intimidating tone and
although you have not named a particular person
and/or group, it appears clear
to the Board that your intention was to send a negative message to a person
and/or group. In the
Board’s view, using social media in this manner is
inappropriate and contrary to the Code.
Board noted this notification was made confidentially however you have
identified a person you believe made the notification.
The Board is of the view
your communication about that person in your correspondence with AHPRA staff and
supporting documentation
was unwarranted and inappropriate and considered same
is indicative of a pattern of conduct by you.
you yourself forwarded your email correspondence with CPSU to AHPRA staff, the
Board considered CPSU’s request to disregard
same is made without basis.
In any event, the Board considered disregarding the email correspondence would
not change its decision
in this instance.
Board noted your assertion that, due to the notifier’s name being withheld
you have not been afforded procedural fairness.
The Board considered the
notifier’s name is irrelevant to the issue at hand and disclosure of the
same is unnecessary for you
to provide a meaningful response.
Board is satisfied your conduct in this instance was contrary to behaviour
expected of nurses and in breach of the SMP and Code.
Further, based on all
information before it, the board remains concerned about your insight into the
potential impact using social
media in such a manner can have on members of
society and general communication in the workplace.
Board has had regard to your further response to proposed action dated 27 July
2018 and while it has noted your submissions as
to why the conditions are not
necessary, however it is not dissuaded from the need to require you to complete
further education in
relation to appropriate and responsible use of social media
and effective communication in the workplace.
on the aforementioned, the Board maintained its reasonable belief your
communication is unsatisfactory. Accordingly the board
considered the
appropriate course of action is to impose conditions on your registration,
requiring you to undergo a program of further
education and training.
Board therefore decided to impose the proposed conditions on your
registration.”
18. As noted previously, it was this decision of the Board
which was referred to the Tribunal for review.
Ms Swetnam’s evidence before the Tribunal
19. Ms Swetnam gave evidence before the Tribunal and was
cross-examined by counsel for the Board. Whilst giving evidence in the course
of what was a comprehensive and courteous cross-examination, Ms Swetnam gave
responses which were, in the vast majority, delivered
in dismissive tones, at
times bordering on the contemptuous.
20. Ms Swetnam conceded that the two
Facebook posts which were the subject of the notification were her posts.
21. In relation to both Facebook posts, Ms Swetnam gave evidence that she
believed, at the time those posts were made, that she had
removed from her
Facebook profile any reference to her place of employment, and that she was
simply referred to on her profile as
a registered nurse. She gave evidence that
she believed she had removed the reference to her workplace at an earlier time
a talk with her employer.
22. I do not accept Ms Swetnam’s
evidence in this regard. The original notification included information that Ms
Facebook profile identified her as a registered nurse at Wilfred
Lopes Centre, and the two invitations by AHPRA to respond to proposed
noted that Ms Swetnam’s Facebook page clearly identified her as being
employed at the Wilfred Lopes Centre. Throughout
the course of her
correspondence with AHPRA in relation to the two Facebook notifications, she did
not, at any time, suggest that
she believed her Facebook profile did not include
any reference to the identity of her employer. I find that at the time the posts
were made, Ms Swetnam’s Facebook page identified her as being a registered
nurse at Wilfred Lopes Centre.
23. In relation to the first post, dated 18
December 2017, Ms Swetnam conceded that upon reflection she believed that the
may have been inappropriate. She conceded that the first Facebook
post that was the subject of the notification had been about Mr
having denied, in her original response to AHPRA that either of her posts on
Facebook, that had been the subjects of
the notification, had anything to do
with Mr C. Because of this, I consider it is appropriate to treat Ms
Swetnam’s evidence
generally with some caution.
24. In relation to the
second Facebook post, Ms Swetnam characterised the second post as a personality
test that was “just a
laugh”. She said that she thought it was
funny, and in the same spirit, added her own comment, which were the lyrics of a
song (the comment being that which was specifically referred to in the
notification about that post). She gave evidence that the
second Facebook post
had nothing to do with work or work colleagues, and did not consider that it
could be interpreted as intimidating
by a reasonable person in the context of
her earlier post.
25. I note is that in the second Facebook post Ms Swetnam
describes herself at the time of making the post as “determined”.
This does not appear to accord with her evidence that she was feeling jovial or
amused by putting the results of the test and her
commentary on her Facebook
post. I do not accept Ms Swetnam’s evidence that she posted the results of
the personality test
and her comments on her Facebook page in a jovial manner,
or just for a laugh. I find that the second Facebook post was likely to
been made in relation to Ms Swetnam’s work because it was likely to have
been made with Mr C. in mind, and I further find,
as the Board did, that both
Facebook posts convey an intimidating tone with an intention was to send a
negative message to a person
and/or group.
26. Counsel for AHPRA explored
with Ms Swetnam under cross-examination her assertion in the correspondence of
27 July 2018 that “it
is also worth noting that I have never had a mark on
my record for this kind of behaviour”. Ms Swetnam conceded that as a
result of an earlier and unrelated notification to AHPRA in relation to
behaviour directed by Ms Swetnam towards different patients
at Wilfred Lopes
Centre, the Board determined to take regulatory action by cautioning Ms Swetnam
in circumstances where her admitted
behaviour was “suggestive of
performance and conduct below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner
of an equivalent
level of training or experience and accordingly
unsatisfactory”. Ms Swetnam, in her evidence before the Tribunal,
that at the time she composed and forwarded her letter dated 27 July
2018 to AHPRA, she had a prior matter before the Board which
had been the
subject of a caution, however she drew a distinction between the matter she had
previously been cautioned about in that
she characterised that it had to do with
communication and behaviour in her nursing practice, whereas she viewed the
matter presently
before the Tribunal in relation to her Facebook posts as
“just a conflict of personalities”.
27. The Board’s
correspondence to Ms Swetnam dated 23 July 2018, and sent by email, was put into
evidence before the Tribunal.
It contained a caution to Ms Swetnam in relation
to “inappropriate and disrespectful communication” towards two
(by gestures) on 17 February 2017 and 5 June 2017. The Board referred
to the requirement in the Code of Conduct that nurses treat
the people they care
for and their colleagues with dignity and respect in a collegial context to
preserve the trust and privilege
inherent in the nursing profession. The Board
advised Ms Swetnam that it believed the caution was appropriate and
proportionate in
the circumstances and would serve as a warning to her that she
needed to take steps to ensure that her behaviour was consistent
expected and as articulated in the Code of Conduct.
Code of Conduct and Social Media Policy – what was in
force at the relevant time?
28. The decision of the Board which is the subject of this
review by the Tribunal referred to and was expressed to be in relation
Principle 3.4 of the National Board’s Code of Conduct for nurses.
29. However, it was common ground between the parties that the behaviour of
Ms Swetnam which is in issue occurred in December 2017.
Principle 3.4 of the
Code of Conduct for nurses did not come into effect until 1 March 2018 and
pre-dated Ms Swetnam’s two
Facebook posts.
30. It was further agreed by
the parties that the standard of expected communication for registered nurses at
the time of Ms Swetnam’s
conduct that was the subject of the notifications
was covered by the Nursing and Midwifery Board’s Australian Code of
before March 2018 (“the Code”) and the Nursing and Midwifery
Board’s Social Media Policy, dated March 2014 (“the
31. Conduct Statements 4, 9 and 10 of the Code, as it stood in December
2017, are set out here:
Statement 4
Nurses respect the dignity, culture, ethnicity, values and beliefs of people
receiving care and treatment, and of their colleagues.
Explanation
planning and providing effective nursing care, nurses uphold the standards of
culturally informed and competent care. This includes
according due respect and
consideration to the cultural knowledge, values, beliefs, personal wishes and
decisions of the persons
being cared for as well as their partners, family
members and other members of their nominated social network. Nurses acknowledge
the changing nature of families and recognise families can be constituted in a
variety of ways.
promote and protect the interests of people receiving treatment and care. This
includes taking appropriate action to ensure
the safety and quality of their
care is not compromised because of harmful prejudicial attitudes about race,
culture, ethnicity,
gender, sexuality, age, religion, spirituality, political,
social or health status, lifestyle or other human factors.
refrain from expressing racist, sexist, homophobic, ageist and other prejudicial
and discriminatory attitudes and behaviours
towards colleagues, co-workers,
persons in their care and their partners, family and friends. Nurses take
appropriate action when
observing any such prejudicial and discriminatory
attitudes and behaviours, whether by staff, people receiving treatment and care
or visitors, in nursing and related areas of health and aged care.
making professional judgements in relation to a person’s interests and
rights, nurses do not contravene the law or breach
the human rights of any
person, including those deemed stateless such as refugees, asylum seekers and
Conduct Statement 9
Nurses maintain and build on the community’s trust and confidence in
the nursing profession.
Explanation
conduct of nurses maintains and builds public trust and confidence in the
profession at all times.
unlawful and unethical actions of nurses in their personal lives risk adversely
affecting both their own and the profession’s
good reputation and standing
in the eyes of the public. If the good standing of either individual nurses or
the profession were
to diminish, this might jeopardise the inherent trust
between the nursing profession and the public necessary for effective
therapeutic
relationships and the effective delivery of nursing care.
consider the ethical interests of the nursing profession and the community when
exercising their right to freedom of speech
and participating in public,
political and academic debate, including publication.
Conduct Statement 10
Nurses practise nursing reflectively and ethically.
Explanation
practise nursing reflectively and ethically in accordance with the Code of
Ethics for Nurses in Australia in order to learn
from experience and contribute
to personal and professional practice.
develop and maintain appropriate an current quality nursing advice, support and
care for each person requiring and receiving
care and their partners, families
and other members of their nominated social network. This responsibility also
applies to colleagues
evaluate their conduct and competency according the standards of the nursing
profession.
contribute to the professional development of students and colleagues.
participating in research do so in accordance with recognised research
guidelines and do not violate their duty of care to
persons receiving nursing
advise employers and any persons in their care of any reduction in their
capacity to practice due to health, social or other
factors, while they seek
ways of redressing the problem.
32. The Policy, as it stood in December 2017, cautioned health
practitioners to be mindful that
• when using social media, the National Law, their
National Board’s code of ethics and professional conduct (the Code
Conduct) apply.
• information circulated on social media may end up in
the public domain, and remain there, irrespective of the intent at the
posting (including where online activity is intended to be viewed only by a
specific group).
33. Specifically in relation to professional obligations of
health practitioners when using social media, the Policy provided:
“The Code of Conduct contains guidance about the required standards of
professional behaviour, which apply to registered health
practitioners whether
they are interacting in person or online. The Code of Conduct also articulates
standards of professional conduct
in relation to privacy and confidentiality of
patient information, including when using social
Submissions on behalf of the Board
34. In general, the Board submits that Ms Swetnam in her
responses to the Board and the course of its processes following the
notification
lacked insight into the professional and ethical standards expected
of nurses, and consistently focused her responses upon the behaviour
rather than reflecting upon her own conduct and whether it complied with
standards as set out in the appropriate code.
35. It was further submitted
that in giving evidence, Ms Swetnam failed to address the standard of
communication expected of a registered
nurse and demonstrated a lack of
understanding of what they involved.
36. It was submitted that Ms
Swetnam’s evidence that her written submissions to the Board to the effect
that she had never had
a mark on her record for this kind of behaviour were, if
not misleading in the light of the Board’s caution to her, was at
further evidence that she lacked insight and understanding that her
communications fall below the expected standard.
37. As to penalty, the Board
submitted that the penalties imposed are appropriate and necessary, particularly
in the light of what
it says is a lack of insight displayed by Ms
Submissions on behalf of Ms Swetnam
38. In relation to the Facebook posts, it was submitted there
was no factual basis or chain of reasoning upon which the Board ought
concluded the second post was about the notifier, and that the commentary Ms
Swetnam posted was a simple re-wording of the
game result.
further submitted that the original notification was only about the Facebook
posts, and the Board’s investigation
commenced only in relation to those
posts, and whether they contravened the Board’s social media policy. It
was submitted that
the email to Ms Swetnam’s union that she accidentally
forwarded to the Board, and her email exchanges at work in December 2017
irrelevant material that the Board ought not to have taken into account in
reaching its decision.
40. It was also submitted that the Board had taken
into account complaints about the treatment of patients nine months prior to the
notification being made about the Facebook posts. These complaints were
submitted to be similarly irrelevant and ought not to have
been taken into
account by the Board
41. As to penalty, it was submitted that if there was a
breach of the Code and Policy, the breach is not severe, and requiring Ms
Swetnam to undergo approved education in social media and electronic
communication in the workplace is excessive and redundant
Did the Board take into account information that was
irrelevant?
42. Under s178(1) of the National Law, a National Board may
take action if, amongst other things, it reasonably believes, because
notification or for any other reason, that the way a registered health
practitioner registered by the Board practices the health
profession, or the
practitioner’s professional conduct is, or may be, unsatisfactory.
43. The Board was entitled to arrive at a reasonable belief in relation to
Ms Swetnam’s conduct for “any reason”
– including Ms
Swetnam’s communications to the Board arising from the Board’s
invitations to respond to allegations
and proposed actions.
44. It is true
that the original notification was confined to Ms Swetnam’s two Facebook
posts that have been set out in this
decision. However, the Board was not
confined to consideration of Ms Swetnam’s conduct only in relation to
those posts.
45. In relation to the email communications between Ms Swetnam
and the CPSU, as a result of the circumstances surrounding the provision
AHPRA of those emails, it is understandable that it was assumed those materials
were intended to form part of Ms Swetnam’s
submissions to the Board. There
was no reason why the Board ought not to have had regard to the
46. The materials additional to the original Facebook posts to which
the Board had regard were all materials that had been provided
to the Board by
Ms Swetnam – initially in response to the notification that had been made
against her, and later in response
to the two invitations to respond to the
proposed action by the Board. On each occasion that the Board was considering
taking action,
it advised her what material it had considered, what matters of
concern had been identified by the Board, and what action it was
considering. Ms
Swetnam’s responses substantially failed to address the Board’s
identified concerns about the nature
and content of her communications, and lack
of understanding about the potential adverse effects of such communications. For
most part, Ms Swetnam’s responses sought to justify her behaviour and
communications.
47. The Board, in viewing those materials as part of the
totality of Ms Swetnam’s responses to the notification and invitations
respond to proposed action by the Board, was entitled to take those materials
into account as ‘any other reason’ in
accordance with s178(1) of the
National Law to form a belief that Ms Swetnam’s professional conduct may
be unsatisfactory.
48. In relation to the submission on behalf of Ms Swetnam,
that the Board took into account irrelevant material in the nature of the
complaints about patient treatment that led to Ms Swetnam being cautioned by the
Board on 23 July 2018, there is no indication from
the Board’s
correspondence to Ms Swetnam or the Board’s ultimate decision to take
action that the Board took into account
the conduct that was the subject of that
caution, or the caution itself.
49. In the hearing before the Tribunal,
counsel for the Board submitted that I ought to have regard to Ms
Swetnam’s assertion
in her response to the Board dated 27 July 2018 that
she had never had a mark on her record for “this kind of behaviour”,
and her evidence as set out in paragraph 26, on the basis that it reinforced
what the Board had concluded was a lack of insight displayed
by Ms Swetnam that
her communications taking place outside the clinical setting could still be
captured by the Code.
50. It is well accepted that a hearing of this nature
– being an application to review the Board’s decision - is neither
hearing de novo, nor an appeal in the strict sense, but a hybrid, in which the
Tribunal may have regard to evidence additional
to that which was originally
before the Board. I accept the submission made by counsel of the Board in this
regard. The conduct that
led to the Board issuing a caution to Ms Swetnam on 23
July 2018 is not relevant to the review of the Board’s decision that
presently before the Tribunal, but the evidence Ms Swetnam gave before the
Tribunal, I accept, is relevant to the degree of insight
displayed by Ms Swetnam
in relation to her conduct and responsibilities as a nurse practitioner.
The Board’s decision – was it reasonable?
51. The decision which is under review by the Tribunal is one
which was made pursuant to s179 of the National Law. The action taken
Board was initiated by the anonymous notification in relation to Ms
Swetnam’s two Facebook posts. s178 of the National
Law authorises a
National Board to take action including cautioning a health practitioner or
imposing conditions on the practitioners’
registration if, pursuant to
s178(1)(a)(i) “a National Board reasonably believes, because of a
notification or for any other
reason.....the way a registered health
practitioner registered by the Board practices the health profession, or the
practitioner’s
professional conduct is, or may be
unsatisfactory.”
52. Although the notification which initiated the
Board’s actions in this case was in relation only to the two Facebook
made by Ms Swetnam, it is clear that s178(1) enables the Board to take
into account the other materials brought before it by Ms Swetnam
in the course
of her responses to the Board, including the communication from Ms Swetnam to
her union which she had not intended
to provide to the Board.
53. The Board,
in its decision, mistakenly referred to a principle of the Code of Conduct that
was not in effect at the time of the
Facebook posts. However, I accept that Ms
Swetnam’s conduct failed to comply with the provisions of the Code and
Policy that
were in force at the time the posts were made. Ms Swetnam’s
Facebook posts displayed inappropriate attitudes and behaviours
towards a work
colleague Ms Swetnam’s further correspondence to AHPRA, and the email
exchanges she provided displayed similarly
inappropriate attitudes and
behaviours. It was not unreasonable for the Board to be concerned that a pattern
of behaviour was emerging.
Further, Ms Swetman’s responses showed little
or no reflection or insight into her behaviour.
54. A review by the Tribunal
of a decision by the Board is a fresh hearing on the merits of the matter to
which the decision relates
– in accordance with
Practitioners Tribunal Act 2010
55. Having reviewed the Board’s
decision, on the basis of the material before the Tribunal, the oral evidence
given by Ms Swetnam
before the Tribunal and the findings that I have made, I am
satisfied that Ms Swetnam’s professional conduct as a nurse practitioner
was unsatisfactory, and did not comply with the standards of the Board’s
Code of Conduct and Social Media Policy that were
in effect at the time the
Facebook posts were made by Ms Swetnam, and the Board’s decision was not
unreasonable
Conditions imposed – are they unfair or
56. The Board imposed conditions on Ms Swetnam’s
registration that she undertake and successfully complete a program of
approved by AHPRA in consultation with the Chair of the Board and
including a reflective practice report, in relation to appropriate
responsible use of social media and effective communication in the workplace.
Further conditions were imposed in relation to
facilitation and completion of
the education program.
57. The Board had originally intended simply to
caution Ms Swetnam. It was Ms Swetnam’s responses to proposed action that
the Board to reconsider its decision, and to impose the
conditions.
58. The written responses that Ms Swetnam provided to the Board,
for the most part, focussed on the behaviour of other people and
the manner in
which Ms Swetnam felt she had been treated. There was little or no reflection
behaviour, or the additional constraints
and responsibilities which are imposed upon nurse practitioners by the Code.
This was not
ameliorated by the oral evidence that Ms Swetnam gave before the
59. The Tribunal’s primary consideration is the protection
of the public, and the maintenance of the reputation of the profession.
the Facebook posts that sparked the original notification might have been
deserving of a caution only, the material provided
to the Board as part of Ms
Swetnam’s responses to the notification and the Board’s procedures
led the Board to have additional
concerns about her conduct and communications.
Ms Swetnam’s apparent lack of insight into her own behaviour and failure
reflect on the standards and expectations imposed by the Code to maintain the
nursing profession’s reputation led the Board
to consider that something
more was needed by way of a sanction than simply a caution. In the circumstances
the conditions requiring
completion of education imposed by the Board were
appropriate and warranted
60. The Board’s decision dated 31 August 2018 is
L D WILKINS
DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (222 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter