URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCCA/2025/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Director of Public Prosecutions v JAP [2025] TASCCA 9 (30 July 2025)
[2025] TASCCA 9
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (COURT OF CRIMINAL
Director of Public Prosecutions v JAP
[2025] TASCCA 9
: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
PROSECUTIONS
30 July 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Wood J, Brett J, Cuthbertson
Criminal Law – Appeal and new trial – Appeal against sentence
– Grounds for interference – Sentence manifestly
excessive or
inadequate – Defendant raped female friend – Used force to overcome
complainant’s resistance and ignored
protests – Defendant was 15
years old at time of offence – Defendant not sentenced until 18 years old
due to delay –
At 18 period of actual detention would be served in adult
prison – Sentenced to home detention for 15 months and community
corrections order – Flexibility needed when sentencing youth offenders
– Delay caused limited appropriate sentencing
options – Sentence
imposed was within sentencing discretion – Appeal refused.
Criminal Law [3521]
Legislation:
Community Protection
(Offender Reporting) Act
Criminal Code
Sentencing Act
Youth Justice Act
Cases Cited:
Director of Public
Prosecutions v JSP
[2020] TASCCA 3
Director of Public Prosecutions v
[2020] TASCCA 8
Director of Public Prosecutions v NOP
Director of Public Prosecutions v Oh Marris
[2023] TASCCA
Director of Public Prosecutions v WLNH
[2017] TASCCA 15
[2014] TASCCA
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Director of Public
Prosecutions
Respondent:
Murdoch Clarke
[2025] TASCCA 9
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 9/2025
File No: 2938/2024
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS v JAP
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
CUTHBERTSON
30 July 2025
Order of the
Appeal dismissed.
Serial No 9/2025
File No 2938/2024
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS v JAP
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
30 July 2025
I agree with the reasons for judgment of Brett J and with his conclusion that
the appeal should be dismissed.
The sentence under appeal is an individualised outcome for the particular
circumstances of the case and, in my view, it should not
be regarded as an
indicative sentence for future cases. As stated by Brett J, a significant
period of detention was an appropriate
sentence in the circumstances of this
The reasons of Brett J identify the considerations in determining the absence
of error: the breadth of the sentencing discretion;
the need for flexibility in
sentencing youth offenders, particularly those as young as 15 years; and the
practical reality of this
case being that at the time of sentencing,
age-appropriate incarceration was not available. I wish only to add that it
follows from
these same considerations that young offenders are not immune from
adult incarceration just because at the time of sentencing, as
a result of
delay, they have reached an age whereby they are no longer eligible for
incarceration in a youth detention centre.
File No 2938/2024
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS v JAP
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
30 July 2025
On 3 May 2024, a jury in Launceston found the respondent guilty of two counts
of rape. On 16 October 2024, he was sentenced by
the trial judge, Pearce J, to
a home detention order with an operative period of 15 months, together with a
Community Corrections
Order which included a condition that he perform 105 hours
of community service. An order was also made that he be placed on the
pursuant to the
Community Protection (Offender Reporting) Act
period of two years.
The Director of Public Prosecutions appeals the sentence. The sole ground of
appeal is that the sentence is manifestly inadequate
in all the circumstances of
Factual circumstances
Both crimes were committed against a 15 year old female, whom the sentencing
judge, for the sake of privacy, referred to as "V".
I will also refer to her by
that pseudonym. They were committed during a single episode on 22 February
2022. The respondent, whose
date of birth is 12 May 2006, was also 15 years of
age when he committed these crimes.
The factual basis was determined by the sentencing judge and recorded in his
comments on passing sentence. His Honour's findings
have not been challenged in
this appeal by either party. The findings are in accordance with V's evidence
at trial, which his Honour
concluded must have been substantially accepted as
truthful and reliable by the jury. This conclusion was inevitable, given that
the respondent had given evidence in which he admitted that the alleged sexual
acts had taken place, but claimed that V had been
a consensual participant in
those acts. Clearly, the jury rejected his claim of consent, and believed V
respondent's evidence left no room for a claim that he
had been mistaken about the question of consent. He claimed that V had been
active and willing participant in the sexual acts. V's description of the
relevant events was directly inconsistent with this
V's version of relevant events was as follows. V and the respondent had been
friends for some time. They knew each other through
the respondent's sister and
through school. At about 3.30 pm on the day that the crimes were committed, V
visited the appellant
at his house. This had been arranged during an online
conversation between them. V was with his sister and the three of them spent
time together in the respondent's room. V said in her police interview, which
was conducted the day after the offending and placed
in evidence during her
evidence-in-chief, that she had made it clear to the respondent before she went
to his house "that we were
not going to do anything and that we were just
friends and he swore that, like, we would not do anything, would not touch me
that". It was on that basis that she agreed to go there.
Upon arrival, the respondent's sister and V spent time with the respondent in
his bedroom. At about 5pm, his sister left the house
to go to work. The
respondent's father was also present at the house. After the sister left, her
partner, who was a friend of the
respondent, arrived and spent some time with
them. About the time that the sister left, V sent a message to a female friend
for collection from the home and was told that the friend would be
there "in 30 to 40 minutes". She then gave her phone, which had
a low battery
level, to the respondent to put on charge. After the offending, she found the
phone hidden under his pillow. It had
been placed on flight mode. The
sentencing judge found that the phone had been hidden and placed on flight mode
by the respondent.
The crimes were committed after this. His Honour's findings about these lead
up events and what happened next are as follows:
"When the time came
that you were together alone in your bedroom, you made a sexual advance to her.
She had already made clear to
you that she did not want to be anything more than
your friend and she rejected your advance. She sent a phone message to a friend
asking to be picked up. However, you continued with your sexual advances. You
positioned yourself over and in front of her, pushed
her back on the bed and,
while you held her down either by pushing on her chest or by holding her hands,
you pulled down her track
pants and pulled down your own pants. You pushed her
G-string aside and, after spitting on your hand, inserted your fingers in her
vagina. You then inserted your penis in her vagina and continued with sexual
intercourse until you ejaculated. Throughout this period
she was asking you to
stop and to get off her, but you continued despite her protests and overcame her
resistance by force. You tried
to kiss her but she avoided you by moving her
head. Instead, you sucked on her neck leaving six very noticeable bruises. She
not otherwise physically injured."
His Honour found that after these events, V dressed herself, found her phone
and left. She had to unlock the latch on the door
of the bedroom to do so. Her
friends who had come to collect her in response to her message had been waiting
for her outside, but
had left when they were unable to contact her by phone. V
found numerous missed calls on her phone when she located it after the
However, after leaving the house, she was able to get in contact with them, and
they picked her up from a nearby location.
His Honour found that she was highly
distressed and emotional when she met her friends. She underwent a sexual
assault examination
and was required to provide the details of what had happened
to a number of persons. His Honour accepted "the largely undisputed
evidence of
the level of her distress after the rape".
His Honour was satisfied that the respondent had used force to overcome V's
resistance. In her interview with police, V described
the force used by the
respondent:
"I said, 'We're not doing this', and I was, like, trying
to scream as loud as I could. He put his hand, like, over my mouth and I
like, screaming, I was trying to bite him – wouldn't really work. And then
he put his dick inside me and just, like, kept
going and had his hands up on my
chest and when he had his hands, like, after he'd got – grabbed my hands
again and put them
up above and then I was just, like, lying there, I was just
frozen. I didn't know what to say, what to think because the music was
no-one can hear us anyway. Like, and I was just lying there and he kept trying
to kiss my lips and I just kept moving from
side to side and he couldn't get my
lips so he left all these marks on my neck and I got three hickeys on each side
and I kept, like,
moving, trying to get out. And then, it felt like between 10
and 15 minutes – it didn't go very long – it felt like forever
it didn't go very long...".
She also described how when he pulled her trackpants down she had tried to pull
them back up again "so he pushed me down". She
demonstrated how he had pushed
her to the shoulders causing her to fall back. In cross-examination, she
described how the respondent
had grabbed her legs, pulling them towards him in
order to force her onto her back. He was then on the top of her pushing her back
down. She was unable to push him off because his weight was on top of her and he
weighed more than her. She also described how she
had yelled at him to get off
and he had put his hand over her mouth to stop her yelling. At this point, she
tried to bite him but
was unable to do so.
The respondent's
personal circumstances
The respondent was fifteen years and nine months at the time of the offending.
He was 18 years of age at the time of sentence. The
sentencing judge obtained
reports from Youth Justice and a Home Detention Assessment Report. His Honour
summarised the respondent's
background, as detailed in these reports, as
"You are now aged 18. You have no prior convictions. Your
personal circumstances were described by your counsel and in the reports
referred to. You are the youngest of seven siblings. You have a good
relationship with them although your childhood was marred
by neglect and
instability. Your parents separated when you were about 5. You were in the care
of your mother but she was affected
by abuse of illicit drugs. In 2015, when you
were 8 or 9, you were placed into the care of your maternal grandmother. A few
later you went to live with your father, after which your life became more
settled. For the last couple of years you have lived in
southern Tasmania with
your brother and his partner. They, and other family members, are very
supportive of you. Your education
was affected by the matters to which I have
referred, but for the last two and a half years you have maintained full time
as a factory hand at a seafood processing plant in Dunalley. You
drive to and from work every day from near Hobart. Your employer
regards you as
a diligent and capable employee and you are valued in the organisation. You have
no physical or mental health concerns.
You do not abuse alcohol or drugs. The
author of the youth justice pre-sentence report assesses you as having low risks
and needs."
On the hearing of the appeal, the Court was told that the respondent had not
committed any further offences since sentence was imposed,
has been wholly
compliant with the home detention order and had continued in employment. He
continues to be strongly supported by
his family and employer. According to his
counsel, he has good future prospects and remains free of negative influences
such as substance
abuse and other addiction.
The sentencing judge noted that the respondent was not entitled to the
mitigation of a plea of guilty. Further, although his Honour
did not comment on
this, there was material in the reports which demonstrated a lack of insight and
remorse on the part of the respondent.
In the Youth Justice report, he told the
reporter that conduct of this nature "won't ever happen again". However, his
explanation
for this was because he was now scared to enter a relationship,
presumably because of his assertion that he had been wrongly accused
when the conduct was consensual. He refused to acknowledge that V had told the
truth, or that there had been any impact from
these events on her. He said that
she had made up this story "because I hurt one of her friends. She did it as a
way of getting back
Sentencing judge's approach
It is clear from his Honour's comments during the course of sentencing
submissions, and his comments on passing sentence, that he
was well aware of the
difficult sentencing task which arose in this case, and in particular, the need
to grapple with the countervailing
sentencing considerations which invariably
arise when serious sexual crimes are committed by a young person against another
person. On the one hand, the objective seriousness of the crimes and its
impact on the victim required an emphasis on general deterrence,
denunciation,
punishment and vindication of the victim. On the other hand, the youth of the
offender required consideration of the
possibility of reduction in moral
culpability arising from the offender's immaturity, and of course the need to
place emphasis on
rehabilitation. Inherent in the latter was the need to
consider, in a case where incarceration was a likely sentencing alternative,
corrupting influence of prison, and the potential for such a sentence to have an
adverse impact on a young person's development.
The need to balance these
factors when formulating a sentence in respect of serious sexual offending by a
young person has been considered
and discussed by this Court in a number of
recent cases
TAP v Tasmania
[2014] TASCCA 5
Director of
Public Prosecutions v JSP
[2020] TASCCA 3
Director of Public
Prosecutions v Oh Marris
[2023] TASCCA 1
, see in particular discussion by
Pearce J, with whom Marshall AJ and I agreed, at [35]-[39].
The sentencing judge referred to these considerations and the resultant
balancing exercise required of him. His Honour referred
to the respondent's
personal circumstances, in particular his young age, lack of prior convictions,
difficult upbringing and good
past and current employment record. However, his
Honour noted that the respondent was not entitled to the mitigation of a plea of
guilty. His Honour considered the objective seriousness and aggravating factors
relevant to the offending itself, noting that rape
"is a grave crime ...
inherently violent and a gross violation of the victim". It was noted that in
this case, the respondent had
used force to overcome V's resistance, that he
prevented her from communicating with her friends by phone, and that he
inside her and did not use a condom thereby exposing her to a risk of
pregnancy and transmission of sexual disease. He noted the
very significant
impact on V, and the understanding of the Court that crimes of this nature can
have profound and perhaps life long
psychological impact.
His Honour made clear that he regarded the sentencing exercise as a balance of
these factors. His Honour then said this:
"In this case I have
determined that all of those conflicting sentencing aims should be addressed by
the making of a home detention
order combined with a community service order. I
regard your case as somewhat different than
which has been
referred to, primarily because of the difference between your age and his. You
have been assessed as suitable for
the making of a home detention order. That
order will impose a significant restriction on your liberty for a considerable
time, which
will be difficult for a young man, while allowing for continuation
of your employment and avoiding the damaging and corrupting effect
of prison for
a person who seems to be making good progress in life, and who was 15 at the
time of the relevant criminal acts."
The appellant's submissions
The appellant acknowledges the wide sentencing discretion conferred on the
learned sentencing judge, and further that it cannot
succeed on the sole ground
of appeal unless this Court is satisfied that the sentence is unreasonable or
plainly unjust, so that
it is demonstrative of an undefined error in the
exercise of the sentencing discretion. Further, it is acknowledged that as a
prosecution
appeal, the primary purpose of this Court's determination is to
provide guidance for sentencing courts and ensure public confidence
administration of justice. These principles are well settled, and the appellant
correctly acknowledges them.
The appellant's submissions focus on the objective seriousness of the crime of
rape generally, and as it was committed in the circumstances
of this case. The
submissions note the aggravating factors, all of which were acknowledged by the
sentencing judge. These include
the use of force, the deliberate and persistent
nature of the respondent's conduct, and the fact that he did not wear a condom
ejaculated into the complainant's vagina. The appellant submits that the
respondent's youth does not significantly reduce his moral
culpability in the
sense noted in the cases, for example, on the basis that his youth and
immaturity resulted in a decision that
was ill considered or that he did not
properly appreciate the criminality of his conduct. His conduct was deliberate,
and calculated. The appellant also noted the significant distress
experienced by the victim, which was observed in the immediate
aftermath of the
commission of the crimes and continued "in the hours and days following the
crime". By way of mitigation, the appellant
concedes the youth of the
respondent, his lack of prior convictions and other factors relevant to
rehabilitation. However, it is
submitted that the need for general deterrence
and denunciation outweighs these factors. Ultimately, it is submitted that a
detention order was a manifestly inadequate response in the circumstances
of this case. The appellant submits that a sentence falling
short of actual
immediate imprisonment is appropriate for the crime of rape only in the most
exceptional circumstances and has informed
the court of various sentences which
it would assert support this submission.
His Honour's reference to
bears further examination. In that
case, the offender was aged 19 and the female victim aged 17, at the time of
commission of the
crimes. The criminal conduct was constituted by a rape and an
indecent assault committed while the offender was visiting the victim
ejaculated and he was not wearing a condom.
The sentencing judge found that this
occurred despite repeated communication from the victim that she did not consent
to the sexual
acts. The sentencing judge also concluded that the offender had
been mistaken as to the issue of consent and that the mistake was
honest but not
reasonable. It was not reasonable because it was one "he would not have made had
he not been intoxicated": s 14A(1)(a)
Criminal Code
The Court concluded in that case that a sentence of home detention for the rape
was manifestly inadequate, notwithstanding that
it was combined with a suspended
sentence for the related crime of indecent assault. It determined that the only
possible sentence
was one of actual imprisonment. The Court's reasoning is
summarised in the following passage:
"For those reasons, when all
matters relevant to sentence are taken into account, imposition of a home
detention order, even when
combined with the other sentencing orders made by the
learned sentencing judge, was not an appropriate sentence. The rape committed
the respondent was so serious that it required a sentence of actual imprisonment
so as to adequately serve the need for punishment,
general deterrence,
denunciation and vindication of the victim. Potential offenders, including young
men, must understand that committing
the crime of rape will result in severe
punishment, which will in most circumstances involve time in prison. It may be
accepted that
there are countervailing and competing sentencing objectives. In
most cases, incarceration will not assist and may be positively
harmful to the
offender's rehabilitation. However, in our view, the inherent seriousness of the
crime of rape, and the gravity of
the criminal conduct in this case, required
that the considerations of general deterrence and denunciation be given more
weight than
the respondent's youth and rehabilitation. In the circumstances of
this case, this required a sentence of actual imprisonment. A
sentence which
fell short of requiring actual imprisonment fell outside the range of sentences
reasonably open to his Honour and
was manifestly inadequate."
The Court refused to exercise its residual discretion, on the basis that the
"particular need for guidance to sentencing courts"
did not "come at too high a
cost in terms of injustice to the respondent".
In this case, it is clear that the sentencing judge determined that the younger
age of the respondent was a significant point of
distinction from
, and justified an approach that placed greater emphasis on
rehabilitation in the balancing process. In
, the Court
considered that the objective seriousness of the offending required emphasis to
be placed on general deterrence, denunciation
and vindication of the victim,
thereby reducing the emphasis to be placed on rehabilitation and youth, and that
this required the
imposition of an immediate sentence of imprisonment. Those
factors are also present in this case. The only possible view of the offending
in this case is that it was a serious crime of rape aggravated by various
aspects of the respondent's conduct. These include the
deliberate and sustained
force used to overcome the victim's resistance, and the contrived nature of the
offending, demonstrated
by placing V's phone on flight mode and hiding it before
commencing the attack. The circumstances of the offending left no room for
claim that the respondent's age materially contributed to a lack of
understanding or reduced insight into the serious nature of
his conduct. As
already noted, the ejaculation and failure to wear a condom were aggravating
factors. The respondent was not entitled
to the benefit of a plea of guilty and
I have already made comment concerning his demonstrated lack of acceptance of
responsibility
and insight into the impact of his actions on V.
On the other hand, as the sentencing judge observed, the respondent's age did
distinguish this case from
. Of course, the relevance of age, as
with any other sentencing factor, will depend on the particular circumstances of
the case. While
general observations can be made concerning the developmental
stage typical of various age groups, the actual maturity, state of
development,
psychological, emotional and intellectual condition and needs of each individual
will vary from one defendant to another.
Hence, an individualised approach in
respect of sentence is important when sentencing youthful offenders. The
discretion of a sentencing
judge must contain sufficient flexibility to permit
such an individualised response to the particular case. Because the balance
sentencing considerations is differently weighted when dealing with
youthful offenders, compared with an offender who is older, such
flexibility is
critical to the sentencing of such offenders, in particular offenders who commit
crimes when they are aged under 18
years. The principles and sentencing guidance
provided in respect of cases of serious sexual offending laid down in
, must be read in the context of the specific facts of that case. In
my view, the learned sentencing judge correctly identified that
distinction.
These observations lead to consideration of another critical aspect of this
case, in particular the impact of delay on the sentencing
task. The delay has
particular significance when regard is had to the age of the respondent. The
offending was reported to police
and investigated almost immediately. The
indictment which charged the respondent with two counts of rape was not filed
until 19 January
2023. The trial commenced on 30 April 2024 and sentencing took
place on 16 October 2024. Counsel for the appellant was not able to
explain the
delay between the reporting of the crime and trial. In particular, the delay in
charging the respondent was not explained,
nor the time that it took after
charging for the case to progress through the court system to a trial. It does
not appear that the
case was expedited on the basis of the youth of the
respondent or the complainant. Both were exposed to the stress of a pending
for a lengthy period. There is no suggestion that the delay was, in any
respect, attributable to the respondent. The delay between
trial and sentencing
can be attributed to the time necessary for the preparation of the pre-sentence
The critical impact of the delay in this case is that by the time the trial
judge came to sentence the respondent, he was 18 years
of age. He was 15 years
old when he committed the crimes. The delay in sentence had significant
implications with respect to the
options realistically available to the
sentencing judge. The crime of rape is a prescribed offence under the
Justice Act
if committed by a youth who is 14 years or older. Hence,
such a crime cannot be dealt with summarily by the Magistrates Court (Youth
Justice Division) under the
Youth Justice Act
and must be prosecuted on
indictment in the Supreme Court. The sentences available are those prescribed by
Sentencing Act
, which include, of course, both imprisonment and
Youth Justice Act
empowers the Supreme Court to exercise sentencing alternatives available under
that Act in addition to or instead of sentences available
Sentencing Act
. Such sentences include a period of actual detention in a
detention centre for a period of up to 2 years:
Justice Act
Although a detention order involves the actual deprivation of
liberty of the offender, there are features built into the legislation
clearly intended to facilitate and emphasise rehabilitation and reduce some of
the more harmful aspects of adult imprisonment.
For example, a youth serving a
sentence under a detention order must be released on a supervised release order
after serving one
half of the period of detention,
of the Act.
Further, there are provisions under the Act concerning the treatment of a
detainee which are commensurate with the overall
approach adopted by the
legislation in respect of youthful offenders. See for example
It follows, therefore, that if the respondent had been sentenced closer to the
date of offending, when he was 15 or 16 years of
age, a period of actual
detention under the
Youth Justice Act
would have been a viable sentencing
option and if imposed would have been served in a detention centre. This would
also be the case
if he was 17, depending on the length of the detention order
and taking into account the implications of supervised release orders.
sentencing judge would still have been authorised to make a detention order in
respect of the respondent as an 18 year
old person, his Honour was informed
during the sentencing proceedings, and it was made clear to this Court, that any
period of detention
imposed on a person of that age would be served in an adult
prison. This result arises as a matter of administrative determination
Youth Justice Act
and the Court cannot alter or affect that
I assume that, for this purpose, the adult prison is declared
to be a detention centre under
of that Act. Even if the respondent had
been sentenced to imprisonment under the
Sentencing Act
administrative arrangements that would have permitted the sentence to be served
in a youth detention centre if the sentence
was to conclude before he reached 18
years of age. The legislation makes clear that a person serving either a period
of detention
or a term of imprisonment in a detention centre, as would be the
case if the sentence is being served before that person reaches
18 years of age,
is subject to the relevant provisions of the
Youth Justice Act
if serving the period in adult prison, as occurs in either case in respect of an
offender who is 18 or older, the applicable
legislative regime is that imposed
on adult prisoners under the
Corrections Act
Youth Justice Act
Corrections Act
latter case and if the sentence is a detention order, that outcome will apply
unless determined otherwise by the Director of
Corrective Services.
The consequence of the delay, therefore, is that by the time the sentence was
imposed, an effective and appropriate sentencing option
had, as a matter of
practical reality, been removed from those available to his Honour. A discussion
between defence counsel and
his Honour during the sentencing proceedings makes
it abundantly clear that his Honour was well aware of this, although he did not
express or discuss this issue in the course of his sentencing comments. The
imposition of a significant period of detention could
be viewed as a
particularly appropriate sentence in the circumstances of this case. It would
have enabled the sentencing judge to
impose age appropriate incarceration, which
is designed under the
Youth Justice Act
to strike an acceptable balance
between punishment, deterrence and rehabilitation. However, because the passage
of time between the
commission of the crime and sentence effectively removed
this option, the sentencing judge's alternatives in respect of incarceration
were limited to a period of detention or imprisonment which would be served in
an adult prison, or home detention.
notwithstanding that it "is obviously less onerous than being
in prison". Per
Director of Public Prosecutions v King
[2020] TASCCA 8.
same case, Wood J noted the capacity of this sentencing option to achieve a
balance between punishment and rehabilitation:
"The punitive impact
of a home detention order and the extent to which it curtails the behaviour and
lifestyle of an offender will
vary depending on the offender's particular
circumstances. If the offender is in employment, or is permitted to leave his or
interaction, and ameliorates the burden of home detention:
R v Filipponi
[2016] SASCFC
and also promotes rehabilitation and enables the offender
to maintain the
continuity of personal, employment and family relationships. It avoids the harm
of incarceration and promotes the
best interests of the community and the
It is reasonable to expect that home detention will have efficacy as a
general deterrent. Home detention is a tangible sentence with
consequences that
are visible, especially if the detail of the conditions are known, such as
electronic monitoring. Home detention
is likely to be perceived by the community
as a real punishment although, correctly, seen as significantly less punitive
than imprisonment
The Sentencing Advisory Council in
Phasing out Suspended Sentences,
Final Report No 6, March
2016 at 62-68 noted that home detention does have appropriate deterrent effect
and is not a 'soft' option."
In these circumstances, I am of the opinion that the imposition of a lengthy
period of home detention, coupled with the requirement
that the respondent
perform a period of community service was within the sentencing discretion of
the learned sentencing judge and
the sentence imposed was not manifestly
inadequate. In arriving at this conclusion, I should not be taken as suggesting
detention was the only sentencing option available to his Honour in
this case, nor that a sentence of actual imprisonment should
never be imposed
for the crime of rape on a 15 year old offender. It is apparent from cases to
which we were referred by counsel
for the appellant that such sentences have
been imposed on frequent occasions. See also the analysis of sentences imposed
persons of that age for the crime of rape by Evans J, with whom Tennent
and Wood JJ agreed in
Director of Public Prosecutions v NOP
[2011] TASCCA
, although it should be noted that all of the cases referred to in that case
preceded the introduction of home detention as a sentencing
option. There is no
question that rape is properly regarded as a serious crime and will generally
warrant a severe sentence. It can
also be acknowledged that in keeping with the
court's better appreciation of the significant long term impact of sexual
on victims that sentences for rape and sexual crimes generally have
increased in recent times. See my comments in
Director of Public Prosecutions
[2017] TASCCA 15
. However, I reiterate the point that
particularly with offenders who are under the age of 18, a considerable degree
of flexibility
should be afforded to sentencing judges. The need for such
flexibility, in my view, increases the younger the age of the offender.
flexibility is consistent with the legislative purpose of the expanded powers
conferred on the Supreme Court when sentencing
young persons for crimes
committed when they were under 18 years of age by
Youth Justice
. In this case, the effective removal of an important and appropriate
sentencing option limited the sentencing judge's options in
a manner that
significantly reduced this flexibility. In those circumstances, I am satisfied
that his Honour's sentencing discretion
included the sentence imposed by
Accordingly, I am not satisfied that the appellant has demonstrated that the
sentence was manifestly inadequate. It follows that
the sole ground has not been
made out and the appeal should be
File No 2938/2024
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS v JAP
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
CUTHBERTSON J
30 July 2025
I agree that this appeal should be dismissed for the reasons given by Brett J.
I have also read and agree with the additional comments
made by Wood
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (182 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter