URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFC/2025/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ARL2 Pty Ltd v Flex-Realty Pty Ltd [2025] TASFC 1 (4 March 2025)
[2025] TASFC 1
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (FULL
ARL2 Pty Ltd v Flex-Realty Pty Ltd
: ARL2 PTY LTD
FLEX-REALTY PTY
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Wood J, Jago J, Martin AJ
Corporations – Winding up – Applications for Winding Up By Court
– Generally – Failure to respond to Statutory
Presumption of Insolvency – Proof of Solvency – Ability to pay debts
as and when they are due –
No error by trial judge.
Corporations [1515]
Legislation:
Corporation Act
2001 (Cth) ss
95A(1), 459A(2)(a), 459C(3)
Case cited:
Deputy Commissioner of
Taxation v De Simone Consulting Pty Ltd
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
LFS Lawyers Pty
Respondent:
Terracall & Associates
[2025] TASFC 1
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 1/2025
File No 737/2024
ARL2 PTY LTD v FLEX-REALTY PTY LTD
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
of the Court (29 August 2024):
Appeal dismissed.
Serial No 1/2025
File No 737/2024
ARL2 PTY LTD v FLEX-REALTY PTY LTD
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
Introduction
appellant applied for the winding-up of the respondent on the ground of
insolvency. Blow CJ was satisfied on the balance of probabilities
respondent was able to pay its debts as and when they became due and payable,
and that it was likely to remain able to do
so for the "indefinite" future. His
Honour accordingly dismissed the appellant's application.
appellant appealed against the decision of the learned trial judge on the
following grounds:
"1 Having correctly identified principles to be
applied in the determination of the Respondent's solvency (at [10]-[12]), the
trial judge erred in law (at [67]) by giving too much weight to the
expert evidence of Mr Rands as to solvency in terms, rather than
materials which were before His Honour that were relevant to the Respondent's
financial position as a whole.
learned trial judge erred in fact (at [65] and [67]) by finding that the
Respondent:
(a) did not have ongoing losses;
(b) did not have poor cashflow;
(c) had assets that consistently exceeded liabilities; and
(d) was able to pay its debts as and when they became due and was likely to
remain able to do so for the indefinite future;
when His Honour had evidence before him to the contrary or, alternatively,
where such findings were not supported by the evidence
before His Honour.
learned trial judge erred in law (at [24] and [67]) by taking into account bare
promises of the Respondent's directors to provide
financial assistance to the
Respondent as a credit resource available to the Respondent for the purposes of
assessing solvency, where
the evidence did not support anything more than a
chance that the directors would provide such assistance.
learned trial judge erred in fact and/or in law (at [25] and [67]) by taking
into account the overdraft facility agreement between
the Respondent and ACN 601
158 507 Pty Ltd as a credit resource available to the Respondent for the
purposes of assessing solvency,
where the evidence did not establish that the
overdraft facility could have been genuinely relied upon by the Respondent.
learned trial judge erred in law at [64] by not regarding the non-payment of the
debt owing to the Appellant as evidence of insolvency
and on grounds unsupported
by the evidence or which the Respondent was not permitted to rely upon."
the conclusion of oral submissions the Court ordered that the appeal be
dismissed. We now set out our reasons for dismissing
written contract dated 23 September 2022, the appellant agreed to sell a rent
roll business to the respondent. The purchase price
was $185,000 payable in nine
instalments.
dispute arose as to how much, if any, of the final instalment was payable, but
the amount in dispute was not quantified. Although
the contract provided that
any dispute be referred to arbitration, neither party sought to arrange the
appointment of an arbitrator,
either pursuant to the terms of the contract or
through application to the Supreme Court.
14 July 2023 the appellant served upon the respondent a statutory demand for
payment of $59,000 said to be owing pursuant to the
contract of sale. The
respondent did not apply for the statutory demand to be set aside. On 12
September 2023 the appellant filed
an originating process in the Supreme Court
applying for the respondent to be wound up on the ground of insolvency.
was common ground that as the respondent had failed to comply with the statutory
demand, and had not applied to set it aside,
pursuant to
s 459A(2)(a)
Corporations Act
(Cth) there was a presumption that the respondent
was insolvent. By reason of
Corporations Act
respondent bore the onus of proving solvency.
is no dispute that the learned trial judge correctly directed himself as to the
law, including
Corporations Act
which provides that the
respondent is solvent "if, and only if, [it] is able to pay all [its] debts as
and when they become due and
payable". His Honour correctly noted that "the test
of solvency is a cash flow test rather than a balance sheet test."
addition, the trial judge correctly observed that the respondent was unable to
rely on any contention that the alleged debt was
not owing, and that for the
purposes of assessing solvency, he was required to assume that the claimed debt
of $59,000 plus interest
was due and payable.
Trial judge's
trial judge summarised the relevant factual background of the
respondent:
The defendant company
defendant company is a two-man company. Its directors and shareholders are Dean
Chamley and Justin Grave. They both gave evidence
at the hearing of this
application. Their shareholdings in the company are equal. The company and Mr
Grave each hold real estate
agent licences under the
Property Agents and Land
Transactions Act
. Mr Chamley holds a property representative licence
under that Act.
business of the company is neither complicated nor risky. It does two things.
It acts as the agent of vendors in relation to
the sale of real estate, and it
acts as the agent of landlords in relation to the leasing of rental properties
and the collection
of rents. Its principal sources of income are commissions
payable in relation to the sales of real estate and the collection of rents.
Commissions on sales are payable when and if the sales proceed to settlement.
Commissions in relation to rent payments are deducted
from rent monies that are
collected from tenants and paid to landlords.
company has seven employees, including the two directors. Only two of the other
employees are engaged in the selling of real estate.
The remuneration of one of
them, but not the other, depends on what commissions he earns. However, to
provide him with a constant
stream of income, he is paid at a flat rate, with
occasional variations. Mr Chamley gave evidence that the furthest the company
would get behind in paying him was 'maybe $5,000'.
company operates from rented premises in Wivenhoe. The landlord is Chamvers Pty
Limited. It is the trustee of a self-managed
superannuation fund of which Mr
Chamley and Mr Grave are members. The company has been paying rent at the rate
of $1,000 per month.
By mistake, the company has been treating the rental
payments as representing $909.09 per month plus GST, but in fact the landlord
not registered for GST. I will say more about this situation later.
company owns an unencumbered piece of vacant land in Strahan. It purchased that
land for $18,000, completing its purchase in June
2022. Mr Chamley estimated
that that land is now worth $25,000 to $30,000. However the government
valuation as at 1 July 2021 was
company has a possessory title to an unencumbered piece of vacant land in
Waratah. By a contract dated 2 November 2021 it agreed
to purchase the interest
of a couple named Prothero in that land for $10,000 and to pay their legal
costs. That contract was completed
in June 2022. Because the company has only a
possessory title to the land, which is not readily saleable, it concedes that
that interest
must be ignored when assessing solvency.
company owns three vehicles – an MG, a Nissan Navara, and a Mercedes. The
MG was purchased in November 2020 for $18,990
inclusive of GST and is
unencumbered. The Nissan Navara was purchased in June 2021 for $57,000 inclusive
of GST and is also unencumbered.
The Mercedes was acquired in October 2020 and
financed by a loan from Metro Finance. The company has punctually paid loan
of $1,080.20 per month since January 2021."
to the respondent's evidence concerning solvency, it is appropriate to set out
the summary provided by the trial judge:
The defendant's
evidence as to solvency
witnesses gave evidence for the defendant – the two directors and a
chartered accountant, Mr Rands. He has been practising
for over 35 years. He
opined that, on the basis of the documents and information provided to him by
the directors, the company was
solvent as at October 2023. The hearing was
conducted as a trial by affidavit. Mr Rands gave oral evidence that, having read
affidavits of the plaintiff's witnesses, he had not changed his mind as to
solvency of the company.
directors each swore two affidavits – one in October 2023 and one shortly
before the hearing. They produced various documents
relating to the company's
financial position. Those documents, and my comments in relation to them, can be
summarised as follows:
produced unaudited financial statements for the company for the years ending 30
June 2022 and 30 June 2023. The 2022 financial
statements contained comparative
figures apparently derived from those for 2021.
produced the company's management accounts for the three months ending 30
September 2023. In his second affidavit, Mr Chamley
produced the company's
management accounts for the months of October, November and December 2023 and
for the period from 1 January
2024 to 22 January 2024. The accounts for October,
November and December showed an excess of expenses over income, but the figures
for the January period showed a net profit of $8,609.02.
produced the company's bank statements for its general account, but not its
trust account, for the period from 1 April 2023 to
28 September 2023. Throughout
that period the general account was in credit. The lowest balance was $70,832.10
on 11 October 2023.
The highest balance was $151,797.82.
second affidavit, Mr Chamley produced the bank statements for the company's
general account for the period from 28 September
2023 to 20 January 2024. It
showed a credit balance of $34,299.82 at the end of that period. The lowest
credit balance during that
period was $26,749.49 as at 18 January 2024.
Chamley produced copies of pages from the company's 'contract book' showing
particulars of real estate transactions from 12 May
2021 to 18 October 2023.
That book contained handwritten details of contracts for the sale of real estate
in respect of which the
company received or hoped to receive commissions. The
details recorded included the date of the contract, the address of the property,
the names of the vendors and purchasers, the sale price, the commission
inclusive of GST, the initials of the listing agent and the
selling agent, notes
as to whether particular contracts were subject to finance or otherwise
conditional, the dates on which conditional
contracts became unconditional, and
the scheduled and actual settlement dates. In his second affidavit, Mr Chamley
produced copies
of the contract book entries for the period from 7 June 2023 to
8 January 2024.
Chamley produced a photograph, taken on 23 October 2023, of a whiteboard on
which details of pending contracts were recorded.
The details on the whiteboard
comprised the addresses of the properties, details of conditional contracts and
the dates by which
the conditions were to be satisfied, settlement dates,
agents' initials, and expenses incurred by the company. I assume the expenses
related to such things as advertising. In his second affidavit, Mr Chamley
produced a second photo of the whiteboard, showing particulars
of uncompleted
contracts as at late January 2024.
Chamley produced a payroll activity summary for the month of October 2023. It
showed that the employees earned $32,052.80 that
month, from which $6,050 PAYG
tax was deducted, leaving net pays totalling $26,002.80. It showed that
superannuation guarantee contributions
of $3,519.36 were paid or payable.
Chamley produced a report generated by the company's accounting system showing
loan payments in respect of the Mercedes motor vehicle
in the sum of $1,080.20
each month from 25 January 2021 to 25 September 2023 inclusive. He also produced
a document showing that
that vehicle was purchased by the company for $57,000
inclusive of GST on 2 June 2021.
produced another document evidencing the purchase of the MG station wagon by the
company on 19 November 2020 for $18,990 inclusive
of GST, on road charges and
stamp duty.
Chamley produced a report generated by the Australian Taxation Office on 5
October 2023 showing the company's income tax transactions
during the two years
commencing 5 October 2021. This report showed that the company owed nothing to
the ATO in respect of income
tax. From that report it can be calculated that the
company owed the ATO $29,622.58 in respect of income tax as at 5 October 2021.
The report shows that the company's 2020 tax return was lodged late, that its
income tax for that year was assessed in the sum of
$3,252.85, and that a
penalty of $1,110 was imposed for the late lodgement. It shows that the
company's 2022 and 2023 returns were
lodged at the same time and processed on 29
September 2023. It did not contain any reference to a 2021 income tax return
company. Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the company must
therefore not have lodged a return for that year. I will say
more about this
issue later.
Chamley also produced an ATO activity statement for the period from 1 July 2022
to 11 October 2023. That statement related to
both income tax and GST. It
showed various transactions, including a payment of $37,156 received on 5
October 2023, and a credit
balance of $15,702.21 as at 11 October 2023. In his
second affidavit, Mr Chamley produced a further ATO activity statement dated
January 2024 showing a zero balance.
Chamley produced a statement showing that the company's solicitors, Terracall
and Associates, were holding $30,366.01 in their
trust account for the company
as at 25 October 2023. At the time of the hearing the firm held $45,366.01 in
its trust account for
the company.
his second affidavit, Mr Chamley estimated that the company would receive
property sales commissions in the order of $41,450 during
January 2024, at least
$29,740 during February 2024, and at least $36,875 during March 2024. He
estimated its rental management income
to be between about $16,000 and $19,000
both of his affidavits Mr Chamley said that the company did not have any
outstanding debts. No debts to trade creditors were shown
in the annual accounts
for 2022 or 2023. Those accounts were prepared by an external accountant. It
would appear that the company
paid all its creditors before the balance date in
those two financial years. Similarly, none of the management accounts in respect
of the current financial year show any debts owing to trade creditors at the end
of the relevant periods.
assessing solvency, the credit resources available to the company must be taken
into account:
Sandell v Porter
(1966) 115 CLR 666
at 671. On 19 January
2024 the company entered into a business overdraft facility agreement with a
company named ACN 601 158 507
Pty Ltd, with the directors acting as guarantors.
Pursuant to that agreement it has the capacity to borrow a maximum of $75,000.
At the time of the hearing it had not drawn upon that facility.
directors gave evidence to the effect that they were willing to provide
financial assistance to the company if necessary. Mr
Chamley stated in his
first affidavit that he loaned $15,000 to the company on 26 October 2022. That
was at about the time when the
company's second payment to the plaintiff, in the
sum of $70,000, was payable. He said that the loan was repaid on 30 March
of the directors provided evidence of his assets. Mr Chamley is the sole owner
of his home, which is in Heybridge. The government
valuation of that property is
$760,000. He estimated that it is worth about $850,000 to $900,000. It is
mortgaged. The mortgage
balance was $243,346.78 as at 25 October 2023.
Chamley purchased a second property in Heybridge in May 2023. Its government
valuation is $210,000. It is mortgaged. The mortgage
balance was $275,672.63
as at 25 October 2023.
Grave is the sole owner of his home, which is also in Heybridge. He purchased
it in 2017. The government valuation is $146,250,
but he estimated that it is
worth $180,000. It is mortgaged to his bank. The mortgage debt was $27,058.36 as
at October 2023. Mr
Grave had a credit balance exceeding that amount in another
account with his bank at that time.
Rands was asked by the defendant's solicitors to provide a report as to whether
the company was solvent at the time of the expiry
of the statutory demand, which
was said to be in the period 4-9 August 2023. He responded by providing a report
dated 13 October
2023 in which he said that, in his opinion, the company was
solvent as at 4-9 August 2023, solvent at the time of his report, and
remain solvent 'in the near future'. He took into account a number of factors
which, viewed in isolation, might have caused
concern as to the financial
soundness of the company:
The company had
failed or refused to pay four monthly instalments of $3,000 each to the
plaintiff, as well as the final instalment
of $47,000.
The company
lodged its 2022 income tax return on 29 September 2023, rather than on the due
date of 15 May 2023.
The company
lodged its monthly BAS statements for February to August 2023 on 28 September
2023. All but the last of them were overdue.
The company did
not have a written business plan.
The company did
not have written cashflow forecasts or budgets.
Mr Rands noted facts and circumstances favourable to the company in relation to
each of these matters. Whilst the company
may have owed $59,000 plus interest
to the defendant, it had had over $70,000 in its general bank account at all
material times prior
to the date of Mr Rands' report, and therefore had the
ability to pay the claimed debt in full. When the 2022 income tax return
lodged, it resulted in a refund of $23,034.50. As at 13 October 2023, the
company had paid income tax of $7,523.25 in advance.
An amount of $37,156 was
due in respect of the activity statements for the months of February to August
2023, but the setting off
of various amounts resulted in the company's account
with the ATO being in credit as at 13 October 2023 in the sum of $15,702.21.
Whilst the directors did not have a written business plan, they had a plan to
keep sufficient money in the company's bank account,
with the target of a
minimum of $100,000. Mr Rands said that in his experience only a tiny minority
of small businesses had a written
business plan, and the absence of such a plan
did not support an assessment of insolvency in his opinion. He noted that,
the directors did not have written budgets or cashflow forecasts, they
monitored the company's bank account and its expected income
and expenditure.
He said that doing so without a written budget or forecast was the typical
approach of most small businesses.
Rands' report contained an executive summary in which, after expressing the view
that the company was solvent and likely to remain
so, he said the
'2.4 Of significance to my opinion is the cash held in
the operating bank account of the company between 4 and 9 August 2023 and for
the period after 9 August 2023 to 11 October 2023. The lowest balance of the
operating bank account of the company since 4 August
2023 was $70,832.10 on 11
October 2023. That is, for the whole of the relevant period of time, it had
sufficient funds to pay the
alleged debt in full.
2.5 Of support to my opinion are the company resources of the kind referred
to in section 5 of this report. These include the capacity
and preparedness of a
company director to provide loan funds to the company and the existence of
company real estate investments
which could be sold or used as security for
company borrowings.
2.6 Also of support to my opinion is the continuing company profitability and
consequential positive cash flow which is enjoyed by
the company. It is my
opinion that the business conducted by the company provides more favourable
positive cash flow for a given
level of sales than many other businesses.'
Rands had some positive things to say about the nature of the company's
business. In his report at [4.11] to [4.14] he said the
'4.11 It is apparent that the receipt of income by the
real estate agent is only contingent on the settlement of a property sale or
collection of rent. There is not an additional process as there is with many
businesses where there is further effort required
after the income earning
activity to invoice a client or customer and then pursue them for payment. A
tradesman undertaking small
repairs, for example, would provide their service
and then invoice the customer. They may have arrangements to facilitate payment,
but there is not the low risk of missing out on income enjoyed by a real estate
4.12 In my opinion, this capacity of a real estate agent to be virtually
guaranteed payment if a property sale settles and if rent
is collected for a
landlord, is an attractive feature of the industry and something which assists
the solvency of industry participants.
4.13 I was advised ... that Ms Murchie maintains a whiteboard where details
of pending settlements are recorded. This allows the directors
to assess the
amount and timing of future cash inflows from property sale commissions. I was
further advised that the level of property
management commissions was relatively
stable from month to month, which also assists prediction of overall cash
inflows. My review
of the financial statements of the company for the 2022 and
2023 financial years attached as Appendix 3, indicate that the cost structure
the business is largely fixed costs. That is, they are relatively constant from
month to month as they are not impacted by changes
in activity or sales. This is
a very helpful feature for the directors to predict overall cash flow
requirements at any point in
4.14 Commissions paid to salespeople are not a fixed cost, as they increase
or decrease in time with sales commissions earned by the
business. In my
experience however a share of the sales commission is only paid to the
applicable salesperson after receipt by the
business. That is, this additional
cost is only payable to employees after it is received by the real estate
agency. This is a further
feature of this industry which assists participants
solvency as large payments of commission to employees will only be made after
receipt of the necessary funds by the business.'"
trial judge provided the following summary of the evidence led by the
The plaintiff's evidence
plaintiff relied on the affidavits of two witnesses – a Melbourne
accountant named Sandro Bagnati and a director of the
plaintiff company, Rebecca
Luck. I struck out most of Ms Luck's affidavit as a result of objections as to
admissibility. The surviving
parts of her affidavit consist mainly of commentary
on the defendant's evidence and are of such a nature that I see little need to
refer to them.
Bagnati is a certified practising accountant with over 43 years' experience. In
his affidavit, which he affirmed on 10 November
2023, he concluded that there
was no possibility that the defendant company was solvent, nor that it was
likely to become solvent
'sometime in the immediate future'. He also expressed
an opinion that Mr Rands, apparently unlike himself, was not in a position
form an opinion as to whether the company was solvent.
material available to Mr Bagnati included Mr Rands' report and his affidavit, Mr
Chamley's first affidavit, Mr Grave's first affidavit,
Ms Luck's affidavit, and
an affidavit of the plaintiff's solicitor/counsel, Mr Xenidis, which was not
relied upon at the hearing.
Bagnati noted that Mr Rands had been asked to consider whether the defendant
company was solvent during a date range from 4 August
2023 to 9 August 2023. He
went on, in paragraph 10(a) of his affidavit, to comment, apparently in relation
to that date range, as
'10 Based on the Bank Statements and
ATO Portal, it is clear that:
(a) There were numerous outstanding invoices outstanding ...'.
Bagnati had no basis for his assertion that there were 'numerous outstanding
invoices outstanding'. He was not provided with any
invoices. The bank
statements revealed a number of payments from the company's bank account after 9
August 2023 but there was nothing
in the bank statements to suggest that there
had been any significant outstanding debts as at that date.
paragraph 14 of his affidavit Mr Bagnati said that for the purpose of his
affidavit he would rely on the various affidavits filed
in the proceedings and
their annexures to determine whether or not he could make a determination of
solvency as at that time. He
went on in paragraph 15 to say the
'15 The qualification to this is that:
(a) The company accounts, being no less than the General Trading Account(s) and
the Trust Account(s), have not been audited. They
ought to be audited no less
than for the period 1 July 2021 and potentially 1 July 2020 to date.
Considering that the accounts for the period 1 July 2021 – 30 June 2023
were being prepared by the Flex Realty Pty Ltd's accountant,
with the knowledge
of an application for winding up a company, an accountant, instructed by the
shareholders and directors of Flex,
to prepare financial statements would not
prepare accounts which evidence
insolvency.
[Original emphasis.]
Real Estate Trust Accounts are required by law to be audited for compliance
with its licence. The audit I would require is more detailed
to ensure that the
transfers between accounts is in accordance with contractual terms. I raise this
as one example where Chamley
suggests a frequency of payments from the Trust
Account, and as supported by the Bank Statements, being four transfers per
Not on a weekly basis but a fortnightly basis.
assumption could be that there is either:
Trust accounts being run on different cycles and or
client book ledgers being run on different cycles and or
Defalcation
within the Trust Account.
(b) Rands decided not to produce the Trust account. This is a concern as:
dispute between the Plaintiff [sic] revolves around the Trust Account
considered the Affidavit of Chamley, he would have identified conflicting
statements as to the money processed through the
Trust Account.
Account ought to be relied upon to determine the receipt of funds into the
General Trading Account, or other.'
can be seen that in that paragraph Mr Bagnati jumped to a couple of unwarranted
conclusions. First, he suggested that any external
accountant knowing that a
winding up application was pending would deliberately not prepare accounts that
evidenced insolvency. When
cross-examined about that suggestion, Mr Bagnati
resiled from what he had said in his affidavit. He denied that he was suggesting
that members of his profession might tend to create misleading financial
statements in that situation. He asserted that what he meant
was that an
accountant who was in a hurry to prepare financial statements that were late
might miss something, and that that might
result in the accounts suggesting
solvency. But that it not what he said in his affidavit.
went on to suggest, without having any basis for doing so, that one could assume
that there was some serious irregularity in relation
to the company's trust
account, such as a defalcation or the operation of multiple trust accounts. His
comment appears to have been
based on a comparison of the bank statements for
the company's general account with Mr Chamley's first affidavit. The bank
showed transfers to the general account, apparently from the trust
account, on a fortnightly basis, as well as some one-off transfers.
did not say anything about such transfers in his first affidavit that was
inconsistent with the bank statements. He did
say that rent was collected from
tenants 'mostly on a weekly basis', that the company then deducted its costs and
fees monthly, and
that the net balance was paid to landlords 'at regular
intervals, usually monthly'. Nothing was said about the frequency of transfers
of commissions relating to sales.
Bagnati's criticisms of Mr Rands in his paragraph 15(b) appear to relate to the
disputed claim for $59,000 plus interest. Mr Rands
was not engaged to advise as
to that dispute. He was engaged to provide an opinion as to solvency, first on
the assumption that the
claimed debt was due and payable, and also on the
assumption that it was not. That is what he did. It was not part of his role
to look for evidence relating to the disputed debt in the trust account
Bagnati went on in his affidavit to make various criticisms and observations
concerning the evidence provided by the defendant
as to its financial position.
In many respects he suggested that that evidence was unreliable and/or
incomplete. In particular,
his criticisms related to the title to the land at
Waratah, Mr Rands not undertaking searches relating to registered charges, the
extent of the information provided as to the entitlements of employees in
respect of commissions, the possibility of GST liabilities
in relation to
commissions, the possibility that superannuation guarantee contributions were
being underpaid, and the possibility
that PAYG payment summaries needed to be
amended. He somehow reached a conclusion that it was more likely than not that
the company
owed commissions to salespersons, and that the annual financial
statements, PAYG payment summaries and tax returns all needed to
be amended. He
noted that a particular bank card was used for transactions that he thought 'may
be personal expenses', assumed that
the card was Mr Chamley's card, and
concluded that Mr Chamley owed 'significant money' to the company. He expressed
the view that
various figures in the financial accounts appeared to be
his views as to the inadequacy and unreliability of the evidence available to
him, he concluded that insolvency had been established.
He said the following,
at paragraph 36:
'36 Under the circumstances, there is no
possibility to suggest that Flex is solvent either at:
a the date between 4-9 August 2023;
b the date of this Affidavit relying on the Affidavit of Chamley, Grave,
Luck and Xenidis;
c Now and sometime in the immediate future.'"
dealing with a number of submissions advanced by the appellant, the trial judge
correctly addressed the question whether solvency
established:
Has solvency been established?
prefer the evidence of Mr Rands to that of Mr Bagnati, for a number of
Unlike Mr Rands,
Mr Bagnati appears to have ignored the fact that the defendant company's
business was not a risky one. So long as
people in and around Burnie continue to
buy and sell real estate and the company more or less maintains its market
share, it is likely
to have a steady income from commissions on sales. So long
as tenants continue to pay their rent, it is likely to have a steady
income from
commissions in relation to leases. There is very little risk of the company
incurring bad debts, although the annual
financial statements show that $1,567
was written off in 2021.
Mr Bangnati
appears to have ignored the fact that, at least until it began to incur legal
expenses in relation to these proceedings,
the company usually maintained a
credit bank balance exceeding $100,000.
appears to have reasoned that any financial records that he did not sight, if
examined, were likely to reveal irregularities
Mr Bagnati in
his affidavit made it clear that he did not consider the capacity of the
directors to lend money to the company or to
facilitate borrowing by the company
to be relevant to its solvency. However, as a matter of principle, the credit
resources available
to the company must be taken into account:
affidavit, Mr Bagnati expressed a number of opinions that appear to have been
based on speculation rather than evidence. I
need not repeat all that I have
said about those opinions. Most significantly, having made observations about
the available evidence
being incomplete and unreliable, he jumped to the
conclusion that the company was insolvent and likely to remain so, rather than
venturing an opinion that solvency had not been established.
the purpose of assessing solvency, I must assume that the claimed debt of
$59,000 plus interest is due and payable. With interest,
that now amounts to a
little under $64,000. I also assume that a further $5,000 to $10,000 is payable
by the company because of the
mistake concerning GST and the premises it
do not regard the decision of the directors not to pay the claimed debt as
evidence tending to indicate insolvency. The fact that
they ceased making
payments to the plaintiff appears to have been due to intransigence and/or bad
advice from a previous solicitor.
The dispute with the plaintiff company should
have been referred to arbitration long ago.
note that a lot of the usual symptoms of insolvency are absent in this case.
There is no suggestion that the company has ever been
late in paying any trade
creditor. Only one creditor contacted the company about a payment when it
learned of winding-up proceedings.
It has not had ongoing losses. It does not
have a poor cashflow. The directors have a practice of monitoring the cashflow
records kept in a contract book and on a whiteboard. The company's assets
have consistently exceeded its liabilities. It does not
have problems selling
stock or collecting debts. It does not have problems in relation to
unrecoverable loans. There is no suggestion
that any suppliers have placed the
company on cash-on-delivery terms. There are no disputes between the
do not consider that I need to see sworn evidence from independent valuers in
relation to the directors' real estate assets. The
directors' estimates of the
values of their properties should be approached with caution, but a comparison
of the government valuations
and the mortgage balances indicates that each
director has a substantial equity in his home and therefore a substantial
capacity. The fact that a financier recently provided a $75,000
overdraft facility confirms that.
my view I do not need to see sworn affidavits from valuers or audited financial
statements in order to reach a conclusion as to
the solvency of this company. I
accept the evidence of Mr Rands as to its solvency. I am satisfied on the
balance of probabilities
that it operates a business that is profitable, that it
has substantial cash and credit resources, that it is able to pay its debts
and when they become due and payable, and that it is likely to remain able to do
so for the indefinite future."
the outset, we should record that we agree with the finding of the trial judge
that he preferred the evidence of Mr Rands to that
of Mr Bagnati. For the
reasons discussed by the trial judge very little, if any, weight could be
attached to the evidence of Mr Bagnati.
On the other hand, the trial judge was
entitled to rely upon the evidence of Mr Rands.
one of the appeal asserted that his Honour "erred in law" at par [67] of his
Honour's reasons "by giving too much weight to
the expert evidence of Mr Rands
as to solvency in terms rather than to the materials which were before his
Honour that were relevant
to the respondent's financial position as a whole". In
substance, the appellant's submission contended that his Honour relied upon
opinion of Mr Rands rather than making his own assessment of the evidence. We
do not agree.
trial judge made his own assessment of the evidence. He was assisted in that
assessment by competing evidence from the experts
Mr Rands and Mr Bagnati. His
Honour correctly preferred the evidence of Mr Rands and, ultimately, having made
his own assessment
of the evidence, accepted the evidence of Mr Rands. This was
a perfectly orthodox approach which did not involve any error of law
ground one relates only the approach of the trial judge to the evidence of Mr
Rands concerning solvency, the appellant's
written submissions contended that
the trial judge erred in describing the approach to proof of solvency taken by
Finkelstein J in
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v De Simone Consulting Pty
[2007] FCA 548
as "less rigorous" than the approach taken by other
judges in authorities to which his Honour referred. Underlying this contention
was the proposition that his Honour erred in his approach to proof of solvency,
but this proposition is without merit.
the passage to which the appellant refers, his Honour was comparing authorities
which might be viewed as tending to support the
view that proof of solvency
required audited accounts and, ordinarily, the "fullest and best" evidence of
the financial position
of the respondent. His Honour preferred the more
flexible approach taken by Finkelstein J in the following passages from the
of Finkelstein J:
"10 Let me say at once that I reject as
unfounded the proposition that to discharge the onus established by
s 459C(3) a company must
produce audited accounts to prove solvency.
The cases to which Weinberg J referred do not support the existence of such
Nor does his decision.
question whether a company is solvent involves both a question of law and a
question of fact. The legal question, or what may
be partly a legal
question, is what is meant by the word 'insolvent' in s 459A for the
purpose of determining what is meant by the
opposite. The judge will
provide that meaning. He or she may say that the word has a technical
meaning and state what that meaning
is. Or he or she may say that the word
is used in its ordinary sense and go to a dictionary to discover that
company that wishes to establish the fact of solvency in accordance with the
meaning laid down by the judge must tender evidence
for that purpose. Then
the following steps will occur. First, the judge will decide whether the
evidence is relevant. The judge
will then determine whether the evidence
is admissible, for not all relevant evidence finds its way into court.
Next, the judge
will assess the probative value of the evidence. That
assessment is inductive. Finally the judge will decide whether the claimed
solvency is probable or more probable than not.
is contrary to basic rules of evidence to assert there is only one method of
proving solvency, namely the production of audited
accounts. ...
explanation to be given to the cases to which Weinberg J referred is this.
There are many shaky companies in the marketplace.
Applications are made
to wind up some of them. Applications are also made to wind up solvent
companies. In each case a representative
can come along attempting to
prove solvency to avoid a winding up. Judges will look with care at the
evidence especially if the
judge suspects the company is or may be in a weak
financial position. Dependent upon the degree of doubt justified by the
a judge may say that the only evidence he will treat as probative is 'the
fullest and best' evidence available - the kind that in
Commonwealth
Bank of Australia v Begonia
(1983) 11 ACSR 609
Hayne J said
was often necessary although interesting enough, not in that case. In some
instances this may be the company's audited
accounts together with verified
proof of both the ownership and value of the company's assets. On the other hand
there will be many
instances where proof of that sort is not required. In such
cases there is no good reason to put the company to the time, trouble
expense of producing audited accounts. In the end it will all depend upon each
particular fact of a case."
approach of Finkelstein J approved by the trial judge was perfectly orthodox and
correct. It did not involve any point of principle.
Rather than describe it as
"less rigorous", it might be more appropriate to describe it as "less
constricted" or "more flexible",
but descriptions aside, the trial judge was not
in error. His Honour did not misapprehend any matter of principle and applied
correct tests to the question of solvency. We reject the appellant's
proposition that his Honour failed to determine the question
of solvency by
reference to the "overall financial position" of the respondent. It is plain
from his Honour's reasons and analysis
that his Honour made his own assessment
of the respondent's financial position and, having made that assessment, was
satisfied that
the respondent had established it was able to pay its debts as
and when they became due and payable.
2 complains that, in addition to erring in finding that the respondent was able
to pay its debts as and when they became due
and payable, his Honour erred by
finding that the respondent:
(a) did not have ongoing losses;
(b) did not have poor cash flow; and
(c) had assets that consistently exceeded liabilities;
(d) was able to pay its debts as and when they became due and was likely to
remain able to do so for the indefinite future.
to the question of "ongoing losses", the appellant submitted that the evidence
demonstrated the respondent had "posted a net loss
of $48,122.85 across the
seven months" prior to the hearing. The written submissions acknowledge that, in
his reasons, the trial
judge identified a period when the accounts showed "an
excess of expenses over income". However, his Honour also noted that although
there existed an excess of expenses over income during the period
October–December 2023, the figures for the January period
showed a net
profit of $8,609.02.
trial judge was well aware of recent figures. The statement that the respondent
"did not have ongoing losses" was a general statement
made toward the end of the
trial judge's reasons when his Honour was summarising the evidence which caused
him to note that "a lot
of the usual symptoms of insolvency are absent in this
case". His Honour was not referring to a particular period. Rather his Honour
was making a general statement concerning the financial position of the
respondent over a significant period which satisfied his
Honour that the
respondent "has not had ongoing losses". Such a broad statement was justified
by the evidence.
second complaint asserts that the trial judge erred in fact by finding that "the
respondent does not have a poor cash flow".
Again, this was a broad statement in
the context of the summary toward the end of the trial judge's reasons which was
also justified
by the evidence. In written submissions, while maintaining that
the evidence demonstrated the respondent had "very poor cash flow",
appellant acknowledged that the poor cash flow was "softened by a combination of
a healthy cash holding (in the beginning), coupled
with not paying the debt owed
to the appellant".
to the final broad statement that the respondent's assets "have consistently
exceeded its liabilities", the appellant challenged
the use of the respondent's
goodwill as an asset. The goodwill was recorded as $146,307.06, and the
appellant submitted that "goodwill
is an intangible asset that cannot be
converted to cash or work in capital for the payment of liabilities".
the respondent pointed out, the notes to the financial year 2023 balance sheet
"explain that goodwill is the excess of the purchase
price for a business
acquired over the fair value of the net assets at the date of acquisition", and
it appears that goodwill "represents
the rent roll" which is a reliable
appellant's submission concerning the trial judge's reference to the
respondent's assets consistently exceeding its liabilities
included the
contention that it was an error of law "to consider the respondent's asset
position as evidence of it being solvent
without also considering the true
nature of the assets and liabilities, or that the respondent had not accounted
for the debt owing
to the appellant". Again, this proposition reads too much
into the words of the trial judge. The paragraph in which his Honour referred
the respondent not having ongoing losses, not having a poor cash flow and the
assets having consistently exceeded liabilities
began with the
"I note that a lot of the usual symptoms of insolvency
are absent in this case".
his Honour was not using these factors as positive evidence of solvency. His
Honour was merely noting that these and other
"usual symptoms of insolvency"
were absent.
to the challenge to the finding by the trial judge that the respondent was able
to pay its debts as and when they became due,
and was likely to remain able to
do so for the indefinite future, the appellant's written submissions were as
to pay debts as and when they fall due
trial judge found that the Respondent was 'able to pay its debts as and when
they become due and payable, and that it is likely
to remain able to do so for
the indefinite future.'
can be demonstrated as contrary to the evidence specifically with reference to
the debt owing to the Appellant. That debt remained
unpaid at hearing.
submissions on cash flow above show that from September 2023, and with only a
few exceptions, the Respondent did not have enough
cash on hand to pay both the
debt owing to the Appellant and a single month of operating expenses (combined
approximately $109,000).
This was certainly the case from October 2023 until
some contrast, Mr Rands suggested that the Respondent could have paid the debt
owing to the Appellant out of its cash balances
at any time
Rands did not consider whether, if the debt was actually paid, there would be
sufficient funds remaining to allow the Respondent
to continue operating (and if
so, for how long). Nor did Mr Rands consider the trajectory of the Respondent's
dwindling reserves
as outlined above.
core notion of a company being able to pay their debts as they become due 'looks
to the future', at least the reasonably immediate
was unfortunate that Mr Rands' report was dated 13 October 2023. Only one week
later, the Respondent's cash balance dropped to
below the value of the debt
owing to the Appellant.
Mr Rands' view about paying the debt from
cash was rendered obsolete.
were more recent financial records in evidence at hearing. Although the
Appellant says those records do not assist the Respondent's
case, it is the
Respondent who declined an adjournment to obtain a further report from Mr Rands
addressing them
evidence shows that by the time the matter reached hearing, the Respondent's
cash balance had dropped to about $22,000. Its net
current asset balance was in
the negative. The debt owing to the Appellant was in the amount of $59,000 plus
interest. There were
simply not enough resources for the Respondent to pay this
only reason the Respondent continued to operate up to the date of trial was
because it was not paying, and indeed was
to pay, the debt owing
to the Appellant as and when it fell due. The Appellant submits that this meets
the required definition of
insolvency.
evidence suggested that only 10 days prior to trial the Respondent entered into
an overdraft facility agreement for $75,000. The
relevance of that agreement is
the subject of ground 4. However, the Appellant submits that the overdraft
facility would not have
improved the Respondent's financial position in any
the Appellant's debt out of the overdraft facility would not have changed the
Respondent's asset position. It would have only
replaced one debt with another,
and with a much higher interest rate of nearly 24%.
this occurred, the Respondent would have still had only about $22,000 in cash
and with monthly expenses of approximately $61,000
plus the repayments and
significant interest on the overdraft. The difficulty is apparent. The
Respondent would have only been able
to operate for a matter of weeks.
evidence did not support a finding that the Respondent was able to pay its debts
as and when they became due and payable. It had
not been doing so for months
prior to hearing. The evidence suggested that trend was likely to continue."
(Footnotes omitted.)
response, the written submissions of the respondent were as
"18 In examining this ground, the Court must be careful not
to confuse the cashflow test of insolvency with the 'indicia' of insolvency,
identified in Part B, above. In that regard, the only dispositive aspect of this
ground is that identified in ground 2(d).
reality of the respondent's financial situation by the time of hearing was
(a) the Company was incorporated on 19 August 2015.
It has traded a
modest real estate business on the North West Coast of Tasmania;
(b) from at least the financial year ending 30 June 2021, it had traded
profitably. In FY21, its net profit after tax was $109,888.
In FY22, it was
In FY23, it was $22,569
The fluctuations from FY21 to FY22 and FY23 can for the most part be
explained by a difference in trading income, which it largely
earned from
commissions on sales and rent management. Given that the real estate market
experiences periods of fluctuation, the movement
in income does not appear
(c) during this period, the business was clearly solvent. It also had assets in
the form of three motor vehicles, though one (a Mercedes)
was encumbered. In
FY22, it acquired vacant land at Ribble Street in Strahan for $18,000.
Mr Chamley estimated it would be worth $25,000 to $30,000 on the open
(d) in or around October 2022, the respondent also acquired the rent roll from
the appellant. The appellant has said in submissions
that the evidence did not
explain how 'goodwill' was calculated on the respondent's balance sheets, though
the notes to the FY23
balance sheet explain that goodwill is the excess of the
purchase price for a business acquired over the fair value of the net assets
the date of acquisition.
It appears that 'goodwill' represents the
rent roll, given the jump in this line item from FY22 to FY23. The rent roll is
a realisable asset;
(e) at around the time the statutory demand expired, the respondent had
$100,680.55 in its trading account
fluctuated with a peak of $160,444.47
on 15 September 2023 to a
balance of $34,299.82 on 20 January 2024.
A balance sheet dated 22
January records the cash balance as $22,148.25. However, over this period, the
respondent:
transferred
$50,750.01 to the trust account of Terracall & Associates as pre- payment
for legal fees (including withdrawals,
Terracall & Associates held
$45,366.01 at the time of hearing);
insurance ($11,010);
an amount to the ATO of $37,156 on 4 October 2023
with the result
that after payment of amounts owing, the respondent was $15,702.21 in credit on
its activity statement. In the period
immediately prior to hearing, its activity
statement balance was $0.00
experienced
lower than average income in December 2023, which appears to be largely from a
drop in sales commissions;
(f) prior to hearing, the respondent had obtained the benefit of the overdraft
facility, discussed further in relation to ground
Undoubtedly,
if the debt was undisputed and was due and payable as at the end of January
2024, which was then a little under $64,000,
the respondent could have met it,
though it would have had to draw on the overdraft facility or procure funds from
the respondent's
directors. Legally, this was an available option without the
respondent becoming insolvent.
the respondent availed itself of either of these options, the respondent could
have paid the overdraft back over time. There is
no reason to think that it
could not have, given that it had traded profitably in the three financial years
prior. On a
worst-case scenario
, the respondent would have had to realise
some assets, such as the Ribble Street property, or call on the directors to
funds, which they were willing to do.
Honour did not err when he found that the respondent could pay all of its debts
as and when they fell due."
accept the respondent's submissions. The finding of the trial judge was open on
the evidence.
respondent's submission concerning the respondent's capacity to meet its debts
was hedged in par [20] with an acknowledgment
that if it was required to pay the
disputed debt at the end of January 2024, then a little under $64,000, to meet
the debt the respondent
"would have had to draw on the overdraft facility or
procure funds from the respondent's directors". This leads into ground
3 asserts that the trial judge "erred in law" by taking into account "bare
promises" of the respondent's Directors to provide
financial assistance as a
"credit resource available to the respondent for the purposes of assessing
solvency". Ground 3 also asserts
that the evidence did not support "anything
more than a chance that the Directors would provide such assistance".
assessment of whether the Directors could be relied upon as a financial resource
for the purposes of assessing solvency was a
question of fact. We are unable to
see any question of law in this issue.
written submissions of the appellant identified authorities which recognise that
support by Directors can be relevant to determining
The appellant relied upon
those authorities for the proposition that the evidence must establish the
Directors are "likely" to provide
financial support and that cogent evidence is
required in that regard. The appellant pointed to the absence of a loan
agreement between
the respondent and the Directors and submitted that the
evidence of the Directors that they were willing to make loans was insufficient
to amount to a credit resource for the purposes of determining solvency.
referring to previous loans from the respondent to the Directors, the appellant
submitted there was "no cogent evidence that
either of the Directors had ever
placed themselves at any degree of risk to prop up the respondent's finances, or
that they were
likely to continue any meaningful financial support". This
proposition was followed by the contention that the trial judge "erred
considering their capacity to lend or facilitate borrowing as relevant to
is readily apparent from the reasons of the trial judge that his Honour regarded
the willingness of the Directors to provide financial
assistance to the
respondent if necessary as a credit resource to be taken into account in
assessing solvency.
paid careful regard to the evidence of the Directors and to their primary assets
and liabilities. In this assessment,
his Honour recognised that the estimates
by the Directors as to the values of their properties "should be approached with
response, the written submissions of the respondent were as
"25 The directors both gave evidence on oath that they were
willing to loan funds to the respondent if needed. These were not bare
They were backed up by evidence by each director of the considerable equity
which each had in real property which would
support such a loan. Moreover, both
have previously loaned funds to the Company. His Honour observed both witnesses
in Court. The
learned Chief Justice would have gained an impression about their
commitment to the respondent. Due weight should [be] given to those
parts of his
reasons where it is noted that the directors were willing to provide financial
assistance to the respondent and that
the respondent had available credit
a tightly held company such as the respondent, a commitment by a director to
loan funds (or provide further capital) is compelling.
Under the Act, directors
are personally liable for debts incurred whilst a company is trading insolvent.
Similarly, they are potentially
liable for unpaid PAYG, superannuation guarantee
charge and GST under the director penalty regime. That liability can be
by a failure to lodge tax returns and BAS. The corporate veil can be
pierced with apparent ease. Given that personal liability can
attach for debt
anyway, there is no reason to think that the directors would not tip in their
own money if the company needed it.
The directors could hardly have expressed
their commitment differently to how they did in their affidavits.
the assertion that the directors have made a 'bare promise' to provide financial
assistance must be untenable when by the
time of the hearing, the directors had
personally guaranteed an overdraft facility in favour of the respondent. Ground
3 discloses
no error of law – or fact, for that matter." (Footnotes
trial judge saw and heard the Directors. Neither Director was cross-examined to
suggest that their "willingness" was unreliable
or limited.
arriving at his view as to the relevance of the Directors as a credit resource,
the trial judge was entitled not only to reach
a view as to the credit and
reliability of each Director, but his Honour was also entitled to have regard to
the background and operation
of the respondent which was a "two-man company",
the Directors and shareholders being the two witnesses concerned whose
shareholdings
in the company were equal. More details appear in pars [13]-[19]
of the reasons of the trial judge cited earlier in these reasons.
We are unable
to discern any error in the approach of the trial judge and the finding that the
Directors amounted to a credit resource
for the purposes of solvency was a
finding open to his Honour on the evidence.
4 is a complaint that the trial judge erred "in fact and/or law" by taking into
account the overdraft facility agreement obtained
by the respondent as a credit
resource for the purposes of assessing solvency. It is asserted in ground 4 that
the evidence "did
not establish that the overdraft facility could have been
genuinely relied upon by the respondent".
appellant's written submissions identified the basis of ground
the process of finding that the Respondent was able to pay its debts as and when
they fell due, the trial judge referred to the
Respondent's 'substantial cash
and credit resources'
evidence only disclosed one formal credit resource, being the overdraft
facility. The trial judge referred to that early when
As mentioned above,
the facility was not secured by any assets.
borrowing can render a company solvent if 'the borrowing is on deferred payment
terms or otherwise such that the lender
itself is not a creditor whose debt
cannot be repaid as and when it becomes due and payable.'
number of features of the terms of the overdraft facility call into question
whether it could actually be relied on to assist the
Respondent in paying its
debts, at least without placing the Respondent in a more dire financial
(a) There was no evidence about the lender, who is not widely known, or whether
it could in fact service the overdraft.
(b) The interest rate for the facility was an unusually high 23.95%
exposing the Respondent to
considerable extra expense if the facility were to be drawn on and drawing into
question the Respondent's
ability to obtain loans on reasonably commercial
(c) Although the facility was to be amortised over 208 weeks (4 years)
the lender was entitled to reduce
the facility or require repayment in full at its sole discretion with only 30
days' notice
(d) The Respondent was in default of the facility agreement
Clause 6(d)(vi) defined one type of default as the Respondent being
'Insolvent'
The Respondent satisfied
multiple contractual definitions of that term, including by being party to wind
up proceedings on the date
the agreement was signed
(e) The evidence did not include the application made to secure the facility or
what representations the Respondent made about its
financial position. With an
inference that the Respondent was in default from the beginning, it is unlikely
that the Respondent disclosed
its true financial position to the lender. [This
last assertion was withdrawn during oral submissions on the appeal.]
Appellant submits that the trial judge erred in law by considering the overdraft
facility as relevant to the determination of
the Respondent's solvency where the
evidence disclosed a doubt about:
(a) whether the Respondent could have relied on it; or
(b) if the Respondent did rely on it, whether the Respondent could facilitate
repayments." (Footnotes omitted.)
response, the written submissions of the respondent were as
"29 As a matter of law, the overdraft facility can be taken
into account as an available resource with which the respondent can satisfy
debts. That is established by
Lewis v Doran
Chan v First Strategic
Development Corporation (in liq)
, referred to above.
appellant has made a number of submissions at [70] which it says call into
question whether the facility could be relied upon
by the respondent. To this
the respondent says:
(a) none of the propositions put at [70] were put to either of the directors in
cross- examination.
In particular, by making the submissions at a, b,
d, and e, the appellant is inviting the Court to draw adverse inferences against
the respondent and its directors, which were not put to them at hearing;
(b) the proposition at a. is irrelevant in any event, because the evidence does
in fact establish an available credit facility;
(c) the propositions at b and c, are irrelevant in circumstances where at trial,
the only amount which had been drawn was the establishment
fee of $495.
Moreover, even if the facility was partly drawn upon to meet the alleged
liability to the appellant, the evidence disclosed
that the respondent and its
directors had other available assets to meet repayments;
(d) the proposition that the respondent was in default of the facility
is of no practical consequence. Clause 7 of the facility agreement
makes clear that the lender
exercise any of the rights set out in
clause 7 if there is an event of default, but that is in its discretion;
(e) any suggestion in d. and e. that the respondent had misrepresented its
financial position is highly unlikely and the Court should
not take up this
suggestion. A simple search of the ASIC Insolvency Notices website would have
disclosed the winding-up application
to the lender.
availability of the overdraft facility is a fact which his Honour could find. It
is not open for the appellant to now ask this
Court to draw adverse inferences
to the effect that it
become unavailable or that it cannot be
relied upon. The appellant's submissions also contend that there is doubt about
whether the
respondent could facilitate repayments. That is pure speculation,
which was not tested on cross-examination."
the Directors were not cross-examined as to the circumstances in which the
overdraft was arranged. It was not suggested to
the Directors that they failed
to disclose the respondent's true financial position to the lender. Nor was it
suggested that, at
the outset, the appellant was in breach of the overdraft
facility. Similarly, it was not suggested to the Directors that if the
drew on the facility, it would not be able to service the repayment.
Calculations discussed during oral submissions demonstrated
that if the
respondent drew down various amounts to the maximum, it was highly likely that
the repayments could have been met. The
model cashflow analysis provided by the
respondent during submissions was helpful in this regard.
trial judge referred to the overdraft facility agreement, with the Directors
acting as guarantors, as a credit resource providing
the capacity to borrow a
maximum of $75,000. His Honour then discussed the willingness of the Directors
to provide financial assistance
as a credit resource. In his conclusion, when
his Honour referred to the respondent as possessing "substantial cash and credit
resources",
it is apparent that his Honour had in mind both the overdraft
facility and the willingness of the Directors to provide financial
assistance.
No error has been demonstrated.
5 asserts that the trial judge "erred in law" by "not regarding the non-payment
of the debt owing to the appellant as evidence
of insolvency". The passage to
which the appellant refers in the reasons of the trial judge is as
"I do not regard the decision of the directors not to pay
the claimed debt as evidence tending to indicate insolvency. The fact that
ceased making payments to the plaintiff appears to have been due to
intransigence and/or bad advice from a previous solicitor.
The dispute with the
plaintiff company should have been referred to arbitration long ago."
written submissions of the appellant contended that the trial judge suggested
that reasons why the debt was not paid can be used
as a factor tending against
insolvency. This proposition misreads the remarks of the trial judge. As a
matter of fact, his Honour
addressed whether the failure to pay the debt to the
appellant tended to indicate insolvency. Having regard to all the evidence,
Honour was not prepared to draw that inference. In his Honour's view, it was
more likely that the payment was due to "intransigence
and/or bad advice from a
previous solicitor".
trial judge proceeded correctly in assuming that the claimed debt was due and
payable. His Honour was entitled to find as a matter
of fact that the failure to
pay the debt was not evidence tending to suggest insolvency. There was another
more cogent reason and
no error has been demonstrated in this
examining the analyses undertaken by counsel for the appellant, and the
assessments made by the trial judge, it is appropriate
to have regard to a
number of features arising from the evidence which provide an appropriate
context for consideration of the issues
debated before the trial judge and on
this appeal. An overall perspective is helpful.
substance of this case concerns a single debt in the relatively modest amount of
approximately $60,000. There is nothing in
the evidence to suggest that the
respondent had failed to pay any other creditor.
rather than follow the contractual provisions and resort to arbitration, or to
undertake the more orthodox approach of
instituting debt recovery proceedings,
the appellant chose the route of a statutory demand, followed by an application
for the respondent
to be wound up on the ground of insolvency.
the respondent is a small local business incorporated in 2015 and which, to use
the words of the respondent's written submissions,
"has traded a modest real
estate business on the north-west coast of Tasmania". Over the years its assets
have exceeded its liabilities
and it has traded profitably with expected
seasonal fluctuations in income.
the hearing before the Chief Justice was notable for its lack of
cross-examination of the Directors to challenge any of
their evidence concerning
material matters. The trial judge saw and heard the Directors and was entitled
to reach the view that they
were committed to the success of the respondent's
business and would support it through periods of financial difficulty.
although the nature of the business inevitably resulted in fluctuation in
income, the expenses of the business were relatively
stable and the prospect of
increasing income as the real estate selling season approached could be assessed
with a reasonable degree
of confidence. Income from the rent management roll was
stable. Evidence was led of a whiteboard demonstrating the existence of
contracts to be settled in the future. Although the appellant sought to dismiss
the significance of the whiteboard because
conditions were attached to a number
of the contracts noted on the whiteboard, there was no cross-examination of the
Directors to
suggest that the existence of such conditions made the prospect of
future income uncertain.
as mentioned, there was no cross-examination of the Directors to suggest that
they would not be willing to support the business
financially or to place their
own assets at risk. There was no cross-examination of the Directors to suggest
that the existence of
the overdraft did not provide a legitimate source of
funds, or that if the overdraft was utilised, the respondent would be unable
meet the repayment liability.
the trial judge found, the usual indicia of insolvency were absent. The overall
impression from the evidence was of a company
which had been trading
successfully for a number of years and which was in dispute with the appellant
over a relatively small debt,
a debt which the respondent could have paid if it
had chosen to do so. While resort to the overdraft would have been necessary to
pay the debt at the time of the hearing before the trial judge, the evidence
justified confidence that repayment of the overdraft,
and other debts, could
readily have been achieved when such debts were due and payable.
these reasons, in our view not only were the findings open to the trial judge on
the evidence, his Honour's findings were correct
and his Honour was correct in
dismissing the
application.
Williams (as liquidator of
Scholz Moto Group Pty Ltd) v Scholz
[2008] QCA 94
Chan v First Strategic
Development Corporation
See par [24] of trial
judge's reasons.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (460 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter