URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMACT/2015/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Simmons v Motor Accidents Insurance Board (Ref No. 11/2012 and 28/2014) [2015] TASMACT 3 (22 June 2015)
[2015] TASMACT 3
MOTOR ACCIDENTS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
H30011/12 & H30028/14
HEARING DATE(S):
13 October 2014;
15 October 2014 - 17 October 2014
SIMMONS Jai
RESPONDENT:
Motor Accidents Insurance Board
22 June 2015
DECISION OF:
Member: R E
DETERMINATION:
1. That reference no.
H30011/12 be dismissed.
2. That upon reference H28/14 the respondent pay to the applicant the sum of
$1179.00 in reimbursement of the cost of treatment provided
by Regional Imaging.
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
K Read S C and R
Solicitors:
C N Dockray, Barrister &
Respondent:
M+K dobson mitchell allport
[2015] TASMACT 3
Member: R E Chandler
INTRODUCTION
1 On the morning of 21 June 2010 the applicant was driving to
work. Her teenage son was with her. There was an accident involving
vehicle being driven by Ms Rowan Morphett. (I will address the circumstances of
the accident in more detail later in these
reasons). The applicant contends
that as a consequence of the accident she has suffered a chronic pain disorder
underpinned by a
soft tissue injury to her neck. The respondent Board agrees
that the accident has caused the applicant to suffer a chronic pain
However, it says that the accident occurred in circumstances which were
incapable of causing the applicant any physical
injury and that her pain
disorder is solely attributable to psychogenic factors. This standpoint led the
respondent to write to
the applicant on 27 April 2012 advising her that
“the Board is unable to attend to the payment of any form of treatment
relates to a physical injury from 1 May 2012 (eg physiotherapy, massage and
treatment from Mr Bittar and Dr Evans) and pharmaceutical
expenses that relate
to the treatment of physical injuries (eg naramig, aspro clear, paracetamol and
2 The applicant responded to this stance by making a
referral to the Tribunal under s28(2) of the Motor Accidents (Liabilities &
Compensation) Act 1973 (‘the Act’). It cites the ground for the
reference in these terms:
dispute that I did not sustain ‘any physical injury’ as a result of
my motor vehicle accident on 21 June 2010
or that by implication I do not
continue to suffer from the effects of ‘any physical injury’ and
therefore dispute the
Board’s determination that it is ‘unable to
attend to the payment of any form of treatment that relates to a physical
3 It is accepted by the parties that since the applicant filed
her reference she has made claims upon the respondent for treatment
pharmaceutical expenses totalling $3294.51 and that the respondent has formally
determined not to pay these claims. This has
led to a second reference being
made to the Tribunal whereby the applicant seeks a determination that the
respondent pay these expenses.
4 In the result the Tribunal has two
references before it which it is required to determine “as it considers
proper in the circumstances”
(s28(4) of the Act).
LEGISLATION
5 By s23(1)(a) the respondent Board is required to pay those
benefits as are prescribed by the regulations to any resident of the
suffers bodily injury as a result of an accident caused by or arising out of the
use of a motor vehicle. Those benefits
are set out in Schedule 1 of the Motor
Accidents (Liabilities & Compensation) Regulations 2010 (‘the
Regulations’)
and by Part 2 include Medical Benefits. Sub-clause 1(1) of
that Part provides as follows:
“Subject to this Part,
where a person suffers personal injury resulting directly from a motor accident,
all the expenses reasonably
and necessarily incurred by the person or on his or
her behalf for the provision of the treatment required by him or her within the
Commonwealth as a result of the injury are payable as medical
6 As to the term “reasonably and necessarily
incurred” sub-clause (1)(4) of Part 2 states:
“For the purposes of
this clause, the expense of providing treatment for any person is taken to
unreasonably incurred
to the extent to which it exceeds the expense that would be incurred if that
treatment had been provided in
the most economical manner practicable in the
circumstances; and
unnecessarily incurred
if the treatment is not warranted, beneficial to the person and curative of the
person's injury.”
What Injury?
7 The answering of this question is the necessary start point
for the resolution of the issues raised upon both references. Its answer
requires, firstly, an examination of the circumstances of the applicant’s
accident, and secondly a consideration of the medical
and related evidence.
The Accident and Related Matters
8 The accident occurred at about 7:50am on 21 June 2010 when
the applicant was driving her 1992 Camry sedan in a general northerly
along Coulter Street in Trevallyn towards its junction with Reatta Road. In
front of her vehicle was a Honda CR-V 4 wheel-drive
vehicle being driven by Ms
Morphett. It was stationary at the junction and the applicant stopped her
vehicle behind it. In her
Application for Scheduled Benefits form completed two
days after the collision the applicant described its occurrence in these terms;
“We stopped 3 feet behind vehicle at give way sign cnr. Coulter St and
Reatta Rd. Other vehicle suddenly reversed into my
car.” In the
accompanying Notice of Accident the applicant asserted that the Honda reversed
at about 25kph. However, there
had been time to reflect on this assertion by
the time the applicant gave her evidence to the Tribunal. There she
acknowledged that
the speed was “nowhere near 25kph” and instead
said that the Honda reversed “suddenly” and was “not
slow.” As to the distance between the two stationary vehicles the
applicant’s re-considered estimate was five to six
feet rather than the
previous estimate of 3 feet. The claimant said that when she saw the Honda
“coming” she gripped
the steering wheel, pushed backwards into her
seat, pushed her foot down on the brake and twisted sideways to put her hand on
son’s chest. Upon collision she felt a jolt and she “moved back
and forward.”
9 Ms Morphett also provided a Notice of Accident to the
Board. In it she gives this description of the event; “I began to pull
out of Coulter St but heard a car coming around the corner of Reatta Rd heading
towards me very fast. I realised the bonnet of my
car was a bit far out and in
danger of being clipped by the car heading up Reatta Rd. I checked my mirrors
(the sun was behind me)
and slowly reversed approx. 1 metre. The spare tyre of
my CRV hit the front drivers side light of the car behind me (the car was
close) and broke the perspex covering the light. No other part of the car came
into contact with the other car. The cover
of my spare tyre was cut by the
broken perspex.”
10 It was the further evidence of Ms Morphett that the
bonnet of her Honda encroached onto Reatta Road by about 1 metre. She said
sat in this position for about 5 seconds before reversing. She said that she
“very slowly reversed, probably a metre....”
She then “heard
a crunch.” She denied that she reversed quickly despite being concerned
that her vehicle may be struck
by another vehicle approaching on Reatta Road.
She initially estimated her reversing speed at 2kph but later described it as
five kilometres an hour. She said that at no time before the
collision was Ms Morphett aware that the Camry was behind her. She
accepted in
cross examination that the position of the sun did not impact upon her mirrored
view of the applicant.
11 The evidence showed damage to the vehicles to be
particularly modest. The Toyota suffered a broken right lamp cover and some
indiscernible damage to its bumper bar whilst the Honda’s only damage
was a cut to its spare tyre cover.
12 Dr Shane Richardson is a forensic
engineer with particular experience and expertise in the study of motor vehicle
crashes. It
was his opinion, based upon the impact damage to the Toyota’s
lamp cover and the cut to the Honda’s tyre cover coupled
with test results
which had been obtained at a conference involving low speed crashes, that the
Honda reversed at a speed less than
9km/h. He provided further opinion evidence
upon two scenarios. Each assumed a reversing acceleration factor of 0.2 for the
The first scenario was based upon a separation distance between the two
vehicles of one metre. In this circumstance it was Dr Richardson’s
opinion that:
• the Honda was travelling at about 7km/h when it
reversed and collided with the Toyota.
• That the post-impact speed of
both vehicles was approximately 4km/h.
• The change in velocity (delta
v) for the Toyota was approximately 4km/h (from a stationary speed of 0km/h to
13 The second scenario assumed a separation distance of 6 feet
or 2 metres. On this basis Dr Richardson opined:
• The Honda’s reversing speed was
• The vehicles’ post impact speed was 5.6 to
• The delta v for the Toyota was 6km/h.
14 Dr Richardson referred in his report to a quantity of
research material upon the relationship between low speed crashes and Whiplash
Associated Disorder (WAD). He interpreted the research to show that on the
balance of probabilities a delta v in the range of 8km/h
to 15km/h was unlikely
to result in significant WAD injury. This led him to opine in this case that it
was unlikely the claimant
could have suffered a significant injury where the
Toyota’s delta v was 4km/h. As to the prospect of injury where the delta
v was calculated at 6km/h he said; “it’s remote but
15 In cross examination Dr Richardson acknowledged that 0.2
was the normal or average acceleration speed for a Honda CRV in reverse
that the maximum reversing acceleration factor was between 0.4 and 0.5. In his
written submissions counsel for the applicant
has included calculations based
upon a common separation distance of 2 metres but upon a varying acceleration
factor ranging from
the norm of 0.2 to the maximum of 0.5. Those calculations
show, at the lower end, a reversing speed for the Honda of 10.1km/h and
higher end a speed of 15.9km/h. A second set of calculations made and utilising
those speeds indicate a delta v speed for
the Toyota extending from 5.7km/h to
9.0km/h. A mid-range delta v, based upon an acceleration factor of 0.35, is
shown to be 7.5km/h.
16 Dr Richardson accepted that the research material
addressed the association between low speed crashes and significant cervical
injury. It did not concern the association with soft tissue or ligamentous
injury. He acknowledged that females were at greater
risk of neck injury than
males. He accepted that a person sitting forward and away from the seat had a
higher risk of injury. He
accepted too that modern seats and head-restraints
afford a 24% lower neck injury rate (it’s self-evident that the
1992 Toyota is not ‘modern’). He agreed that it
was possible, in the claimant’s case, for her to have suffered
when the change in velocity speed or delta v for her vehicle was less than the
threshold speed of 8km/h.
Initial Findings
17 I find that the accident occurred as follows. Ms Morphett
drove the Honda to a point where it encroached onto Reatta Road by about
metre. Whilst stationary in this position she heard a vehicle approaching from
her right. The noise of this vehicle indicated
that it was travelling quickly.
Ms Morphett was concerned that her vehicle would be struck by the oncoming
vehicle and made the
decision to reverse out of harm’s way. At this point
the claimant’s Toyota was stationary behind the Honda and Ms Morphett
unaware of its presence. I do not accept that Ms Morphett looked in her rear
mirrors before reversing and that the sun impeded
her view. Rather, I find that
the Honda was reversed without any attempt being made to ensure that the road
behind was clear.
18 I find that approximately three feet or one metre
separated the vehicles when they were stationary and before the Honda began its
reverse. This distance equates with the evidence of Ms Morphett and is
corroborated by the applicant’s initial estimate.
Because of the short
distance travelled it is difficult to make a finding upon the Honda’s
precise reversing speed. Ms Morphett
put it in the range of 2km/h to 5km/h.
The applicant has described it as “sudden” and “not
slow.” The damage
to the vehicles was particularly modest which common
sense suggests is consistent with a low speed impact. That damage coupled with
some test results led Dr Richardson to state the speed to be less than 9km/h.
Overall, doing the best I can, I find the speed of
the reversing Honda to have
been in the range of 5km/h to 9 km/h.
19 Dr Richardson has provided
calculations which show that if the Honda reversed at a speed of 7km/h the delta
v for the Toyota, post
collision, would be 4km/h. This assumes a separation
distance of one metre and a reversing acceleration factor of 0.2 which he
was the normal or average acceleration speed for the Honda in reverse.
Even allowing for a slightly increased acceleration factor
the equations in
evidence indicate that the delta v factor would be well below 8km/h which Dr
Richardson has opined is established
by research to be the threshold speed
before an injury will be suffered.
20 In the result my findings to this
point mitigate against the likelihood of the applicant suffering a significant
cervical injury
as a consequence of the collision. Nevertheless, I need to
consider whether the applicant, as a result of the collision, has suffered
less severe physical injury including a minor cervical injury in the context of
an occult condition which has been postulated by
Dr Andrew Muir. This leads me
to consider the medical evidence. This first needs to be introduced by the
claimant’s own evidence
relevant to her chronic pain disorder and its
Claimant’s Evidence Upon Her Injury
21 The claimant said that she drove on to work following the
accident. When she arrived she was “shaking.” She saw the
he told her to go home and to see her doctor. She took this advice. Later that
day she saw Dr Sue Gelston, her longstanding
general practitioner. She reported
suffering from pain in her right arm and pain on either side of her neck. She
also had a headache
which was constant and extended across her forehead and into
the sinus area. She said that it differed from her migraine headaches
only affected one side of her head. She was advised to take paracetamol for her
neck and head pain.
22 Thereafter the claimant continued to consult Dr
Gelston and she pursued a variety of treatments upon her advice. Initially she
had one or two physiotherapy sessions, but these were not beneficial and gave
her a left-sided migraine. She had some remedial massage
which greatly relieved
her right arm pain. This was maintained weekly for about 2 to 3 months. She
also saw an osteopath who carried
out some massage and then some manipulative
treatment upon her neck which she considered beneficial. Too, she had
acupuncture which
was initially beneficial, but afterwards was of no benefit.
Also she had some hydrotherapy which she described as “pleasant”
of little benefit. Medication was also utilised. She tried Voltaren for her
neck pain but this made her feel nauseous. She
also used Naramig, and later
Maxalt for the relief of her head and neck pain. These were supplemented, as
required, with over-the-counter
pain relievers. It was the applicant’s
evidence that these eased her pain to a rating of 3 out of 10 from a level which
rated at 8 to 9 out of 10. This improved her capacity to function and
in particular enabled her to drive and to continue working.
In 2011 she began
consulting a psychologist, initially a Mrs Ernst and later Ms Helen Bindoff. At
varying times the claimant was
also referred to several orthopaedic surgeons,
but they did not carry out any treatment. One apparently told her after a MRI
that she may have multiple sclerosis or a cancer. This caused her
considerable anxiety which was relieved two days later when Dr
Gelston had the
radiologist review the scan and disavow both diagnoses. At one point she was
prescribed Lyrica which completely
relieved the neck pain but not the headaches.
However, it had serious side effects including nausea and weight gain. She also
a neurologist. He recommended Topamax which relieved the neck pain but not
the headaches. However, it also generated severe side
effects including
anxiety, paranoia and diarrhoea. He also recommended botox treatment which also
relieved the neck pain, but intensified
her forehead pain. She said that the
pain in her left arm ceased following a C6 nerve root injection carried out in
2013. By this
time she had been diagnosed with an adhesive capitulitis
affecting the left shoulder. However, her neck pain and headaches persisted.
23 The claimant confirmed that since May 2012 she has continued to take
medication to treat her pain which she has paid for herself.
She has also
continued to consult Ms Bindoff who assists her with strategies to cope with her
pain and depression. In August 2014
she had diagnostic injections to the C2/3
facet joint on both the right and left sides on the recommendation of Pain
Management Consultant,
Dr Andrew Muir. She said the procedure taken on the
right side provided almost instantaneous relief. As to the left side there
an initial delay, but after several days the claimant experienced significant
relief from her pain on that side also. For a
time she said she was pain free
for the first time since the accident. However, over time the benefits waned.
She said that her
headaches have returned, but are not as severe as previously.
She describes the current level of her neck pain as “severe.”
Information sheets completed by the applicant and providing a post-injection
pain summary were put into evidence. They show that
the applicant recorded an
on-going beneficial effect on the right side present one week after the
procedure. On the left side the
summary shows the benefits existing up to 24
hours post-injection.
24 The applicant did not accept that she was
obsessive/compulsive. She said that if she identified a task that needed to be
then she wanted to do it “right now.” She accepted that at
work she had a fixed routine but only because this enabled
her to get her work
done efficiently. She acknowledged that when she was employed in the fashion
industry she had a form of bulimia
but this ended when she became pregnant.
Whilst she remains conscious of her weight she manages it by eating healthily
and walking
regularly. She accepted that her family history did include
psychiatric difficulties. Her son had attempted suicide on one occasion
considered this event to be related to his Crohn’s disease. She said her
brother suffered from bi-polar disorder.
She said too that a sister suffered a
depressive episode but this was in the context of a marriage breakdown. Neither
of her parents
had any psychiatric difficulties but she believed several of her
grandparents were alcoholics.
Sue Gelston
25 Dr Gelston saw the claimant on the morning of her accident.
She “fitted her in” and only had time to carry out a cursory
examination. She said that at that time the claimant complained of pain and
discomfort in her neck and upper back along with discomfort
in her right arm.
She also said she had developed occipital pain and frontal headaches. The
claimant next attended her on 30 June.
On this occasion the claimant complained
of headaches across her forehead extending from right to left, constant pain in
back on both sides, and pain radiating to both sides of her neck.
This time Dr Gelston carried out an examination of the claimant
and detected
tenderness in the cervical spine at C2/3/4 and also in the upper thoracic spine.
There was also tenderness at the base
of the skull and in the right upper back.
Dr Gelston next carried out an examination of the claimant on 25 July 2010. She
tenderness, again in the cervical and upper thoracic spine and at the
base of the skull. The claimant reported pain to the neck
when she moved her
head and also reported right arm pain when lifting. Dr Gelston again detected
cervical and thoracic spine tenderness
on examination on 2 August. There was
another examination on 8 September and on this occasion tenderness was detected
in both the
upper and lower cervical spine. There was also tenderness on the
right side of the neck. Dr Gelston’s notes show that there
was a further
examination of the claimant on 25 February 2011. On this occasion tenderness in
both the upper and lower cervical
spines were detected and the claimant reported
pain on movement of her neck. Dr Gelston confirmed that at no time did she
any inconsistency in the claimant’s presentation.
26 It was Dr
Gelston’s evidence that the medications prescribed by her had a
therapeutic benefit for the claimant. She said
that they assisted her to
function, to care for her son and to continue working. In the main they have
been prescribed to relieve
her neck pain and/or headache with the purpose of
assisting her to function normally.
27 It was Dr Gelston’s evidence
that in August 2014 she arranged for the claimant to have diagnostic cervical
facet blocks after
she had seen Dr Andrew Muir. She reported that there was an
excellent response to the right C3 facet joint block and a good response
same procedure on the left side. In her view the facet joint injections have
been beneficial in easing the claimant’s
headaches and neck pain. She
says the claimant should be referred to a neurologist for assessment and the
consideration of possible
radio frequency denervation. It is her opinion that
the success of the facet joint injections indicates that the C2/3 facet joints
are the likely source of her persisting pain. At her last examination of the
claimant on 16 September 2014 she noted tenderness
on palpation of the right
C2/3 facet joint and both sides of the base of her skull. She said palpation
caused a recurrence of pain
in both C2/3 facet joints.
Gelston’s opinion the claimant’s car accident caused the claimant an
injury affecting her C2/3 facet joints and
the small ligaments binding them
together. In her view that injury has now been productive of a chronic pain
29 Dr Gelston acknowledged that the claimant had a history of
severe migraine headaches ongoing since she was a teenager. They were
with various medications. She reported that in July 2009 the claimant purchased
an Alpha-Stim machine and that since then
her migraine headaches had eased. In
the 9 month period prior to the motor vehicle accident she had not reported a
30 Dr Gelston’s notes indicate that on 10 February 2005 the
claimant complained of pain across her forehead. At this time she
reported that
she had had a depressed mood for about 6 weeks. She also reported that she had
been previously depressed and suffered
from bulimia for about 7 years to age 31.
On this occasion she was prescribed Zoloft.
31 Dr Ernst is a specialist musculoskeletal physician. He
examined the claimant on 25 May 2011 and subsequently produced 2 reports.
were put into evidence. He said that his examination of the claimant revealed a
reduced range of left shoulder movements,
left rotator cuff tenderness and
widespread occipital, spinal, shoulder blade and left shoulder tenderness. His
neurological examination
was unremarkable. He diagnosed the claimant to be
suffering from a whiplash injury with complicating cervical migraines along with
a left rotator cuff sprain. He described a whiplash injury as “over
stretch of soft tissue structures in the context of ligaments,
tendons and
muscles connecting the head, spine and shoulder blades.” He attributed
these injuries to the claimant’s
motor vehicle accident. He acknowledged
that her post-accident recovery was complicated by a pre-existing biological and
psychological
vulnerability.
Helen Bindoff
32 Ms Bindoff is a clinical psychologist with a special
interest in cognitive behaviour therapy. The claimant was referred to her
Gelston in March 2012 and thereafter she had regular sessions with her. At
their first consultation Ms Bindoff obtained a
general background history. She
was informed of the motor vehicle accident and her subsequent injury. She
reported a troubled family
background with major mental illness extending back
for 5 generations and including a brother diagnosed with bipolar disorder. She
also reported that in December 2011 her son had a serious depressive episode
which led to a suicide attempt. Too, she reported herself
having suffered
bulimia which began in her teens and continued for about 12 years. It
re-presented following the accident but was
self-managed by the applicant and
tapered off after three months. She also reported having an obsessive
compulsive personality which
Ms Bindoff, in a subsequent report described in
these terms; “This is a self-diagnosis (by the applicant) and has not been
formally confirmed by a psychiatrist. She says she becomes very anxious if she
feels she is losing control of a situation. To ameliorate
this anxiety she will
plan in minute detail what she needs to do each day.” Ms Bindoff
understood her role was to provide
psychological treatment for the claimant to
manage the psychological illnesses which had arisen following the
33 In Ms Bindoff’s opinion the claimant was suffering from a
pain disorder associated with both psychological factors and a
general medical
condition. Ms Bindoff said that at the time of this diagnosis she accepted the
opinion of other medical practitioners
that the claimant had suffered a cervical
injury as a result of the accident. She considered that injury to be integral
to her diagnosis.
She acknowledged that as an alternative diagnosis she had
considered pain disorder associated with psychological factors. That
requires a judgement that psychological factors have played the major role in
the onset, severity, exacerbation or maintenance
of the pain. Ms Bindoff
understood from the claimant’s history that pre-accident she had been in a
“happy place”
and she did not think it plausible on that background
for the claimant to have suffered from a spontaneous psychological illness
brought on a significant pain disorder. She said that she was unable to detect
the presence of such a psychological ailment
in the claimant which in her view
was capable of playing a major role in the claimant’s pain
34 It was also Ms Bindoff’s view that the applicant suffered
from depression which had fluctuated over the time she had been
seeing her.
Factors bearing upon it were associated with difficulties arising from the
claimant being both an employee of the respondent
and also a claimant upon it.
Also the level and persistence of her pain at varying times impacted upon her
depressive state. She
said that there was not any evidence to indicate that her
obsessive compulsive traits had impacted upon her work in any way prior
accident and in fact there was not any history of any pre-accident psychological
condition which required intervention by
a psychiatrist.
35 Ms Bindoff
reported that over the first 7 months of treatment there was a definite
improvement in the mental state of the claimant
and she had been able to
significantly reduce her pain medication and engage in daily stretching
exercises. Too, her depression
had “lifted.” In Ms Bindoff’s
opinion this improvement or indeed any level of improvement would not be
with a pain disorder being solely attributable to psychogenic pain.
One trait of a pain disorder associated with a psychogenic cause
was persistent
pain without variation. This did not apply in the claimant’s case as she
reported pain which was highly variable
and at times responsive to medication.
She also said that psychogenic pain is ordinarily non-localised and covering a
large portion
of the body. This was not so with the claimant whose on-going
pain has been localised to the neck and skull regions.
36 Subsequent to
February 2103 Ms Bindoff expressed the view that the applicant’s condition
had deteriorated. She said that
she found it more difficult to cope with pain
and that her depression had again worsened. She had a view that the respondent
had become more hostile.
Andrew Muir
37 Dr Muir is a consultant in pain management based in
Victoria. On 21 November 2013 he examined the claimant for the purpose of
litigation. Two reports were generated following that consultation and they are
part of the evidence.
38 Dr Muir obtained a history consistent with the
evidence already stated. The claimant told him that following the accident she
developed pain in the neck, shoulders and base of the skull radiating to the
retro-orbital area and, despite treatment, her symptoms
had essentially not
changed. On examination he noted that the claimant had a considerably
restricted range of motion of the cervical
spine both in flexion and extension.
She found difficulty sustaining power against resistance because of pain
triggered in her neck
and head. She was tender to palpation, principally to the
base of the skull. There was also secondary muscular tenderness affecting
cervical extensors extending to the trapezius muscles bilaterally as well as the
sternocleidomastoid. There was also tenderness
over all of the lateral masses
of the cervical vertebrae.
39 In Dr Muir’s opinion the claimant was
suffering from a cervicogenic headache which he explained had its origins in
pain from structures in the cervical spine. In addition it was his
view that she suffered from a secondary myofacial pain syndrome
described as an anatomically circumscribed area of pain associated with muscle
tenderness and restriction of motion. He
said the syndrome is distinguishable
from fibromyalgia which is more widespread and diffuse.
40 Dr Muir explained
that it was not possible to precisely identify the structure that was injured at
the time of the accident. However,
he considered from the claimant’s
description of the onset and distribution of her pain, that it was entirely
typical of an
injury to one or more of the structures of the cervical spine or
the surrounding soft tissues. He considered this injury sufficient
her chronic pain syndrome. As to the pathogenesis of a regional pain syndrome,
Dr Muir provided this explanation; “In
the setting of an injury in pretty
much any locus of the body where pain persists there are adaptive changes that
are made. There
are changes in the process of nociceptive information of the
spinal cord, changes in the processing of nociceptive information in
As a consequence and as a normal adaptive response the patient will tend to move
less, protecting an injured part, hoping
that pain will reduce and in general
most people will succeed with this. The problem with this is that as a
consequence abnormal
movement patterns develop and pain develops in other sites,
for instance in muscles that are no longer being used in the appropriate
There’s research documenting this a long way back. That becomes the
template for a series of self-reinforcing cycles
wherein continuing pain
produces continuing distress, continuing distress and anxiety feed into that
loop. And again the latest
or more recent research in functional MRI imaging
demonstrates clear changes in the distributions of pain signals throughout the
brain and furthermore capacity for states such as anxiety to materially feed
back and act as an enhancing and accelerating factor
in the perception of pain.
Over time these can lead to really profound disability where the cycle of
progressive lack of activity
produces secondary physical change which reinforces
the patient’s cognition of serious illness and the cycle continues.”
41 Dr Muir said that in his experience it was common for cervicogenic pain
to be triggered as a consequence of relatively trivial
or even no specific
trigger. He did not agree with the proposition advanced by Drs Sale and Kapur
that the claimant’s chronic
pain syndrome was entirely psychogenic. In
his view the applicant’s pain syndrome had “a significant biological
component.”
42 This exchange with counsel for the respondent helps
explain Dr Muir’s opinion upon the relationship between the
applicant’s
accident and her pain syndrome:
“.....So you assumed did you that there had been some damage to a
structure in the accident?
“........no I assumed that as a consequence of the accident
that the pain had occurred. Now in someone of this age group occult
spine and lumbar spine pathology is very very common. It’s often
difficult or impossible to identify on structural
imaging studies but ..... the
trigger of a minor incident such as this producing pain in the neck (in this age
group) is very common.
“Even in the presence of occult....pathology there would need
to be a sufficient energy transfer to the neck to take it beyond
range for an injury to occur wouldn’t there?
“If you’re talking about a structural injury you may
well be correct. If you’re talking about trigger (for) on-going
don’t agree with you.
“What’s the mechanism you say then that triggers ongoing
pain without structural damage or have I not summarised your
“.... it could be intra articular elaboration of substance P
.....a range of chemical triggers that occur. The relationship
demonstrated structural pathology and pain is extremely variable in nearly all
the major areas where it’s been studied.
So you’re looking at
sub-structural change that occurs as a consequence of a minor trigger. The
science is far from complete
in this area.
“Which is the receptor that substance P attaches to?
“The neuro kine 1 receptor.
“Right....so...
“It’s a range,....however its only one of a range of
biological active compounds that are released under certain circumstances.
“and....the mechanism by which substance P is then associated
with a central sensitisation is that there needs first of all
messages sent that’s correct? From an injured area. Sorry there needs
first of all to be
“that’s true
“That is also true but there’s background traffic
through these ....synapses ubiquitously. It’s a matter of
sensitivity. It is for instance possible for any of us to walk down the street
and bump our hand on a parking meter......that
causes pain.....it doesn’t
necessarily cause injury. It certainly doesn’t cause injury at a
structural level...... but
nevertheless it can cause pain (and)...........in
certain circumstances that pain can
43 Dr Muir postulated that the applicant’s previous
migraine history may have served to sensitise her nociceptive processing
thereby reducing its capacity to filter out and reduce incoming nociceptive
signals. In the result this sensitisation made
the applicant more likely to
experience pain. Too, he opined that anxiety and daily stressors can serve as
maintenance factors for
chronic pain.
44 In Dr Muir’s further opinion
the post-procedure results following the C2/3 facet blocks were consistent with
the notion that
the C2/3 facet joints were a significant pain generator in this
instance. He did not accept the opinion of Dr Kapur that the length
applicant’s beneficial response to the facet blocks indicated a placebo
response and expressed the view, from his understanding
of the literature, that
the applicant’s response was not “outside clinical
experience.”
45 In Dr Muir’s opinion, although the results of
the facet blocks did not permit a diagnosis, he nevertheless was of the view
that they warranted further investigation. Depending on the outcome treatment
in the form of radio frequency neurotomy may be beneficial
to the applicant.
Dilip Kapur
46 Dr Kapur is a specialist pain medicine physician and is
currently employed as the Director of the Pain Management Unit at the Flinders
Medical Centre in South Australia. He consulted with the claimant on 13
December 2011 on the instructions of the respondent. She
complained to him of
pain problems affecting her left shoulder, the neck and head. She described her
headache as the most troublesome
and persistent symptom. She detailed the motor
vehicle accident on 21 June 2010. She also recited a history of her treatment
the time of the consultation which I have already set out. She reported to
Dr Kapur upon her “obsessive compulsive disorder”
and a previous
eating disorder but said that she had never been assessed by a mental health
professional. She described her mental
health problems “as a
weakness.” She also describes significant mental health history within
her family.
47 Dr Kapur undertook a clinical examination. Inspection of
the neck revealed no obvious spasm in the musculature. Palpation was
unremarkable and no particular tenderness was noted over the neck or over the
occipital nerve markings. Neck movement
was modestly restricted. Shoulder
movement showed modest restriction. Gentle passive abduction of the left
shoulder was typical
of an adhesive capsulitis. In his view radiology of the
brain, cervical spine and thoracic spine was all normal.
Kapur’s opinion the claimant presented with “unusual symptom
complex.” He did not consider that she had
suffered any injury. It was
his understanding from the claimant’s own description that her vehicle was
no more than 6 feet
behind Ms Morphett’s vehicle when it began to reverse.
He estimated that the maximum impact speed would be likely to be less
kilometres per hour. He said that he was not aware of any body of literature
which purported to show persistent and irrecoverable
injuries sustained from a
frontal low velocity impact.
49 Counsel put to Dr Kapur the
‘construct’ which Dr Muir postulated to explain the claimant’s
presentation. It
comprised these elements:
1) That prior to the accident the
claimant was suffering from an occult condition affecting a structure within the
cervical spine.
2) The forces of the accident were sufficient to cause a
minor injury in the context of that occult condition.
3) The minor injury
then generated pain signals.
4) The claimant may have been sensitised by
reason of her migraine history.
5) The pain signals sparked the central
sensitised condition thereby leading to her cervicogenic headaches, myofacial
pain syndrome
and an abnormal movement disorder.
50 Dr Kapur explained that
an occult condition, by its very nature, is hidden and hence is incapable of
being either confirmed or
refuted. However, he pointed out that the radiology
of the claimant’s cervical spine was normal and did not show those
degenerative
changes which are often present in middle-aged persons. This
indicated to him that it was unlikely the claimant was suffering from
condition affecting a structure within her cervical spine. Nevertheless, he
accepted that an underlying occult condition
was “a possibility.”
51 It was Dr Kapur’s opinion that it was unlikely that the forces
involved in the claimant’s accident were likely to cause
injury. In the context of the presence of an occult condition he made the
observation that if that condition was present
in the C2/3 facet joints then a
front-end collision would likely make the head move forwards, which movement
would open up and thereby
“off-load” those facet joints. This, in
his view, mitigated against the likelihood of any injury to those
structures.
52 Dr Kapur accepted that if there was a minor injury then it is
possible that it would have sent a pain signal. He said that central
sensitisation is a normal phenomenon. However, it is reversible. In the
claimant’s case he understood the evidence to be
that she had not
experienced any migraines for a lengthy period, up to 1 year, prior to the
accident. This suggested that there
had been a withdrawal of the sensitising
stimulus which meant, in his view, that the central sensitisation had resolved.
that if it had not resolved then there would have been evidence of
migraine headaches over the months preceding the accident. In
his view he
doubted that the claimant was sensitised at the time of the accident.
the end it was Dr Kapur’s view that the scenario postulated by Dr Muir was
possible and could not be excluded. However,
he made the point that it
“involved a lot of conjecture.”
54 Dr Kapur did not consider
that the claimant’s response to the C2/3 facet joint blocks represented
evidence of dysfunction
at those levels. He said that whilst treatment effects
from this procedure was seen, it is recognised that interpretation of such
effects needs to be modified by consideration of the placebo effect. It was his
evidence that the anaesthetic used was 0.5% bupivacaine,
the effect of which
ends after 8-12 hours. The applicant reported on-going effects, particularly on
the right, well beyond this
time. This suggested, in Dr Kapur’s opinion,
that the placebo effect was the most likely explanation. He said that because
he was not satisfied that the C2/3 facet joints were the likely source of
symptoms radio frequency denervation of those facet joints
was not justified.
55 In cross-examination Dr Kapur agreed that he could not rule out that the
claimant had suffered a temporary minor injury from which
she had recovered at
the time of his examination. However, it was his view, given the circumstances
of the accident that the applicant
could not have suffered a serious or
significant injury giving rise to lasting consequences. He accepted that it was
possible that
the claimant’s C2/3 facet joints were a pain generator and
that this could be consistent with the results of the C2/3 nerve
However, he did not consider the further investigations recommended by Dr Muir
for diagnostic purposes could be justified.
56 Dr Sale is a Consultant Clinical Psychiatrist. He examined
the claimant for the respondent on 21 March 2012. He obtained a history
included detail of the accident. She described it as “the most minor
thing in the world.” She detailed to Dr
Sale her subsequent injuries,
most particularly her headaches. She reported that she had been diagnosed with
chronic pain syndrome.
As to her previous health history the claimant reported
on her migraines and their relief about 1 year before her accident. She
detailed her previous mental health difficulties, including an episode of
bulimia in early adulthood, coupled with a background
of obsessive compulsive
traits. She reported on her family’s mental health history with relatives
having suffered variously
from bipolar disorder, schizophrenia and alcohol
dependence. She said that her son had made a suicide attempt in late 2011 which
led to him receiving psychiatric treatment.
57 Dr Sale described his
assessment of the claimant as “complicated.” Nevertheless, he
considered that her complaints
of pain were not feigned or intentionally
produced. Upon the issue whether a physical injury was possible given the minor
of the accident Dr Sale says; “I have indicated agreement with Dr
Kapur because common sense and general experience would suggest
it is unlikely
that a vehicle reversing from a distance of around 1.6 to 1.8 metres could cause
injury. It has always seemed to
me the more likely explanation is that the
claimant’s problems following this accident arise out of her anxious and
obsessional
temperament, together with the adverse effects that arise from her
condition being medicalised from an early stage.”
Sale’s view the claimant was a vulnerable individual in the light of her
family’s psychiatric history, coupled
with her own mental health problems.
He described the family history of psychiatric disorder as being
“strong.” He said
such a family history enhanced the
claimant’s risk of suffering from a psychiatric illness.
agreed that the claimant was suffering a pain disorder but said that it was
primarily due to psychogenic factors. He did
not consider that a “general
medical condition” should be included as part of the diagnostic
formulation. It was his
further opinion that the claimant’s family
history, replete as it was with psychiatric difficulties, coupled with her
compulsive traits and coupled further with her sub-clinical eating
disorder, made her vulnerable to developing her pain disorder
considered had likely manifested itself shortly after the accident. It was his
further view that her case had involved
a “process of
medicalization” and that it, coupled with the suggestion made that she may
be suffering from sinister conditions,
notably multiple sclerosis, were factors
that helped to maintain and aggravate her pain disorder.
considered that cognitive behavioural therapy was an appropriate short-term
treatment for the claimant but a course involving
40 to 50 sessions was
excessive and went beyond the length of time where such treatment was likely to
be effective.
61 As I have already stated it is common ground that the
accident has caused the applicant to suffer a chronic pain disorder. The
respondent asserts it to be solely attributable to psychogenic factors.
However, the applicant contends it to have an organic or
physical component and
it is this contention which I move to consider.
62 Drs Gelston and Ernst
have expressed the view that the accident caused the applicant to suffer a
whiplash type injury affecting
soft-tissue or non-skeletal structures of her
neck. Following the nerve block procedures Dr Gelston has more specifically
that the ligaments binding the C2/3 facet joints are the likely location
of the applicant’s injury but she was unable to be
more forthcoming upon
the precise nature of that injury. Dr Muir’s view that the worker’s
pain disorder has an organic
element is based upon his ‘construct’
which I have set out. Dr Kapur, whilst acknowledging the
‘construct’
to be a possibility, nevertheless has made comment that
it involves “a lot of conjecture.” I agree with this
characterisation
for these reasons. Firstly, Dr Muir assumes the presence of an
underlying pathology within the applicant’s cervical spine,
most probably
at C2/3, which he asserts to be common in a person of her age. However, the
evidence is that the imaging of the applicant’s
cervical spine at C4-7 is
normal reducing the likelihood of degenerative changes or other pathology at
C2/3, particularly as movement
at this higher level is less. Secondly, Dr
Muir’s ‘construct’ assumes that the applicant’s migraine
has had a sensitising effect making the applicant more sensitive to pain
stimulus. However, it was the un-contradicted evidence
of Dr Kapur that
sensitisation is reversible and points to the fact that well before the accident
the applicant had ceased suffering
from migraines (Dr Gelston has said that the
applicant had not reported a migraine to her for nine months pre-accident),
that any sensitising effect had been reversed.
63 Also a matter
of conjecture raised by Dr Muir’s ‘construct’ is the
likelihood of an association between the accident
and an injury. I have found
that the vehicles were about one metre apart when the Honda began to reverse.
Its reversing speed did
not exceed 9km/h. The delta v factor for the Toyota was
well below 8km/h. The most serious item of damage to either vehicle was
broken lamp cover. In my opinion, in the context of these matters, common sense
would suggest it unlikely that the accident would
cause the applicant a physical
cervical injury, even one of a minor nature upon an occult condition.
64 What can be deduced from the facet blocks performed on the applicant at
C2/3? The opinions of Dr Muir and Dr Kapur are at odds.
The former is of the
view that the response to the procedures is consistent with a pain generator
existing at that level of the
cervical spine. However, he says that the results
do not permit a diagnosis of injury and that further testing would be required.
On the other hand Dr Kapur is of the view that the results of the facet blocks
are of no diagnostic value. Rather he says that
the applicant’s prolonged
anaesthetic response, particularly on the right side, is a typical placebo
response. As it stands
the evidence on this subject is, at best, incomplete and
inconclusive. It certainly does not permit me to make a finding that the
applicant has suffered a cervical spine injury at C2/3 which is attributable to
her accident.
65 In the end Dr Muir has advanced a ‘construct’
which he says indicates that the applicant suffered a cervical spine
the accident at C2/3 and that injury has, coupled with underlying psychological
factors, led to the applicant’s cervicogenic
headaches, myofacial pain
syndrome and her abnormal movement disorder. I am unable to accept this. As I
have shown, Dr Muir’s
‘construct’ involves a stepped process
but is premised on the assumption that, pre-accident, the applicant was
an occult condition affecting her cervical spine. However, her
medical history does not provide a hint of that condition. It is
contraindicated by the radiology. None of her medical examiners have been able
to specifically identify or diagnose that condition.
In the end I am unable to
make a finding that such a condition did exist at the time of the accident. The
existence of an occult
condition is the cornerstone of Dr Muir’s
‘construct.’ Nevertheless, I am not satisfied that other elements
the ‘construct’ are fulfilled. Notably, I accept Dr
Kapur’s evidence with respect to the sensitisation and am
not satisfied
that because of her migraine history the applicant had an increased sensitivity
to pain at the time of her accident.
Finally and critically I am of the view
that it is inconsistent with common sense to conclude that the accident, in the
its trivial circumstances, caused the applicant to suffer a physical
injury to her cervical spine and this is so even if it could
be established that
she was suffering an occult condition.
66 The evidence shows the worker to
have had psychological difficulties upon a background of familial psychiatric
illness. Pre-accident
it seems that for a short time she was treated for
depression. For many years she dealt with an eating disorder which was in
at the time of the accident but re-presented post-accident. Too, she
has a long history of obsessive/compulsive traits although
there has not been a
formal diagnosis and it does not seriously impair her day-to-day functioning.
In my view the evidence shows
her to be psychologically vulnerable. It is my
conclusion, and I so find, that the applicant does suffer from a chronic pain
which has resulted from the accident. However, that condition is
attributable to psychogenic factors without a physical or organic
Consequences
67 The applicant’s first reference seeks a determination,
in effect, that the respondent has a liability for the yet-to-be incurred
of treating a physical component of the applicant’s pain disorder. My
finding that the applicant’s chronic pain
disorder is psychogenic and does
not include a physical component makes otiose a determination on this reference.
It follows that
it should be dismissed.
68 By her second reference the
applicant seeks a determination that she be reimbursed for the cost of treatment
and pharmaceutical
expense. Those costs are itemised in a schedule attached to
the reference.
69 The legislation in this instance obliges the respondent
to pay all those expenses necessarily incurred for the provision of treatment
a personal injury which has resulted directly from a motor vehicle accident.
The relevant injury is the applicant’s chronic
pain syndrome, absent a
physical component. The question becomes whether the expenses in dispute were
necessarily incurred in the
provision of treatment for that condition. The
element of necessity requires the treatment provided to be warranted, beneficial
to the applicant and curative of her injury.
upon the Treatment
70 It was the applicant’s evidence that all those
expenses listed in the schedule were incurred by her for the treatment of
pain condition affecting her head and neck. She said that at varying times she
took Naramig to relieve severe pain. It was
later replaced by Maxalt. As
required, these were supplemented by over-the-counter pain relievers which are
variously described
in the schedule as para-codeine, Aspro-Parac, Aspro-Clear,
paracetemol, Panamax, codeine, and Panadeine Forte. She said that at
took Restavit when she had difficulty sleeping because of pain. It was the
applicant’s evidence that at times she
rated the severity of her head and
neck pain at 8 to 9 out of 10 and that these medications reduced the level of
that pain to about
3 out of 10. This enabled the applicant to drive and to
continue working. She said that at times her medication regime included
laxatives and Nexium both taken to help manage the side effects of the codeine
based medications.
71 Dr Kapur provided his views with respect to the
treatments. He said that para-codeine, as an opioid was not a suitable
for the treatment of a pain syndrome without an organic element.
Too, he said that it was associated with secondary headache phenomenon
not suitable for this reason too. Of Naramig and Maxalt (including the wafer
form) he opined that their role was confined
to management of migraine and was
not appropriate for treatment of chronic pain. For Aspro-Parac, Panamax and
paracetemol he said
they were suited to treatment of a common headache. In the
case of a pain disorder they would not cause harm but were unlikely to
effective. As to Aspro-Clear Dr Kapur said they were suitable for migraine and
headache pain but not for a pain disorder. Of
Restavit he said that it was an
antihistamine and was inappropriate for the treatment of headache or a pain
disorder. Nexium, in
Dr Kapur’s opinion, had no role in the treatment of
a pain disorder. As to laxatives he said that the need for these would
arise if an appropriate medication regime was in place. Overall it was Dr
Kapur’s opinion that none of the medications
listed in the schedule were
suitable for the treatment of a chronic pain disorder attributable to
psychogenic factors. This in large
measure was a view shared by Dr Sale. For
the same diagnosed condition Dr Kapur opined that the cervical facet blocks
Dr Muir were inappropriate.
Further Evaluation
72 It was the opinion of Dr Kapur, which I accept, that the
Naramig, Maxalt, Aspro-Clear, Restavit, Naxium and laxatives were all
inappropriate for the treatment of either pain disorders generally or at least
for a psychogenic pain disorder. The claims for the
cost of these medications
are rejected on the basis that they are not warranted. As to the Aspro-Parac,
Panamax and paracetemol
I accept the evidence of Dr Kapur that the use of these
drugs is unlikely to be effective in the treatment of a pain disorder. On
basis I determine that their cost is not payable by the respondent as they too
are not warranted. The remaining costs claimed
relate to the facet blocks.
These were carried out on the advice of Dr Muir. Their clear purpose was to
assist in the diagnosis
of the worker’s condition. In my view this course
was both warranted and beneficial. It was also, in my opinion, curative.
word should not, in my opinion, be so narrowly defined so that it only
encompasses treatments which may heal or cure an injury
or disease. Such an
interpretation would exclude treatments involving any procedure undertaken to
diagnose or help facilitate the
proper treatment and management of an injury or
disease. That in my view would be an illogical and untenable interpretation. I
am satisfied that the facet blocks undergone by the applicant qualify as being
curative and therefore their cost should be met by
the respondent.
Conclusions
73 For the reasons stated there will be an order that the first
reference be dismissed. The schedule to the second reference shows
cost of the facet blocks to be $1179.00. The provider was Regional Imaging.
There will be an order on the second reference
that the respondent pay this sum
to the applicant in reimbursement of this cost.
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (206 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter