URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCAT/2025/194.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
TF v ZZI [2025] TASCAT 194 (8 October 2025)
[2025] TASCAT 194
Anti-Discrimination
TF (Complainant)
ZZI (Respondent)
Hearing Date:
Hearing Location:
Date of Orders:
8 October 2025
Date Reasons Issued:
8 October 2025
R O Winter, Senior Member
Orders Made:
complainant’s objection to the respondent being legal represented is
directions conference by telephone is listed before the Tribunal at 10.00am on
Monday 20 October 2025.
Catchwords:
Anti-Discrimination – Review of dismissal – Legal
representation.
Legislation Cited:
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2020
Cases Cited:
Project Blue Sky v Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355
[1998] HCA 28.
Representation:
Complainant: Self Represented
Respondent: P Willshire
Solicitors:
Complainant: N/A
Respondent: Willshire Law
Publication Restriction:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication.
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
complainant [TF] made a complaint to the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner (the
ADC) against the respondent [ZZI]. The complaint
which alleged that the
complainant had been victimised by the respondent was lodged with the ADC on 22
August 2024 and accepted for
investigation on 3 October 2024.
8 April 2025, the ADC dismissed the complainant’s complaint on the basis
that it did not relate to discrimination or prohibited
conduct pursuant to s
64(1)(a) of the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
8 April 2025, pursuant to s 71(3) of the ADA, the complainant sought to review
the ADC’s dismissal of his complaint.
the complainant’s application for review was made in writing, and was made
within 28 days of his receipt of the ADC’s
decision to dismiss his
complaint, the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and determine this review.
initial directions conference before a case officer was conducted in the
Tribunal on 13 June 2025. During this directions conference
the respondent made
application to be legally represented. The complainant indicated that he
objected to leave being granted to the
respondent for this purpose.
a directions conference before a Tribunal member on 17 July 2025 directions were
given with regard to the provision of written
submissions in relation to the
complainant’s objection to the respondent having legal
representation.
19 September 2025 the timetable for the provision of written submissions had
been complied with.
following are my reasons for dismissing the complainant’s objection to the
grant of leave for the respondent to be legally
represented.
Consideration
his written submissions objecting to the granting of leave for the respondent to
be legally represented, the complainant asserted:
I write to formally object to the respondent being granted legal representation
in this matter: While the Tribunal has discretion
section 98(1)
Tasmanian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2020
(TASCAT Act), I submit that
allowing such representation would be procedurally unfair, for the following
Thereafter,
under a heading “Grounds for Objection”, the complainant summarised
his bases for the objection to the respondent
being granted leave to have legal
representation. These were summarised under the following headings:
Framing of ZZI’s Conduct
Omission of ZZI’s Offer to Vacate
Reason for Eviction - Concealment of Victimisation
selective disclosure to ADC
reliance on “Derance case” as rationale
complainant submitted that the respondent’s written submissions to the ADC
included misleading omissions of material facts
which significantly influenced
the ADC’s decision to dismiss the complaint. He respectfully contended
that this conduct engaged
s 105(b) of the ADA which provides:
(b) omit any matter from a statement knowing that without that matter the
statement is misleading.
the heading “Conclusion” in his submissions of 17 July 2025, the
complainant stated “in light of the above,
the complainant submits that
the respondent:
Misled the ADC
by omitting key dates, context, and communications
Selectively
quoted from WhatsApp to frame the complainant unfairly
disclose her own role in prolonging maintenance issues and house tensions
Exploited post
hoc grievances to justify an eviction rooted in retaliation
These omissions fall squarely under s.105(b) of the Anti-Discrimination Act 1988
(Tas) and amount to procedural unfairness if the
respondent is now granted legal
representation based on a record distorted by these omissions.
the respondent’s reply to the complainant’s submissions seeking the
grant of leave for legal representation which were
dated 19 September 2025, the
respondent reiterated his objection to the respondent being granted leave for
legal representation,
reiterating that this should be excluded under s 105(b) of
the ADA on the basis of misleading and deceptive conduct across
proceedings.
also provided a number of direct responses to the complainant’s written
submissions which are discussed subsequently in this
The respondent’s submissions
the respondent’s written submissions of 22 August 2025 the respondent
submitted the following reasons for the grant of leave
for the respondent to be
legally represented pursuant to s 79A of the ADA.
matter is complex involving complex factual allegations, multiple tenants, legal
timelines, voluminous evidentiary material and
activity prior to the ADT
involvement.
claimant’s ‘Objection to Legal Representation’ contains
serious allegations against the respondent under s105(b)
issue to be determined by the Tribunal is whether the decision of the ADC to
dismiss the complaint was the correct decision. The
allegations serve to
introduce and widen issues over and above the question of victimisation which
was the issue for determination
by the ADC. Consequently, proceedings are at
risk of becoming protracted.
representation will assist the respondent as she has work commitments and finds
it difficult to attend the Tribunal for directions
hearings and interlocutory
to the seriousness of the allegations, the respondent is also concerned about
potential reputational damage and financial consequences.
respondent is experiencing stress due to these proceedings and is concerned
The interests of justice and
fairness favour allowing representation in such circumstances.
is a long history between the parties. In addition to the claim before the ADT,
the claimant made a complaint against the respondent
to the Tenants Union of
Tasmania in approximately May/June 2023. The claim alleged that due to the
verbal altercation between the
claimant and Mr Zhao and Mr Zhao’s
offensive conduct towards the claimant, that she as landlord, failed to provide
quiet enjoyment
to the claimant in breach of the terms of his rental agreement.
(NB/ the complaint was ultimately withdrawn by the claimant).
claimant also sent the respondent a letter of demand in July 2024 seeking
compensation in the sum of $12,000 alleging that he
had suffered a detriment and
victimisation by the respondent.
involvement of a legal representative would assist in communication between the
parties, particularly considering the long history
between them and the current
state of their relationship.
counsel would be able to assist the Tribunal identify and narrow the relevant
issues and applicable legal principles and is
likely to facilitate earlier and
appropriate resolution of all preliminary matters relating to the
application.
respondent’s legal representative acknowledges the expectation of the
Tribunal that legal counsel will conduct themselves
and their client’s
case in such a way as to assist the Tribunal and to promote efficient
pre-hearing procedures and hearings.
is not procedurally unfair to the claimant if leave is granted to the
respondent, as the claimant is also able to be represented
at the hearing of an
inquiry pursuant to s79A(3) the
Determination
respondent’s application for leave to be represented relates to legal
representation in the review jurisdiction of the Tasmanian
Administrative Tribunal – see
Tasmanian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2020
(the TASCAT Act), ss 74-78. Section 75(3) of the TASCAT
Act provides that the complainants review of the dismissal of his complaint
to be a review by way of a re-hearing.
complainant’s application for the review of the dismissal of his complaint
is not being dealt with pursuant to the original
TASCAT Act – ss 72-73. This is the jurisdictional aspect of the TASCAT Act
which governs referrals
for inquiry pursuant to s 78 of the ADA.
the complainant correctly points out, representation in proceedings under the
TASCAT Act are detailed in s 98 of the TASCAT Act
which states:
(1) A party to proceedings is, subject to the provisions of a relevant Act,
entitled to –
(a) appear personally; or
(b) be represented by an Australian legal practitioner; or
(c) with the leave of the Tribunal and subject to the Tribunal rules – be
represented by another representative.
(2) Unless otherwise determined by the Tribunal, a person appearing before the
Tribunal may be assisted by another person as a friend.
(3) A person may not act as a representative referred to in subsection (1)(b) or
(c) in proceedings if –
(a) the person is an Australian legal practitioner whose practising certificate
is suspended; or
(b) the person’s name has been removed from the local roll, within the
meaning of the
Legal Profession Act 2007
, or on an equivalent roll under a law,
of another State or a Territory, that corresponds to that Act; or
(c) the person is subject to disciplinary proceedings under the
Profession Act 2007
or a law, of another State or a Territory, that corresponds
to that Act.
(4) The Tribunal may –
(a) appoint a person to act as guardian ad litem for a party; or
(b) appoint a person to represent a party; or
(c) order that a party be separately represented.
(5) In proceedings that directly, or significantly, affect a person who has not
attained the age of 18 years and who is not a party
to the proceedings, the
Tribunal may –
(a) appoint a person to act as guardian ad litem for the person; or
(b) order that the person be separately represented.
98(1) of the TASCAT Act clearly makes the provisions of the TASCAT Act subject
to the provisions of the relevant Act, in this
case the ADA.
regard to legal representation in an inquiry, s 79A of the ADA states:
79A. Representation in inquiry
(1) At any stage during the hearing of an inquiry,
the Tribunal may permit a party to be represented or accompanied by another
and may withdraw that permission.
(2) A party may be represented or accompanied by
another person in an inquiry only with the permission of the Tribunal.
(3) If the Tribunal gives permission for one party to
be accompanied or represented by another person at the hearing of an inquiry,
any other party taking part in the hearing may also be accompanied or
represented by another person.
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2020
does not apply in relation
to a hearing of an inquiry.
modern approach to statutory interpretation in Australia was stated as follows
Project Blue Sky v Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR
[1998] HCA 28
per McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ:
The primary object of statutory construction is to construe the relevant
provisions so that it is consistent with the language and
purpose of all of the
provisions of the statute. The meaning of the provision must be determined
“by reference to the language
of the instrument viewed as a
whole”....the process of construction must always begin by examining the
context of the provision
that is being construed.
this statutory interpretation process, s 79A of the ADA which relates to
representation in an Inquiry is clearly not relevant
to s 98 of the TASCAT Act
in so far as it relates to representation in a review of the dismissal of a
complaint within the review
the complainant has correctly identified the relevancy of s 98 of the TASCAT
Act, he is incorrect in his assertion that leave
is required for the complainant
to be represented in proceedings in the Tribunal by an Australian legal
practitioner.
98(1)(b) clearly provides that a party to a proceeding is “entitled”
to be represented by an Australian legal
practitioner.
98(1)(c) does require the leave or permission of the Tribunal to allow a party
to a proceeding to be represented by another
representative. This other
representative clearly does not include an Australian legal practitioner.
the complainant’s application for the review of his dismissal of his
complaint being dealt with in the review provisions
of the TASCAT Act and
following the reasoning detailed above, the respondent is entitled to be
represented by a legal practitioner.
my view, this interpretation of s 98 is also supported by s 79A(4) of the ADA
which clearly only excludes or makes it “subject
to the provisions of a
relevant act”, the operation of s 98 of the TASCAT Act in relation to the
requirement for leave for
legal representation to be granted by the Tribunal in
an inquiry. As previously stated in this decision, an inquiry under the ADA
dealt with within the original jurisdiction of the TASCAT Act.
an entitlement to representation by an Australian legal practitioner would also
apply to the complainant if he chose to take
that course.
if I am wrong as to the interpretation of this legislative scheme applying to
reviews of dismissals under the ADA, and leave
for legal representation is
required, on all of the material before me, particularly for the reasons
articulated by the respondent
in its written submissions, I would grant the
leave sought for the respondent to be represented in any event.
Tribunal will benefit from the assistance of the respondent’s legal
practitioner in understanding what are clearly complex
leave is required for legal representation I grant that leave, which would
entitle the complainant also to seek and obtain legal
representation if he so
directions conference by telephone is listed for Monday 20 October, 2025 at
10.00am. Hearing notices will issue to the parties in
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.8 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter