URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASWRCT/2021/29.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:23:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
P. v Xenco Pty Ltd [2021] TASWRCT 29 (20 August 2021)
[2021] TASWRCT 29
WORKERS REHABILITATION AND COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
P. v Xenco Pty Ltd
[2021] TASWRCT
XENCO PTY LTD
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
27 July 2021
DELIVERED ON:
20 August 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Commissioner Wilkins
CATCHWORDS:
Entitlement to compensation – whether injury
suffered in the course of employment – whether employer induced or
worker to engage in activity
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
Hatzimanolis and ANI Corporation Ltd
(1992) 173 CLR;
[1992] HCA 21
Comcare v PVYW
[2013] HCA 41
Comcare v Mather
[1995] FCA 1216
Westrupp v BIS Industries Limited
[2015] FCAFC 173
DETERMINATION:
The injury to the worker’s shoulder arose in the
course of his employment.
REPRESENTATION:
C McKenzie / A
P Jackson SC / J Brown
Solicitors:
McLean McKenzie &
Abetz Curtis
[2021] TASWRCT 29
Commissioner Wilkins
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. The worker was employed as a project civil superintendent by
the employer from about September 2020 onwards. He was required to
work at the
Renison Mine (“the mine”) which is owned by Bluestone Mines Tasmania
Joint Venture Pty Ltd (“Bluestone”).
Bluestone also owns the Zeehan
Village, which is situated between Zeehan and the mine. When the worker was in
between shifts at
the mine, he was provided with accommodation at the Zeehan
2. Early one morning, the worker fell at the Zeehan Village and hurt
his shoulder. This occurred on 3 January 2021.
3. The worker made a claim
for compensation on or about 8 January 2021. His employer successfully disputed
the claim. The worker
referred his claim to the Tribunal pursuant to s42 of the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988 (“the
4. It is the question of the employer’s liability that is
presently before the Tribunal, specifically whether the worker’s
injury, not being a disease, arose in the course of his employment. If the
injury did arise in the course of his employment,
the employer is liable to pay
compensation to the worker for his shoulder injury.
What is the law?
5. Section 25(1)(a) of the Act relevantly sets out:
If in any employment -
(a) a worker suffers an injury, not being a disease, arising out of or in
the course of his employment;...
his employer is... liable to pay compensation in accordance with this
6. There is no dispute that the worker suffered an injury to
his shoulder, not being a disease, within the meaning of s25(1)(a) when
to the ground at about 4.50 am on the morning of 3 January 2021.
7. There is
no dispute that the injury did not arise “out of” the employment,
that phrase recognised as connoting a causal
connection between the injury and
the employment duties. The worker’s case is that his injury arose
“in the course of”
his employment.
8. There is no dispute the
injury to the worker arose during an interval or interlude between actual
periods of work – that
is, between his shifts whilst he was required to
work remotely at the Renison mine.
9. It is recognised that an injury
occurring in an interval or interlude period may be compensable as an injury
which arises in the
course of a worker’s employment.
10. The leading
authorities in relation to ‘interval’ cases are Hatzimanolis and ANI
Corporation Ltd (1992) 173 CLR;
[1992] HCA 21
(“Hatzimanolis”) and
Comcare v PVYW
[2013] HCA 41
11. In Hatzimanolis the
worker was working in a remote area in Western Australia for a period of months,
and accommodated at a camp.
On a day that he was not required to work, the
employer organised an excursion for any employees who wished to participate.
vehicle in which the worker was travelling overturned, and the worker was
injured. The High Court determined that the worker’s
injury in that case
arose in the course of the worker’s employment. The High Court as a
matter of principle set out:
“Accordingly,
it should now be accepted that an interval or interlude within an overall period
or episode of work occurs within
the course of employment if, expressly or
impliedly, the employer has induced or encouraged the employee to spend that
interval or
interlude at a particular place or in a particular way.
Furthermore, an injury sustained in such an interval will be within the
of employment if it occurred at that place or while the employee was engaged in
that activity unless the employee was guilty
of gross misconduct taking him or
her outside the course of employment. In determining whether the injury
occurred in the course
of employment, regard must always be had to the general
nature, terms and circumstances of the employment ‘and not merely to
circumstances of the particular occasion out of which the injury to the employee
as arisen’”
12. In PVYW, some 20 years later, the High Court considered and
explained the decision in Hatzimanolis.
13. The Court’s joint majority
judgement made some observations in relation to Hatzimanolis, and then
specifically set out the
steps to be taken in applying the principles of that
case at paragraph 34 and following:
“It is important to
identify how Hatzimanolis sought to define the circumstances for, and the extent
of, an employer's liability
for compensation. Hatzimanolis sought to provide a
legal justification for an injury, which occurred between periods of actual
being regarded as occurring in the course of the employee's employment. It
did so by characterising the interval by reference to
the employer's inducement
or encouragement. The employer's liability in such circumstances depends upon
what the employer induced
or encouraged the employee to do. Hatzimanolis did not
seek to extend the employer's liability beyond that.
Because the employer's inducement or encouragement of an employee, to be
present at a particular place or to engage in a particular
activity, is
effectively the source of the employer's liability, the circumstances of the
injury must correspond with what the employer
induced or encouraged the employee
to do. It is to be inferred from the factual conditions stated in Hatzimanolis
that for an injury
to be in the course of employment, the employee must be doing
the very thing that the employer encouraged the employee to do, when
Moreover, it is an unstated but obvious purpose of Hatzimanolis to create
a connection between the injury, the circumstances in which
it occurred and the
employment itself. It achieves that connection by the fact of the employer's
inducement or encouragement. Thus,
where the circumstances of the injury involve
the employee engaging in an activity, the question will be whether the employer
or encouraged the employee to do so.
That this must be so is confirmed by a consideration of the legal
reasoning involved in applying the principle stated in Hatzimanolis
to the facts
of a case. That process of reasoning does not commence with the fact of the
employer's inducement or encouragement.
The joint reasons sought to direct
attention to the new principle and therefore stated it out of the order in which
the enquiries
inherent in applying the principle would arise for
consideration.
Applying the Hatzimanolis principle
The starting point in applying what was said in Hatzimanolis, in order to
determine whether an injury was suffered in the course of
employment, is the
factual finding that an employee suffered injury, but not whilst engaged in
actual work. The next enquiry is what
the employee was doing when injured. For
the principle in Hatzimanolis to apply, the employee must have been either
engaged in an
activity or present at a place when the injury occurred. The
essential enquiry is then: how was the injury brought about? In some
injury will have occurred at and by reference to the place. More commonly, it
will have occurred while the employee was
engaged in an activity. It is only if
and when one of those circumstances is present that the question arising from
the Hatzimanolis
principle becomes relevant. When an activity was engaged in at
the time of injury, the question is: did the employer induce or encourage
employee to engage in that activity? When injury occurs at and by reference to a
place, the question is: did the employer induce
or encourage the employee to be
there? If the answer to the relevant question is affirmative, then the injury
will have occurred
in the course of employment.
It follows that where an activity was engaged in at the time of the
injury, the relevant question is not whether the employer induced
or encouraged
the employee to be at a place. An employer's inducement or encouragement to be
present at a place is not relevant in
such a case.”
14. In PVYW, the injured worker, whilst visiting a regional
office of the Commonwealth Government agency with whom she was employed,
required to stay overnight at a motel which had been booked by her employer.
Whilst the worker was engaged in sexual intercourse
that evening, the glass
light fitting above the bed was pulled out of the wall, and landed on her,
causing injury. In discussing
the concept of an injury related to a place that
occurred in an interval between periods of undertaking duties, the majority in
rejected the proposition that the employee in question had been injured
whilst present at ‘a place’, in the sense in
which that concept had
been discussed in Hatzimanolis. The majority judgement in PVYW observed at para
“An injury occurring to an employee by
reference to or associated with a place where the employee is present may
involve something
occurring to the premises or some defect in the premises. For
example, if the light fitting in this case had been insecurely fastened
place and simply fell upon the respondent, the injury suffered by her would have
arisen by reference to the motel. The employer
would be responsible for injury
because the employer had put the respondent in a position where injury occurred
because of something
to do with the place. Liability in those circumstances is
justifiable. Liability for everything that occurs whilst the employee
present at that place is not.”
15. In relation to circumstances where a worker is injured in
an interval, whilst engaging in ‘an activity’ the majority
went on at paragraph 46:
“Nothing said in
Hatzimanolis supports the notion that the employer is to be liable for an injury
which occurs when an employee
undertakes a particular activity, if the employer
has not in any way encouraged the employee to undertake that activity, but has
merely required the employee to be present at the place where the activity is
undertaken”.
Ultimately, in PVYW, the majority of the High Court found that
there had been no encouragement or inducement to engage in the particular
activity which led to the worker’s injury, and compensation was not
payable to her.
16. The interpretation of the phrase “induced or
encouraged”, in the context of Hatzimanolis, was considered by the Federal
Court in Comcare v Mather
[1995] FCA 1216
(“Mather”).
Mather, Kiefel J (as she then was), referring to Hatzimanolis, observed that the
High Court in that case made it clear that
a question of whether an employer had
induced or encouraged an employee to spend an interval or interlude at a
particular place or
in a particular way are questions that “are not to be
determined narrowly, by reference only to the particular circumstances
particular occasion out of which the injury arose, but by having regard to the
general nature, terms and circumstances of
the employment”.
Honour went on at paragraph 22:
my view “encouragement” is not to be taken as of narrow meaning and
limited to some positive action and in specific
terms which might lead the
employee to undertake a particular activity or attend at a particular place.
The two particular cases
which their Honours in Hatzimanolis were concerned with
in this context......involved, respectively, an expectation of presence coupled
with a recognised practice and making available facilities for an employee's
use. The facts in Hatzimanolis did not require the Court
to discuss in greater
detail what was encompassed by the phrase "induced or encouraged". To be said to
have, expressly or impliedly,
induced or encouraged an undertaking or presence
at some location could refer to, by way of example only, requirements,
suggestions,
recognition of practices, fostering of participation, or providing
assistance and may include the exercise of discretion or choice
on the part of
the employee. Further attempt at definition would be fruitless. In each case,
the question will be whether the attendance
at the place at which or the
undertaking in which the employee is involved when injured in an interval falls
within the ambit of
statements, acts or conduct made by the employer and what
may be said to logically arise from them. And in each case, importantly,
must be viewed in the background of the particular employment and the
circumstances in which the
19. This approach was approved by the Full Court of the Federal
Court in Westrupp v BIS Industries Limited
[2015] FCAFC 173
(“Westrupp”).
20. The worker in that case was employed to work
in an outback mining town in Western Australia. The town was owned by the mine
and as part of his employment roster of two weeks on, one week off, the
worker was required to stay at a mining camp in the town
between his shifts. He
actually resided in New Zealand. Whilst staying in the camp, the worker lived
in the single persons’
quarters, ate breakfast and dinner in the
“dry mess” and had access to the camp facilities which included a
tavern, gym,
swimming pool, basketball, squash and tennis courts. One evening,
during an interval between shifts, the worker went to the tavern
with a friend.
Another patron took issue with the worker’s friendly interactions with a
female acquaintance who was also at
the tavern. The other patron assaulted the
worker, substantially damaging his shoulder.
21. The Full Court of the
Federal Court, in referring to the decision of the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal at first instance, commented
evidence before the AAT showed that, although employees of the first respondent
were not directed that they should not
leave Leinster during their two-week
swing (eg on the longer overnight break between dayshift and night shift), they
were expected
to be properly rested when they commenced night shift the
following day. Mr Westrupp said also that they were encouraged not to
night unless necessary, to avoid the danger of striking animals. Both elements
may be seen to operate as a disincentive
to leaving the camp unnecessarily
during the two week swing. In any event, Leinster is in a remote area in the
Goldfields region
stay should not be seen as a casual undertaking.
It seems obvious that the first respondent should be taken to have
accepted (and expected) that Mr Westrupp would make use of the
provided at Leinster, including the tavern, as incidents of his
employment.”
22. The Full Court found that the approach taken by the AAT to
treat the “place” of the injury as the tavern where Mr
Westrupp was
injured was too narrow an approach. Their Honours, in their joint judgement,
observed “it does not sufficiently
take into account the “general
nature, terms and circumstances of the employment”. The injury to Mr
Westrupp may as
easily have occurred at any of the other facilities provided in
association with, and as part of, the camp – eg “gym,
swimming pool,
basketball, squash and tennis courts” or at the [single persons’
quarters] barbecue area. As Toohey J
said in Hatzimanolis (at 491) regard must
be paid to activities which “the respondent saw as making the working
more attractive than they would otherwise be”. There was no
reason in the present case to regard the tavern as a place unconnected
employment. Furthermore, the approach taken by the AAT does not sufficiently
recognise the breadth of the concept of
“encouragement”
determined in Westrupp that the worker was, indeed, injured in the course of his
employment, the Full Court of the Federal
Court made some final observations
that although Mr Westrupp’s injury was considered by the AAT and resolved
by the Federal
Court as a ‘place’ case, it could also have been seen
as being a case involving both elements of an ‘activity’
‘place’ case. It was observed that the worker would also have been
entitled to compensation if the case had
been dealt with as an
‘activity’ case, given that “Mr Westrupp was engaged in a
recreational activity which was
endorsed by the first respondent. He was using
a facility which was an integral aspect of the facilities provided for the use
employees, as were the other
facilities”
The worker’s evidence - background
24. Very little of the factual background to the claim for
compensation is in dispute.
25. The worker gave evidence. He said that he
lives in Devonport. He started working for the employer in September 2020, at
Renison mine near Zeehan. His employer arranged accommodation for him at
the Zeehan Village. He worked a six day on, one day off
rotation until about
Christmas. He said after the last shift on his rotation, he would drive back to
Devonport. This was not the
usual rotation, but was put in place because of
COVID-19 restrictions. He said the usual rotations commenced after Christmas,
was a three week on, one week off rotation. He said his working days were
to the mine at about 5.20
am to 5.45 am depending on what was happening. He said when he got to work he
would check emails to see
if anything had happened overnight, and there would be
a pre-start meeting at 5.50 am and 6.00 am prior to a shift commencing. The
worker said that he usually drove his car between Zeehan Village and the mine
which took about 10-15 minutes travelling time. Sometimes
he was by himself,
and sometimes he shared the trip with others.
26. The worker said that there
were a number of cabins in Zeehan Village, each with three separate
self-contained accommodation rooms.
He said he did not always stay in the same
room, and in fact if people were classified as casual workers, which he was,
be required to change their rooms and cabins at any time in their
working shift cycle for permanent workers. The direction to change
cabins would come from the camp managers.
27. The worker referred to a plan
of Zeehan Village and identified the buildings on the plan that included
approximately 35 separate
cabins, a laundry facility, a gym, a recreation room
(which included television and eight-ball facilities) and a mess room with
facilities.
28. By reference to series of photographs that he had
taken, the worker described the area of the camp including the cabin where he
had been staying at the time he was injured, and the laundry
facilities.
29. What can be seen from the photographs, and what was described
by the worker by reference to the photographs, is that there are
slightly raised
concrete paths running throughout Zeehan Village in between the cabins, with a
concrete slab running between the
concrete paths to the entrance to each of the
self-contained accommodation rooms in each cabin. In between the raised
concrete paths
are beds of crushed rock which give way to grassed areas around
the sides and back of the cabins.
30. The worker’s route from his
accommodation to the laundry, which he described in evidence, involved him
walking from his
accommodation along the raised concrete path, then across the
crushed gravel, onto the grassed area and then across more crushed
gravel that
abuts a concrete slab at the front of the laundry entrance. The path that the
worker traversed was between two cabins
which were opposite his own
accommodation in the cabin on the other side of the concrete path. In the
grassed area between the cabins
as he walked towards the laundry, the worker
identified two large round concrete manhole covers sticking out of the grass
assumed were sewerage and storm water access points. He also
identified a square black plastic storm water drain situated between
concrete manholes and the laundry. What can also be seen from the photographs
referred to by the worker is that there are
paths through the grass which are
worn down and which he said were the result of people walking over the grass.
These were referred
to in evidence as “goat tracks”. The worker said
there were numerous “goat tracks” around the Zeehan Village
people walked across grassed areas that were not the defined concrete
31. The worker said that he had never been told or directed to use the
concrete paths, nor been told not to walk on the grassed areas,
“goat tracks”.
32. In relation to the laundry facility itself,
the worker said the laundry has four dryers, and three washing machines. He
they were commercial machines, as one would expect to find at a commercial
laundry. He said the laundry facilities were for people
who were staying at
Zeehan Village. On some occasions there could be up to 100 people staying
there, but that would be rare. He
said it was difficult to get to use the
machines at times, depending on how many people were in the residence, as it was
essentially
first in, best dressed for both the washers and the
33. The worker was asked about work wear being provided by the
employer. He said that he had been issued with three shirts, three
trousers, a
pair of boots and some wet weather gear. He said that he had purchased for
himself extra shirts and trousers. He said
that there was no requirement that he
only wear the clothing provided by his employer, but that it was expected that
he present in
a professional manner with clean clothes.
34. The worker said
that when he was working the six days on, one day off shift, he would do his
laundry twice a week. He agreed that
he had never been directed or instructed by
the employer to use the laundry, but had been told it was available for his use.
that he disliked having a pile of dirty laundry in his room, and
particularly so because he would never know if he was going to be
required to
change rooms at short notice.
Circumstances surrounding the injury
35. The worker said that, in the lead up to the morning that he
injured his shoulder, he had not been able to access an empty washing
and he was down to his last set of clean clothes. He said he managed to get his
clothes into a washing machine before he
went to dinner at 7.00 pm on the night
of 2 January 2021. He went back that evening, after the wash cycle had stopped,
and put his
clothes into the dryer and left the dryer going overnight.
36. The worker gave evidence that the following morning, his alarm was set
for 4:00am. He had a meeting at the mine at 5:50am. He
was intending to leave at
Zeehan Village before he left
for the mine. He said that at about 4.45 am he
went to the laundry to collect his clothes from the dryer. It was dark. The
in the laundry were turned off. There was an overhead street light that
was on. The worker said he walked over the grassed area,
adjacent to the
“goat track”, and between that track and the concrete manhole
37. The dryer had turned off at some time during the night, and all
the worker’s clothes were still wet. He said he put everything
the machine and put it on again, and then headed back towards his accommodation
to get ready for the day. He left the lights
on in the laundry, so that the
light from the laundry behind him cast a shadow in front of him as he walked
away, but he said that
he could still see the ground. He said the concrete
manhole covers were visible at night because they were a lighter colour than
surrounds. He avoided the manhole covers and the storm water drain cover. He
intended to follow the same route back that he had
taken to get to the
38. The worker said that he had taken two or three steps onto the
grass when he fell forward. He said that he felt he tripped on something,
thought his foot snagged. He fell forward, face first, with his right arm across
under his body. The worker said his arm was
not painful, but felt as if it was a
‘dead arm’.
39. In relation to the grassed area where he had
fallen, the worker said that grass had recently been mown, and there was a layer
of mown grass across the top. When he got up after falling, he had cut grass on
his clothes.
40. He went to work at the mine, but his arm was not working
properly. He reported the incident. He was initially driven to Rosebery
Hospital, and later sent by the Rosebery Hospital to Burnie.
Evidence from Mr Crabtree
41. Mr Aaron Crabtree gave evidence on behalf of the worker.
He said he was working for the employer at the mine from September 2020
April 2021 as a health, safety and quality superintendent.
42. He said that
between September 2020 and mid-December 2020 he worked a six day on, one day off
roster, because of COVID-19. Following
that, he worked a fourteen days on,
seven days off roster. He said his official starting time was 6:00am, but he
would usually be
at work by 5:00am, and depart the mine at about 5:30pm to
6:00pm. He has said that getting in early enabled him to get organised
43. He said that he socialised with the worker to a degree, and there
would be the odd night where they would have a couple of drinks
on the balcony
outside their respective rooms before heading off for dinner within Zeehan
Village. Mr Crabtree said that he was
the person who had driven the worker to
the Rosebery hospital after he reported his injury.
44. In relation to the
accommodation, Mr Crabtree said that for the first couple of months at the
Zeehan Village, he was a causal
resident, and because of that every 2 to 5 days
or so he would be moved to a different room. He said Zeehan Village was usually
at full capacity or thereabout between about Sunday to Thursday, but there would
generally be a decrease in the number of people
staying at Zeehan Village over
the weekend.
Documentary Evidence
45. A number of documents were tendered by consent, and I set
out relevant details in relation to some of those documents as
46. Documents relating to Zeehan Village were put into evidence
which were:
• Bluestone Mines Tasmanian Joint Venture Pty Ltd Village
Rules, Regulations and Guidelines (Tasmania) dated 20 July 2020 (“Village
• Bluestone Mines Tasmanian Joint Venture Pty Ltd
Accommodation Guidelines and Overview (Tasmania) dated 16 July 2015
(“Accommodation
Guidelines”).
47. The worker confirmed that the Village Rules and
Accommodation Guidelines were given to him at the commencement of his stay at
Zeehan Village, and he was asked to read them and acknowledge that he had
received them.
48. Relevantly, for the purposes of the determination, the
Village Rules provide:
• 1.3 Compliance with Village Regulations – Each
occupant shall at all times observe and comply with these Village Regulations
and the Associated Environmental Protection Regulations or any amendment made
These regulations are designed for the comfort and convenience of
all occupants of the Village and the protection of the local environment.
Bluestone Mines Tasmania therefore reserves the right to amend the rules at any
time in order to ensure these aims are achieved.
Rules for the use of the
Village recreational facilities as displayed will be strictly adhered
• 4.5 Minimum Standard of Dress – Persons using dining room
facilities must be clean and respectably dressed at all times.
The minimum
standard of dress is: t-shirt, shorts and thongs. The Village management has
the final say as to attire being appropriate.
No dirty work clothing or work
boots will be allowed in the dining room. You may be asked to leave for a
shower by the Manager of
Chef if you do not present in a hygienic
• 5.2 Laundry – Laundry facilities are provided for use
by Village occupants and will be used with all necessary care
and attention.
Machines are to be switched off and left in a clean condition after
Machines marked as such are to be used for heavily soiled clothing.
[Original emphasis]
49. The Accommodation Guidelines relevantly provide:
• 3. DRIVE-IN DRIVE-OUT
A fully catered Accommodation
Village Complex is provided at no cost for those employees who elect to drive in
and out to their place
of residence in Tasmania.
The West Coast Village
Accommodation Complex is provided for employees while they are rostered to work
on their designated shift cycle.
This accommodation is provided on the
conditions contained in the Village Rules and Regulations (G092) document which
all occupants
need to sign prior to being accommodated in the West Coast Village
or Accommodation Complex.
50. An email from Tiffany Munday, Site Manager Zeehan Village
to Matthew Finney dated 4 January 2021, reporting the incident in which
worker was injured. The email is as follows:
morning Matt, as an FYI for your records – yesterday afternoon, Paul
received a call from
[the worker]
letting him know that he had a fall at
4:50am yesterday morning at the Village.
It has been reported that he was using a ‘goat track’ to cut
through between his room and laundry when he tripped over.
It is unknown if he tripped on something particular or his own feet. When he
fell, it is reported that he hurt his right arm.
It has been reported that he went to the doctors yesterday afternoon and that
they believed there are no breaks.
I will have a reminder put on the tables today in the dining room in regard
to using designated walkways around the Village.
Tiffany Munday”
Applying Hatzimanolis, as per PVYW - the first question is not
51. The High Court in PVWY confirmed that the starting point,
in applying Hatzimanolis, is a factual finding that the worker suffered
but not whilst engaged in actual work. As I have indicated, there is no dispute
suffered injury to his shoulder
in the interval between his shifts at the mine, and that he was not engaged in
actual work at that
time. I so find.
What was the worker doing when he was injured?
52. For Hatzimanolis to apply, the worker must have been either
engaged in an activity, or present at a place when the injury occurred.
no dispute that at the time the worker was injured, he was present at the Zeehan
Village. There is also no dispute that
the worker, as well as being present at
the Zeehan Village at the time he was injured, was also engaged in activity at
53. Although both parties agree that the worker was engaged in an
activity when he was injured, they differ as to how that activity
ought to be
characterised. On behalf of the employer, it is submitted that the worker was
engaged in the activity of attending to
his personal laundry, which activity
necessarily involved him walking to and from the laundry. On the worker’s
behalf, it was
submitted that the worker was engaged in the activity of using
the facilities in the Zeehan Village.
54. Whilst there is no doubt from the
evidence that the facilities provided for the use or enjoyment of occupants of
the Zeehan Village
included the laundry, it would be artificial to characterise
the “activity” engaged in by the worker at the time of the
being the use of the facilities generally. The evidence is clear – that
the worker was attending to his laundry.
He was not using any of the other
facilities at Zeehan Village at that time.
55. I find that the worker was
present at the Zeehan Village at the time that he was injured, and further, at
that time, he was engaged
in the activity of attending to his personal
How was the injury brought about?
56. In relation to this enquiry, as explained by PVYW, the
questions are whether the injury occurred at and by reference to a place,
whether it occurred when the worker was engaged in an activity. An injury may
occur by reference to a place where it involves
“something occurring to
the premises, or some defect in the premises”.
57. What evidence is
there about the circumstances surrounding the injury? The worker’s
evidence was:
• he was walking on the grass adjacent to the “goat
• there was cut grass lying on the top of the grass from
where it had been recently mown;
• it was still dark;
was an overhead “street light” that was on;
• the lights
from the laundry cast a shadow in front of him as he walked away from the
• he could still see the ground, and he could see the storm
water drain and the two manhole covers;
• he took two or three steps
onto the grass before he fell;
• he felt he tripped on something, or
thought his foot snagged on something.
58. The email from the site manager at the Zeehan Village the
day after the worker’s fall indicates that it was ‘unknown’
whether the worker tripped on something in particular, or whether he tripped on
his own feet.
59. The email is, for the most part, second-hand hearsay, as
it is a report by the author of the email of a phone call between the
and another person. Counsel for both parties made submissions about the question
raised in the email about whether the worker
may have tripped on something in
particular or tripped on his own feet. In relation to that part of the email, I
do not give it any
weight – at its highest, it appears to be speculation
on the part of the author, as it is the only part of the email relating
circumstances surrounding the incident that do not refer to things “being
60. The worker gave evidence that he was able to see the
ground in front of him when he tripped. He would therefore have been likely
have seen any impediment in his way. He had also traversed the same route on the
way to the laundry only a matter of minutes beforehand.
On the evidence before
the Tribunal, there is nothing that would enable the conclusion that the worker
tripping, or snagging his
foot, occurred by reference to something to do with,
or because of a defect in, the Zeehan Village.
61. This is not a
“place” case, as understood by reference to the authorities. Whether
or not the worker was encouraged
or induced to be present at the Zeehan Village
is not relevant to the issue of whether he was in the course of his employment
the time that he was injured.
62. This is an “activity case”.
I find that the worker’s injury occurred whilst the worker was engaging in
the activity
of attending to his personal laundry, that activity including the
surrounding circumstances relating to that activity, including
walking to and
fro between the laundry facilities at the Zeehan Village and his
accommodation.
Did the employer induce or encourage the worker to engage in
that activity?
63. On behalf of the employer, it was submitted that although
the employer undoubtedly induced or encouraged the worker to reside
Zeehan Village for periods whilst he was working at the mine, the evidence does
not permit the conclusion to be drawn that
the employer induced or encouraged
the worker to engage in the activity of doing his personal laundry in the period
leading to the
injury that occurred.
64. I accept the evidence that the
worker’s employer never directed or instructed the worker to use the
laundry whilst he was
staying at the Zeehan Village. But, as per Hatzimanolis,
the phrase “induced or encouraged” is not to be interpreted
reference to the ‘circumstances of the particular occasion out of which
the injury has arisen’, but by having
regard to the ‘general nature,
terms and circumstances of the employment’. Keifel J in Maher was clear
that “encouragement”
“is not to be taken as of narrow meaning
and limited to some positive action and in specific terms which might lead the
to undertake a particular activity”.
65. As a drive in/drive
out worker at the mine, the worker was expected to stay at Zeehan Village in the
intervals between his shifts
at the mine. The Zeehan Village provided a number
of facilities that were available for the use of people who were accommodated as
drive-in/drive-out workers at the Zeehan Village. To paraphrase the Full Court
of the Federal Court in Westrupp, the employer should
be taken to have accepted
(and expected) that the worker would make use of the facilities provided at the
Zeehan Village as incidents
of his employment, including the laundry facilities.
The difficulty the worker encountered in accessing a washing machine in the
lead-up to his accident indicates that the laundry facilities were likely in
regular use by the Zeehan Village occupants.
66. The worker’s evidence
was that, at the time he was injured, he had just commenced a three weeks on,
one week off rotation
(which started just after the Christmas break). In a three
week working rotation, it would seem to be incontrovertible that he would
using the laundry facilities, on several occasions during that period. The
worker gave evidence that he considered it was appropriate
and professional for
him to present in clean attire for work. It was also clear from the
Accommodation Guidelines that presenting
in clean and respectable clothing was a
requirement for use of the dining room facilities at the Zeehan Village.
67. Even if the worker was working the six day on, one day off rotation, it
would be reasonably expected that the worker would access
the laundry facilities
provided for the use and benefit of those who were accommodated in the Zeehan
Village whilst he was there,
rather than allowing a whole rotation’s worth
of dirty clothes to accumulate - which would then need to be laundered in a
short period upon his return to Devonport – before driving back
to Zeehan Village again).
68. On the basis of the above, a consideration of
the ‘general nature, terms and circumstances’ of the worker’s
employment leads to the conclusion that he was induced and/or encouraged by the
employer to engage in the activity which led to his
injury, and I make that
Did the worker suffer the injury in the course of his
employment?
69. Applying the relevant questions, as set out in PVYW, to the
Hatzimanolis principle, the worker’s injury occurred during
an interval
between actual periods of work, whilst he was engaged in an activity in which he
had been induced or encouraged to engage
by the employer.
70. On that basis,
therefore, the injury to the worker’s shoulder arose in the course of his
employment, and the employer is
liable to pay compensation to the worker in
accordance with the Act.
71. I will hear the parties further, if it becomes
necessary, to finalise any other issues arising from the worker’s s42
COMMISSIONER
It should be noted that the
Full Court of the Federal Court in
indicated that this was a
typographical error that ought to have referenced “employee’ rather
than “employer”.
Here the Full Court set out
the passage from the judgment of Keifel J. in
which is reproduced
at paragraph 18 above.
Paragraphs 88-90 inclusive.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (176 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter