URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASWRCT/2021/37.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:23:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Building Apprenticeship Scheme Ltd v G. [2021] TASWRCT 37 (13 October 2021)
[2021] TASWRCT 37
WORKERS REHABILITATION AND COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
Building Apprenticeship Scheme Ltd v G.
BUILDING APPRENTICESHIP SCHEME LTD
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
5 October 2021
DELIVERED ON:
13 October 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Chief Commissioner Clues
CATCHWORDS:
Entitlement to compensation – inconsistent histories
provided to practitioners – reasonably arguable case
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
Bradshaw v Tasmania Networks Pty Ltd
[2019] TASSC 41
v Tasmania Networks Pty Ltd
[2021] TASFC 2
; Vos Construction & Joinery Pty
Ltd v Norton-Smith
[2016] TASSC 38
; GIO Australia Limited v Lovell
[2000] TASSC
; Lamont v MRD Supermarkets Pty Ltd
[2016] TASSC 16
; St Helens Oysters Pty Ltd
v Coatsworth
[2007] TASSC 90
(2007) 17 Tas R 43.
DETERMINATION:
A reasonably arguable case
REPRESENTATION:
M. Wilkins (Page Seager Lawyers)
[2021] TASWRCT 37
Chief Commissioner Clues
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. The worker is employed as an apprentice carpenter by the
employer. He made a claim for workers compensation on 1 July 2021. In
of that claim he presented an initial workers compensation medical certificate
dated 1 July 2021.
2. In summary, the worker claims that on 25 June 2021 he
was “Lifting piece of sheet mesh and felt a pop at lower back, shooting
pain down leg and lower back with worsening over day”.
3. In response
to question 18 of the claim form about whether the injury or condition was
solely due to this occurrence, the worker
responds “No” and states
“Similar back pain over last 4 years, last episode was around 2 months
ago, work related
but private work not claimed as w.c”.
4. A similar
description is provided in the initial workers compensation medical certificate
signed by Dr Chen. Dr Chen describes
the worker’s injury or disease as
“an aggravation of an existing condition”. Dr Chen certified the
worker as incapacitated
for work from 1 July 2021 to 15 July 2021.
employer disputes liability for the worker’s claim pursuant to
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
(the Act). When the referral
was listed for hearing the Tribunal attempted to contact the worker but was
unable to do so. I was
satisfied that it was appropriate for the hearing to
proceed in the worker’s absence.
Grounds of Dispute
6. Although not clearly set out in the referral, the grounds
for the dispute are as follows:
(a) The worker did not suffer an injury, not being a
disease, arising out of or in the course of his employment as required by
of the Act.
(b) The worker did not suffer an injury, which is a
disease, and to which his employment contributed to a substantial degree as
(c) The worker did not suffer an injury or
disease which is a recurrence, aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or
deterioration
of any pre-existing injury or disease to which his employment was
the major or most significant contributing factor to that recurrence,
aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or deterioration as required by
(b) of the Act.
7. The issue for the Tribunal to determine is whether the
employer has a reasonably arguable case to dispute liability to pay compensation
to the worker in relation to his claim for compensation.
The Evidence
8. The following material was tendered in support of the
(a) workers compensation claim form dated 1 July
(b) initial workers compensation medical certificate dated 1 July
(c) continuing workers compensation medical certificates dated 15 July
2021, 19 July 2021 and 4 August 2021;
(d) letter of dispute to the worker
dated 21 September 2021;
(e) MRI scan report dated 5 July
(f) general practitioner progress notes for the worker dated 25 June
2021 (Dr Last), 1 July 2021, 15 July 2021 and 4 August 2021 (Dr
(g) report of Keeley Wentzel (physiotherapist) dated 30 August 2021;
(h) report of Mr Yee (Peter) Gan dated 15 September 2021.
9. I summarise the relevant evidence below.
10. The worker
consulted Dr Last on 25 June 2021. Dr Last’s notes include the following
information:
“background
- initial injury was 4 years ago – took 6 months to recover
- has one flare/year
- has happened several times
- usually has anterior thigh tingling bilat - (usually at start of flare then
- L1/L2 region
- last time happened 4 weeks ago with Dr Tan
- impression without MRI was prolapsed disc
- hasn’t been to physio as per suggestion
- lift rio sheet and felt it ‘pop’ and then pain all day and
shooting pain into quads
- thinking needs more time off to get it healed
- L1/L2 tingling
- would like to speak to boss about workers comp before we do
11. The worker consulted Dr Chen on 1 July 2021. Dr
Chen’s notes read as follows:
“Reason for contact:
past 4 year getting episodic lower back pain
would get it around once a year
recently 2 month ago episode from reaching when plastering
settled with 2 session physio
and was completely fine
when lifting metal mesh
felt pop in lower back and sudden onset lower back pain which progressively
and also started getting shooting pain into both ant thiugh
most comfortable standing straight
sitting quite sore
no change in bowel
no weakness
lumbar pain suspected slipped disc with radiculopathy
refer physio
discussed red flag
off work for now
discussed after MRI to consider back to alternative
12. The worker first consulted Keeley Wentzel (physiotherapist)
on 2 July 2021. In her report dated 30 August 2021 Ms Wentzel states:
• The history the worker provided in relation to the
incident on 25 June 2021 was that he “was picking up a piece of sheet
metal and felt a click and immediate pain in his back. The pain slowly got
worse as the day went on. He was unable to bend over
lifting injury at work. The worker felt he went back to work too early after
his previous back injury he sustained
at work. He had 3 weeks off work before
he went back to full
episode [25 June 2021] is an acute-on-chronic presentation of low back pain that
is from a pre-existing injury.
[The worker] has a 4 year history of chronic low
back pain which originally started from an injury sustained from squatting at a
gym. He has had several repeat episodes including 6 weeks prior to this episode
when he stepped off a ladder while pulling plaster
13. The worker underwent a MRI scan on 5 July 2021. The
clinical notes record:
“21 yr old with lower
back pain following bending and lifting metal mesh and bilateral L1/2
radiculopathy pain. ? slipped disc.
Workers comp
14. The conclusion in the report is:
“L5/S1 central disc
protrusion/extrusion, although there is no neural compressive lesion. No lesion
is seen to impinge either
the L1 or L2 nerve
15. Dr Gan in his report dated 15 September 2021 summarises the
history the worker provided to him as follows:
back symptoms initially started when he was in grade 11. He
was in the gym and did squats with a bar and felt a pop in his low back.
not seek any medical help and it took a long time to recover. This was about
four years ago.
lockdown. He put a 20kg weight down and had a sudden increased
low back pain.
He saw the GP who treated him with physiotherapy and non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory medication and was put off work
for two weeks. He recovered
and was back to work full-time after that.
In the February/March of this year, he was doing some home renovation with
his mother. He stepped off the back of the ladder and
had immediate severe low
back pain. It was not as painful as the incident he had about a year ago. He
had a few sessions of physiotherapy
and took a few weeks off sick but was able
to go back to work.
At this time on 25 June 2021 which was around four weeks after return to
work, on that morning he said that his back felt fine with
no pain at all. He
was using a hammer to claw and lift up a double layered mesh sheet which was
While doing so, he fell backwards and felt a
sudden pop in his back. He had immediate increased pain in his lower back which
got worse. Throughout the day, the pain radiated to halfway down both
his quadriceps. He told his supervisor and continued to
16. Dr Gan makes a diagnosis of “exacerbation of a
pre-existing degenerative disease in his lower back causing L5/S1 disc
protrusion”
respect to causation Dr Gan states:
“I do not consider he
has suffered injury.
...I do not believe there was sudden and ascertainable physiological
18. Dr Gan says that in his view the worker “has suffered
a disease which is degenerative disease of his lumbar spine in particular
disc protrusion.” He also says that in his opinion the worker’s
“employment was not the major or most significant
contributing factor to
the development of that disease”. Dr Gan says “The process of the
development of disease is likely
maybe due to axial injury caused by lifting of
weights about four years ago and is aggravated and exacerbated several times
the years as is described in the
19. Further,
Dr Gan says:
“As the incident
happened doing his work, when he was lifting a 6 m x 3 m metal sheet, fell
backwards and had a sudden onset
of low back pain with no symptoms of back pain
for the last four weeks, in my opinion, his employment was the major and most
significant
contributing factor to the exacerbation of his
20. Dr Gan goes on to say:
“The factors, events
or state of affairs that led to the exacerbation were due to the fact that he
was lifting a metal sheet
with a hammer, fell backwards and jerked his back. He
at the time was just fully recovered from the exacerbation of low back symptoms
that occurred in February/March of this
The Inconsistencies in the Worker’s History
21. The worker told all the practitioners referred to in the
evidence about his original injury to his back that occurred 4 years
ago when he
was doing squats at the gym. However, the history in relation to his episodes
of back pain since that original incident
as well as ongoing symptoms and
treatment since then is far from clear.
22. In relation to the background
before the incident of 25 June 2021, Dr Last refers to:
• One flare per year.
• Most recent flare 4
weeks ago [late May].
• Saw Dr Tan “impression without MRI was
prolapsed disc”.
• Has not been to physio as per
suggestion.
23. With respect to the incident on 25 June 2021, the worker
said that he felt his back “pop” and then had pain all day
shooting pain into his quads. Dr Last refers to the worker “thinking
needs more time off to get it healed”.
24. Dr Chen refers to:
• One episode of lower back pain a year.
recent 2 months ago when plastering [late April].
• In the initial
workers compensation medical certificate Dr Chen refers to this as an episode
“related to work, but not
claimed under workers
compensation”.
• It settled with two sessions of physiotherapy
and was “completely fine”.
• On 25 June 2021 when lifting
metal mesh felt pop in lower back and sudden onset lower back which
progressively got worse and
also started getting shooting pain into both
25. Keeley Wentzel (physiotherapist) reports that:
• The worker’s first appointment was on 2 July
• The worker suffered several repeat episodes of low back pain
(since original incident), most recent 6 weeks prior [mid-May
• The recent episode occurred when he slipped off a ladder while
pulling plaster down at work.
• With respect to the lifting injury at
work on 25 June 2021, the worker felt he went back to work too early after his
back injury he sustained at work.
26. Dr Gan only records two episodes of back pain since the
original incident. The first occurred about a year ago when the worker
lifting a 20kg weight at home. The worker told him he recovered and went back
to work fulltime after that. The second occurred
in February/March 2021 doing
some home renovation with his mother. He stepped off the back of the ladder and
had immediate severe
low back pain. He had a few sessions of physiotherapy,
took a few weeks off work but was able to go back to work. On the morning
June 2021 the worker told Dr Gan “his back felt fine with no pain at
“In my opinion,
[the worker’s]
employment was the major and most significant
contributing factor to the exacerbation of his symptoms
[on 25 June
However it is important to note that this opinion was formed
based on the history given to him by the worker that prior to the incident
June 2021 he had “no symptoms of back pain for the last four
Further, this opinion is based on the history provided to Dr Gan by the worker
that as at 25 June 2021 “he was just fully
recovered from the exacerbation
of low back symptoms that occurred in February/March of this
28. There is inconsistent
evidence about whether the worker had “no symptoms of back pain for the
last four weeks” before
the incident of 25 June 2021 and further that he
was “just fully recovered” from the previous episode of back pain
occurred in February/March 2021 and prior to the incident of 25 June
29. The worker told Dr Last on 25 June 2021 that his last episode of
back pain had happened 4 weeks ago (not that he had been with
no symptoms of
back pain for the 4 weeks prior to 25 June 2021). Further, at that time the
“impression” about the worker’s
injury, with the benefit of a
MRI scan was that he had suffered a “prolapsed disc”. Further,
after the incident of 25
June 2021 the worker was thinking that he needed
“more time off to get it healed”. This would seem to relate to the
previous injury that occurred approximately 4 weeks ago according to the notes
of Dr Last.
30. The worker told the physiotherapist that his previous episode
of back pain had occurred 6 weeks previously and that it occurred
stepped off a ladder while pulling plaster down at work. He said he had 3 weeks
off work before he went back to full duties.
Once again this calls into doubt
the history provided to Dr Gan that the worker had been with no symptoms of back
pain for the last
4 weeks. The worker further told the physiotherapist that he
felt he went back to work too early after his previous episode of back
which implies that he was not symptom free as at 25 June 2021 and not
“fully recovered” as he told Dr Gan.
Consideration
view the inconsistencies in the worker’s history as recorded by each of
the practitioners he has consulted raises
arguable issues in relation to
32. The question to be determined by the Tribunal is whether a
reasonably arguable case exists concerning the liability of the employer
compensation. To do this, the Tribunal must assess the strength of the
competing factual contentions open on the evidence.
33. I refer to the
decision of Brett J. in Bradshaw v Tasmania Networks Pty Ltd
[2019] TASSC 41
which was upheld by the Full Court in Bradshaw v Tasmania Networks Pty Ltd
[2021] TASFC 2.
34. At paragraphs [22] to [23] Brett J. states:
The effect of
is that the employer's liability to pay compensation will arise where the worker
has suffered an injury as defined, in the circumstances
prescribed by that
section. In respect of the two pathways to liability created by the section,
Pearce J, in Vos Construction &
Joinery Pty Ltd v Norton-Smith (above), said
‘[23] There is no dichotomy between an injury which is a disease and an
injury which is not a disease. A worker is entitled
to recover if he or she
falls within either head of recovery: Zickar v MGH Plastic Industries Pty Ltd
(1996) 187 CLR 310
per Kirby J at 351, applied by
McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ in Kennedy Cleaning v Petkoska at 310
[23] The authorities also establish that when regard is had to the extended
definition of injury contained in subpar (b), there are
in fact three available
pathways to liability arising from
(a) The worker suffers an injury in the primary sense, that is an injury
which is not a disease, but is ‘something that can
be described as a
sudden and ascertainable or dramatic physiological change or disturbance of the
normal physiological state’.
See Military Rehabilitation and Compensation
Commission v May
[2016] HCA 19
257 CLR 468
, as discussed by Pearce J in Vos Construction v
Norton-Smith. Such an injury will be compensable if it arises out of or in the
of the worker's employment.
(b) The worker suffers a disease to which his employment contributed to a
substantial degree within the meaning of
that is, only if it is the major or most significant factor.
(c) By virtue of the extended definition of injury and its interaction with
an aggravation etc of a pre-existing injury or disease is an injury, but only
where the employment was the major or most significant
contributing factor to
that aggravation. In the case of the aggravation of a pre-existing disease, it
is the aggravation, not the
underlying disease, which must be causally connected
to the employment in the required sense: Long v Kmart Australia Ltd
[2016] TASSC 6
25 Tas R 237
, per Porter J at
35. Dr Gan’s report supports a finding that the employer
has a reasonably arguable case in relation to the first two pathways
liability. The evidence supports a finding that on 25 June 2021, the worker
suffered a worsening or exacerbation of his lower
back symptoms. The resolution
of this referral distils to the question of whether the evidence compels a
conclusion that the employer
has established that a reasonably arguable case
exists that the worker’s employment was not the major or most significant
contributing
factor to that exacerbation.
36. In the case of Vos Construction
& Joinery Pty Ltd v Norton-Smith
[2016] TASSC 38
Pearce J. refers to
the following quote from Kirby P. (as he then was) with agreement of Sheller and
Powell JJA. in Kooragang Cement
Pty Ltd v Bates
(1994) 35 NSWLR 452
result of the cases is that each case where causation is in issue in a workers
compensation claim, must be determined on
its own facts. Whether death or
incapacity results from a relevant work injury is a question of fact. The
importation of notions
of proximate cause by the use of the phrase
‘results from’, is not now accepted. By the same token, the mere
certain events occurred which predisposed a worker to subsequent
injury or death, will not, of itself, be sufficient to establish
incapacity or death ‘results from’ a work injury. What is required
is a common sense evaluation of the causal
37. Whether there is a reasonably arguable case requires
consideration of whether the material before the Tribunal discloses any other
possible causes of the exacerbation such that an incident of employment may not
be the major or most significant contributing factor.
38. It is my view that
based on the evidence and the inconsistencies in it, it is reasonably arguable
that circumstances other than
the incident that occurred at work on 25 June
2021, may have been the major or most significant contributing factor to the
exacerbation
of symptoms that occurred on that date.
39. One circumstance may
be the natural progression of the effects of the worker’s pre-existing
injury or disease and another
is the episode of back pain that occurred when the
worker stepped off the back of a ladder doing some home renovation work sometime
between February 2021 and late May 2021.
40. The evidence that the
worker’s employment was the major or most significant contributing factor
to the exacerbation of his
pre-existing injury or disease was based on a
potentially incorrect history and in my view is sufficiently equivocal to
argument that the employer has a reasonably arguable case with
respect to this worker’s claim.
41. Considering the totality of the
evidence, I am of the view that it is reasonably arguable that the
worker’s incapacity for
work from 1 July 2021 does not arise from an
injury compensable under
42. The employer bears the onus of proof in
establishing a reasonably arguable case (see GIO Australia Limited v Lovell
[2000] TASSC 75
and Lamont v MRD Supermarkets Pty Ltd
[2016] TASSC 16).
However, as explained by Estcourt J. in the Full Court decision of Bradshaw v
Tasmania Networks Pty Ltd
[2020] TASFC 2
the employer carries the onus of proof on a
application, I accept the
submission...that what the employer is required to prove is not that there is no
liability under
of the Act, but only that there exists, on the evidentiary
material the employer relies upon in the
proceedings, a reasonable chance
that the worker will be unable to discharge the onus of proof that will
ultimately rest with the
worker...on a final hearing of the worker's
43. In the same paragraph, Estcourt J. said he accepted
“the employer was certainly not required in this instance to positively
prove that some specific factor other than the worker’s employment was the
major or most significant contributing factor.”
44. Whether or not the
worker has a compensable claim cannot be finally determined on this referral.
What can be said at this stage
is that it is reasonably arguable that some
factor other than the worker’s employment was the major or most
significant contributing
factor to the exacerbation of the back pain he suffered
on 25 June 2021.
45. I am satisfied that it is reasonably arguable on the
material available in relation to the claim as well as the identified
deficiencies
and weaknesses in the claim that following a contested hearing, the
worker’s claim may be rejected. Accordingly, the test
set out by Evans J.
in St Helens Oysters Pty Ltd v Coatsworth
[2007] TASSC 90
(2007) 17 Tas R 43
is satisfied.
46. I have reached the conclusion that a reasonably
arguable case exits in this claim based on the evidence tendered at the
47. At the hearing, counsel for the employer made the following
submissions in support of an argument that a reasonably arguable case
do not accept the following submissions that were made.
(a) Once it is determined that the injury is one which is a
disease as defined by the Act, the only consideration that falls to the
is whether the worker’s employment contributed to that disease to a
substantial degree within the meaning of
(b) That the third pathway
to liability is only available to a worker if there is a pre-existing injury or
disease that is already
causative of an incapacity in the worker and work makes
that injury or disease more symptomatic.
(c) “That whilst Dr Gan says
there has been an exacerbation of the worker’s pre-existing L5/S1 disease,
he uses disease
in a medical and not legal sense. This is despite being
directed to it not being sufficient that there was a pre-existing symptomatic
“condition” that Dr Gan has equivalated disease (which has a
particular meaning under the Act) with a condition. To
do so is an error which
focusses, wrongly the question of causation on the proximate rather than the
totality of the contributing
factors to the suffering of a disease. Dr Gan
ignores that at this time [the worker] was symptom-free at the commencement of
work on 25 June
48. With respect to the first two submissions they are contrary
to the law as set out in Vos Construction & Joinery Pty Ltd v
Norton-Smith
[2016] TASSC 38
as well the decisions of Brett J. in Bradshaw v Tasmania
Networks Pty Ltd
[2019] TASSC 41
and the decision of the Full Court in Bradshaw
v Tasmania Networks Pty Ltd
[2020] TASFC 2.
49. With respect to the third
submissions, I consider it is “unduly technical and
unjustified.”
A disease is a condition of abnormal functioning and the word
“condition” is used in the definition of disease in
of the Act,
namely “ailment, disorder, defect or morbid condition”. Further, I
have found that considering the totality
of the potential contributing factors
to the exacerbation of the worker’s disease, it is arguable on the
evidence that at the
commencement of work on 25 June 2021 the worker was not
symptom free.
Determination
50. I am satisfied on the evidence before the Tribunal that
reasonably arguable case exists concerning the liability of the employer
compensation. I determine that a reasonably arguable case exists and there will
be orders pursuant to
and (d) of the Act.
A. M. CLUES
CHIEF COMMISSIONER
K Wentzel’s report dated
30 August 2021, page 1, para
K Wentzel’s report
dated 30 August 2021, page 1, para
K Wentzel’s report
dated 30 August 2021, page 2, para
MRI scan report dated 5
July 2021, page 1.
report dated 5 July 2021, page
Dr Gan’s report dated
15 September 2021, page 3.
Gan’s report dated 15 September 2021, page
Dr Gan’s report dated
15 September 2021, page 8, 4.4(a) and
Dr Gan’s report
dated 15 September 2021, page 7, 4.3(a), (b) and
Dr Gan’s report
dated 15 September 2021, page
Dr Gan’s report
dated 15 September 2021, page
Dr Gan’s report
dated 15 September 2021, page
Dr Gan’s report
dated 15 September 2021, page 10,
report dated 15 September 2021, page 10,
Section 81A
referral, page 3, paragraph
[2021] TASSC 28
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (160 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter