URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASRPDComm/2009/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:20:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Launceston Planning Scheme 1996 Amendment 151 [2009] TASRPDComm 25 (18 June 2009)
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Planning and Approvals Act 1993
Resource Planning
and Development Commission Act 1997
LAUNCESTON PLANNING SCHEME 1996
Draft Amendment 151
meeting on 17 November 2008 and pursuant to Section 8 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission Act 1997
, the Commission
delegated to John Vandenberg and Clarry Pryor jointly and
powers and functions under
sections 40
(2), of the
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
in relation to draft amendment
151 to the Launceston Planning Scheme 1996; and
connection with the exercise of those powers in performance of those functions,
its powers under Part 3 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission
The purpose of the amendment is
to create a Special Area (overlay) on the Plan entitled Invermay/Inveresk Flood
Inundation, which
is bounded generally by the Tamar and North Esk Rivers and
various property boundaries at the foot of Mowbray Hill, Launceston. The
affected area is also shown on proposed Schedule 15 which delineates seven
precincts where differing management objectives will apply.
The accompanying
Ordinance change creates Clause 39.5 to regulate use and development of land
within the precincts for the purpose
of limiting development that may increase
potential flood damage and risk to residents. Consideration is required to be
community, infrastructure and environmental impacts in the development
of land within the Special Area.
Council’s s.35 report, of 29 April 2008, describes the subject area as
containing 311 hectares of land that is at risk from
a 1:100 Average Return
Interval (ARI) flood event if the existing flood levees failed. There are 1866
individual properties within
the affected area, representing a mix of
residential, industrial, commercial, recreational, cultural and public
infrastructure uses
and developments.
The suburbs of Invermay and Inveresk were previously presumed to be adequately
protected by the levee system and this was reflected
in the 1996 planning scheme
controls. Subsequent
revealed that even a modest flood (1:50 ARI or less) could enter the suburbs
through levee failure or underflow. However the
‘flood protection
paradox’ has been at work for many years, in that flood mitigation works
have stimulated greater investment
in property development and thereby placed
more (and more valuable) property at risk.
Council’s initial response, under the
Building Regulations
, was to raise
required (new) floor levels for habitable rooms to be above the 1:100 ARI level.
This was seen as an interim control
until a more ‘fine-grained’
approach that recognised the varying character of use and development across the
could be formulated. Amendment 151 seeks to provide that more nuanced
approach to flood risk.
The zoning of the suburbs includes tracts of residential, industrial, light
industrial, commercial and recreation zones. The 7 precincts
shown on Schedule
15 follow closely (but not precisely) the zone boundaries and are listed as:
Residential
Residential
Road Commercial
Recreational
Recreational
See locality map below.
Documents supplied by Planning Authority
Council supplied the following documents: -
amendment 151, certified 14 April 2008, consisting of ordinance changes,
Special Area plan changes and Schedule 15;
minutes of 14 April 2008;
from the Mayor (7 August) seeking variation of process to enable further
community consultation and re-exhibition of proposed
modifications; (A further
extension of time to submit its
documents was granted until 31
Floodplain Study (See Footnote 1 for full reference);
of representations (See list of representors below)
Minutes of 1 September 2008;
amendment documents;
Representors
& M Ruijschop (H&M Autos)
Hooper (Badcocks P/L)
Walters (GJ Walkem & Co)
Davis (Davis Family Trust)
Connors (Protek)
Ruijschop (JR Autos)
& Collins lawyers (obo Clyde Nominees P/L)
Walkem (Graeme Walkem Project Management)
Treasury and Finance
Hoffman & A Blanch
Issues raised in Representations
Eleven representations were received and responded to collectively by
Issues raised related to: -
(a) floor area limits for residential, commercial and industrial
development;
(b) unnecessary restriction of development above the 1:100 ARI level;
(c) allowance for filling of land;
(d) prohibition of residential subdivision;
(e) anticipated devaluation of property;
(f) management objectives for the Riverside Industrial precinct;
(g) risk management; and
(h) subjectivity in assessment of flood impact.
Council’s Response to the Representations
In delivering Council’
report Council noted that modifications to
the amendment were recommended and commented that,
“This amendment is the end point of a complex analysis that factors in
many competing viewpoints. It is also the implementation
phase of a broader
agreement between Council and the State Government to better plan for potential
future flooding in the Invermay/Inveresk
area. Key stakeholders in the process
include the State Government, expert engineers, economists, town planners,
politicians, land
owners and the wider community. It is clear that there is no
consensus view on what is the best
Council supported the representations in part and submitted a revised
version of the amendment, identified as Document No. 1691648,
incorporating the
following responses to the representations: -
(a) Floor size limit
Council agreed that a 150m
floor area maximum and
allowance of a 25m
or10% increase for existing houses
was unfair to owners of small dwellings. A maximum of 200m
for houses and 400m
for industrial and
commercial property was recommended.
(b) Controls on land outside the 1 in 100 year flood inundation area
Council agreed that floor space limitations should not apply to land not
affected by inundation but reaffirmed that significant community
infrastructure
uses (such as hospitals, residential aged care and retirement villages) should
not be located in flood-free but potentially
isolated pockets in the Invermay
Residential precinct.
(c) Subdivision
Council recommended that, although the scope for residential subdivision was
very small, the creation of residential lots should
be prohibited (except within
the Invermay Residential Precinct).
(d) Devaluation
Council considered that it had advised the community of its proposals at the
earliest opportunity, there was no evidence that the
proposed controls would
cause devaluation and furthermore no compensation was payable under the Act.
(e) Management zone issues and related matters
Council considered it appropriate to ‘cap’ development at a
reference date of 1
January 2008 and suggested new
controls in relation to wharf related activities, restrictions in the Inveresk
Cultural precinct,
prohibition of residential use in the Invermay Road
Commercial precinct and restrictions on medical centres, childcare centres and
emergency service facilities. Business risks were shared with the community.
Council reiterated suggestions for relaxation of floor
space limits previously
noted. Some subjective assessment of performance criteria was part of the
planning process.
Date and Place of Hearing
March 2009 at the Town Hall, Civic Square, Launceston
Attendance at the Hearing
Robert Pearce, of Douglas and Collins, lawyers obo Clyde Nominees
Mrs Martin (Clyde Nominees)
Peter Davis (Davis Family
Ruijschop (H&M Autos), assisted by Ald. R.
James Dryburgh, Graeme Walkem Project Management
Phil Connors,
Protek Building Surveying & Consulting Services
Geoff Brayford, Director
Infrastructure Services, Launceston City Council
Brian Risby, Assistant State
planning adviser, assisted by Chris Lock and David Richardson obo Dept Treasury
and Finance
Richard Jamieson, senior planner, Launceston City
Michael Brett, lawyer for Launceston City Council
Decision and Reasons for the Decision
Issues for consideration
levels and kinds of risk to which various parts of the suburbs of Invermay and
Inveresk may be exposed, in a flood event.
characteristics of possible flood events and their effects on risks to life,
private property, public infrastructure, communications
and emergency response
capabilities.
land use and development controls may assist people, businesses and authorities
avoid, prevent and respond
the identified
the planning controls proposed by certified draft Amendment 151, will contribute
to the minimisation of identified risks and
the fair and orderly use and
development of property in the Invermay floodplain.
Issues 1 and 2 are thoroughly explained in the report by GHD, “Invermay
Floodplain: A Social, Economic, Infrastructure and
Risk Evaluation Study”
(October 2006), [the GHD report] the main conclusions of which are summarised
below. Issues 3 and 4
are dealt with in our examination of the certified draft
amendment and the modifications submitted by Council.
Issue 1. Risk Profile of the Invermay Floodplain
Mr Brayford advised that much of Invermay/Inveresk is below high tide level,
around AHD 2.0m, and were it not for the levees, would
be regularly inundated.
The water table level fluctuates in phase with tidal variations, illustrating
that water can move under the
levees and into the suburb. In recent years
Council has established a minimum floor level for habitable rooms at AHD 3.7m
derived from a 1:100 year Average Return Interval (ARI) flood level of
3.4m plus 0.3m freeboard.
The GHD report revealed that a major flood in Invermay/Inveresk is inevitable
– it is a question of when, not if. The weak
links in the system of levees
and the underlying ground conditions are such that the commonly perceived
“1 in 10,000 year protection”
given by the existing flood levees is
an illusion. Although designed for the ‘probable maximum flood’, the
engineering
advice is that the levees could fail even in a 1: 50 year flood
event before being overtopped. (GHD, p iv) The probability of damaging
over the next 50 years is estimated at 40%. This would result in direct losses
to residential, commercial and industrial property
of $110M or more.
The estimated total cost (in 2005 dollars) to buy up all property in the flood
plain is shown in the following table.
Table 1. Cost of Buying up Property in the
Residential
University, Museum & York Park (1)
Number of properties
Approximate costs to buy up
Source: Derived from GHD Report Appendix E
Note (1): There are no buy-out costs provided for Precinct 6, containing
Heritage Forest and Churchill Park.
Council analysed land use in each proposed precinct. The total area includes
some land above the 1:100 year ARI level. The distribution
of land use types
across precincts is summarised below. The predominant type is
highlighted.
Table 2. Area of Land Use in each
Precinct number
Precinct Area (ha) (approx)
Residential area (ha)
Commercial area (ha)
Industrial area (ha)
Public (inc sport & rec.)
Other (inc vacant & no record)
Totals (by precinct)
Source: Adapted from tables in Council’s s.35 report
Repair and replacement of levees, as recommended by GHD, could raise the level
of protection up to a 1:200 year flood level for an
initial cost of $25M and an
ongoing annual cost of $1M. However, it is not feasible to construct a levee
system that could give guaranteed
protection of properties from the largest
possible floods. Worldwide, it is now recognised that
security from flooding is neither technically possible nor economically
(White and Wallingford, 2001, quoted in GHD report,
According to Council’s flood map, the 1:200 year flood level would
inundate most of Churchill Park, the showground, Invermay
Park, Aurora stadium,
the Inveresk Railyards precinct, the Kings Wharf precinct and all the land lying
generally south of Landale
Street/Howard Street and west of Rooms Avenue.
Floodwater would also reach parts of Heritage Forest and the mostly commercial
in the vicinity of Mackenzie Street and Mowbray Street as well as
vacant land surrounding the Ti Tree Bend Waste Water Treatment
‘island’ of predominantly residential properties centred on Mayne
Street and Burns Street would remain above
the 1:200 year flood level but would
be isolated by flood water across Invermay Road to the north and south and
deprived of services
such as water, sewer and power.
GHD reported that (based on yr 2003 valuation records) 640 residential, 194
industrial , 78 commercial and 9 government properties
would be affected,
together with a smaller number of other property types, such as sport and
recreation facilities. Approximately
3000 people live in Invermay/Inveresk and
1450 people reside in the potentially flood affected area, not including those
for work, shopping and education. Council calculated that
approximately 1380 people would have to be evacuated and a further 1550
would be isolated by such a major flood.
GHD examined twelve options that evaluated the feasibility of doing nothing,
buying out properties or improving the levees. All the
buy-out options were
eliminated following analysis of costs and benefits.
GHD examined several options for upgrading the levee system, with or without
additional planning and building controls. Sub-options
examined the level of
protection required for the 1:100, 1:200 and 1:500 year flood event. Indicative
construction costs ranged
between $10M (do minimum to withstand 1:100 year ARI)
through various combinations of risk and levee improvement ($15M - $34M) to
most expensive option of $56M (new alignment to Montague St and all levees to
withstand a 1:500 year ARI flood).
The 2006 report noted, “
There are no land use or other planning or
building controls in place at present within the flood area that stop people,
and the community placing themselves, their property or their
facilities at risk of very serious damage...”
The economic modelling showed that the ’confidence net benefit’ for
the options increased by $1M - $3M and the ‘confidence
loss’ decreased by $4M -$6M with the imposition of new planning and
building controls.
In view of the expert engineering advice and modelling provided by Council, it
is considered that a clear case has been made out
to impose more restrictive
planning controls on use and development in the suburbs of Invermay and
Issue 2. Flood Characteristics
Ten major floods (i.e. greater than 1 in 20 year ARI) have been recorded for
the South Esk River. Five floods were 1 in 50 year
ARI or greater. The range of
recorded floods in the South Esk is shown in the following table. The North Esk
peak flows are approximately
20-25% of those in the South Esk.
Table 3. Flood Data for the South
Peak flood discharge (m
Peak flood level
Estimated ARI
1 in 200 year
1 in 100 year
1 in 50 year
1 in 20 year
Source: Adapted from Table 3, GHD Report, p 20.
GHD’s risk assessment of the existing levee system confirmed previously
documented deficiencies and identified eight potential
failure mechanisms,
including overtopping, undermining, overturning, sliding or collapse of sections
Council had estimated that under particular assumptions Invermay/Inveresk could
fill to the 100 year ARI level within 12 hours but
GHD noted that with a more
catastrophic collapse the filling time would be much shorter. Evacuation times
were difficult to estimate
but could be between 24 and 48 hours and would be
influenced by other flood-preparedness measures. GHD concluded that
unacceptable levels of risk are posed by the levee during floods
equal to or exceeding the 50 year ARI
The possible effects of climate change - sea level rise and more violent
extremes of weather – were noted by GHD as, “
grounds for
erring on the side of caution in relation to planning decisions where water
inundation is a significant factor
Council’s flood maps show the expected depth of flood waters at several
locations at intervals of 2, 4 8 and 12 hours following
a breach of the levees.
The indicated depths after 12 hours range from 0.74m near the northern end of
Invermay Road and 1.70m at
the Aurora stadium, to 2.52 m at the Forster/Montague
St junction. Mr Brayford advised that the velocity of flood waters was not
concern except in the immediate vicinity of a levee breach - for which there
might be no warning.
It is considered that the 1:100 year ARI is an appropriate design parameter to
use in establishing the precincts that should be subject
to more restrictive
planning controls.
Issue 3. Flood Risk Management
The GHD report recommended integrated flood risk management, a coordinated
approach that requires the following:
➢ Construction and maintenance of protection structures;
➢ Detailed and appropriate land use planning controls;
➢ Clear building controls and constraints;
➢ Flood emergency planning;
➢ Clearly defined responsibility, roles and functions; and
➢ Community involvement in decision-making and in preparation.
The agreement reached between Treasury and Council is not relevant to our
Levee Reconstruction
The GHD report recommended that: -
The Mowbray
levee should have minor repairs;
The Kings Wharf
and Scottsdale levees be replaced
in more or less the same
location except along Lindsay Street;
The Lindsay
Street section be reconstructed further back from the North Esk River. This
would require the purchase of private properties
but would create the
opportunity to develop public lands along the river edge.
It is considered that the potential to create more accessible public land along
the North Esk foreshore should be supported. Subsequent
planning scheme
amendments will be required in due course to confer an appropriate zoning on the
public land that is acquired
The Draft Amendment
Mr Jamieson explained that the draft amendment had been framed as a way of
balancing conflicting interests among stakeholders, in
the face of many unknowns
and uncertainties. Controls had to recognise and minimise the reality of the
flood risk, yet not be so
harsh as to curtail all development and depress
property values. The guiding principles for the amendment were to: -
(a) prohibit sensitive or critical uses such as schools, hospitals and emergency
(b) limit intensification of development (but recognising that Council could
only do this indirectly by limiting floor area);
(c) ensuring that new development was located and designed to withstand a flood
(d) adopt a precinct-based approach to enable a finer grained control suited to
the predominant characteristics of each area.
The proposed controls operate as an overlay that modifies the use status of uses
in the underlying zone and establishes extra controls
over development in the
form of ‘acceptable solutions’ and ‘performance
criteria’. This will enable the development
controls to be readily
transferred into a new planning scheme prepared in accordance with Planning
Directive No.1 (Format and Structure
of Planning Schemes). Some existing uses
and developments would become non-conforming but would retain existing use
Following exhibition, community consultation had been sought through
correspondence to landowners and in follow up meetings. Mr Jamieson
that the consequent modifications now recommended by Council represented a
better balance between competing interests.
In summary, the modifications proposed by Council are:
(i) Clause numbering - Change from ‘39.5.(*)’
(ii) Statement of Purpose – Add the words “to minimise risks and
hazards from flooding in accordance with the specific
principles applying to
flood prone land under Objective 4.22.2 of the planning scheme, in
particular...[then sub clauses (1), (2)
and (3) as certified] ” This
change clarifies the rationale for limiting development and use.
(iii) Application – Delete specific reference to the area affected by a
1:100 year ARI flood (which is not shown on a scheme
Plan) and refer only to the
land shown in proposed Schedule 15.
(iv) ‘Management zones/Precincts’ – Change to
‘Management Precincts’ and make minor wording changes
descriptions and management objectives.
(v) Controls over land use – Add Childcare Centre and Government Services
Centre (i.e. police station, ambulance station, fire
station or other emergency
service depot) as Prohibited in every precinct; add Single Dwelling as
Prohibited in the Invermay Road
Commercial precinct.
(vi) Standards for development –
(a) Expand the introductory statement to read, “These standards must be
read in conjunction with the standards for development
contained within the zone
provisions and other schedules of special areas. Unless a development complies
with the Acceptable Solutions
for each applicable objective, a Discretionary
Permit will be required Under (sic) this clause. Where there are no performance
for a standard the development must meet the acceptable solution in
order to be permitted under this clause. A development must be
refused if it
does not meet the applicable acceptable solutions for a standard and is also
assessed as not meeting the relevant performance
criteria for that
(b) Simplify the table of performance criteria and acceptable solutions by
applying common standards to all precincts and making
other wording changes.
(Those wording changes will be examined in more detail in the discussion of
submissions by representors. At
the hearing Mr Brett submitted that the words
‘in conjunction’ should be replaced by ‘in addition
Representors concerns raised at the hearing
Mr H Ruijschop and Mr J Ruijschop were concerned about the limited potential for
expansion of floor area in the Invermay Road Commercial
precinct posed by the
acceptable solution requiring a maximum 10% floor area increase and a
maximum total floor area per title. Mr H.
Ruijschop owns three titles with a total area of
. Even with Council’s submitted
modification to raise the maximum floor area to 400m
he would be only able to develop 1200m
Mr Jamieson responded that in the underlying Local Business zone the minimum lot
size was 300m
. There was no restriction proposed on
subdivision for non-residential purposes. It would be possible for Mr Ruijschop
to resubdivide
his titles to maximise the floor area that could be developed.
Alternatively, under Council’s proposed modification, if the
floor levels
were raised to be above the 1:100 year ARI level, no floor area restriction
would apply.
Mr Walkem’s representation stressed that the Invermay/Inveresk area
contained the most significant Commercial/Light Industrial
land in the Tamar
region. It questioned the prohibition of several use classes in specific
precincts and the restrictions on properties
that were not subject to
inundation. At the hearing Mr Dryburgh queried –
interpretation of the management objectives (which he regarded as too vague) in
the Invermay Road Commercial precinct;
reliance on
floor area as a measure of intensification of development;
the emphasis on
flood velocity in Council’s requirements for a hydrological report and
emergency management plan for any development
of new buildings and
infrastructure; and
prohibition of
caretaker’s dwelling. (This point was also raised by Mr
He also suggested that the White City redevelopment warranted its own precinct,
but this idea was not supported by Council. The Delegates
were not persuaded
that a sufficient case had been made to treat this locality differently from the
remainder of the Invermay Road
Commercial precinct.
Mr Jamieson explained Council’s reasoning behind the prohibition of
specific use classes in each precinct. The management objective,
‘Maintenance of the current intensity of development’ was not
intended to prevent the development of the 16 remaining
vacant titles in the
Invermay Road Commercial precinct. Floor area was ‘not a perfect
tool’ but was one of the few practical
measures available. Based on
analysis of Invermay/Inveresk buildings, a 400m
building was considered a reasonable upper limit as an acceptable solution (A2)
under Council’s proposed modifications. Applicants
requiring larger
buildings should consider other locations or be able to satisfy the
corresponding performance criterion (P2). He
opined that the level of
investigation required for a particular application would depend on the probable
depth of flood water across
the site and its proximity to the levees during a 1:
100 year ARI event. On the question of a caretaker’s dwelling Mr Jamieson
conceded that there could be circumstances where it would be convenient to
develop one but he was not aware of many instances. It
was uncertain whether
such a dwelling would be treated as a separate use or as ancillary to an
approved use.
Mr Risby submitted that the amendment, with the modifications proposed by
Council, represented a careful and considered approach
to a complex matter. It
was consistent with the objectives of the Act and the provisions of the scheme.
It supported the precautionary
approach and addressed the ‘flood
protection paradox’ by limiting the potential for intensification of
development. Although
the proposed modifications included some development
provisions that had been slightly relaxed, few properties were affected.
Furthermore,
other land use controls were proposed to be tightened and the
Government remained comfortable with the balance that had been
Assessment of the certified amendment and recommended
modifications
Both Council and the Department of Treasury and Finance expressed a strategic
intention to counter the ‘flood protection paradox’
that leads, over
time, to a perverse result of placing more people and built capital on the flood
plain at risk. The approach taken
is to limit the growth of residential
population exposed to risk and limit capital intensification of land. This is to
be done through
prohibition of some land uses and capping the amount of
development that may be permitted.
On the other hand, the representors who had an interest in developing land in
the flood plain sought to retain the potential to invest
further capital in
their sites.
The 7 precincts are shown on a plan that forms part of Schedule 15. There is a
reference to Schedule 15 to be shown on the relevant
Special Area Maps, so that
readers of the scheme maps are made aware of the additional controls. However,
in the locality at the
foot of Mowbray Hill the boundary of the ‘Special
Areas –Invermay/Inveresk Flood Inundation’ (Precinct 5) is unclear.
Following the hearing, Council provided a clearer version of that
Mr Jamieson advised of a drafting error affecting Mr Atkinson’s property
in Montague Street. A version of the Schedule 15 plan
correcting this error has
been provided.
The modification to expand the statement of purpose for Schedule 15 is supported
because it explains the rationale for the controls
and links them back to the
overarching objectives of the planning scheme.
The Delegates also agree with the proposed modified tables of uses for each
precinct, generally in the form put forward by Council
in document 1691648. The
precinct names should be numbered for consistency with the text and plan of
Schedule 15 to assist readers
of the scheme to cross reference the text to the
Mr Brett submitted, and the Delegates agree, that in the first sentence of
35.A.7 Standards for Development, the words ‘in
conjunction with’
should be replaced with ‘in addition to’.
It can be seen from Table 2 and the Schedule 15 plan that the precinct
boundaries encompass areas of generally similar land use,
with the predominant
land use occupying the majority of its precinct.
The management objectives for each precinct contained in the draft amendment
express Council’s intention in the following way
and are substantially
unchanged by Council’s proposed modifications. They assist to guide the
exercise of discretion when Council
considers an application relying on the
performance
Management Objectives in the Certified amendment
Council’s proposed modifications to the Management
1. Riverside Industrial
Long term limitation of riverside industrial activities;
Limitations on future capital intensification of existing industry;
New residential uses prohibited;
Significant community infrastructure prohibited;
No conversion of industrial uses to residential uses.
Prohibit new residential uses;
Prohibited Significant community (sic) infrastructure;
2. Inveresk Residential
Long term maintenance of the residential area at the current intensity;
Limitation on future increases in residential development;
Prohibitions of significant new community infrastructure;
3. Cultural
Maintenance of the area as a centre of cultural, recreational, entertainment and
educational facilities;
Prohibition of new residential uses;
Limit commercial development opportunities to those that support the cultural,
recreational, entertainment and educational intents
Prohibit new residential uses
4. Invermay Residential
Maintenance of the existing residential character;
Prohibit significant community infrastructure.
5. Invermay Road Commercial
Maintenance of the current intensity of development;
Provide for limited redevelopment opportunities;
Prohibit intensive residential uses;
Prohibit significant community infrastructure.
Prohibit residential uses
6. Recreational
Maintain the largely open space character of the area;
Buildings only to support recreational use of the land;
No new commercial or industrial uses;
Prohibit new residential uses;
Prohibit significant community infrastructure.
7. Riverside Recreational
To create a open space (sic) precinct to be used for reconstructed levees;
To allow limited development consistent with the use of the area for public
recreation;
Prohibit new residential development;
Prohibit significant new infrastructure.
Suggested changes to the wording of management objectives are considered later.
Some minor typographical corrections are also needed.
The management objectives
should guide the exercise of discretion over development applications that rely
on performance criteria
for the development standards of
‘intensification’ and ‘flood impact’.
Council’s proposed modifications condensed the certified development
standards into two standards, to apply across all precincts.
The standards have
the following objectives:
Intensification
– To limit the intensification of development in
areas subject to flood inundation; and
Flood Impact
– To ensure that new buildings and infrastructure are
designed to consider the impact of flooding.
These two objectives were not proposed to be changed.
Under the ‘Intensification’ objective, the performance criteria and
acceptable solutions in the certified amendment distinguished
between the
industrial/commercial precincts, the residential precincts and the
cultural/recreational precincts but did not distinguish
between residential and
non-residential buildings.
The acceptable solution was that each new or relocated building or building
extension was to be limited to a 10% increase in floor
area over a base figure
taken at 1 January 2008, with no building or collection of buildings on a title
allowed to become larger
. Performance
criteria were available to enable Council to exercise discretion to approve
larger developments that were consistent
with the management objectives for a
precinct, except in the residential precincts, where no performance criterion
was available.
Moreover, in the residential precincts (#2 &#4) the floor
area limit was the lesser of 10% or
Following exhibition and consultation, Council proposed structural modifications
that, in effect, largely removed the distinction
between precincts but provided
different acceptable solutions for residential and non-residential buildings.
The floor area limit
was relaxed to 200m
residential buildings and 400m
for non-residential
The concern for some representors, and the Delegates, was to clarify how the
standards for development would be interpreted in addition
to the intents and
standards of the underlying zone and the precinct management objectives of
Schedule 15 so as to guide the assessment
of development
applications.
It was suggested by some that floor area was a fairly crude measure of the
intensity of development, as it took no account of the
value of building
materials, fittings, machinery or stock.
A subtle but potentially significant change suggested by Council would remove
the floor area limits for residential buildings and
the prohibition on
subdivision or strata for future residential development in the Invermay
Residential precinct – the ‘island’
above the 1:100 year
The structural changes to the Acceptable Solutions and Performance Criteria, as
recommended by Council in Document 1691648, are generally
supported with the
following further changes.
Residential buildings
Acceptable Solution A1 (c) should become a performance criterion, as
“P1 New floor area for residential buildings on a vacant lot must not
exceed 200m
or through extensions of existing
buildings increase the floor area by more than 10% of that existing or approved
January 2008 unless the building will be
within the Invermay Residential Precinct and the development is consistent with
the management objectives for that precinct.”
Non-residential buildings
For non-residential buildings the performance criteria for precincts 1, 3, 5, 6
and 7 were condensed into one modified performance
criterion (P2) which allows
the recommended 400m
limit to be exceeded if: -
(a) the use is for a river related activity in the Riverside Industrial
precinct; or
(b) the use is for a public entertainment, recreational or community purpose in
the Inveresk Cultural precinct; or
(c) all new floor area is located above the 1:100 year ARI;
and in all cases the development is consistent with the management objectives
for the precinct.
The definition of floor area does not include car parking areas. The scheme
definition is – “the total area of all floors
within the external
walls of a Building. It does not include any area occupied by mechanical or
electrical services and plant, lifts,
or stairways, or any loading bay, or car
parking area.”
The concern is that by allowing all new floor area above the 1:100 year ARI
level to be excluded from a 400m
floor limit, the
control over intensification is seriously weakened. For example, for sites not
far below the ARI level it would
be possible to import sufficient fill onto the
site to raise floor levels above the ARI level and overcome the floor area
For sites where inundation was deeper, conversion of ground floor space
to car parking and construction of new floors above the ARI
level would be an
alternative way of avoiding the floor area limits of the acceptable solution.
Those alternatives would undermine
the broader strategic objective of minimising
intensification.
Council and the State government concurred in their submissions at the hearing
that some non-residential intensification was allowable
because businesses could
assess their risks on a commercial basis before deciding whether to locate or
expand their operations in
the floodplain. Residents were generally not as able
to manage their risk in the same way as a business. Nevertheless, it is
the flooding of non-residential buildings can generate community
costs and the risk is not simply a matter of commercial judgement
individual business owner.
Intensification
The term ‘intensification’ is used in the scheme but is not defined.
In the amendment, floor area is used as a proxy
to measure intensification but
was acknowledged by Mr Jamieson to be a ‘blunt
instrument’.
Using the figures shown in Tables 1 and 2 above, a broad estimate of the
existing level of capital intensity can be made by dividing
the estimated
buy-out cost by the area of land use. For example, 75.2 hectares of residential
land use, across all 6 precincts, has
an estimated buy-out cost of $115M, giving
a capital intensity of $1.53M/hectare. For the four broad classes of land use
the following
ratios can be obtained, as shown below. The cost of open space was
not calculated by GHD but is presumed to have a low capital
Table 4 Broad Estimates of Capital Intensity ($M/ha, 2005
Area of Land use type
( from Table 2)
Estimated buy-out cost (from Table 1) ($M)
Capital Intensity
Residential
Public buildings (University, Museum and York Park only)
(Precinct 3 only)
(Precinct 6 only)
No estimate but no need to buy out
Presumed to be lower than all other uses
Obviously these are crude estimates and could be refined on a precinct by
precinct basis, with allowances made for the age and condition
of the built
fabric or other factors such as heritage value. With refinement, they could be
useful in establishing a baseline against
which to measure future changes in the
intensity of development, at least at a precinct level. Comparison of the
relative levels
of capital intensity for each broad land use type can provide a
strategic basis for land use choices in a flood plain.
If the prime strategic goal is to minimise the future intensification of
development, as measured by capital-at-risk, then uses with
the lowest capital
intensity, historically, would be preferred ahead of those with the highest
capital intensity.
On the ratios calculated in Table 4 the order of preference for land uses would
be: - open space, then industrial, then public, then
residential and finally
commercial uses - which has the highest capital intensity.
This order (open space> industrial> public building> residential>
commercial) is reinforced by consideration of risk
to life, because industrial
and public uses are generally likely to be occupied for fewer hours each day or
at lower population density,
compared to residential and commercial
Discussion at the hearing focussed on the development potential of precinct 5,
the Invermay Road Commercial precinct. The management
objectives for precinct 5,
‘maintenance of the current intensity of development’ and
‘provide for limited redevelopment
opportunities’ are not considered
sufficiently precise to establish how ‘current intensity’ is to be
measured or
what the cut-off figure for ‘limited redevelopment’
might be, nor whether these factors are to be measured for the particular
or the precinct as a whole. However there are other discretionary powers
available to Council, including the permit status of
use classes and floor area
qualifications on some uses, which may assist to restrict excessive
intensification of precincts.
Alternative wordings were suggested for the precinct 5 management objectives.
Mr Jamieson initially proposed substituting the existing words with,
“Maintenance of the current commercial/retail character
of the area”
and deleting “Provide for limited redevelopment opportunities”. Mr
Brett cautioned that those words
would free up development completely and that
any development that maintained the commercial/retail character would satisfy
the management
objective, regardless of size and flood resistance. He suggested
removal of P2 (d). Mr Risby also expressed concern at the relaxation
of criteria
and the inconsistency of Mr Jamieson’s suggestion with a preferred policy
that ‘encourages the conversion
of land use to activities that incur low
levels of flood damage’.
Mr Risby then proposed, and Mr Jamieson supported, replacing ‘Maintenance
of the current intensity of development’ with
‘Maintenance of the
current commercial/retail character of the area with limitations on future
capital intensification of existing
commercial, retail and light
In consideration of the above arguments, Mr Risby’s suggested wording is
The standards for development in terms of intensification and flood impact can
be simplified by adopting Council’s recommended
modifications, but with
some changes.
It is considered that although the Invermay Residential precinct may not be
‘subject to flood inundation’ (except perhaps
in the more extreme
flooding scenarios) it could nevertheless be
affected by
flood inundation
in any flood event that is accompanied by a levee failure.
This would occur through physical isolation by flood waters and tidal waters
interruptions to power, water, sewerage and telecommunication services that
could take some time to restore while a levee was
Council’s proposed changes to the controls for the Invermay Residential
precinct, which were not opposed by the State Government’s
representatives
at the hearing, would deny it the capacity to limit the potential for more
intensive residential redevelopment in
this precinct, and thereby limit the
numbers of people affected by the secondary effects of
It is considered that the Intensification objective should be expanded. It is
also considered that mere location within the Invermay
Residential precinct is
not a sufficient reason not to apply controls over intensification.
The allowance of subdivision under performance criterion P3 should recognise
that it may be desirable to separate, by strata title,
dwelling units within a
building as well as separating individual residential buildings on a
It is considered that the intensification standard should be modified to read:
Objective: To limit the intensification of development in areas subject to, or
seriously affected by, flood inundation.
Performance Criteria
Acceptable Solution
P1. New floor area for residential buildings on a vacant lot must not exceed
or through extensions of existing buildings
increase the floor area by more than 10% of that existing or approved on the
January 2008 unless the building will be within the
Invermay Residential Precinct and the development is consistent with achieving
the management objectives for that precinct.”
A1. New residential buildings, extensions to existing residential buildings or
relocated buildings :
not increase the floor area of individual buildings or the total floor area on
the title to more than 110% of that existing or
approved on the
January 2008; or
not result in a total floor area of more than 200m
a vacant site.
P2. New floor area for non-residential buildings on a vacant lot must not exceed
or through extensions of existing buildings
increase the floor area by more than 10% of that existing or approved on the
January 2008 unless:
use is for a river related activity such as boat building, boat repair and
maintenance, marina, wharf, provedore, chandlery or
boat ramp within the
Riverside Industrial Precinct; or
use is for public entertainment, recreational or community purposes within the
Inveresk Cultural Precinct; or
new floor area is located above the 1:100 year ARI flood level; and in all
development is consistent with achieving the management objectives for the
relevant precinct.
A2. New non-residential buildings, extensions to existing non-residential
buildings or relocated buildings :
not increase the floor area of individual buildings or the total floor area on
the title to more than 110% of that existing or
approved on the
January 2008 or 400 m
whichever is the greater; or
b) will not result in a total floor area of more than 400m
on a vacant site.
P3. Subdivision or division of land by strata plan will not create any
additional lots capable of future residential development
proposal is to separate existing dwelling units that have been approved by
Council on a single title; or
proposal is to separate existing residential buildings and non-residential
buildings that have been approved by Council on a single
proposal is within the Invermay Residential Precinct and is consistent with
achieving the management objectives for that precinct.
A3. Subdivision or division of land by strata plan will not create any
additional lots capable of future residential development.
Under the objective of ‘Flood Impact’ the certified amendment had
two acceptable solutions that required (a) all new
buildings and extensions to
have floor levels at least 300 mm above the 1:100 ARI flood event and (b) new
buildings and infrastructure
to be sited and designed in accordance with a
hydrological report and emergency management plan prepared by an
It would appear that compliance with the first acceptable solution would not
obviate the requirement to comply with the second acceptable
solution even if
the site was clearly well above the flood level. That is, even for land above
the 1:100ARI an engineer’s hydrological
report must be provided. Also, the
performance criteria merely restated the acceptable solutions in a different way
and did not provide
a clear trigger for the exercise of Council’s
discretion.
The modifications to the draft amendment proposed by Council sought to
distinguish between habitable and non-habitable rooms but
removed any
performance criteria for habitable rooms, as shown below.
Objective: To ensure that new buildings and infrastructure are designed to
consider the impact of flooding.
Performance Criteria
Acceptable Solution
P1 a) No performance criteria
A1 a) Floor levels of habitable rooms will be at least 300mm higher than the
1:100 ARI flood event
P2 a)New non-habitable rooms or buildings must be designed to take account
velocity of flood waters and depth of inundation;
need to locate electrical equipment and other fittings above the 1:100 year ARI
flood level
likely affect of the use or development on flood
characteristics
of the occupants of the development and whether there is flood free access to
of the use or development to withstand flood inundation and debris damage and
the necessity for the incorporation of any flood
proofing or protection measures
in the development.
A2 Floor levels of non-habitable rooms or buildings:
be located on land the surface of which at 1
2008 is or is approved to be above the 1:100ARI flood event; or
be sited and designed in accordance with a hydrological report and an emergency
management plan prepared by a suitably qualified
engineer. The report must
detail the likely impacts of a flood on the building and its occupants and how
the building will be designed
to avoid, mitigate or remedy the
Neither the planning scheme nor the
Building Act 2000
habitable room (although a definition is found in the Building Code of
Australia) but
Building Act
“59. Land subject to flooding
A person must not erect or place a building containing habitable rooms on
land subject to flooding unless the floor level of each
habitable room in the
building is 300 millimetres or more above the prescribed designated flood level
for that land.”
speaking, proposed acceptable solution A1 a) is superfluous because the
necessary control for Council is found in the
Building Act
. However, in the
interests of informing readers of the scheme, the acceptable solutions can
remain with modifications. Proposed acceptable
solution A2 need not refer to
floor levels because it is meant to be dealing with the location of the building
on a suitably elevated
site. If the building site is not sufficiently elevated,
the performance requirement offers a mechanism for Council relaxing the
for a non-residential building upon submission of an engineer’s
comprehensive report. This enables a commercial assessment
of risk to be
factored into the costs of the site works and buildings.
It is considered that the confusion between acceptable solutions and performance
criteria has not been fully addressed and that the
standard should be reworded
as follows: -
Objective: To ensure that new buildings and infrastructure are sited and
designed to avoid or mitigate the risk and minimise the
Performance Criteria
Acceptable Solution
P1. a) No performance criteria
A1. Floor levels of habitable rooms will be at least 300mm higher than the
1:100 ARI flood event, in accordance with the
Building Act
P2. a) New non-habitable rooms or buildings must be sited and designed in
accordance with a hydrological report and an emergency
management plan prepared
by a suitably qualified engineer.
The report and plan must detail the risks and likely impacts of a 1: 20 year, 1:
50 year and 1:100 year ARI flood event on the site,
the building and its
occupants and how the development will be designed and how the use will be
managed to avoid, mitigate or remedy
the impacts to take account of:
(i) the risk of levee failure in the vicinity of the site;
(ii) likely velocity of flood waters and depth of inundation;
(iii) the need to locate electrical equipment and other fittings above the 1:100
year ARI flood level;
(iv) the likely affect of the use or development on flood characteristics;
(v) safety of the occupants of the development, potential evacuation routes and
whether there is flood free access to the land;
(vi) ability of the use or development to withstand flood inundation and debris
damage and the necessity for the incorporation of
any flood proofing or
protection measures in the development.
A2. Non-habitable rooms or buildings will be located on land the surface of
January 2008 is or is subsequently
approved to be above the 1:100ARI flood event.
The amendment is required to be modified as shown in Annexure
Schedule 1 Objectives
The draft amendment, once modified in accordance with this decision, is
considered to further the Objectives. It promotes fair, orderly
and sustainable
development of land in the Inveresk/Invermay floodplain through integrated flood
management. This will involve a
combination of levee improvements, controlling
the potential intensification of use and development in flood affected areas and
emergency management protocols. There was no evidence of adverse
effects on ecological processes or biodiversity. There has been
substantial
public involvement in the preparation and assessment of the draft amendment and
appropriate sharing of responsibilities
between governments and the community.
Economic development will be facilitated within the constraints imposed by a
thorough assessment
of flood risks.
The amendment is strategically
based and strengthens the established planning scheme. It is based on an
assessment of environmental
factors, and the risks of flooding in social and
economic terms so as to improve the safety of the living, working and
recreational
environment of Inveresk/Invermay and protect public and private
Application of State Policies
State Coastal Policy 1996
The affected land is within an established settlement on a major estuary. The
Policy allows for development of port related activities
as proposed in the
management objectives for precinct 1 and the redevelopment of industrial land to
create public foreshore land
in precinct 7. The amendment has been prepared as
part of integrated flood management that seeks to respond to coastal processes
of tidal inundation, flooding and storm surge. The amendment, as modified, is
considered to be in accordance with the Policy.
Interim State Policy on the Protection of Agricultural Land 2008
The amendment applies to an urban area with no agricultural value. The Policy is
not relevant.
State Policy on Water Quality Management 1997
The amendment applies to a fully serviced urban area and is considered to have
been prepared in accordance with the Policy.
Pursuant to
Section 41(a)
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
the Commission requires the planning authority to modify the draft amendment
as set out in Annexure A and gives its approval to the
draft amendment as
modified pursuant to Section 42 of the Act.
John Vandenberg Clarry Pryor
DELEGATE DELEGATE
18 June 2009
The certified amendment is modified as follows: -
Plan changes
the certified plans with the modified plans, amended 16 March 2009, showing
properties at 30, and 36 Montague St and part
of 75 Mayne St within precinct 1.
the boundaries of the Invermay/Inveresk Flood Inundation Area on the relevant
Special Areas Maps with a reference to Schedule
Ordinance changes
Clause 39.5.1, after the words “The purpose of” delete the words
“this schedule is” and insert the words
“this clause is to
minimise risks and hazards from flooding in accordance with the specific
principles applying to flood prone
land under Objective 4.22.2 of the planning
scheme and in particular:”
39.5.2 Application of the provisions
, delete the text of the
sub-clause and substitute “This clause applies to use and development,
including subdivision, on land
shown in Schedule 15 “Invermay/Inveresk
Flood Inundation Precincts”.
39.5.3 Definitions
include after the definition of
following definition of ‘habitable room’
“Habitable room
– means a habitable room as defined in the
Building Code of Australia.”
39.5.4 Exemptions
after the words ‘height of 2.1 m’
insert the words ‘and not a habitable room’.
Clause 39.5.5 delete ‘zones/’ from the heading.
Clause 39.5.5, Management Objectives Table,
a. delete the heading ‘Area’ and substitute
‘Precinct’;
precinct 1, dot point 3 with ‘Prohibit new residential
precinct 1, dot point 4 with ‘Prohibit significant community
infrastructure’;
precinct 2, dot point 3 with ‘Prohibit significant community
infrastructure’;
precinct 5 dot point 1 with ‘Maintenance of the current commercial/retail
character of the area with limitations on
future capital intensification of
existing commercial, retail and light industry’;
precinct 6 description replace ‘heritage forest and coronation park’
with ‘Heritage Forest and Churchill Park’;
precinct 7 dot point 1 replace ‘a’ with ‘an’ before the
word “open”;
precinct 7, dot point 4 with ‘Prohibit significant community
infrastructure’.
Clause 39.5.6 , number the heading ‘Controls over land use’ as
39.5.6.1 and number the precincts 1-7 in addition to
Clause 39.5.6 first paragraph, second line delete ‘zones/’;
the heading ‘Standards for development as 39.5.6.2
Clause 39.5.6, for each precinct table insert after ‘Care facility’
the use ‘Childcare Centre’ as a PROHIBITED
Clause 39.5.6 for each precinct insert, in alphabetical order, the use
‘Government Services Centre’ with the corresponding
“PROHIBITED – if a police station, ambulance station, fire station
or other emergency services depot”
Clause 39.5.6 in the Invermay Road Commercial precinct insert, following
Retirement village the use ‘Single dwelling’
as a PROHIBITED
Clause 39.5.6.2 omit the tables following “Discretionary Permit will be
required...” and insert the following:-
“A. Intensification’
Objective: To limit the intensification of development in areas subject to, or
seriously affected by, flood inundation.
Performance Criteria
Acceptable Solution
P1. New floor area for residential buildings on a vacant lot must not exceed
or through extensions of existing buildings
increase the floor area by more than 10% of that existing or approved on the
January 2008 unless the building will be within the
Invermay Residential Precinct and the development is consistent with achieving
the management objectives for that precinct.”
A1. New residential buildings, extensions to existing residential buildings or
relocated buildings :
not increase the floor area of individual buildings or the total floor area on
the title to more than 110% of that existing or
approved on the
January 2008; or
not result in a total floor area of more than 200m
a vacant site.
P2. New floor area for non-residential buildings on a vacant lot must not exceed
or through extensions of existing buildings
increase the floor are by more than 10% of that existing or approved on the
January 2008 unless:
use is for a river related activity such as boat building, boat repair and
maintenance, marina, wharf, provedore, chandlery or
boat ramp within the
Riverside Industrial Precinct; or
use is for public entertainment, recreational or community purposes within the
Inveresk Cultural Precinct; or
new floor area is located above the 1:100 year ARI flood level; and in all
development is consistent with achieving the management objectives for the
relevant precinct.
A2. New non-residential buildings, extensions to existing non-residential
buildings or relocated buildings :
not increase the floor area of individual buildings or the total floor area on
the title to more than 110% of that existing or
approved on the
January 2008 or 400 m
whichever is the greater; or
not result in a total floor area of more than 400m
a vacant site.
P3. Subdivision or division of land by strata plan will not create any
additional lots capable of future residential development
proposal is to separate existing dwelling units that have been approved by
Council on a single title; or
proposal is to separate existing residential buildings and non-residential
buildings that have been approved by Council on a single
proposal is within the Invermay Residential Precinct and is consistent with
achieving the management objectives for that precinct.
A3. Subdivision or division of land by strata plan will not create any
additional lots capable of future residential development.
Objective: To ensure that new buildings and infrastructure are sited and
designed to avoid or mitigate the risk and minimise the
Performance Criteria
Acceptable Solution
P1. a) No performance criteria
A1. Floor levels of habitable rooms will be at least 300mm higher than the 1:100
ARI flood event in accordance with the
Building Act 2000
P2. a) New non-habitable rooms or buildings must be sited and designed in
accordance with a hydrological report and an emergency
management plan prepared
by a suitably qualified engineer.
The report and plan must detail the risks and likely impacts of a 1: 20 year, 1:
50 year and 1:100 year ARI flood event on the site,
the building and its
occupants and how the development will be designed and how the use will be
managed to avoid, mitigate or remedy
the impacts to take account of:
(i) the risk of levee failure in the vicinity of the site;
(ii) likely velocity of flood waters and depth of inundation;
(iii) the need to locate electrical equipment and other fittings above the 1:100
year ARI flood level;
(iv) the likely affect of the use or development on flood characteristics;
(v) safety of the occupants of the development, potential evacuation routes and
whether there is flood free access to the land;
(vi) ability of the use or development to withstand flood inundation and debris
damage and the necessity for the incorporation of
any flood proofing or
protection measures in the development
A2. Non-habitable rooms or buildings will be located on land the surface of
January 2008 is or is subsequently
approved to be above the 1:100ARI flood event.
“Invermay Floodplain: A Social, Economic, Infrastructure and Risk
Evaluation Study”, October 2006.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (341 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter