URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASLPDT/2024/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:16:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Penelope Curtis v Sally Sarah Ellen Rofe and Mary Anne Ryan [2024] TASLPDT 2; (10 May 2024)
LEGAL PROFESSION DISCIPLINARY TRIBUNAL
CITATION: Penelope Curtis v Sally Sarah Ellen Rofe and Mary Anne Ryan [2024]
PARTIES: Applicant: Penelope Curtis
Respondents: Sally Sarah Ellen Rofe and Mary Anne Ryan
FILE NO: 458-1/2022DT
DELIVERED ON: 10 May 2024
DELIVERED AT: Hobart
HEARING DATE: 12 December 2023
THE TRIBUNAL: M. E. O’Farrell SC (Chairman)
D. Luttrell
application is dismissed
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: In person
Respondents: A B Walker
Decision Number: [2024] TASLPDT 2
Number of paragraphs: 105
DETERMINATION
Introduction
23 and 24 April 2021, the applicant made two complaints to the Legal Profession
Board (‘the Board’). The first complaint
was against her former
solicitor, the first respondent. The second was against her former barrister,
the second respondent.
respondents were retained by the applicant in relation to proceedings that had
been initiated by the applicant’s former
husband on 9 May 2017 under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) for a property adjustment order. The
first respondent was retained for the proceedings on 6 March 2017. The second
was not retained until 18 March 2018, just over 4 weeks before the
trial of the proceedings before a judge of the Federal Circuit
Australia. The trial of the proceedings was conducted on 24, 26 and 27 April
2018. The respondents’ retainers ended
on 28 May 2018.
review of the complaints against the respondents is confined to their conduct of
those retainers.
2 March 2022 the Board handed down its determination dismissing the complaints
pursuant to
Legal Profession Act 2007
(Tas) (‘the
LP Act’). In doing so it considered that there was no point in further
investigating the matter.
applicant applies to the Tribunal, under s 458 of the LP Act, for a review of
the Board’s determination.
complaints to the Board consisted of a considerable number of elements. The task
is to identify which, if any, of these elements
is capable of being dealt with
under the LP Act as unsatisfactory professional conduct, or professional
misconduct.
the reasons that follow, we determine that the application to the Tribunal
should be dismissed.
application is made under the LP Act, s 458, which relevantly
(1) The complainant, or the Australian legal practitioner who is the subject of
the complaint, who is served with a notice of the
determination of the Board in
relation to a complaint may, within 21 days after the date of that determination
(a) apply to the Tribunal ...to have the matter to which the determination
relates determined by the Tribunal...
(3) The determination of a matter pursuant to an application made under
subsection (1)(a) is to be by way of a re-hearing.
respondents submit that it is not the Tribunal’s task to undertake a
merits review. We consider that the task is not quite
so confined.
Boland v Boxall
pointed out ‘the element of ambiguity in the use of the word
‘re-hearing’’, Blow CJ said:
8. Having regard to the second reading speech and the history of the
legislation, it is clear that the word "re-hearing" is used
to refer to the sort
of re-hearing that the Full Court undertakes in an appeal from a decision of a
single judge in a civil matter.
The nature of such a re-hearing was well
described by Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Kirby JJ in
Fox v Percy
214 CLR 118
, as follows:
The 'rehearing' does not involve a completely fresh hearing by the appellate
court of all the evidence. That court proceeds on the
basis of the record and
any fresh evidence that, exceptionally, it admits.
9. On such an appeal by way of rehearing, the issues for determination are
defined by the grounds of appeal. Since this proceeding
is not an appeal, but
one involving a re-determination, the issues are not so confined. Unless
otherwise ordered, the parties may
not rely upon any evidence other than the
record of the proceedings before the Board and the documents or other exhibits
before the Board.
‘matter to which the determination relates’ is the dismissal of the
applicant’s complaint to the Board under
the LP Act, s 451. That section
451. Dismissal of complaint
After an investigation of a complaint against an Australian legal practitioner
has been completed, the Board may dismiss the complaint
if satisfied that
(a) there is no reasonable likelihood that the practitioner will be found guilty
of either unsatisfactory professional conduct or
professional misconduct; or
(b) it is in the public interest to do so.
Board’s ground for the dismissal was that there was no reasonable
likelihood that either respondent would be found guilty
of either unsatisfactory
professional conduct or professional misconduct.
expression ‘reasonable likelihood’:
...speaks of a chance of an event occurring or not occurring which is real
– not fanciful or remote. It does not refer to a
chance which is more
likely than not to occur, that is, one which is 'odds on' or where between nil
and certainty it should be placed.
A chance which in common parlance is
described as 'reasonable' is one that is 'fair', 'sufficient' or 'worth
terms ‘unsatisfactory professional conduct’ and ‘professional
misconduct’ are found in Chapter 4, Part
4.1, Division 1 of the LP Act.
Those expressions are defined as follows:
420 Unsatisfactory professional conduct
For the purposes of this Act –
unsatisfactory professional conduct
includes conduct of an
Australian legal practitioner occurring in connection with the practice of law
that falls short of the standard
of competence and diligence that a member of
the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably competent Australian legal
practitioner.
421 Professional misconduct
(1) For the purposes of this Act –
professional misconduct
(a) unsatisfactory professional
conduct of an Australian legal practitioner, where the conduct involves a
substantial or consistent
failure to reach or maintain a reasonable standard of
competence and diligence; and
(b) conduct of an Australian legal
practitioner whether occurring in connection with the practice of law or
occurring otherwise than
in connection with the practice of law that would, if
established, justify a finding that the practitioner is not a fit and proper
person to engage in legal practice.
(2) For finding that an Australian legal practitioner
is not a fit and proper person to engage in legal practice as mentioned in
(1), regard may be had to the suitability matters that would be
considered if the practitioner were an applicant for admission to
profession under this Act or for the grant or renewal of a local practising
certificate.
422 provides for non-exclusive categories of conduct, none of which are
presently relevant. The categories of conduct are
not, however, closed. In
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v
Brett J said that the
task of determining conduct under ss 420 and 421:
...involves an evaluative assessment of the conduct, measured against the
standard of competence and diligence that a member of the
public is entitled to
expect of a reasonably competent Australian legal practitioner. The second step
is to determine whether the
unsatisfactory professional conduct amounts to
professional misconduct. In making this determination, an assessment must be
as to whether the conduct involved a substantial or consistent failure to
reach or maintain a reasonable standard of competence and
diligence. It is the
finding that the relevant failure has been substantial or consistent which is
critical to this determination.
A further observation which can be made about
the legislative scheme incorporated into this legislation is that the standard
of competence
and diligence required of a legal practitioner is to be evaluated
on the basis of what a reasonable member of the public would be
entitled to
expect of the practitioner. I think that this results in an important shift of
emphasis away from the formulation which
preceded this legislation, which
depended upon what practitioners of good repute and competency would reasonably
consider to be conduct
which could be described as disgraceful or dishonourable.
standard of proof for the finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct or
professional misconduct is the balance of probabilities.
But it is well
recognised that the standard requires the Tribunal to be reasonably satisfied,
and that threshold is not reached ‘by
inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect
inferences’.
LP Act, s 458(5) provides:
The Tribunal may determine an application, made to it under this section, in
accordance with Part 4.7, other than sections 464, 466(7)(b),
467(5)(b) and 468,
as if the application were an application made under Division 2 of that Part.
s 466(7)(c)(iii) the Tribunal may dismiss a complaint if ‘the application
was made more than 3 years after the conduct complained
of is alleged to have
will become apparent, a considerable amount of the conduct alleged in the
complaints occurred more than 3 years before they were
follows that our task is to determine whether:
(a) we should dismiss the complaints in so far as they relate to conduct that
occurred more than 3 years before they were made; and
(b) if not, or the conduct is otherwise within the 3 year time limit, there is a
reasonable likelihood that having regard to the
requisite standard of proof, the
respondents would be found guilty of either unsatisfactory professional conduct
or professional
misconduct in respect of any of the conduct alleged.
The Complaints
Conduct more than 3 years before the complaints were
complaint against the first respondent was made to the Board on 23 April 2021.
The complaint against the second respondent was
made on 24 April 2021. A
considerable amount of the conduct complained of occurred more than three years
before the complaints were
made. The Board’s determination, however,
considered the whole of the conduct complained of, without considering whether
was just and fair to do so, having regard to the delay or the reasons for
However, having regard to the
Board’s determinations that it did not need to investigate the matter
further and that the complaints
were not reasonably likely to amount to
professional misconduct, the point may be academic. Nevertheless, for reasons
that will become
apparent, we conclude that none of the applicant’s
allegations in respect of the conduct alleged to have occurred 3 years before
the complaints were made are capable of amounting to professional misconduct,
and that it is not in the public interest to deal with
reasons for concluding that it is not in the public interest are that:
(a) the applicant was given considerable latitude before the Board to produce
all of the documentary evidence said to support her
complaints. It is reasonable
to conclude that she has no further evidence;
(b) both that evidence and her long and sometimes convoluted accounts, or
submissions accompanying her evidence confirm that either
she was confused as to
the proceedings in which she was involved and how best to conduct them, or she
was determined that they be
conducted in the manner she wanted them to be
conducted, regardless of the advice given to her by the respondents;
(c) the applicant was given every opportunity to present her case to the
(d) accordingly, there is no public interest in prolonging the outcome of these
complaints or requiring the respondents to respond
further. The complaints would
undoubtedly fail.
Accordingly,
in respect of that conduct, we would, in any event, dismiss the complaints under
s 466(7)(c)(iii) of the Act.
Recurring issues
complaints need to be understood in the context of four related issues that
constantly arise in the material before the Tribunal.
The first issue concerns
the applicant’s desire to maintain her marriage, despite her husband
having left the matrimonial home
and instituting the property proceedings. A
second and related issue is the applicant’s insistence that her husband
was suffering
from dementia. On her view this meant that her husband lacked
capacity to make a decision to separate from her. A third issue was
allegation that her husband had on many occasions been violent towards her. A
fourth issue was that one of the couple’s
daughters, Ms K, a lawyer, had
engineered the separation and the property proceedings.
once the point about the husband’s capacity was lost, the issue in the
proceedings involved the financial adjustment
that had to occur between the
husband and the applicant. The issues raised above should then have fallen away,
except for the limited
possibility that a ‘Kennon’ adjustment could
be advanced in favour of the applicant.
focus must remain on the respondents’ conduct viewed in that
Fresh evidence
applicant submitted that the Tribunal ought to have regard to a number of
documents that were not in the considerable material
she had provided to the
Board. One of the documents, a letter dated 13 April 2017, bearing the heading
‘[W]ithout prejudice
save as to costs’ from the first respondent to
the former husband’s solicitors was admitted by consent as exhibit A1.
respondents objected to the admission of the other documents. We marked those
documents for identification.
tests for whether the Tribunal should admit new evidence are:
(a) could the evidence have been produced to the Board or discovered with
reasonable diligence when the matter was before the Board;
(b) would it make a material difference to the outcome of the application.
reject the application to admit the documents marked for identification MFI A to
E on the following bases.
(a) MFI A is a case note summary of phone calls from the applicant to the
National Domestic Family Violence and Sexual and Support
Service, between 23
March 2016 and 5 May 2017. In a covering note, the applicant states that the
document was generated on 9 May
2017 and that ‘[she] cannot remember
showing it to [the first respondent]’. Clearly, the document was in
existence when
the matter was before the Board and could have been produced. It
would also not make a difference to our determination about whether
there was a
reasonable likelihood that the respondents would be found guilty of either
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct.
(b) MFI B is a bundle of documents, which apart from documents 3 and 4 in the
bundle, all post-date the termination of the respondents’
retainers. None
of the documents are the respondents’ documents and therefore cannot
materially go to any question relating
to their conduct. Moreover, they could
have been produced by the applicant to the Board.
Document 3 is a letter 20 July 2017 from the former husband’s
geriatrician to his lawyer. It was in evidence before the Board
and before the
Document 4 is a letter 13 September 2017 from the applicant to the
geriatrician. It also forms part of the evidence before the Board.
There is no need to duplicate these documents.
(c) MFI C is an affidavit sworn 6 March 2019 made by a friend of the former
husband in support of an application for a family violence
order against the
applicant. It post-dates the termination of the respondents’ retainers and
is, in any event, irrelevant to
any issue relating to their conduct.
(d) MFI D is an undated document executed by the applicant before a justice of
the peace setting out information apparently obtained
from ‘family
members’ on 24 December 2022. Clearly, it post-dates the termination of
the retainers and is not material
to any issue relating to the
respondents’ conduct.
(e) MFI E is an email exchange between the applicant and the Retirement Benefits
Fund concerning the Court’s orders made in
2018. They record that the RBF
was never served with the orders. They do not relate to any element of the
complaints made by the
applicant against the respondents to the Board. That is,
there is no complaint that the Court’s orders were not properly executed.
Matters of complaint
its reasons, the Board set out a summary of the complaints under a number of
headings. For convenience, we propose to adopt the
Board’s summary and set
out our determination in respect of each complaint. Where necessary, we will
refer to the Board’s
The Husband’s Dementia.
applicant contends that the respondents:
(a) failed to obtain expert opinion about the husband’s dementia
(b) failed to obtain affidavits from the husband’s treating doctors and
geriatrician and have them give evidence so that the
second respondent could
cross-examine them;
(c) incorrectly stated and/or agreed that the evidence of the husband’s
dementia was historical;
(d) failed to read the doctors’ notes that were subpoenaed as they
contained information about the husband’s visits to
the doctor, his
admissions about his treatment of the applicant, and the doctors’ belief
that the husband’s dementia
was worsening with violence; and
(e) failed to accept her contention that she was not separated from her husband,
that the marriage was intact and that they were
only living separately due to
the husband’s dementia and the resulting psychotic violent incidents.
appears that on 1 May 2017
first respondent wrote to the husband’s solicitor raising the issue of his
capacity, by reason of dementia. The husband’s
solicitor wrote back in
perfunctory terms on 2 May 2017 in effect rejecting the contention that the
husband lacked capacity. On 3
May 2017 the first respondent wrote back
requesting the husband’s solicitor to obtain an assessment to determine
whether the
husband had capacity to provide
instructions.
report dated 20 July 2017 was obtained from Dr
It relevantly stated:
I remain convinced that [the husband] suffers some minor cognitive changes as a
consequence of small vessel ischaemic change but
that his cognitive function has
been quite stable over the fifteen years in which I have known him. I believe he
has always had and
retains the capacity to make financial and lifestyle
decisions and that he has not and does not suffer from a dementia. I have always
been of that opinion and remain so.
applicant did not agree with Dr D’s assessment. However, the husband would
not agree to a further assessment. The respondents
advised her, correctly, that
there was no cause, or procedure available to compel the husband to attend an
assessment.
evidence relied on by the applicant to prove the husband’s dementia was
contained in his medical
To that extent it is
correct to characterise it as ‘historical’. The notes reveal MRI
scans in 2002 and 2003 ‘consistent
with ischaemic injury’. There are
many recorded subsequent attendances on doctors, but, again, as the Board found,
no record of further diagnostic testing.
first respondent provided the applicant with the opportunity to examine the
husband’s medical records. The applicant complains
that the first
respondent should have examined them as well. In our view, that complaint has no
substance for two reasons. First,
as the first respondent advised her, spending
time examining the records would increase the applicant’s costs and would
be counterproductive. The applicant was advised that successfully pursuing
her husband’s dementia may result in the husband
receiving a greater share
of the property pool.
the applicant was once a nurse, who, on her own account, held a senior nursing
position. Given her determination that her
husband had dementia, it was fair to
assume that she would locate relevant material in the records and instruct the
respondents accordingly.
She provided the respondents with notes of her
examination of the medical records. In our view, the entries recorded in the
are at best equivocal and do not confirm a firm diagnosis of
also consider, consistently with the reasoning of the Board at [63] of its
determination, that the assertion that the husband had
dementia was largely
generated from the applicant’s subjective opinions about her
husband’s condition.
with that evidence, and the recent opinion of Dr D, the respondents’
approach to the applicant’s case is unsurprising.
They provided advice to
the applicant that the evidence was against her and she was unlikely to succeed
on the point. In our view,
they were correct.
appears, however, that they pursued their instructions to the point of cross
examining the husband on the question of capacity,
until it became clear that
the judge thought the point had no
our view there is no reason to further investigate this issue. There is no
reasonable likelihood that, in respect of the conduct
identified in the
applicant’s complaints, having regard to the requisite standard of proof,
the respondents would be found
guilty of either unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct.
Family Violence
applicant complains that:
(a) the respondents inappropriately focused on historical abuse by the husband,
when she did not want any family violence issues
to be included in her
affidavit, with her instructions to only detail the more recent violence that
was attributable to the husband’s
(b) the respondents acted against her instructions in applying to subpoena
Tasmania Police files;
(c) the respondents failed to provide advice or consider that the husband was
committing a criminal offence when he left her and
refused to provide medical
care and assistance given he was her paid carer;
(d) her first affidavit did not have 10 pages about family violence and there
was no heading of family violence; and that
(e) the claim that there was no evidence of the recent family violence is
incorrect; that the applicant had advised the respondent
of the evidence that
was contained in the subpoenaed medical files.
documents were prepared by the applicant and provided to the respondents setting
out her instructions of the family history and
her husband’s violence
towards her. At least one of those
appears to have been
delivered on 23 March 2018.
was likely sent soon
afterwards, it having been requested by the first
respondent.
23 April 2018 the second respondent provided written confirmation of her advice
to the applicant, given in conference on 22 March
2018. In relation to the
violence she said:
[The applicant] went on to speak about the burden of family violence she had
suffered at her husband’s hands throughout the
relationship, but
particularly in the years following his diagnosis with dementia...
I confirmed with [the applicant] she wanted us to concentrate on:
The family violence she alleged...
The proceedings are matrimonial property proceedings. Accordingly, the only
relevance of negative conduct, such as family violence,
by one party towards
another is the impact it has had on a party’s earning capacity and the
burden it presented to contributions
made by the subject of the violence. Thus,
a psychological/psychiatric condition needs to be diagnosed as first existing in
subject and secondly directly attributable to the violence. Other than that
it is not relevant to the proceedings...
...I tentatively advised it was doubtful on our best case we could achieve
anything like a 5% adjustment because of this and she
should expect no more than
1 to 2% if we were able to satisfy the court that an injury exists in Ms Curtis
which is directly attributable
to violence from the husband. I reiterate I
remain pessimistic as to this.
is evidence that the advice was read in full to the applicant on 24 April 2018
and that she signed a copy of it in
acknowledgement.
We find that it
was read to her and that she signed the document.
applicant’s affidavit in support of her response to the proceedings was
filed on 11 April 2018. Following the delivery of
the applicant’s
affidavit to the husband’s solicitor on 11 April 2018 the husband’s
solicitor complained that the
allegations of violence suggested that the
applicant would be attempting to seek a ‘Kennon’ adjustment against
the husband
and that there was no basis for
The respondents had advised
the applicant that the basis for such a claim was doubtful and that it was
unlikely to succeed.
There is no
evidence to suggest that the applicant changed her instructions to include the
violent episodes in her affidavit.
view of the advice given by the respondents it seems unlikely that they would
pursue the issue of violent episodes in the absence
of the applicant’s
specific instructions.
the execution, filing and delivery of the applicant’s affidavit on 11
April 2018, she telephoned the first respondent’s
office at 1.28pm to
leave a message to the effect that she was ‘devastated and
distraught’ that she had ‘now signed
something that’s not
first respondent sent an email to the applicant at 2.10pm that day asking her to
‘go through the affidavit and note specifically
what is inaccurate’.
The evidence does not reveal that the applicant complied with this request. On
11 April 2018 she wrote
to the first respondent to say (amongst other things):
Nowhere in the affidavit does it say that I have cared for [the husband] for 15
years with increasing difficulty due to psychotic
episodes. [The second
respondent] is wrong when she says he was not having them. He is ill. We were
separated by illness under one
roof, with Government help to keep me safe.
is evidence in the handwritten notes of a meeting between the applicant and the
respondents on 16 April 2018 that she did not
want the episodes of violence
included, yet at the same meeting she appears to have insisted that they be
brought out at trial. The
notes also record the respondent’s refutation of
the suggestion that the applicant did not want the episodes to be included.
18 April 2018, the applicant sent the first respondent a further affidavit
stating that she had read the husband’s affidavit
and did not realise that
affidavits could be so personal, and therefore she wanted to change hers. She
ended the email as follows:
‘and now this added threat of removing the violence and health conditions.
There is no hope now at all of regaining my family
and the truth coming
as to the allegation concerning the commission of a criminal offence. Even
accepting that it occurred (as to which we express
no opinion) it was no part of
the respondents’ retainer to provide advice about it.
of the alleged conduct occurred less than three years before the complaint was
it had, we would agree that there was no reason to further investigate this
issue. There is no reasonable likelihood that, in respect
of the conduct
identified in the applicant’s complaints, having regard to the requisite
standard of proof, the respondents
would be found guilty of either
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct.
Allegations of Mental Health issues:
applicant contends that the respondents:
(a) claim that she needed a litigation guardian were baseless;
(b) inappropriately pressed to obtain a report from her Consultant Psychiatrist,
Dr K and when she refused permission to obtain a
report from Dr K and he
declined to provide one, they then inappropriately pressed her to obtain an
independent report. She does
not suffer from a severe psychiatric illness and
has not spent months/years in psychiatric hospitals as claimed.
first respondent initially instructed another barrister, who had to withdraw
from the case because of a conflict of interest.
However, following an initial
conference with the applicant on 20 December 2017 that barrister raised concerns
ability to provide instructions and suggested the
possibility of a litigation guardian.
similar concern was raised by the second respondent shortly after she was
briefed as counsel.
is well recognised that practitioners are sometimes required to make judgments
concerns, take appropriate
our view, the respondents were well within their bounds of their professional
obligations to raise the issue with the applicant
and seek to confirm it with
the person most likely to be able to assess the applicant’s capacity; her
consultant psychiatrist.
is common ground that the applicant terminated the possibility of seeking the
psychiatrist’s assessment. There is no reason
to think that that action,
or the applicant’s assertion that she did not need a litigation guardian
would allay the respondents’
are unable to find any basis for this complaint.
Matrimonial Property, Assets & Financial Disclosure
applicant complains that:
(a) her instructions were clear, that is, she wanted to keep the matrimonial
disabilities;
(b) the respondents failed to seek an expert opinion or research the
husband’s superannuation, including the effect of a splitting
order, if it
was even possible. The trial went for an additional day as the Court sought that
a representative from RBF be called
to give evidence about the RBF
superannuation. No contact was made or information obtained about a TasPlan
(c) the respondents did not contest the husband’s affidavit, which
included false information about his finances including
that the husband had not
declared all his income and did not explain the withdrawals he made from joint
accounts prior to separation.
The financial information that the second
respondent submitted to the Court on the applicant’s behalf had errors in
the calculations,
for example, the money in one of her bank accounts was counted
twice, the costs paid by the second respondent for fixing items that
were broken
around the home when the husband collected his belongings were not included as a
payback, the money she received as an
inheritance and her redundancy payment
were not taken into account as additional contributions made by her and the
first respondent
failed to identify the errors in the financial statements
tabled at a conciliation in 2017.
the marital property was the inevitable consequence of the husband’s
application to the Court. The applicant was given
consistent advice to that
effect. Failing compromise, the split would be achieved by an order of the
Court. The subjective desires
of a party to a marriage will not necessarily be
realised in the process.
is no doubt that the respondents provided advice to the applicant about the
property split and that much of that advice was
predicated on the premise that,
as the principal asset in the property pool, the marital home would need to be
is evidence that she wanted to ensure a smooth transition from the sale of the
accommodation.
result of the application was that the respondents achieved a 55/45 split in the
applicant’s favour.
to the allegations concerning the husband’s superannuation, the evidence
is to the contrary. The first respondent researched
the question of the
husband’s superannuation and an officer of the Retirement Benefits Fund,
from the Department of Treasury
was called to give evidence at the trial.
to the complaint that the husband’s financial statement contained false
information and that the applicant’s financial
statement was incorrect, on
the evidence it is difficult to accept that the respondents failed to give
attention to the accuracy
of the material to be put before the Court. The
financial position of the parties was the issue before the Court.
is, however, correct that the balance of one of the applicant’s savings
accounts was counted twice in the consent orders
filed and made on 27 April
That was an unfortunate
mistake that was corrected when those orders were vacated and fresh orders filed
on 15 June 2018.
the inclusion of the second entry in relation to the savings account was
negligent is not a matter which we need to decide.
However, without more, it
could not be said to amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct or
professional misconduct.
complaint relating to the conciliation conference relates to conduct that
occurred more than 3 years before the complaints were
our view there is no reason to further investigate this issue. There is no
reasonable likelihood that, in respect of the conduct
identified in the
applicant’s complaints, having regard to the requisite standard of proof,
the respondents would be found
guilty of either unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct.
Elder Abuse
applicant complains that the respondents failed to provide the Court with
letters written by her daughter to doctors that proved
her daughter committed
elder abuse and reveal her daughter’s agenda to punish her.
material before us suggests that the applicant held a belief that one of her
daughters, Ms K, had, effectively, orchestrated her
Husband’s separation
from her and was controlling her husband’s case in the proceedings.
or not that was the case, it was not relevant to any issue in the proceedings.
It was no part of the respondents’ professional
duties to provide the
material to the Court.
our view there is no reason to further investigate this issue. There is no
reasonable likelihood that, in respect of the conduct
identified in the
applicant’s complaints, the respondents would be found guilty of either
unsatisfactory professional conduct
or professional misconduct.
Affidavit sworn by the applicant on 11 April 2018
applicant contends the respondents failed to:
(a) finalise her affidavit, which included matters that she did not want to be
included, and advised her that despite her protestations
she was not allowed to
make any changes;
(b) emphasise the incidents of violence as instructed by her that related to the
husband’s dementia and were more recent;
(c) include the husband’s letters to the Commissioner of Tasmania Police
to protect the
(d) include the many letters from her daughter, a friend of the husband, and the
husband which proved that the husband was being
influenced with respect to the
separation and supported her contention that the marriage was intact but they
had separated due to
the husband’s illness;
(e) additionally, the applicant states she signed her affidavit under duress and
did not read it entirely, therefore missed the words
such as ‘abused all
my life’ and ‘fucking’. As a result of her distress about the
content of the affidavit,
the applicant had to make changes when she gave
evidence at the trial.
response to the first respondents’ submissions to the Board, the applicant
claimed that:
(a) she signed the affidavit under duress, was lying by omission, didn’t
want to sell her house, and that the affidavit did
not include that she cared
for the husband for 15 years with increasing difficulty due to the
husband’s psychotic episodes;
(b) she wanted it to be known that the husband was ill and that they were
separated by illness under one roof with government help
to keep her safe, and
that she needed to clear her name with friends, children, grandchildren and
(c) in her email to the first respondent on 16 April 2018, she noted that she
wanted the truth about the Husband’s behaviour
to be addressed, but also
to be in the context of the cause being his dementia;
(d) having read the affidavits of her children and the risk that they would be
called to give evidence, in order for that not to
happen she would withdraw from
the proceedings and tell the Judge that she had no choice but to lie in her
affidavit and she repeatedly
told the respondents that she did not want extra
money, she just wanted the truth, in particular about her daughter who had been
abusing both of them.
nature and the detail of the applicant’s response to the Board is telling.
First, it shows her inability to comprehend the
proceedings in which she was
involved. The proceedings related to the division of property, not to her
allegations relating to her
husband’s behaviour during the marriage, her
daughter’s behaviour, or her vindication in the eyes of others. Secondly,
it reveals that she did not, or could not, accept the respondents’ advice
that the allegations of dementia and violence were
unlikely to succeed, or
assist in the outcome of the proceedings.
relevant facts about the affidavit have already been set out. The evidence does
not suggest that the respondents dictated the
content of the affidavit. To the
contrary, for reasons already given, they did not consider that the allegations
of dementia and
violence would have a significant effect on the proceedings. The
desire to effect changes to the affidavit, after its execution,
emanated from
the applicant. Moreover, when asked to specify the changes, the applicant failed
to respond, except in the most general
second respondent also expressed in her advice 23 April 2018 her misgivings
conduct alleged occurred more than 3 years before the complaints were made.
it had not, in our view there is no reason to further investigate this issue.
There is no reasonable likelihood that, in respect
of the conduct identified in
the applicant’s complaints the respondents would be found guilty of either
unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct.
Meeting on 11 April 2018
applicant complains that the respondents ignored her doctor’s certificate
stating she could not make any legal decisions
on Monday 11 April 2018, because
she had a urinary tract infection and that the second respondent screwed up and
threw a letter from
the husband at her, which stated that he loved her and
wanted to grow old with her. The second respondent told her that they did
want that sort of evidence.
doctor’s certificate is not in evidence. In any event, we have significant
doubts about whether a urinary tract infection
would prevent ‘legal’
decisions being made. The fact is that the applicant attended the meeting.
Consistent with the
Board’s reasons, we expect that the respondents’
concerns were to prepare the matter for trial, finalise the evidence,
discuss any necessary further steps to be taken.
conduct alleged occurred more than 3 years before the complaints were made.
it had not, in our view there is no reason to further investigate this issue.
There is no reasonable likelihood that, in respect
of the conduct identified in
the applicant’s complaints, the respondents would be found guilty of
either unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct.
Letter from the Husband’s solicitor 11 April 2018
applicant complains that she was not advised of the letter from the
husband’s solicitor regarding the content of her affidavit
and she was not
advised that the respondents were seeking a ‘Kennon’ adjustment.
allegation is not supported by the evidence provided by the applicant to the
Board, that confirms she was aware of the letter
from the husband’s
solicitor. It is clear from the email from the first respondent to the applicant
of 19 April 2018 that she
was at least aware of the existence of the
to the complaint that she did not understand that the respondents were seeking a
Kennon adjustment, the advice from the second
respondent sets out the principles
of that type of adjustment.
conduct alleged occurred more than 3 years before the complaints were made.
it had not, in our view there is no reason to further investigate this issue.
There is no reasonable likelihood that, in respect
of the conduct identified in
the applicant’s complaints the respondents would be found guilty of either
unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct.
Letter of Advice dated 23 April 2018
second respondent prepared a letter of advice for the applicant in or about late
April 2018. The applicant complains:
(a) the letter was not read to her on 23 or 24 April 2018 and the first time she
saw the document was when it was provided to her
by legal practitioner, JM,
months later;
(b) the version received by JM and provided to her is the same as the version
provided to the Board by the second respondent, however
it was not signed;
(c) the first and second respondents have provided different versions of the
(d) she did not sign the letter on 23 or 24 April 2018.
letter of advice provided to the Board by the first respondent bears the
crossed out and the date
21 April 2018 was handwritten above it. The letter of advice provided by the
second respondent is dated
23 April 2018. It bears the applicant’s
signature dated 24 April 2018.
agree with the Board that nothing turns on the different dates on the documents
submitted to the Board. The question of substance
is whether the advice was
given to the applicant.
applicant contends that she did not receive, read, or have read to her, the
letter which bears her signature, yet she does not
contend that her signature is
forged. In those circumstances, as already found, we conclude that she signed
the document on 24 April
Case Outline filed 24 April 2018
applicant contends:
(a) the document failed to include the assault by the husband on 1 July 2016 in
the list of assaults, which the applicant was told
would be considered by
Tasmania Police as grievous bodily harm;
(b) the respondents acted contrary to her instructions when they stated in the
document that she understood that the matrimonial
property would need to be
(c) she did not see this document and did not give instructions for it to be
case outline is a submission to the Court, based on the available evidence.
While some practitioners may consider it prudent that
a client should see and
approve of a case outline, others may consider that unnecessary, even unhelpful.
any event, the second respondent wrote to the Judge’s Associate on 22
April 2018 noting that she was unable to file the outline
April 2018) because she needed to go through it with the client
on Monday morning, 23 April 2018. We think it more likely that she
that the fact that the matrimonial property would need to be sold would not have
been a surprise to the applicant.
the omission of a vital fact, or submission of law from the outline had a
material effect on the outcome of the case, there may
be some basis for a
conduct complaint, on the basis of incompetence. However, on the material that
is before us it is not likely
that the incident alleged by the applicant to have
occurred on 1 July 2016 was vital, or even material, to the outcome of the case.
our view there is no reason to further investigate this issue. There is no
reasonable likelihood that, in respect of the conduct
identified in the
applicant’s complaints, the respondents would be found guilty of either
unsatisfactory professional conduct
or professional misconduct.
is a list of general complaints about the respondents’ conduct. The
applicant complains:
(a) the first respondent provided incorrect advice to her around 2 May 2017
she and the husband
had with the first respondent in 2016 when they enquired about obtaining a
restraint order against their daughter;
(b) the first respondent incorrectly claimed that the husband did not attend the
2016 meeting, when he did and he was the one seeking
(c) the first respondent was slow to respond to the request from the
husband’s lawyer for financial disclosure;
(d) the first respondent failed to provide her with information about the Court
process or etiquette, therefore she did not know
what to expect and did not have
a support person;
(e) the respondents failed to inform the Court of her medical issues including
that sitting long term caused her pain and as a result
the Judge became
irritated when she kept standing up;
(f) the first respondent failed to advise her that she could request that the
husband’s support person leave the Court;
(g) the first respondent failed to provide her with the husband’s
solicitor’s affidavit in July 2017 and as a result
she was maligned by his
opening and questioning of her during cross-examination;
(h) she does not understand why she was kept alone in a small room during the
mediation in 2017. The husband, the husband’s
support person and her two
friends all heard the discussions as they were seated outside the mediation
(i) the first respondent did not follow up on the return of items
inappropriately taken from her home by the husband and did not
brief the second
respondent about the issue and therefore the second respondent missed the
opportunity to ask the husband questions
(j) the respondents failed to raise that the Judge had a conflict and ought not
have heard her matter as the Judge was friends with
her son, his wife and
(k) she emailed the first respondent on numerous occasions that she did not want
the second respondent acting for her;
(l) she did not give the first respondent authority to interact with her
surgeon, Mr H. She believes that the authority in the documents
fabricated because Mr H’s details are written as the others are typed;
(m) she does not believe that the notes of the meeting on 16 April 2018
accurately reflect the matters discussed at the meeting.
Board did not specifically address these matters. The investigator did not
consider it necessary to address the matters individually
other to than to say
that ‘the majority are not conduct issues and even if proven could not
amount to either unsatisfactory
professional conduct or professional
misconduct’.
consider that:
(a) (a) and (b) occurred more than 3 years before the complaints were made and,
in any event, are not matters related to the retainer
between the applicant and
the respondents and are not ‘conduct issues’;
(b) as to (c), the conduct occurred more than 3 years before the complaints were
made and, in any event, given that the retainer
between the applicant and the
first respondent lasted from 6 March 2017 to 28 May 2018, there is no substance
in an allegation of
delay. The proceedings were prosecuted and defended with
reasonable diligence;
(c) none of the complaints in (d) to (g) inclusive, could amount to
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct;
(d) as to (h), the conduct occurred more than 3 years before the complaints were
made and, in any event, the evidence is that the
solicitor for the husband
refused to participate in the mediation if the applicant was present in the
room. This had nothing to do
with the respondents’ conduct;
(e) as to (i), the evidence about the items missing from the applicant’s
premises following the husband’s representatives’
attendance to
collect them was inconclusive. It appears that the husband was not present at
the time. The respondents had to make
a forensic choice about whether the matter
should be pursued. On the evidence, there is no reasonable likelihood that the
first respondent
would be found guilty of professional misconduct or
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
(f) as to (j), there is no reason to think that the judge would be required to
recuse herself in the proceedings. The evidence is
that the applicant raised
this issue was after the trial had
(g) as to (k), there is no evidence of numerous emails. The allegation was first
raised after the trial had
as to (l), the conduct alleged occurred more than three years before the
complaint was made. In any event, there is no evidence that
the document was
fabricated. The allegation falls short of a direct allegation of forgery. There
is no reasonable likelihood that
the first respondent would be found guilty of
professional misconduct or unsatisfactory professional conduct;
as to (m), the conduct alleged occurred more than three years before the
complaint was made. In any event, the allegation lacks specificity.
are a contemporaneous record of what occurred. There is no complaint against the
note taker.
The application is dismissed.
M E O’Farrell SC
Chairperson
[2016] TASSC 30 (Blow
of Agriculture and Rural Affairs v Binnie
[1989] VicRp 73
[1989] VR 836
Young CJ and Teague J agreeing), discussed in
Betts v Legal Profession
Complaints Committee
[2019] WASAT 25
, followed by the Tribunal in
[2022] TASLPDT 1, [9].
, [11]; applied in
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v W
[2023] TASFC 1
, [14] (Estcourt J, with whom Jago J and
Porter AJ agreed).
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, 362 (Dixon J)
[2017] TASSC 57
, [35] (Tennent J).
This letter does not appear in
the materials, but it can be inferred from the terms of the husband’s
solicitors letter 2 May
2017 at pdf 173 and
Memo Pt 1, pdf
Memo to the Board Pt
1, pdf 318.
Memo Pt 1, pdf
Memo Pt 1, pdf
Memo Pt 1, first
respondent’s report of the trial, 16 May 2018, pdf
Memo Pt 1, pdf
Memo Pt 1, pdf
Memo Pt 1, pdf
Memo Pt 1, pdf 790
Memo Pt 1, pdf 554. A
Kennon claim is one in which a party seeks an adjustment of the property in
their favour by reason of family
Memo Pt 1, pdf
Memo Pt 1 pdf
Memo Pt 1 pdf
Memo Pt 1, pdf
Memo Pt 1 pdf
Memo Pt 1, pdf
Memo Pt 1, pdf
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.17 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter