URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASWRCT/2021/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:23:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
S. v Metro Tasmania [2021] TASWRCT 23 (6 July 2021)
[2021] TASWRCT 23
WORKERS REHABILITATION AND COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
S. v Metro Tasmania
[2021] TASWRCT
METRO TASMANIA PTY LTD
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
17 & 18 November 2020, written submissions
concluded 7 December 2020
DELIVERED ON:
6 July 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Commissioner Wilkins
CATCHWORDS:
Entitlement to compensation – whether injury disease
or aggravation of pre-existing disease – major or most significant
contributing factor.
Bradshaw v Tasmanian Networks Pty Ltd
[2019] TASSC 41
Kmart Australia Ltd
[2016] TASSC 6
Federal Broom Company Pty Ltd v
[1964] HCA 34
(1964) 110 CLR 626
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
DETERMINATION:
The worker’
referral is dismissed.
REPRESENTATION:
Solicitors:
Page Seager
[2021] TASWRCT 23
Commissioner Wilkins
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. The worker claims to have been injured in July 2019 in the
course of her duties as a bus driver with Metro Tasmania. She made
a claim for
compensation in August 2019. The claim was successfully disputed by her
employer, and she referred her claim to the
Tribunal pursuant to
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
(“the Act”) to
determine her entitlement to weekly payments of compensation and to medical and
related expenses.
2. It is the worker’
referral that falls to be
determined by the Tribunal. The worker says that she has suffered an injury
which is an aggravation, acceleration
or exacerbation of an underlying disease,
within the extended definition of “injury” under
of the Act, and
to which the employment was the major or most substantial contributing factor.
The employer resists liability to
pay compensation on the basis that it says
that the worker has suffered an injury, which is a disease, within the meaning
of the Act, but to which the employment did not substantially
contribute within the meaning of
The claim for compensation
3. The workers compensation claim form is dated 7 August 2019.
The worker, in that claim form, indicated that the injury or condition
noticed on 12 July 2019 and that she had experienced “burning in shoulders
and then extreme shoulder pain”.
In the claim form she indicated that she
stopped work on 25 July 2019 at 9.06 pm, and that she had started work on that
late afternoon.
4. The claim was supported by an initial workers
compensation medical certificate that had been issued by Dr Luke Craig, dated 26
July 2019. In the certificate, Dr Craig noted the worker’s presenting
symptoms to be “left shoulder pain radiating to
hand” and gave a
provisional diagnosis of cervical radiculopathy. Dr Craig indicated that the
worker stated her condition
to have been caused by routine work with nil
specific incident on 12 July 2019. He certified the condition to be of
uncertain cause
and he queried “?previous cervical fracture in childhood.
Previous neck pain but no similar features”. He certified
the worker to
be unfit from 26 July 2019 to 31 July 2019. In a subsequent certificate, which I
will refer to in more detail, he certified
the worker to have ceased incapacity
on 31 July 2019.
The worker’s evidence about the onset of symptoms and
stopping work
5. The worker was first employed by Metro Tasmania as a driver
in 2013 on a casual basis. Approximately two years later she changed
a weekend roster, which included working week days, and three weekends per
month. She said approximately one or one and
a half years later she went on to
the part-time roster, which meant she worked Monday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday
and Saturday,
which was a 40 hour week, and then had the following week off.
She said her shifts were seven or nine hours long with a 40-60 minute
break. She said there were other rest breaks, but they were usually used as
catch-up time if, for example, buses were running
late because of heavy traffic.
She said her duties in a typical day would involve her arriving at work, signing
on, collecting her
tin (by which she meant her float for fares) and going to
undertake a preliminary check of her bus before she started duties doing
various runs and picking up passengers. She said she would be sitting in the
driver’s seat of the bus for up to five hours
in a shift. In terms of the
activities whilst she was sitting in the driver’s seat, she would be
checking the mirror on the
left hand side of the bus as she pulled in, to make
sure she didn’t hit anything like a sign, looking down at the money tray
to give change, and the ticket machine to give tickets, looking out the right
hand mirror to pull out, and checking the rear mirror
to see what her passengers
were doing – for example watching people depart out the back
6. She said she wore a seatbelt which could be over either the left or
right shoulder, but when wearing that seatbelt it would restrict
movements so she moved her neck more. She said the ticket machine would be to
her left just below the height of her left
shoulder, and the change for fares
would be located either at around about chest height, or waist height, depending
on the bus.
7. She said in general, she might experience some aching pain
or discomfort which she attributed to sitting in the driver’s
long time, but much like driving a car for five hours, where she might
experience an aching neck and shoulders. She said
that might happen more
towards the end of the working week at the end of her shifts, but that pain and
discomfort did not last long
and went away after a break.
8. In mid 2019 the
worker had five weeks away from work on her rostered holidays. She said she did
not do anything particular in
that time, and that she was not experiencing any
neck or shoulder pain whilst on leave. In cross-examination the worker agreed
in her five weeks break, she had driven her manual cars, about every couple
of days and that included the usual activity of looking
in the mirror, and
turning her head to look for traffic.
9. She said she returned to work on
Monday 8 July 2019. On the first day back at work, she said she developed a
burning sensation
of pain across the back of the neck. She did not take too
much notice as she thought it might be related to having been away from
a while and that she would come good. Tuesday 9 July 2019 was her usual Tuesday
rostered day off, and the pain was not
so bad. She said on Wednesday 10 July
2019 the pain was there again as soon as she started driving, and was in her
left shoulder.
She completed her full shift, and said she tossed and turned all
Wednesday night with pain in the shoulder, and she was concerned
that she had
damaged it.
10. She said between Wednesday 10 July 2019 and Thursday 11 July
2019 she developed tingling in the fingers of her left hand. She
was not sure
whether the tingling started on the Wednesday or the Thursday.
11. She said
by Thursday 11 July 2019 she had pain across the back of the neck and in the
left shoulder, and tingling in the fingers.
She said on Friday 12 July 2019 the
pain was so bad she went to the operations officer of the employer, Mr Banks,
because she did
not want to drive. He referred her on to Mr Horne, and although
Mr Horne was not able to organise anybody to cover the first half
of her shift,
he said he would organise cover for the second half. She said she filled out a
handwritten incident form, and she
agreed to do the first half of her
12. The worker gave evidence that she has not driven a bus since
completing the first half of her shift on that day, and has not returned
in any capacity. She said Mr Horne organised for her to see Dr Craig, who is a
general practitioner. She saw Dr Craig on
26 July 2019 and he referred her for
an MRI scan and gave her a workers compensation certificate. She went back to
see Dr Craig
after the MRI had been performed, and he told her it was not a work
injury and she ought to follow up with her own general practitioner
being a general practitioner with an association with the employer).
The employer’s evidence about the worker’s report
and cessation of work
13. In relation to the worker reporting her injury to the
employer, documents tendered by consent in the course of the hearing included
incident/injury report form filled in by the worker and a document entitled
“Injury Detail”.
14. The incident/ injury form has the
handwritten date 12 July 2019 at the top, but the worker said in evidence that
it was not her
handwriting. The form is otherwise undated. Next to “Date
of Incident” the worker has written “Approximately Friday
fortnight” and under “How did the incident happen?” she wrote
“Returned to work after holidays and shoulder
was aching and got worse
instead of improving”.
15. The “Injury Detail” document
contains information entered by Mr Anthony Banks on 25 July 2019. The date of
is recorded as 12 July 2019 at 4.00 pm and that this injury was reported
to Mr Banks on 25 July 2019. The injury is described as
a strain, and under the
heading “Injury Notes”, Mr Banks has recorded “Returned to
work after Holidays and Shoulder
was aching and gets a bit painful sometimes
towards end of shift but will self manage and advise if worse.”
Nicholas Gray is a Human Resources Officer with the employer. He gave evidence
in relation to documents relating to the worker’s
shifts and work hours
around the time she was injured.
17. Mr Gray said a printout headed
“Time Cards” was a payroll report setting out Metro Tasmania
employees’ start
and finish times of their shifts as rostered. The
rosters show the number of hours the person shown on the roster is scheduled to
work, and the start and finish times of their shifts. He said there would be a
comment placed on the document if there was any change
to the rostering,
including where a worker was running late or sick. The Time Cards sheets
generally shows the worker’s shifts
would commence sometime in the
afternoon, with a break of about 40 to 60 minutes, and then recommence for
another period of several
hours, finishing any time from about 11:30pm to 2:00am
as rostered.
18. Mr Gray gave evidence that the Time Cards sheets
specifically showed that
• in the weeks prior to the week commencing Sunday 7 July
2019, the worker was on a mixture of annual leave and leave without
• In the week commencing Sunday 7 July 2019, the worker was rostered
to work Monday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday.
• In the week
commencing Sunday14 July 2019, the worker was not rostered to
• In the week commencing Sunday 21 July 2019, the worker was
rostered to work Monday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday.
the Friday and Saturday that week (that is, Friday 26 July and Saturday 27
July) the worker was noted as being “Sick
from Duty” but “Paid
as Rostered” for the shift.
19. Mr Gray said that in general, after bus drivers start work
they have 15 minutes to log on the bus they are rostered to drive and
the bus for the run. They use a card that is personal to them and a PIN
(number) to log on to the particular bus that they
are driving. This enables the
drivers to sell tickets and effect other necessary transactions.
referred to a document “Bus Details Per Driver”. Mr Gray said that
the document notes daily information that includes
details of a driver’s
personal ID number, the card number that is allocated to that driver, the name
of the driver, the bus
number that they are operating at any time, the time that
they log on to the bus for their shift and log off again, and the number
device that is logged into on the bus.
21. The difference between the two
sets of documents is that while the Time Cards document shows the time that a
shift starts and
finishes, the Bus Details Per Driver document shows the time
the driver logs on and off a particular bus.
22. So, for example, in relation
to 8 July 2019, the Time Cards document shows the ‘first half’ of
the worker’s
rostered shift was from 4:49pm to 7:19pm, and the
‘second half’ of the shift was from 8:18pm to 12:59am the following
morning, with a meal break in between the two halves of the shift. The Bus
Details document shows that after starting her shift,
the worker logged on to
bus number 182 at 4:57pm . After she completed her run, she logged off bus 182
at 7:13pm, which was 6 minutes
before her scheduled meal break. The following
entry in the Bus Details document shows that the worker then logged on to bus
219 at 8:26pm and logged off that bus at 12:26am.
23. The Bus Details
document indicates that the worker logged on and off buses for shifts commencing
on each of the days she was rostered
to work in the week commencing Sunday 7
24. The Bus Details document indicates that the worker did not log
on or off any buses in the week commencing Sunday 14 July 2019.
25. The Bus
Details document indicates that the worker logged on and off buses for shifts
that she was rostered to work on Monday
22 July 2019 (2 runs), Wednesday 24 July
2019 (2 runs) and Thursday 25 July 2019 (for one run – although she was
rostered for
a second run in the shift).
26. This is inconsistent with the
worker’s evidence that she ceased work on Friday 12 July 2019, and has not
driven any buses
after that day. The documentary evidence relied on by the
employer, and Mr Gray’s evidence was put to the worker. It was
specifically
put to her that, rather than experiencing symptoms on her first day
back at work (8 July 2019) and stopping working part way through
her rostered
shift on the Friday of the same week (12 July 2019) she had, in fact, worked the
first week back, as normal, had the
next week off, as normal, and then worked
Monday and Wednesday of the following week (22 and 24 July 2019) and then
notified her
employer about shoulder pain on Thursday 25 July 2019 and ceased
work after the first part of her shift.
27. The worker was very definite
that symptoms started on her first day back at work, and that she did not drive
at any time after
stopping work on Friday 12 July 2019. When pressed about the
records that apparently showed that she was on shift the week commencing
2019, she said she may have been sitting in the tea room, but had not driven.
The worker did not accept that the Bus Details
document showed that she had
worked driving buses after 12 July 2019. She said that the document only showed
that she had been allocated
certain buses that she would have been on had she
being working. She agreed that her Metro ID card had been in her possession
and no one else had accessed it.
28. I accept Mr Gray’s
evidence that the Time Cards and Bus Details documents show the shifts the
worker was rostered to work,
and did work in the weeks following her return from
leave on 8 July 2019. I therefore accept the employer’s evidence that the
worker continued to work driving buses until she completed her first run on her
rostered shift on 25 July 2019. I accept that the
worker’s Metro ID card
would be required to log on and off buses, and that the worker has kept the card
in her possession.
29. Although the worker was very definite in her
recollections about ceasing work, I find that she is mistaken about this, to the
extent that her recollections are inconsistent with the employer’s
documentary evidence, and with the claim for compensation
that the worker
30. I make the following findings of fact:
(a) The worker returned to work with the employer on Monday
8 July 2019 after a period of five weeks’ leave
(b) The worker worked
her rostered shifts for that week on Monday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and
(c) The following week, commencing Sunday 14 July 2019, the worker
did not work, which was in accordance with her usual working schedule
week commencing Sunday 21 July 2019, the worker worked her scheduled shifts on
Monday 22 July 2019, and Wednesday 24 July
2019. On Thursday 25 July 2019, the
worker completed the first run in her scheduled shift, but did not commence the
second run in
(e) On Thursday 25 July 2019, the worker reported
her shoulder symptoms to the employer.
(f) On Thursday 25 July 2019, after
she reported her shoulder symptoms, the employer arranged for the worker to see
Dr Luke Craig
on Friday 26 July 2019.
What happened after the worker stopped work?
31. Dr Craig saw the worker on 26 July 2019. He issued the
initial workers compensation medical certificate as outlined above. He
recommended an MRI scan. In evidence by agreement, Dr Craig’s notes of the
consultation with the worker that day were:
Metro left shoulder pain since returning from leave on
this month.
Left anterior/superior shoulder pain.
Pins and needles left forearm and thumb past 3 days.
Had a week off last week, got worse rather than better.
Nil incident at work.
Just gradual onset discomfort.
TPS intact (mild subjective paraesthesia left thumb and radial aspect
second digit to light touch).
C6 distribution.
Did have cervical fracture in MVA in childhood.
Does occasionally get neck pain, nil previous similar symptoms.
Nil neck pain currently.”
32. Dr Craig’s notes were put to the worker who said it
was incorrect that she had experienced pain at first on Friday 12 July
She agreed that she may have told Dr Craig there was no incident at work, and
that she also may have told him that she had
previously occasionally had neck
pain. She also confirmed she may have told him that there was no neck pain at
the time she saw
33. The MRI scan was undertaken on 29 July 2019. The
MRI findings were reported:
reversal of the normal cervical lordosis centred at C5/6. Vertebral body
heights are preserved. Facet alignment is
anatomical. No suspicious marrow
No abnormality of the imaged posterior fossa or craniocervical
No abnormality of the atlantoaxial articulation. No
central canal or foraminal stenosis.
: Disc height preserved. No significant disc osteophyte
complex lesion. No central canal or foraminal stenosis. Normal facet
: Disc height preserved. No significant disc osteophyte
complex lesion. No central canal or foraminal stenosis. Mild right sided
joint arthrosis.
: Shallow broad-based left paracentral disc protrusion. Mild
effacement of the anterior thecal sac. No cord compression. Slight
of the left foramen but no exiting nerve compression. Normal facet
: Loss of disc height. Circumferential disc osteophyte
complex bulge with left foraminal protrusion. Compression of the exiting
C6 nerve in the foramen. Moderate narrowing of the right foramen but the
exiting right C6 nerve appears intact. Normal facet
: Disc space narrowing. Circumferential disc ossified complex
bulge with encroachment of the foramina bilaterally. Bilateral foraminal
narrowing and flattening of the C7 nerves, worse on the left side. Normal facet
: Disc height preserved. No significant disc osteophyte
complex lesion. No central canal or foraminal stenosis. Normal facet
Degenerative
discs at C5/6 and C6/7.
C5/6 foraminal stenosis and compression of the exiting left C6 nerve.
C6/7 moderate foraminal narrowing, worse on the left.
34. The worker saw Dr Craig again, on 31 July 2019 after
the MRI scan had been performed. Dr Craig’s workers compensation medical
certificate of 31 July 2019 provided an updated diagnosis of C6 Radiculopathy
and noted “MRI findings. Likely combination of
past trauma and
degenerative disease. No ongoing symptoms relate”. He certified that the
worker has ceased to be incapacitated
35. The worker gave evidence that she
saw her general practitioner, Dr Baghurst, at her usual GP clinic, on 6 August
2019. She told
him she had been told it was not a workplace injury, and she
consulted him in relation to pain management. He suggested she look
spinal block and gave her a referral to Mr Thani, who is a Neurosurgeon. Dr
Baghurst’s notes for that consultation were
put into evidence, and
disclose that the worker at that time told Dr Baghurst that her symptoms had
come on about 5 weeks previously,
and that at the time of the consultation, she
was having problems sleeping, and was mainly experiencing symptoms of
tingling, left shoulder pain, neck pain” which Dr Baghurst
considered to be consistent with left C6 nerve root compression
that was evident
on the MRI.
36. The worker then saw Dr Thummala on 20 August 2019 in the same
clinic as Dr Baghurst. The worker said Dr Thummala thought it was
injury, and gave her a workers compensation certificate certifying the worker to
be wholly incapacitated. Dr Thummala has
continued to issue workers compensation
medical certificates
37. In relation to her current symptoms, the worker said
she still has tingling fingers and she has pain in the shoulder and the neck.
She was not receiving any treatment, only pain relief. She said her symptoms
were similar to those she experienced in the week
starting 8 July 2019, but it
was hard to compare because she is currently on pain medication. She said she
is limited to carrying
a maximum of 5kgs, and is unable to undertake tasks
around the home such as carrying heavy washing, mowing lawns, hanging towels
on the line. She said the more she uses her left arm the more pain she
experiences. She has been certified fit for light duties
in the way of
administrative work for some time, but has not been offered any duties by the
employer. She said she went through
her union in relation to obtaining some
light duties, and said she was told that unless she could pass a medical and
drive a bus
she would not be able to work with the employer.
Onset of symptoms – findings of fact
38. The worker’s evidence in relation to the onset of her
symptoms is inextricably entwined with her evidence in relation to
work. I have not accepted her evidence relating to her cessation of work because
it is inconsistent with documentary evidence
and her claim for compensation. I
also hesitate to accept the worker’s evidence in relation to the timing
and nature of the
onset of symptoms, where the worker’s evidence is
inconsistent with relatively contemporaneous incident related documentation,
medical consultation notes. Where the worker’s evidence conflicts with the
incident documentation and the consultation
notes recorded by Dr Craig, I prefer
those documents over the worker’s oral evidence.
39. I make the
following findings of fact:
(a) The worker, after she returned from leave, completed her
rostered shifts on Monday 8 July 2019, Wednesday 9 July 2019 and Thursday
July 2019 without incident or symptoms.
(b) On Friday 12 July 2019, whilst at
work, the worker began to experience some symptoms of left shoulder
(c) There was no incident, rather a gradual onset of
discomfort.
(d) The worker’s shoulder symptoms did not improve over the
following week, when she was not rostered to work. They became worse.
the time the worker reported her condition to her employer on 25 July 2019, her
shoulder symptoms had deteriorated further.
(f) The event that the worker
recalls, of crying at night because of her shoulder symptoms, likely occurred
after her shift had completed
on Wednesday 24 July 2019, which was the last full
shift she completed.
(g) When the worker consulted Dr Craig on 26 July 2019,
she was experiencing left superior/anterior shoulder pain, and had begun to
experiencing pins and needles in her left forearm and thumb which had most
likely commenced on Tuesday 23 July 2019, because she
said they had been there
for the ‘past three days’. She was not experiencing any neck
(h) When the worker consulted Dr Baghurst on 6 August 2019, the worker
was experiencing left shoulder pain, neck pain and left thumb
numbness/tingling
Past medical history – General Practice consultation
40. In addition to the notes of Dr Baghurst on 6 August 2019
relating to the worker and consultation notes for Dr Thummala, consultation
notes for Dr David Ridgers (from the same practice), who saw the worker on 26
February 2008 were put into evidence. Dr Ridgers’s
notes set out:
neck pain for several months
affected by sleep posture
spasm particularly in am...
Diagnosis: cx spondylitis”
41. Dr Ridgers referred the worker for a cervical spine X-ray,
and the X-ray report, dated 27 February 2008, was also in evidence:
“CERVICAL SPINE
Pre vertebral soft tissues are within normal limits.
Posterior vertebral body alignment is normal. Disc height is
maintained.
Oblique films show mild narrowing of the left C4 and right C6
No cervical rib.
No focal bone lesion.
Dr Julian Shaddock”
Medical evidence for the worker – Dr Thummala
42. Dr Thummala, who is the worker’s certifying
practitioner gave evidence, and a report that she had provided to the
solicitors dated 12 November 2019 was put into evidence. Dr
Thummala said she had composed the report based on the clinical notes
the practice, including notes of Dr Baghust. She confirmed her consultation
notes recorded what the worker had told her on
20 August 2019, which was that
the worker had “developed left shoulder burning pain on 12 July when she
returned to work after
a holiday” and that the worker was experiencing
radiating pain from her left shoulder into the left arm and fingers, with
in the thumb and index finger. Dr Thummala said she issued the workers
compensation medical certificate on that date based on the
worker telling her
that what she had suffered was a work injury, and that a certificate should be
issued. Dr Thummala said she provided
a provisional diagnosis of “soft
tissue injury C[ervical] spine” on the certificate, meaning that there was
no bony injury.
She said that the disc bulge identified on the MRI scan was the
soft tissue injury she was referring to in the certificate she issued,
subsequent certificates.
43. Dr Thummala agreed that there was evidence of
very minor degenerative changes on the X-ray of the worker’s cervical
from 2008, that degenerative diseases, by their nature, progress, and she
would accept that if the worker experienced symptoms of
tingling and burning,
she would consider it would be an indication of progression of the
worker’s degenerative condition at
Medical evidence for the worker - Dr Sharman
44. Dr Sharman gave evidence on behalf of the worker. Dr
Sharman is a Consultant Occupational Physician. He had seen the worker for
medico-legal assessment at the request of her solicitors on 31 March 2020, and
his report dated 30 April 2020 was put into evidence.
45. The history that
Dr Sharman took was:
• The worker had worked as a bus driver for the employer
for about seven years, working part time, about 40 hours per
• The worker had been off work on holidays for about five
weeks and on the first shift back at work on a Monday evening she
burning feeling across both shoulders. Initially she attributed her symptoms to
deconditioning from being away from work.
She had the following day rostered
off but on the Wednesday she continued to suffer pain localised into the left
shoulder. She
continued her night shifts, however it reached the point where
she would come home crying because of pain in her left shoulder.
• During this period she also had developed tingling and numbness of
the index and middle fingers of her left hand.
• The worker reported
her difficulties to the operations staff with Metro on the Friday of the first
week back at work, and
was unable to complete her shift, and her employer
arranged for a review with a doctor at Sonic Health in North Hobart.
• The worker could recall wearing a neck brace following a motor
vehicle accident at some stage in her youth (it had occurred
when she was about
8 – 12 years of age)
• She also recalled the X-ray in 2008, and
although she thought she probably did have neck pain at that time, had not had
neck pain since, until the onset in July 2019.
46. Dr Sharman reviewed the X-ray report from 2008, the MRI
scan imaging from July 2019, and GP clinical notes and reports which have
referred to above. He noted that there had been another GP appointment in July
2008 where the worker had referred to ongoing
back and neck symptoms.
Sharman, in his report to the workers’ solicitors set out:
...There is however, a more significant medical attendance in 2008 when
she consulted Dr Ridgers with a several-month history of neck
symptoms. Dr
Ridgers arranged an x-ray which showed degenerative changes at a higher level
than that affected currently.
It seems likely that in the ten-year period from 2008, [the worker] has
developed some progressive degenerative change in her cervical
spine at C5/6 and
C6/7 levels, however it was not until she returned to work in July 2019 after a
period of five weeks off work that
she developed symptoms that suggested acute
progression with discal prolapse and impingement of the left C6 and possibly C7
The important question from a causation perspective in this matter is
whether her work has caused the development of this progression
or whether this
was an inevitable consequence of the underlying degenerative disease.
[The worker’s] work as a bus driver involves repetitive neck
movements in addition to forces transmitted to the cervical spine
through the
shoulder girdle. There are, at times, significant demands as a result of the
requirement for operating a bus with heavy
steering. In addition, there is the
potential for jarring in the course of driving.
It seems likely that [the worker] might have eventually developed symptoms
but it also seems likely that her work activities have
precipitated and
determined the timing of onset of her condition.
My understanding of the epidemiological literature is that professional
driving roles are associated with an increased risk of cervical
spinal disorders. Hence the epidemiological evidence would support the
possibility of a causative association but causation
in individual cases needs
to be determined on a “case by case” basis, taking into account the
specific circumstances.”
48. Dr Sharman said that his opinion was that the worker had
suffered an “acute progression” of her underlying condition.
“acute”, he meant something had happened quickly. Based on the
development of symptoms, he considered there had been
a rapid change for the
worse in the worker’s condition.
49. The history that the worker gave
of the development of numbness was consistent with the progression of the discal
prolapse that
led to nerve root compression, and that was the inference he drew
because of the symptoms and signs upon examination of the worker,
combined with
the MRI imaging. It was put to Dr Sharman that the discal prolapse and
impingement could be the inevitable development
of the underlying disease, with
which he agreed.
50. When it was put to Dr Sharman that there was no
“incident” reported by the worker he agreed that there was no
of a specific incident, but said that in most cases something happens at
a “biomechanical level” that he would see as
an incident. He said
it might be microscopic and not recognised by the person to whom it happened, or
it may be more significant
in which case it would be likely to be remembered.
51. He said that it would be unusual for a musculoskeletal structure to fail
if it was not being used at the time. It was his view
that if a person was not
using their neck and suffered a discal prolapse, he would see that as a
progression of the underlying disease,
but the reality is that people use their
bodies, and their necks, all the time. He acknowledged there is a distinction
significant injurious activity and day to day activities, but said
that “bus drivers have added risks”.
52. In relation to this
added risk, Dr Sharman referred to the epidemiological evidence referred to in
his report - that professional
drivers have added risks over and above the
usual driving population. In particular Dr Sharman said there had been a Danish
in relation to drivers of heavy vehicles. When asked further about this,
Dr Sharman recalled that it was a study relating to truck
drivers and bus
drivers, and when it was put to him that he was unable to specify the vehicles
involved in the study he said it was
not car drivers, but drivers of heavy
vehicles. Dr Sharman’s evidence about the study he was referring to was
somewhat nebulous.
53. In relation to bus driving activities in general, Dr
Sharman said he said he had spoken to many bus drivers over the years and
recognised that steering a bus can be a demanding task.
54. It was put to
Dr Sharman that the worker’s symptoms may have developed irrespective of
work, and he agreed, but said that
work was “a significant
55. Dr Sharman agreed with Mr Dohrmann’s formulation that
the worker is suffering from a symptomatic left C5/6 disc protrusion
C6 nerve root compression producing referred left shoulder and arm pain.
However, he disagreed with Mr Dohrmann’s
reference to the worker suffering
from cervical spondylosis. Dr Sharman said that “cervical
spondylosis” is a more general
term, and he would not prefer that term in
this case where there was more significant degeneration at the particular
identified levels.
Medical evidence for the employer - Mr Dohrmann
56. Mr Peter Dohrmann gave evidence on behalf of the employer.
He is a Neurosurgeon whose qualifications also include a Graduate
Occupational and Environmental Health.
57. He saw the worker for the purposes
of medico-legal assessment via a telehealth assessment on 1 July 2020, and
provided a report
to the employer’s solicitors dated 7 July
58. The worker gave Mr Dohrmann a history that on her first bus run
back at work after five weeks of annual leave she experienced
sensation across her shoulder, but said she did not worry at first. As the days
progressed she noticed the symptoms persisting,
tending to be worse by the end
of the day, and recalled feeling as if the problem was principally in her
shoulder. The worker said
that she developed tingling in the fingers of the
left hand and numbness in the left arm within a few days of the onset of
and recalled coming home from work at least on one occasion crying and
being unable to sleep. When her symptoms persisted she reported
the condition
to her employer, and worked half of her shift on the day of her report before
she had to go home. She said she had
been off work since that time.
the time Mr Dohrmann saw the worker she told him she suffered from constant neck
pain felt posteriorly and across both shoulders
which occasionally catches and
is often associated with a grinding sensation. She said the pain is made worse
by physical activity
and by driving and it reduces with rest. She also has
constant pain in the left shoulder with radiation into the mid portion of
left arm associated with tingling in the radial three digits of the left hand
(thumb, index and middle fingers) but there is
no definite numbness in the
finger tips.
60. In response to a question about the nature of the
worker’s condition, Mr Dohrmann, in his report, indicated:
is my view that [the worker] is suffering from a progressive degenerative
condition of the cervical spine. I note the absence
of any specific incident or
injury to account for the onset of her symptoms since July 2019. I also note
her observation that the
work she has performed over the previous seven years is
not particularly physically demanding.
However, I think it is reasonable to assume that the neck movements
involved in her driving a bus may have contributed to some degree
exacerbation of the pre-existing constitutional condition of the cervical
spondylitis. Therefore I believe employment has
been a contributing factor, but
I do not believe it could be described as the “major or most significant
contributing factor”
to any aggravation, acceleration or exacerbation of
cervical spondylosis.
I consider it likely that any exacerbation related to work is now ceased
given the length of time that has elapsed since [the worker]
was working as a
bus driver.”
61. In cross examination, Mr Dohrmann said, in relation to the
above answer, that it was his view that the general duties of a bus
driver over
a number of years would have contributed to the worker’s underlying
condition, and that that was what he was referring
to when he identified
“the neck movements involved in her driving a bus may have contributed to
some degree to an exacerbation
of the pre-existing constitutional
condition”.
62. In evidence, Mr Dohrmann described that cervical
spondylosis is a degenerative change in the cervical spine which occurs
universally
in everyone beyond childhood or early adulthood. He said it may or
may not be associated with symptoms, and it is a diagnostic label
that covers a
range of changes in the spine over years or decades. Cervical spondylosis is
characterised by a narrowing of discs,
and loss of normal lordosis or contour of
the spine. He described it as an inevitable and normal part of aging in
relation to which
the severity varies with person to person as well as the
symptoms. In relation to the specific diagnosis where a disc protrudes
sufficiently to compress a nerve root, he described it as a subset of the
condition of cervical spondylosis. He said a normal disc
does not protrude, and
the progressive condition of cervical spondylosis must be present before a disc
can protrude, with the possible
exception of an otherwise healthy disc being
injured in a high speed motor vehicle accident.
63. In relation to the
x-ray taken in 2008 in relation to the worker, Mr Dohrmann said he could
identify some things in the x-ray
which amounted to mild spondylitic changes,
which were the narrowing of the foramina – being the holes in the side of
through which nerves pass. He said that was an indication of the
presence of cervical spondylosis at that time, and was typical
worker’s age at the time that x-ray was taken.
64. In relation to the
MRI scan from 2019, he confirmed that he had been able to assess the actual
film. The prolapsed disc is visible
in the MRI which protrudes to press against
the C6 nerve root.
65. Generally, he said the diagnosis of this nature is
based on the history given by the worker, and usually there would be a physical
examination, although in the case of the worker and the COVID-19 restrictions in
place at the time of his assessment, that had obviously
not been able to take
place. The MRI confirms the clinical diagnosis that is made upon taking a
history and, where possible, physical
examination.
66. In his evidence Mr
Dohrmann said the symptoms described by the worker in July 2019 were typical
symptoms that are seen where there
is pressure on a nerve, and that the
worker’s described symptoms from July 2019 were consistent with
symptomatic nerve compression.
67. In cross-examination , Mr Dohrmann was
asked whether the worker’s reported symptoms of left shoulder pain and the
symptoms related to tingling in her fingers coincided with the
physiological change that compressed the C6 nerve. Mr Dohrmann confirmed
the worker’s symptoms at that point were the clinical manifestation of
pressure on the nerve. He said there was likely
to have been some physiological
change which had brought that about which could either have been the protrusion
of the disc for the
first time, or the disc had already been protruding but
something had occurred to cause the symptoms.
68. In relation to the
worker’s actual bus driving duties at the time that she experienced the
onset of symptoms in July 2019,
Mr Dohrmann said that her work related movement
at that time may have made her symptoms more noticeable than they would
have been, but he did not believe those movements were the only cause
of the disc protrusion, and that the pre-existing condition
69. Counsel for the worker put to Mr Dohrmann the various concepts of
‘aggravation’, ‘exacerbation’ and
‘acceleration’
contained in the extended definition of
“injury” in
of the Act, as discussed by of Porter J in Long v
Kmart Australia Ltd
[2016] TASSC 6.
70. Mr Dohrmann said that he never used
the term “acceleration”, and he would be disinclined to use it in
this instance.
He said he used the term “exacerbation” as a
temporary worsening of a condition, whereas he considered an
“aggravation”
to be a permanent worsening. He said the reason he
came to the conclusion that the term “exacerbation” was more
appropriate
in relation to the worker’s claimed condition than
“aggravation” was that firstly, there was no specific incident
accident that had occurred to bring about the onset of symptoms; secondly, the
inherent physical requirements of driving a bus
and thirdly, that the worker had
told Mr Dohrmann that although her work was inherently repetitive, it was not
physically heavy in
its nature.
71. Mr Dohrmann that it is more likely than
not that by mid 2019 the worker would have been suffering the same left shoulder
even if she had not been engaged in driving a bus. He said whilst the
physical tasks involved in driving a bus may have made the
symptoms more
noticeable, he did not consider that those tasks had caused the symptoms to
occur any earlier than they were destined
to otherwise have done.
noted that cervical spondylosis is a very common condition, and that disc
prolapse in middle life is also a very common occurrence.
He considered that
the worker’s disc prolapse was simply destined to happen. He agreed that
bus driving duties could have
potentially contributed to the overall progression
of the worker’s underlying cervical spondylosis.
73. It was Dr
Dohrmann’s view that the worker’s bus driving duties over the years
had been a contributing factor to her
overall condition, but not the major or
most significant contributing factor, in fact, only about 20% in his estimation.
for the worker put it to Mr Dohrmann that what he was doing in making
that estimation was looking at the worker’s overall condition
2019, and asking what percentage contribution was constitutional, and what
percentage was work. He agreed.
74. Counsel for the worker, in final
submissions, said that Mr Dorhmann was here retrospectively looking at the
aggravated disease,
and assessing relative contribution by work and non-work
related causative factors, and that it is clear from Long v Kmart Australia
that this is not the correct approach (see below).
Employers’ liability to pay compensation under the
75. The liability of an employer to pay compensation is set out
of the Act. That section provides as follows:
any employment —
(a) a worker suffers an injury, not being a disease,
arising out of or in the course of his employment; or
(b) a worker suffers an
injury, which is a disease and to which his employment contributed to a
substantial degree, within the meaning
section 3(2A)
employer is, except as is otherwise provided by this Act, liable to pay
compensation in accordance with this Act —
(c) to the worker; or
Section 3(2A)
(2A) For the purposes of this Act,
employment contributed to a disease to a substantial degree only if it is the
major or most significant
Section 3(1)
of the Act contains
the following definitions:
disease means any ailment, disorder, defect,
or morbid condition, whether of sudden or gradual
development;
injury includes —
(a) a disease; and
the recurrence, aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or deterioration of any
pre-existing injury or disease where the employment
was the major or most
significant contributing factor to that recurrence, aggravation, acceleration,
exacerbation or deterioration
78. In Bradshaw v Tasmanian Networks Pty
[2019] TASSC 41
, Brett J considered the scheme of the Act, and set out the
three “pathways to liability” which might lead to a worker
entitled to compensation. He observed:
is that the employer's liability to pay compensation
will arise where the worker has suffered an injury as defined, in the
circumstances
prescribed by that section....
The authorities also establish that when regard is had to the extended
definition of injury contained in subpar (b), there are in
fact three available
pathways to liability arising from
(a) The worker suffers an injury in the primary sense, that is an injury
which is not a disease, but is "something that can be described
as a sudden and
ascertainable or dramatic physiological change or disturbance of the normal
physiological state". See Military Rehabilitation
and Compensation
Commission v May
[2016] HCA 19
257 CLR 468
, as discussed by Pearce J
in Vos Construction v Norton-Smith. Such an injury will be compensable if
it arises out of or in the course
of the worker's employment.
(b) The worker suffers a disease to which his employment contributed to a
substantial degree within the meaning of
, that is, only if it is
the major or most significant factor.
(c) By virtue of the extended definition of injury and its interaction
, an aggravation etc of a pre-existing injury or disease is
an injury, but only where the employment was the major or most significant
contributing factor to that aggravation. In the case of the aggravation of a
pre-existing disease, it is the aggravation, not the
underlying disease, which
must be causally connected to the employment in the required sense: Long v
Kmart Australia Ltd
[2016] TASSC 6
25 Tas R 237
, per Porter J at
79. In Long v Kmart, Porter J considered the extended
definition of “injury” under the Act, and the various
‘substantives’
contained within that definition – that is,
“recurrence”, “aggravation”,
“deterioration”,
“exacerbation” and
“deterioration”. It should be noted that Porter J, in dealing with
those substantives
collectively, found it convenient to use the shorthand term
“aggravation”, unless looking at a particular substantive
individual basis. His Honour observed that the substantives each
“..have different shades of meaning, and
there is overlap between at least some of them”
“The question each poses is... whether the disease has been made
worse in the sense of more grave, more grievous or more serious
in its effects
upon the patient” (per Windeyer J, Federal Broom Company Pty Ltd v
[1964] HCA 34
(1964) 110 CLR 626)
80. Following review of authorities, Porter J concluded that
relevant points to be gleaned were:
“The substantives have difference
connotations but may overlap. The essence of the operation of the provision is
that, irrespective
of whether the existing disease pathology has been advanced
or worsened, there is a relevant ‘aggravation’ if the symptoms
difficulties emanating from it have increased and become more serious. In either
event, where the employment has contributed
to the requisite degree, there is an
‘injury’. The injury is the ‘aggravation’ of the
pre-existing disease,
not the aggravated disease. In the case of a progressive
disease, the concept of acceleration may be more readily applicable, depending
on the circumstances. Whether a pre-existing disease has any causative role to
play in an ‘aggravation’ will depend on
the nature of the disease as
established by the medical evidence.
For “the employment” to be a contributing factor under par (b)
of the definition, there must be an incident or state of
affairs to which the
worker was exposed in the performance of his duties, and to which he would not
otherwise have been exposed;
some event or characteristic of the work or the
conditions in which it was performed”
81. In addition, Porter J noted that, in considering whether
the test for liability under the extended definition of injury, or ‘third
pathway’ has been satisfied, it is inappropriate to look for a temporal
connection between some physiological change in the
worker’s underlying
condition and the employment. He said at paragraph 78:
“The test does not require an
‘aggravation’ to occur, commence or conclude in the course of
employment. The question
is simply whether there has been an aggravation of a
pre-existing disease, and whether the employment has the requisite degree of
causal connection”.
The pathways to liability
82. There is no suggestion in this case that the worker
suffered an injury which is not a disease within the meaning of
83. The only potential pathways to liability that might be open to the
worker are the questions of whether the worker suffered an
injury which is a
disease, within the meaning of
of the Act, or whether the worker
suffered an injury within the extended definition in of injury. In relation to
both, the onus is
on the worker to establish that the employment was the major
or most significant contributing factor.
84. Counsel for the employer
submitted that I could only consider the extended definition of
‘injury’ under the Act as
a potential pathway to liability where
any pre-existing injury or disease had previously also incapacitated the
worker. This submission
was made on the basis that the meaning of
‘injury’ and ‘disease’ must be the same throughout Act,
the Act, there is no injury or disease until incapacity
85. I do not accept that submission. It is inconsistent with the
wording and intention of the extended definition of “injury’
the Act. A person may be injured without being incapacitated and a person may
have a disease that is not incapacitating. It
may be that the person has not
“suffered” an injury or disease for the purposes of the Act in
accordance with
(5) if there is no incapacity, but an injury or
disease could still exist to be the subject of an ‘aggravation’ as
contemplated
by the extended definition of “injury”.
consensus of medical evidence is that the worker has a degenerative condition in
her cervical spine which was pre-existing
prior to July 2019. By its
degenerative nature, the condition was progressive. There is a difference
between Dr Sharman and Mr Dohrmann
to be characterised. On balance, I prefer Mr Dohrmann’s opinion to that
the worker’s
pre-existing condition was that of cervical spondylosis. Mr
Dohrmann’s explanation in relation to the prevalence and development
cervical spondylosis was compelling. His description of what he identified as
mild spondylitic changes from the 2008 x-ray accorded
with the diagnosis of Dr
Ridgers at the time, and also the findings reported by Dr Shaddock, the
radiologist.
87. I find that the worker had the underlying degenerative
condition of cervical spondylosis, from at least February 2008, and that
a progressive condition, and falls within the definition of
“disease” under
of the Act. Although I understand the evidence of
both Dr Sharman and Mr Dohrmann to be that the worker’s driving duties
the employer may well have contributed, to some extent, to the progression
of that underlying condition generally prior to 12 July
2019, there is no
suggestion in the evidence that the worker’s driving duties in her
employment were the major or most substantial
contributing factor that
88. On 12 July 2019, whilst undertaking her bus driving duties,
the worker went from being symptom free, to experiencing a gradual
discomfort or pain in her left shoulder. Those symptoms emanated from the
underlying degenerative cervical condition. It
may be that the onset of
symptoms, and thus the worsening of the worker’s underlying condition,
occurred as a natural and inevitable
progression of that condition, or it may
be that the worker’s employment was the major or most significant
contributing factor
to the worsening of the condition. If the worker is able to
establish the latter on the balance of probabilities, she will be entitled
compensation.
89. There is no need for a temporal connection between the
onset of symptoms and work (as per Porter J in Long v Kmart). However,
symptoms came on during a period of work will not necessarily be determinative
of the question of whether employment was
the major or most significant
contributing factor, which is the test for liability.
90. Mr Dohrmann’s
opinion does not assist the worker. Although he concedes that the worker’s
driving duties over the course
of working for the employer may have contributed
to the overall progression of the worker’s underlying degenerative
he does not consider that her employment was the major or most
substantial contributing factor to the aggravation of that condition.
with the submission of counsel for the worker that Mr Dohrmann’
assessment of the relative causative contributions to the worker’s
ultimate condition after the ‘aggravation’ occurred
do not assist in
determining the relative contributions to the ‘aggravation’ itself.
However, that does not detract from
Mr Dohrmann’s other evidence that the
symptoms would have occurred in the same time frame, irrespective of the
driving duties.
91. Dr Sharman agrees with Mr Dohrmann that a
progressive underlying degenerative condition may ultimately and inevitably
a disc prolapse, but considers this was not the situation in the
worker’s case – because of what Dr Sharman has identified
additional risks for bus drivers.
92. As I understand Dr Sharman’s
evidence, a prolapse would unquestionably be the inevitable end point if it
occurred where
a person was not using their neck and a disc prolapsed. It is
difficult to imagine circumstances where any person would not be using
neck, and I understand Dr Sharman’s further evidence – that people
use their bodies and their necks all the time
– to mean that a progression
and disc prolapse could occur in the course of day to day activities, and would
not necessarily
be caused by what they were doing at the time, but it would
depend on the circumstances.
93. Dr Sharman has concluded that the onset of
the worker’s shoulder symptoms, which happened because of a deterioration
the worker’s underlying condition, was something to which the
employment was a major or most substantial cause. He has based
his conclusion
on his understanding about what the worker’s driving duties involved, and
that there was an acute progression
of the worker’s condition on, and
immediately following, her first day back at work after five weeks’
94. The worker’s evidence about her work-related driving
activities were that they are checking the right and left hand mirrors,
down to the left at the money tray and the ticket machine and checking the rear
mirror. This accords with the worker’s
description to Mr Dohrmann that the
her driving activities were repetitive but not heavy. Although it is obvious
that she must turn
the steering wheel to drive a bus, she did not mention that
aspect of her duties at all in giving evidence.
95. In addition to the
worker’s repetitive neck movements as part of her driving work, Dr Sharman
in his report refers to ‘significant
demands as a result of operating a
bus with heavy steering’, and ‘the potential for jarring in the
course of driving’.
The worker gave no evidence about these things. The
only evidence in relation to issues about steering buses was that Dr Sharman
said he had spoken to many bus drivers over the years and it was recognised that
steering a bus ‘can’ be demanding.
96. Further, Dr Sharman has
based his opinion on the history of there being an ‘acute
progression’ of the worker’s
symptoms, that is, it had
‘happened quickly’, and the ‘timing of the onset’ of
those symptoms had been precipitated
and determined by her work activities. The
finding of fact that I have made in relation to the worker’s attendance at
and the onset of her symptoms do not accord with the history of those
matters that was given by the worker to Dr Sharman. In particular,
rather than
the onset of symptoms occurring on the first day back at work after the
worker’s leave, and progressing over the
next few days as she continued to
work, the history as I have determined is that the worker’s symptoms
commenced after several
uneventful days back at work, progressed during the week
that she was away from work, and after the completion of one shift the following
week, progressed further to the commencement of nerve root compression.
do not think that the reasons upon which Dr Sharman has based his opinion about
causation have been borne out by the evidence
before the Tribunal.
not necessary to determine which of the ‘substantives’ under the
extended definition of injury best describes
what happened to the worker’s
underlying degenerative condition in July 2019 and for which the claim for
compensation was made,
although the evidence suggests it was most likely an
‘aggravation’, ‘acceleration’ or
‘exacerbation’
. To use the shorthand of ‘aggravation’
to include those substantives, I am satisfied that the worker has proved, on
balance of probabilities, that she suffered an ‘aggravation’ of a
pre-existing disease of cervical spondylosis,
by way of disc prolapse, which
commenced on Friday 12 July 2019, and progressed until it came to a head
causing nerve root compression,
and resulting in incapacity for work on Thursday
25 July 2019.
99. However, for the reasons I have set out, I do not think
that the worker has satisfied the onus upon her to prove that her employment
the major or most significant contributing factor to that
‘aggravation’. The worker’
referral is therefore
COMMISSIONER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (223 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter