URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASWRCT/2021/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:23:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
G. v The State of Tasmania (Department of Education) [2021] TASWRCT 24 (9 July 2021)
[2021] TASWRCT 24
WORKERS REHABILITATION AND COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
G. v The State of Tasmania (Department of Education)
[2021] TASWRCT 24
THE STATE OF TASMANIA (DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION)
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
28, 29, 30 July 2020 and 8 August 2020
DELIVERED ON:
9 July 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Commissioner Wilkins
CATCHWORDS:
Entitlement to compensation – date of injury –
whether notice given as soon as practicable – whether reasonable
failure to give notice – whether s25(1A) available to employer –
whole person impairment psychiatric injury
– whole person impairment skin
Arnott Snack Products Pty Ltd v Yacob
[1985] HCA 2
(1985) 155 CLR
M. v Allianz Australia Services Pty Ltd (No. 2)
[2019] TASWRCT 35
McMillan v TIO
of Motor Accidents (Compensation) Appeal Tribunal of the
Northern Territory, M11 of 1986;
Muir-Wilson v State of Tasmania
Hart v Comcare
[2005] FCAFC 16
Drenth v Comcare
Comcare v Martin
[2016] HCA 43
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
DETERMINATION:
i) The employer is to pay weekly payments of
compensation for total incapacity to the worker for such periods since 20 March
to the date of this order where that incapacity has been supported by
workers compensation medical certificates in the prescribed
form, less the
amount of actual earning of the worker in the sum of $3,246.
ii) The employer is liable to pay to the worker benefits in accordance with
Division 2 of Part VI of the Act from 20 March 2018.
iii) The employer pay to the worker the whole person impairment entitlement
iv) The issue of costs is reserved.
REPRESENTATION:
Solicitors:
C N Dockray – Barrister
& Solicitor
Office of the Solicitor-General
[2021] TASWRCT 24
Commissioner Wilkins
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. The worker was employed as a teacher with the Department of
Education for many years. She commenced work at Brooks High School
Launceston at the start of the 2016 school year, following a transfer initiated
by the Department from Riverside High School.
2. In mid May 2018 she made a
claim for workers compensation for a stress related condition and delivered an
initial workers compensation
medical certificate in support of the claim.
3. The employer disputed liability for the claim, and on 24 August 2018 the
Tribunal made a consent order, finding that the employer
had demonstrated that
it had a reasonably arguable case under s81A of the Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1988 (“the
4. The worker has referred
her claim back to the Tribunal under s42 of the Act. She seeks a determination
that the employer is liable
to pay her compensation by way of weekly payments
and benefits under Division 2 of Part VI of the Act, as well as a lump sum for
permanent whole person impairment.
5. In relation to the whole person
impairment, the worker claims that she has an 18% whole person impairment as a
result of her psychological
condition, and an additional whole person impairment
arising from an eczema condition on both hands which the worker says has been
aggravated, exacerbated or deteriorated by her work related psychological
6. The employer raises an issue that it says the worker failed
to give notice of injury as soon as practicable, in contravention of
Act. It says further that even if the worker suffered a work related stress
condition, the condition is a disease to
which the provisions of s25(1A) of the
Act apply to relieve the employer of liability to pay compensation.
particular, the employer says that the worker’s condition is a disease
which is an illness or disorder of the mind which
arises substantially from
reasonable action taken in a reasonable manner by the employer to transfer the
worker (s25(1A)(a)) and/or
reasonable administrative action taken in a
reasonable manner by the employer in connection with the worker’s
employment (s25(1A)(c)).
8. Finally, the employer, in relation to the claimed
whole person impairment, says that if the worker has an entitlement to lump sum
payment it is arising from the worker’s psychological condition, but no
allowance ought to be made in relation to the worker’s
skin condition on
9. On the basis that the parties are agreed that the worker has
suffered an injury that is a disease to which the worker’s employment
contributed to a substantial degree within the meaning of s25(1)(b) and s3(2A)
of the Act, the questions that need to be determined
by the Tribunal
injury did the worker suffer?
did the worker suffer her injury?
did she give notice of injury to her employer?
that notice given as soon as practicable as required by s32(1)(a).
notice of injury was not given as soon as practicable, do the provisions of s37
operate to excuse that failure; ie
the failure occasioned by mistake or other reasonable cause (absence from the
State not being an issue); and
the employer’s defence to the claim not been prejudiced by reason of that
either the notice of the injury was given as soon as practicable, or the
worker’s right to claim compensation is not affected
because s37 of the
Act is satisfied, has the employer established that the worker’s injury
arises substantially from:
action taken in a reasonable manner by the employer to transfer the worker
and/or reasonable administrative action taken
in a reasonable manner by the
employer in connection with the worker’s employment.
the employer has not established that either s25(1A)(a) or s25(1A)(c) is
available to defend the worker’s claim for compensation,
what is the
worker’s entitlement to a lump sum payment for whole person impairment in
accordance with s71 of the Act.
Background of the claim
10. The worker gave evidence that she qualified originally as a
11 years from
1978 to 1989. She was a special education teacher for one term in 1989, and
then from 1990 to 1994 taught home economics
and child studies.
commenced at Riverside High School in 1995 and in that time taught health and
physical education and child studies and home
economics. She explained that
child studies involves teaching how to raise children, home economics involves
cooking and sewing
and special education involves teaching children who have
particular challenges. She said in health and physical education she taught
mindfulness, relaxation and meditation, as well as sport and games.
September 2015 the worker received an email from the Department’s
Learning Services Northern Region. Their email
included a letter advising the
worker that because of the number of years she had been teaching at Riverside
High, she was included
in the required transfer category of the Department of
Education’s Teacher Transfer/Assignment of Permanent Duties Industrial
Agreement 2013 (“the transfer agreement”) and may be required to
transfer to another school or college.
13. The letter went on:
light of the number of years you have served in your current appointment and
your skill area, you are included in the Required
Transfer Category and
(original emphasis)
be required to
transfer to meet the staffing needs of the Learning Service.
Your Principal and/or a member of the learning service HR team, will
provide an opportunity for consultation and exchange of information
appointment for 2016
The worker was asked to complete a form outlining her work
history and preferred outcome if a transfer became necessary.
14. I need to
briefly outline the terms of the transfer agreement.
15. Schools or colleges
are characterised as levels A, B, C or D under the transfer agreement. Level D
schools are “isolated
schools”; Level C schools are schools with an
agreed difficulty in commuting from an urban centre; Level B schools are schools
with occupational educational needs indexed above a specified figure and also
special education facilities. Occupational educational
needs index is a measure
of socio-economic status of the school and student need. A higher score
indicates a higher level of funding
need from the Department. Finally, level A
schools or all other schools.
16. The transfer agreement provides that it is
expected that all teachers will undertake eligible service during their career
a level B, C or D school (either three years in a level D school, or
four years in a level B or C school). Changes in systems or
school or college
needs and the requested transfers of teachers who have completed eligible
service are the prime initiators of required
transfers. Transfers may be in
employee initiated or employer initiated.
17. Where an employee requests a
transfer, the transfer agreement prioritises teachers who have completed
eligible service in a level
B, C or D school, and where a teacher has completed
that eligible service, they are guaranteed a requested transfer to the
geographical
location of their choice, subject to there being a vacancy or a
vacancy in their skill area that can be created by the required transfer
teacher who has completed eligible service in a school or college (including a
level A school eligible service of six years).
18. Thus, the practical effect
of the transfer agreement for the worker towards the end of 2015 was that she
had completed eligible
service of six years at Riverside High School, which was
a level A school. Because of this, she might be required to transfer to
school (a “required transfer”) if a teacher who had completed
eligible service in a level B, C or D school requested
a transfer to the area
that included Riverside High (“a requested transfer”).
worker filled in the form that was provided with the email of 1 September 2015.
She set out the years she had worked at particular
schools, and that her
position/skill areas were variously teaching HPE, home economics, child studies
and one term of special education.
20. On 11 September 2015 the worker
received another email from Learning Services Northern Region attaching further
correspondence.
The correspondence advised, in part:
light of the number of years you have served in your current appointment and
your skill area you are now to be included
in the Required Transfer category to
meet the staffing needs of the Learning Service and Riverside High School. This
as staffing arrangements for 2016 progress further, you may be
required to transfer to another school.
When this process is resolved, which is anticipated to be prior to the
commencement of term 4, 2015, your placement for 2016 will
be advised, whether
continuing at Riverside High School or at another school.”
21. The worker said she was awoken when she received an email
at 2.00 am on the first Saturday morning of the third term school holidays,
advising her that she was to be transferred to Brooks High School in
22. She met the Brooks High School staff in the term 3 holidays. The
principal of Brooks High School told her and another transferring
teacher that
it was planned to give them both full HPE teaching roles, and that they could
expect to hearing about their 2016 timetables
of the fourth term in 2015.
23. In the week before the end of term, the
worker received a timetable that showed she would be teaching maths, English,
and geography. The worker said the other teacher was teaching all HPE.
The worker had never taught any of those subjects.
24. The worker said she
telephoned Amanda Buchanan, who was the signatory of the correspondence from
Learning Services, and that Ms
Buchanan told her that she needed to ‘be
25. The worker said that she brought every textbook that she
could about the subjects for 2016, and spent nearly every day in the
holidays trying to get ready for her new position and subjects. When the school
year started, the worker was teaching about
50 or 60 children in a double
classroom. Her co-teacher was very experienced and supportive and helped her.
The worker described
working long hours to try to get across the subjects she
was teaching, including being at school from 7.30 am to 5.30 pm, and then
her life. She said people kept asking her
things like “who did you
upset?” and “what did you do wrong?”. She said she avoided
going out in public
so as to avoid people asking her those sorts of questions,
and if she had to go somewhere she would go with one of her daughters.
her sleep suffered, she became very anxious, and struggled with her sewing for
leisure. She said by the end of term 1
she knew that she was teary and
withdrawn, but she just thought that she was not adjusting to her new job very
26. She was offered a change of role in term 2 in the Hub. She said it
was an area in the school where extremely disadvantaged children
came, and were
supported to stay in school. The worker said that she provided maths support to
the children in the Hub, generally
low ability students, who needed help with
things like learning budgeting and life skills. She said that it was, for her,
in her comfort zone, although the children were still quite challenging.
She worked in the Hub through the rest of 2016.
27. The worker said that in
term 4 of 2016 the principal told her that she would be leaving work at the Hub
to teach cooking. She
was told by the principal that the school needed a
qualified home economics teacher, and she was the person to do it.
worker described that she was not unhappy in the home economics role in 2017.
She said the kids were great, and her assistant
was lovely. She described going
to work early at about 7.00 or 7.15 am to do administrative work at that time to
avoid meeting the
leadership team in the office. The worker said that towards
the end of 2017 she was exhausted. She thought if she took first term
off work, it would give her nearly six months away. She said she intended to go
and that the teacher who was there
didn’t want to be doing that job. Accordingly, the worker applied for
long service leave
in term 1 of 2018 and was granted leave. She said in
evidence that it was not as beneficial a break as she thought it would be,
she tended to stay home. She said that in March 2018 she received a voice
message from Ms Louise Fisher, who was the principal
of Brooks High School,
wanting to talk about the worker returning to school, teaching a grade 7 core
class. The worker said it was
her daughter who took the message, and told her
that Ms Fisher wanted to talk to her about the next term. The worker said she
her daughter might have mentioned the phrase “core class”.
The worker said she went into “absolute meltdown”
and collapsed on
the floor. She said she went, in her head, back to term 1 of 2016. She said
her daughter made an appointment for
her to see the doctor and took
29. She said that when she saw the doctor on 22 March 2018 “I was
a mess. Couldn’t drive, couldn’t think”.
She said her
general practitioner, Dr White, discussed options with her including resigning
from work, going on sick leave, or making
a claim for workers compensation. She
said he went through the pros and cons of each option and suggested she look
into them. She
said she didn’t recognise that she had a mental health
issue. She said she spoke to the Education Department. It was a difficult
conversation, and it made her accept that she had an issue. She was told that
the workers compensation person was away for three
weeks, and she would have to
wait to speak to them. She decided to give a friend of hers, who had worked at
the Australian Education
Union a call, which she did. That was Mr Upston. She
talked matters through with him. She said he suggested that she make a claim
for workers compensation that would likely be disputed by the Department, but
that it would take three months for that to happen.
She said she went to see a
psychologist, but did not really gel with the psychologist. She commented that
she was “not thinking
at all rationally”.
30. Dr White, on 22
March 2018, gave the worker a sick leave certificate (not an initial workers
compensation medical certificate)
covering the period 30 April 2018 to 31 May
2018 inclusive. The worker said she thought that it covered the period from the
day of term 2, which was when she was expected to return from her long
service leave.
31. The worker went back to see Dr White on 1 May 2018. She
told him that she had decided she wanted to pursue workers compensation.
White gave her an initial workers compensation medical certificate.
worker made a claim for compensation. In the “Incident and Worker’s
Injury Details” section of the claim
form she did not fill out those parts
of the form that ask for the date the injury or condition occurred or was first
noticed, but
provided details of “increased work demands as a consequence
of working out of area. Illness increased gradually.”.
The claim form
indicates that she gave the claim and the medical certificate to the employer on
4 May 2018, although those documents
appear to have been date stamped by the
Department of Education’s workers compensation section on 15 May
33. The worker’s general practitioner continued to certify the
worker to be incapacitated for work, continuing to the date of
the hearing in
the Tribunal, and beyond.
The employer’s evidence
34. Mr Paul Stevenson gave evidence that in 2015 he was the
Assistant Principal at Brooks High School and at the time was in charge
timetable. He said he recalled two teachers who were being transferred from
Riverside High School coming for a visit and
tour of the school before they
started, and he had a conversation with them in relation to their teaching
35. He said that he knew that the worker had experience in teaching PE,
but there were several others in the school (Brooks High School)
who were also
experienced PE teachers. Not all of them were teaching PE at Brooks, and there
was no position for the worker to come
in in a PE teaching role.
36. He said
that when he assigned the worker’s teaching role for 2016 he knew she was
predominantly a PE teacher but he paired
her to team teach with someone who had
considerable experience, who was Mr Murray. He described Mr Murray as an
advanced skills
37. Mr Stevenson said he had been the person who
had set up the Hub programme at Brooks High School. He said it was a very
challenging
position but from conversations he had had with the worker he
believed she would work well in that role, and it appeared that the
pleased to be going into that role in term 2 in 2016. Mr Stevenson said he left
Brooks High School for an Assistant Principal
role at a different school about
five weeks into 2016.
38. Louise Fisher who is the current Principal of
Brooks High School gave evidence. She said she had started at Brooks High
in 2016. She described that the co-teaching system in the school is to
support teachers who are new to the school, but also for
other reasons. She
said that across Grade 7 and 8 a variety of subjects are taught, but always
maths, English and humanities. She
said in the team teaching scenario one
teacher takes the lead and one is the support person. If someone is stronger in
example, they would take the lead, but the other teacher might be
stronger in English. She said the system provides support for
the students who
are transitioning from primary school because the students have the same
teachers most of the time and those teachers
get to know the students.
Fisher said she commenced at Brooks High School in 2016. She was at Brooks High
School for term 3 onwards in 2016. At the
time she commenced at Brooks High
School the worker had been working in the Hub since the start of term
40. She said towards the end of 2016 she emailed all her teaching staff to
ask them what their teaching preferences were for 2017.
She said the worker
responded the following morning indicating that she “would like to be
doing the same role as I am now
in 2017 if at all possible. I am able to teach
was given cooking for the 2017 year because:
said she was able to teach it and it was her second choice in her email. We had
no-one else on staff who had those skills.
I do not believe it was ‘out
of area’ for [the worker]. I had heard from a variety of sources
including our HR department
that she trained as a home economics
This was a timetabling decision based on the needs of students and the
school and that [the worker] said she was able to do this.
This was not because
we had concerns around her teaching performance in the hub.
It is my practice to discuss with teachers their teaching load for the
following year after the timetable is completed. I recall
that I explained to
[the worker] that we needed a cooking teacher as our current cooking teacher was
going on maternity leave and
she indicated that she wanted to stay in the hub.
I explained that we had a trained support teacher coming into the hub as we had
a permanent trained support teacher transferred into the school for the 2017
year. The school did not have a cooking teacher for
2017 as she had gone on
maternity leave. I followed up with HR around if there are any cooking teachers
available from other schools
and they told me there wasn’t.”
41. Ms Fisher said in her statement that during 2017 the worker
taught cooking for all but two lessons of her teaching load, which
lessons of history each week, which was slightly under the award expectations of
20 hours. Ms Fisher said all the history
units were planned for the worker and
the worker was supported by a very experienced humanities teacher. Ms Fisher
said she understood
that the units of work for the history subject were
“collaboratively planned together with the history teacher and [the
was not on her own or unsupported at any time.”
42. She said
she was not aware that the worker had any issues in relation to stress or
anxiety caused at school during the 2017 school
43. Ms Fisher, in
relation to the worker’s load teaching home economics in 2017, said that
there were times that the school
had asked for food to be provided for staff or
other functions, to be cooked by catering students during class time. Ms Fisher
it was clearly communicated with the worker that they were looking for food
such as “soup and bread rolls” but the worker
would choose to cook
significantly more complicated dishes and offer choices. Ms Fisher said she
recalled speaking to the worker
on at least two occasions telling her to
simplify the menu and therefore reduce her work load. She said the worker
my instructions and told me she was fine and continued to do
extra”. Ms Fisher said the worker also ignored other requests
to do less.
She said “Again [the worker] ignored this request and continued to cook
more than we requested, therefore spending
her own time preparing food rather
than having the catering students doing the work during class time, as
requested. I made it clear
that I did not expect her to do work in her own
44. Ms Fisher stated “I dispute there were any increased
work demands placed on [the worker] in respect to her cooking load.
cooking was not out of area for her, and she was advised to reduce the level of
catering by the students from the options
she was providing.”
Fisher said in October 2017 she asked staff for their teaching preferences for
the 2018 year. The worker advised her first
choice would be cooking. Ms Fisher
said that in or around late October 2017 the worker asked to take long service
leave in term
1 2018, which was granted. Ms Fisher said she advised the worker
she was unsure what the worker’s teaching role would be on
46. Ms Fisher said that her intention as to place the worker in
teaching a core class upon her return, much the same as she had been
the first term of 2016 before Ms Fisher commenced at Brooks High School. The
intention was that she would be team teaching
with another teacher who would be
the “lead teacher” in the class with the worker being the
“supporting teacher”.
She said in her statement “This was the
plan for four weeks only and this was explained to [the worker]........it is
difficult to give everyone their first choice, particularly when they are
returning in second term, as we have to meet the student
needs and fit in around
an established timetable. I do recall that after that initial four weeks
coverage while someone was on leave
we would be looking at one day of cooking
and some other teaching roles for [the worker]. However I was unsure of how
look and planned to discuss this with her after her return.”
She said she attempted to telephone the worker to discuss the
term 2, however there was no answer. She said this happened twice in early
March 2018 and the worker did not
return her calls. She said in her statement
“I believe I left a voice mail which I believe I advised [the worker] that
would be team teaching with [another teacher] for the first four weeks of
term 2 while one of our teachers was on leave and after
that we would be looking
at one day of cooking and some other teacher roles but we could look at that
47. Ms Fisher said the next response she has was to an email
she sent where the worker advised her that that worker would be on medical
until 30 May.
48. She said she then received an email from the worker on 3
May 2018 that the worker intended to claim compensation, and that email
first time Ms Fisher was aware the worker was having difficulties due to stress
caused at school. She said the worker had
not shared any concerns with her
prior to that email.
49. In cross-examination Ms Fisher said she was not
aware at any time that the worker was having issues with the leadership team at
the school. She said she felt that the worker had been supported in the school
environment.
50. In general, in relation to allocation of teaching load, Ms
Fisher, in her statement, expressed that asking staff what they would
teach for the next school year is something that is not generally done by
schools. She felt that her process of doing so,
and then following up with a
personal discussion was reasonable. In general she stated:
teachers upon completion of University are trained as teachers first and general
key teaching competencies are transferrable
across all subjects in year groups.
While teachers may specialise in any particular subject, there is no guarantee
they will be
employed in this because it depends on the vacancies available and
the needs of each school. I understand that some schools do not
have specialist
maths or science teachers and it is common practice that teachers teach a
variety of subjects.
There is nothing in the teaching award, which requires teachers to teach
in only one specific learning area, and teachers are expected
to be flexible in
the areas they teach to meet the needs of the school.”
51. Ms Fisher said that she never had a single conversation
with the worker where the worker suggested she was not coping at Brooks
School. She said she was aware the worker had taught a core class for her first
term at Brooks, and the feedback Ms Fisher
had received was that the worker had
been successful in doing so. If a teacher was not coping, she had an
expectation that the teacher
would go to see one of the Assistant Principals or
herself, and if that happened, the school would look at a plan to support the
52. Amanda Buchanan, who is an HR Manager with the employer gave
evidence that she manages a team responsible for Education Department
staffing between Bicheno and Strahan, including Riverside High School and Brooks
High School in the northern region. Her
statement was put into evidence also.
53. She gave evidence that in 2015 there were a number of teachers who had
completed eligible service in level B, C and D schools
who wanted to go into
Riverside High School, and the worker was categorised as a base grade teacher
and eligible for transfer. She
said ultimately seven transfers were made from
Riverside High School, not all of them to Brooks.
54. In cross-examination
Ms Buchanan confirmed that she was aware that the worker’s particular
professional skills were in
the areas of home economics, child studies and
physical education. She agreed that she had been told that there was a gap at
High School in 2016 in Physical Education, and a small one for home
economics, and that was why she identified the worker as a suitable
because her skill base would be matched with the needs of the school.
relation to the manner in which the worker was advised of the transfer, Ms
Buchanan was not able to dispute that the worker
received notice at 2:02 am at
the start of the term 3 holidays in 2015. Ms Buchanan said in her statement
that Learning Services
Northern Region:
all transfers (in excess of 120 emails) from the one email address. There was
no reason other than the delay in all
of those emails being sent that the email
would arrive early in the morning during a weekend.
The emails were sent to the work email addresses of all applicants and it
was [the worker’s] decision to have a device that
must have woken her at
this time. It is not a requirement for her access her emails after work hours
and it was her personal choice
to set her device with a notification. There was
no intent for the email to arrive at this time and there was no expectation that
she would be checking her emails after hours. There were over 120 letters sent
and this would have been an IT matter with the delay
in sending due to the
volume of emails sent from that particular mailbox.”
56. Ms Buchanan agreed in cross-examination that she did not
consider the receipt of the email advising about the transfer to 2:02
good practice. She agreed that it could be good practice for the worker’s
manager (being her Principal) to advise
her about the transfer. She was not
prepared to agree that it was reasonable and appropriate for the manager to
advise a person
who had been the subject of a forced transfer that they were to
57. She recalled she had received a telephone call from the worker
in about mid December 2015. She said up until that time there
had been no
complaints from the worker about her transfer. She agreed that the complaint
the worker expressed in that phone call
was that she would be teaching
unfamiliar subjects.
58. In relation to the sending of the transfer letters,
Ms Buchanan advised that all the letters were scanned and sent at 3:00 pm
last day of term, which was the last day to send notifications. She said they
were sent at the conclusion of the school day
because the Department does not
like to interrupt student learning. She said as a general principle the
Department prefers not have
a model of principals speaking with individual staff
members, because it is preferable to have consistency across the board in
to notifications about transfer.
59. She said she had no
involvement in setting the worker’s timetable at Brooks High School, and
nothing to do with the subject
distribution that the worker
60. When asked about her letters of 1 and 11 September 2015 where
she made reference to the worker’s (as a potential transferee)
“skill area”, she said it gives the opportunity for the teacher to
give information about areas in which they have been
teaching for the last
previous years prior to the transfer.
Medical evidence for the worker – Dr Ratcliff
61. Dr Ratcliff had seen the worker for independent medical
assessment on 25 July 2019, and his report dated 6 August 2019 was put
evidence. The history that he obtained from the worker was substantially
similar to the history the worker gave in evidence
which has already been set
out. In his discussion about the worker and her claim generally, Dr Ratcliff
detailed the worker’s
particular interest in assisting school children who
were, for one reason or another, challenged or disadvantaged. He
client has a particular concern for children who have been traumatised or
disadvantaged, and whose behaviour is likely
to lead to periods of suspension or
expulsion from school. Her concern as a teacher was to prevent such outcomes
when possible and
even in her current state to think about making provision
for care of suspended students and the aftercare of those who have been
expelled. She has a particular interest in the "pastoral,, care of school
children beyond the purely didactic role of a teacher.
She has pursued these
interests both in volunteering for activities that are not additionally
remunerated and often extend beyond
hours of duty, and has regularly attended
conference and training sessions relevant to these activities. She has
encountered a range
of responses to these concerns among school authorities;
some being supportive and appreciative of her efforts, others apparently
them as extraneous to the principal purposes of a school, not relevant to your
client's teaching role and sometimes leading
to over-involvement in the problems
of a particular student, perhaps even laying the school open to criticism in the
event of adverse
62. Dr Ratcliff went on to make comment in relation to the
requirement that the worker teach an unfamiliar teaching role following
transfer to Brooks High School:
“As far as the issue of being required to
teach core subjects in which she had no special training or background
she was a victim of the longstanding policy of having generic
teachers who could be deployed to teach any subject at secondary level
than teachers with special expertise in particular subjects. This policy is I
understand under increasing criticism at the
present time but not likely to be
rapidly altered after several decades of B Ed in place of BA Dip Ed or BSc Dip
Ed. The requirement
is challenging even for new graduates, but multiply so for a
physical education and home economics teacher of forty years experience
areas. Your client's response was to spend the long vacation in attempts to
prepare herself for the role, and to spend
much of her own time in preparation
for the following day's lessons, at the same time feeling that she was falling
short of her own
standards in teaching, and in danger of letting down her
pupils. This stress was constant from the time when she first saw her timetable
for the beginning of the school year 2016, as was apparent in the process of
adapting to the transfer to a more "difficult" school.
Related stressors were
constant throughout 2016 and 2017, but mitigated by supportive colleagues and
initially by a sympathetic principal,
but then exacerbated by a change of
principal and perceived devaluation and actual criticism of supportive
63. At the time of the assessment, Dr Ratcliff opined that the
worker’s initial diagnosis (in retrospect) would appear to have
Adjustment Disorder with Anxiety, but a changing pattern of sleep disturbance
and development of minor cognitive difficulties
suggested to him the development
of a Major Depressive Disorder. He noted panic episodes leading to avoidance
also potentially indicated
the possibility of Panic Disorder with
Agoraphobia.
64. Dr Ratcliff was asked a number of questions in relation to
causation of the worker’s psychiatric condition, and those questions
his responses were as follows:
causation, has the diagnosed condition been caused by [the worker’s]
employment to the substantial degree required;
if yes, detail the aetiology of
The diagnosed condition has been caused by [the worker’s] employment
to a substantial degree.
In my opinion the chain of causation is from a range of situational
stressors connected with her employment [outlined in my responses
question 7 and 8]. These resulted in an Adjustment Disorder with· Mixed
Anxiety and Depressed Mood that triggered a
reactive depression with significant
features of Major Depressive Disorder and panic attacks resulting in social and
agoraphobic
avoidance. Major Depressive Disorder and Panic Disorder are
recognised, indeed frequent complications of Adjustment Disorders. In
absence of any past history of related disorders it is in my opinion more
probable than not that these arose as complications
of an Adjustment Disorder
and not as coincidental occurrences.
you agree with Dr Evenhuis' opinion that "the major contributing factor was not
the transfer itself but rather the fact that [the
worker] was required to teach
in areas she felt less proficient in"; if yes, why?
requirement to teach unfamiliar subjects was undoubtedly stressful, but in her
case it was accompanied by a devaluation of her
concerns about her obligation to
students, especially to troubled students. She coped with the transfer supported
by other staff
and a sympathetic principal, but became stressed by having to
teach the unfamiliar subjects and then by an unsympathetic principal
"Leadership Team". Conversely there was some improvement in her symptoms when
placed in a supportive role.
[the worker’s] age and given her seniority and background experience, was
it in your opinion reasonable for the Department
to require her to teach 19
different subjects over 2016 and 2017 (noting her perfectionist traits), ie, did
that expose [the worker]
to an unreasonable risk of suffering stress and anxiety
and ultimately a mental health condition; why was this
unreasonable?
In my opinion the requirement to teach
unfamiliar subjects was very unreasonable and for a somewhat perfectionistic
teacher a nightmare.
It would stress any teacher of her length of experience and
would appear in itself to have been an unreasonable administrative
For some decades the public education system has relied on generically
trained teachers and not as formerly in the secondary system
teachers for
special expertise. I understand from other sources that there is now recognition
that this has had negative results.
The requirement of a specialist teacher to
teach unfamiliar subjects at a secondary level did in my opinion expose her to
an unreasonable
risk of suffering stress and anxiety”
65. In giving evidence, Dr Ratcliff was asked by counsel for
the worker about the relative significance of the transfer to Brooks
High School
as opposed to the subject load at the school in terms of causing the
worker’s condition. He responded that the
transfer was a contributing
stressor, but not the principle one. It was his view that the requirement to
teach unfamiliar subjects
was the principle causative stressor to the
worker’s condition. He also gave evidence that if the worker had been
transferred
to Brooks High School into a home economics or physical education
teaching role, or otherwise an area of comfort in terms of her
experience, whether it was unlikely the worker would have suffered the same
condition. It was Dr Ratcliff’s view
that although the possibility of
suffering the diagnosed condition was not remote, it would have been much less
66. Dr Ratcliff was also asked to assess the worker’s whole
person impairment, and his opinion about this, and the opinion of
Dr Evenhuis
Medical evidence for the employer – Dr Michael
67. Dr Evenhuis saw the worker for independent medical
assessment in June 2018, and his reports dated 25 July 2018 and 7 November
were put into evidence.
68. Dr Evenhuis, when he saw the worker on 28 June
2018 took a history that was once again similar to the evidence given by the
in the Tribunal, and to the history which had been taken by Dr Ratcliff.
69. Dr Evenhuis provided a general overview resulting from his assessment as
and Opinion
[The worker] is a 61-year-o!d teacher with 40 years of experience who
developed fluctuating symptoms of anxiety and low mood over
the two-and-a-half
year period since she was required to transfer from Riverside to Brooks High
School. She reported that having
to take on classes that lay outside of her
area of expertise affected her sense of worth and self-efficacy, she was
apprehensive
that she was unable to live up to her own high standards. There
improvement in her mood when she took on a support teacher role and was able
to derive some satisfaction from teaching
cooking but continued to struggle
throughout 2017 during which time she felt unappreciated and unsupported
[The worker] denied past difficulties with low mood and stated that issues
in her personal life including her elderly father’s
declining health were
not a focus of her concern. She sought leave at the beginning of 2018 to recover
and regroup but deteriorated
rapidly once she learnt that she would initially be
teaching various Grade 7 subjects and after that she would be more or less
within a relief role. [The worker] described being passionate and
committed to teaching and she struggled when she was not able to
teach to her
strengths and perform at a level that she felt was satisfactory. She described
being prone to perfectionism and this,
a degree of obsessionality and her stage
in career made it difficult for her to adapt to change. Her mood deteriorated as
became less reinforcing, she withdrew socially and negative changes in
her lifestyle further contributed to deterioration in her
Based on the history provided, it seems likely that [the worker] first
developed symptoms of major depression in 2016 and that unfortunately
condition was not recognised or effectively treated in the interim. Whilst her
symptoms have fluctuated according to her circumstances
of employment, she has
not been free of symptoms during this period and describes sufficient symptoms
including sleep disturbance,
changes in appetite, feelings of hopelessness, loss
of self-esteem and suicidal ideation to meet the criteria for a major depressive
episode. She has only recently commenced psychological treatment and is yet to
be prescribed an antidepressant.”
70. In terms of diagnosis, Dr Evenhuis advised:
“Whilst there is no doubt a reactive
component to [the worker’s] symptoms, she appears to meet the diagnostic
for a major depressive episode. It is not entirely clear when she
first would have met criteria for this condition but she may well
significantly depressed as far back as 2016. A possible differential diagnosis
is an adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety
and depressed mood but the severity
and breadth of her symptoms she describes is consistent with a major depressive
71. When asked about the cause or causes of the worker’s
condition, Dr Evenhuis responded:
“According to the available history, it
does appear that [the worker’s] employment was the major contributing
her development of depressed mood. In particular, her need to teach
in areas she did not feel proficient in affected her sense of
self-efficacy and
self-worth and there was a corresponding deterioration in her mood as well as
heightened anxiety. The situation
was worsened by [the worker’s]
perception that her contribution was not appreciated and that she was not
adequately supported
by some of the staff.”
72. Dr Evenhuis was asked about any reasons the worker might
have given for not seeking medical assistance at an earlier date. He
“It appears that [the worker] did not fully
recognise the extend of her symptoms or the fact that she may have been
from a mood disorder in 2016 when her symptoms first became apparent.
The fact that she is very committed to her role as a teacher
probably meant that
she was less likely to seek workers compensation and time away from work when
she first experienced symptoms.”
73. When Dr Evenhuis saw the worker for review in November
2019, he took an updated history of an overall improvement in mood since
last seen her, subsequent to the commencement of antidepressant medication.
However, anxiety, panic attacks and agoraphobia
continued. Dr Evenhuis
considered that the worker qualified for a diagnosis of Panic Disorder, and
that the diagnosis of Major
Depressive Disorder continued to be appropriate, was
by that stage was partially in remission.
74. In giving evidence Dr Evenhuis
confirmed that his view was that the major contributing factor to the
worker’s psychological
condition was not the transfer itself, but the need
to teach in areas where the worker did not feel proficient. He said that the
transfer which had taken place was from a position where she was teaching
subjects where she was confident to do so, to a school
where she was then
required to teach subjects where she was not comfortable.
The medical evidence – discussion
75. As both Dr Ratcliff and Dr Evenhuis observed in their
reports, they are substantially in agreement about many things about the
and her psychiatric condition, and many of the issues they address in their
respective opinions appear to be uncontroversial.
76. Both Drs Ratcliff and
Evenhuis are in agreement that the worker’s employment has been the major
or most significant contributing
factor to the development of the worker’s
psychiatric condition. This is a matter of agreement between the
77. The psychiatric opinions originally diverged as to the
diagnostic label that ought to be placed on the worker’s condition,
not to any substantial degree, and as the worker’s condition has
developed, there is now essentially agreement as to the
appropriate
78. Dr Ratcliff, in August 2019 made an “initial
retrospective diagnosis” of Adjustment Disorder with Anxiety, but
that with the onset of other symptoms, a diagnosis of Major
Depressive Disorder, with a possibility of Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia
also be applicable. As he set out in his answer to question 6 in paragraph 65
above, the later diagnosed conditions are recognised
and frequent complications
of Adjustment Disorder, and in Dr Ratcliff’s view were likely to be
connected in this case.
79. Dr Evenhuis, in July 2018, made a diagnosis of a
Major Depressive Episode, possibly occurring as far back as 2016, and also
a potential differential diagnosis of Adjustment Disorder with Mixed
Anxiety and Depressed Mood. In evidence, Dr Evenhuis agreed
worker’s condition may have started as an Adjustment Disorder, and
progressed to a Major Depressive Episode. By the
time he saw the worker again,
he considered the Major Depressive Episode continued, but partially in
remission, and he further diagnosed
a Panic Disorder, secondary to the original
condition. I observe that Dr Evenhuis has referred to “Major Depressive
and “Major Depressive Disorder” interchangeably in
his second report, so I infer those terms refer to much the same
80. As to the cause of the worker’s psychiatric injury, again,
there is substantial agreement between the two psychiatric experts,
differences being in relation to the emphases they each placed on different
aspects of the worker’s history. Dr
Ratcliff and Dr Evenhuis were in
agreement that the transfer from Riverside High School to Brooks High School was
a contributing
factor to the worker’s condition, but not the major
contributing factor. Both agreed that the major contributing factor was
requirement to teach unfamiliar subjects in the first term of 2016 following the
81. As Dr Evenhuis observed in his second report,
Ratcliff’s formulation of the case is compatible with my own. I note that
he has put more emphasis on [the worker’s]
perceived loss of her role as a
supporter to troubled youth, and agree that this was a significant, but not the
most significant
contributing factor to the development of her symptoms. Dr
Ratcliff has expressed a view that the requirement for [the worker] to
area outside her expertise was unreasonable in the circumstances. This is not an
area that I feel I can comment upon”
82. I find that the worker’s condition is an injury which
is disease, which commenced as an Adjustment Disorder, and progressed
Depressive Disorder and Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia, and to which the
worker’s employment was the major or most
substantial
contributing.
When did the worker suffer the injury ?
83. The question of when the worker suffered the psychiatric
injury that is the subject of her claim for compensation is in dispute
the parties.
84. This is because s32 the Act requires a worker to give
notice of injury as soon as practicable after the occurrence of the injury.
Failure to do so will mean the worker has no entitlement to compensation, unless
the worker can demonstrate, pursuant to s37 of the
Act, that the failure to give
notice as required was occasioned by mistake, absence from the State, or other
reasonable cause and
the employer’s defence of the claim has not been
prejudiced. The issue of when the injury occurred will be relevant to the
question of whether notice was given as soon as practicable, but will also
inform the period within which a worker might have to
explain the failure to
give notice, and issues relating to prejudice.
85. S3(5) of the Act
For the purposes of this Act, where a worker suffers an injury that is a
disease, that injury shall be deemed to have occurred
(a) on the day on which the worker became totally or partially
incapacitated by reason of that injury; or
(b) if a day cannot be ascertained under paragraph (a) , on the day on
which a medical practitioner has certified that the worker
incapacitated by reason of that injury.”
86. The worker says that she suffered the injury either when
she received the message from Ms Fisher that it was intended that she
a Grade 7 core teaching role when she returned to work from her long service
leave, or when she attended Dr White on 22
March 2018 and was given a medical
certificate covering the second term of 2018.
87. Counsel for the worker
submitted that there was no evidence of workplace incapacity until those events,
and the incapacity occurred
at the time that the worker fell within the
formulation under Arnott Snack Products Pty Ltd v Yacob
[1985] HCA 2
, that is ‘physical incapacity for actually doing the work in the
labour market in which the employee works or may reasonably
be expected to work
or physical incapacity resulting in actual economic loss’.
employer says that the worker was incapacitated for work in early 2016, as
evidenced by the symptoms identified by Dr Evenhuis
(and confirmed by the worker
in her evidence) including insomnia and symptoms of anxiety such as increased
heart rate, nausea, headaches
and avoidance. Further, the employer points to
evidence given by the worker that she was ‘teary and withdrawn’ in
first term of 2016. It was submitted the inference ought to be drawn that
the worker knew she was unwell and that she did not notify
the school or the
Department about how she felt.
89. Counsel for the employer referred to the
decision of former Chief Commissioner Webster in M. v Allianz Australia Services
Ltd (No. 2)
[2019] TASWRCT 35
where the Chief Commissioner
determined:
worker was at least partially incapacitated for work on 7 March 2018, despite
the fact that she did attend work on that
day and on 8 and 9 March 2018 before
being certified as incapacitated on 10 March 2018. It seems to me that the
totality of the
evidence suggests she experienced very significant difficulties
after the telephone call on 7 March 2018 in performing her normal
duties. Her
evidence as to these matters was
the telephone
call......made her “very anxious”......
she found it
very difficult to concentrate......
headache, fatigue and was extremely anxious.....
she did not
sleep on the night of 7 March 2018.”
Applying the same logic it is contended by the employer that
the symptoms detailed by the worker in this case in 2016 demonstrate
was at least partially incapacitated for work at that time.
alternative, counsel for the employer submitted that there was evidence that the
worker was incapacitated for work either
in late 2017, or February 2018. She
referred to the medical records from the worker’s general practitioner
that were in evidence.
There was a visit to the worker’s general
practitioner in September 2017 where the worker was diagnosed with an upper
respiratory
tract infection and given time away from work. At that time the
general practitioner note recorded “not enjoying job....finding
stressful”. The employer also refers to the worker’s evidence that
towards the end of 2017 she elected to take
the first term of 2018 as long
service leave with an expectation that a term away from school would have
improved how she was feeling.
Additionally, counsel for the worker points to a
note of the history taken by Dr Ratcliff where he referred to her last work at
school being on the last day of term in 2017, and then quoted the worker
“I just can’t go back”. It was submitted
that this showed the
worker was incapacitated on the last day of term 2017 as she told Dr Ratcliff
that at that time she could not
go back. Additionally, the employer refers to
the general practitioner’s notes of 19 February 2018 where Dr
notes record that the reason for the visit was in relation to the
worker’s diabetic condition where in consultation his notes
“patient fed up with work, really doesn’t want to go
91. In my view, there is a distinction between the situation
before the former Chief Commissioner in M. v Allianz (supra) and here,
in this situation I have before me evidence that, despite the symptoms that the
worker was clearly suffering from in 2016,
and the fact that both Dr Evenhuis
and Dr Ratcliff had retrospectively assessed that she was suffering from a
diagnosable psychiatric
condition, the worker was still successful at performing
the duties required of her by her employer. Ms Fisher’s evidence
that to her knowledge there had been no concerns around the worker’s
teaching performance, that the Assistant Principals
at Brooks High School had
told Ms Fisher that the worker had been “successful” in the core
teaching role in 2016.
92. The submissions that have been made on behalf of
the employer that I should be satisfied the worker first became incapacitated
towards the end of 2017 or early 2018 are not, in my view, supported by the
evidence that is referred to. There is no doubt the
worker was not happy at
work and finding it stressful towards the end of 2017, and I accept that by
February 2018 when she was on
long service leave she really did not wish to
return. The worker would not be the first person to harbour those feelings
employment, but I consider the evidence does not enable an inference
to be drawn that the worker was, at either stage, wholly or
incapacitated for work.
93. I find that the worker suffered the injury on 20
March 2018 when she received Ms Fisher’s advice about her proposed
role when she returned to school in the second term of 2018. The worker
described that she had “an absolute melt down”,
and fell to the
floor. It was one of her daughters who proceeded to make an appointment for her
to see Dr White. Although the appointment
to see Dr White did not take place
until 22 March 2018, the worker’s description of what happened to her when
she found out
she was expected to go back to core teaching was so severe that
she must, at that time have realised that she was significantly unwell.
94. I further find that the worker gave notice of her injury to the employer
on 4 May 2018, which is the date indicated on her claim
form that the claim and
initial workers compensation medical certificate were given to the employer.
Although I think it makes little
or no practical difference, I do not think the
worker gave when she emailed Ms Fisher to advise about her workers compensation
certification
from Dr White on 3 May 2018, because it gave no indication of what
the worker said was the cause of her condition.
Was notice of injury given as soon as practicable?
95. The worker says that, despite there apparently being a
delay of several weeks in giving notice of injury to the employer, notice
still, in all the circumstances, given “as soon as practicable” in
accordance with s32.
96. Counsel for the worker referred to the decision of
Gallop J in McMillan v TIO of Motor Accidents (Compensation) Appeal Tribunal
the Northern Territory, M11 of 1986, where His Honour said:
phrase ‘as soon as practicable’ is designed to impose a reasonably
practical time limit after the subject accident
for making a claim under the
Act. What is a reasonably practicable time must vary according to the
circumstances. No doubt all
the surrounding circumstances relevant to the claim
must be taken into consideration as in every other case where it falls to the
Tribunal to decide what is reasonable. Those circumstances would include the
physical and mental incapacity of the injured person
at the time in question,
his degree of business knowledge, the nature and time of his enquiries, the
result of such inquiries, any
difficulties encountered, the magnitude of any
injuries, whether they had stabilised, and such similar matters.”
97. Counsel for the worker referred to Dr White’s case
notes of the appointment with the worker on 22 March 2018 where he recorded
worker’s presentation as “nausea, teariness, emotional,
insomnia” and that he discussed options with her that
2. med cert sick leave
3. workers comp
pros and cons to all discussed
advised pt to seek union support
advised pt to seek psychological support”
Dr White also outlined that his plan that he provided to the
worker was:
“1. some time off to plan
pt to see that she still has ability to contribute to education, even if not
face to face teaching”
98. Counsel for the worker then referred to the worker’s
inability to obtain advice from the Education Union because nobody
was available
to give her that advice for three weeks, and that she sought counselling from a
clinical psychologist which was also
in accordance with Dr White’s advice.
Counsel for the worker also referred to the worker thereafter seeking advice
Upston and heard evidence he told her if she made a claim she would get
“three months compensation”, but that the claim
99. As a general proposition, it was submitted that it was
reasonable for the worker to act on the advice of Dr White to undertake
enquiries that he suggested she undertake and which were in part delayed by her
ability to obtain advice from the union. On
that basis, it was submitted that
it should be determined that the worker gave notice soon as reasonably
practicable taking in to
account her physical and mental capacity, her degree of
knowledge, the nature and time for enquires, the results of such enquiries,
difficulties encountered, the magnitude of her injury, the fact that it had not
stabilised, the advice received about the complexity
of her case, the fact that
she was on long service leave and was self-funding her situation at the time,
and that the worker described
herself as being in a “complete fog”
and unable to think rationally during that time.
100. I find that notice of
injury was not given by the worker as soon as it practicably could have been.
After her consultation with
Dr White in March 2018, the worker was in a position
to advise her employer about her sick leave, and follow through with the plan
she and Dr White discussed by organising and attending psychological
counselling, contacting her union for the purpose of seeking
advice, coming up
with an alternative plan to speak to Mr Upston when union assistance was not
readily available, considering Mr
Upston’s advice and reaching a decision
(by the time she went back to see Dr White on 1 May 2018) that she intended to
a claim for compensation. If she was able to do those things, I consider
she was in a position to also give notice of injury to her
employer during that
same time frame while she considered her options, and it was reasonably
practicable for her to do so.
Does s37 operate to excuse the failure to give notice as soon
as practicable?
101. S37 of the Act provides:
of failure to give notice of injury, &c.
(1) The failure to give notice of injury
in accordance with
any defect or inaccuracy in such a notice does not affect the worker's right to
claim compensation under this Act if –
(a) the failure or defect or inaccuracy was
occasioned by mistake, absence from the State of the worker or other reasonable
(b) it is found in proceedings relating to
the worker's right to claim compensation under this Act that the employer's
not prejudiced by reason of the failure.
(2) Without limiting the generality of the
reasonable cause
, that expression includes –
(a) the making of a payment to a worker that
the worker believes to be a payment of compensation under this Act; and
(b) any representation that is made to a
worker that the worker believes is made by or on behalf of the worker's employer
to the effect
that compensation under this Act will or will not be
(3) Any dispute relating to the failure of
the worker to give notice of injury in accordance with
be referred, by either party to the dispute, to the Tribunal for
determination.”
102. The worker relies on “reasonable cause’ as the
basis for her failure to provide notice of injury in accordance with
103. It is accepted that an assessment of whether delay in providing notice
was due to a ‘reasonable cause’ requires the
assessment to be made
from the perspective of the worker (Muir-Wilson v State of Tasmania [200] TASSC
104. I think the evidence in relation to the worker’s
circumstances, which are outlined in the above paragraphs, from her collapse
20 March 2018 when the injury occurred to the point that she gave notice of
injury to her employer on 4 May 2018, provides an
explanation for the delay in
giving notice that amounts to a reasonable cause.
105. I infer that Dr
White’s discussion with the worker on 22 March 2018 relating to the
‘pros and cons’ of the
options he outlined would have given the
worker much to consider. In the circumstances, I am of the view that it was
reasonable for
the worker to take some time to plan as discussed, and seek the
recommended support and advice before making a decision as to her
106. As it was, the period of delay between the worker’s
injury and notification to the employer was approximately six weeks.
employer points to the breadth of evidence before the Tribunal as being
generally suggestive of prejudice to the employer. I
do not think there is
anything to suggest that the employer’s defence of the proceedings has
suffered any prejudice by the
worker’s failure to give notice of injury
at any earlier time within that period of delay.
107. Therefore, although the
worker failed to give notice of injury as soon as it was reasonably practicable
for her to do so, I find
that the failure to do so was occasioned by reasonable
cause, and the employer’s defence has not been prejudiced by that failure.
Her right to claim compensation for the injury is not affected by her failure to
give notice as required.
Is s25(1A) available to the employer as a defence to the
108. The employer says that if the worker’s right to
claim compensation is not adversely affected by her failure to give notice
injury, compensation is not payable because s25(1A) of the Act is
109. S25(1A) provides, relevantly as follows:
Compensation is not payable under this Act in respect of a disease which is an
illness of the mind or a disorder of the
mind and which arises substantially
(a) reasonable action taken in a reasonable manner by an employer to
transfer.......... a worker.........; or
(c) reasonable administrative action taken in a reasonable manner by an
employer in connection with a worker's employment;”
110. In M. v Allianz (supra), former Chief Commissioner Webster
determined that, for an employer to be able to defend a claim by relying
s25(1A) it is necessary only for the employer to show that the worker’s
condition was ‘substantially’ caused
by one of the
‘defences’ under paragraphs (a) to (e) inclusive in that sub
section, where ‘substantial’ is
something of “weight, size or
importance”, or “more than de minimus”.
111. There may be
more than one, or many, substantial contributing factors from which a
worker’s psychological injury has arisen.
It is not, in accordance with M
v Allianz (supra), necessary that the reasonable action or decision or failure
to take action on
reasonable grounds under s25(1A) be the major or most
substantial cause of the worker’s injury, it will be enough for the
to show that one of them was a substantial cause.
112. On this
basis, the employer submits that the preponderance of evidence is that the
transfer of the worker from Riverside High
School to Brooks High School was a
contributing factor to the worker’s condition, and that it was
“reasonable action
taken in a reasonable manner by the employer to
transfer the worker” within the meaning of s25(1A)(a).
113. Further,
the employer said that the allocation that the worker would teach ‘core
subjects’ when she commenced at
Brooks High School amounted to reasonable
administrative action taken in a reasonable manner in connection with the
employment, in accordance with s25(1A)(c).
114. That the
worker’s condition arose substantially from this requirement is not in
dispute, given that Drs Ratcliff and Evenhuis
are in, essentially, ferocious
agreement that the allocation of the ‘core subjects’ was the major
or most substantial
contributing factor to the worker’s
115. The worker’s position is that neither s25(1A)(a) nor
s25(1A)(c) is available to the employer, on the basis that the worker
transfer of the worker was neither reasonable nor reasonably undertaken, and
that the direction that the worker teach the
core subjects in term 1 of 2016,
whilst action that was administrative in nature, was neither reasonable in all
the circumstances
nor reasonably undertaken.
116. In addition, counsel for
the worker submits that the decision of the former Chief Commissioner in M. v
Allianz (supra), as regards
the meaning of “substantially” in
s25(1A) is not good law.
117. This submission was made on the basis that,
although Chief Commissioner Webster had regard to the Federal Court decisions of
Hart v Comcare
[2005] FCAFC 16
, and Drenth v Comcare
[2012] FCAFC 86
, he was not
apparently referred to the decision of the High Court in Comcare v Martin
, where the High Court held that the Full Court had erred in its decision
that was then on appeal to the High Court, and which effectively
followed the
same approach that the Full Court of the Federal Court had taken in Hart v
Comcare (supra).
118. It is not necessary for me to determine whether M. v
Allianz (supra) is good law, on the basis of the submissions put on behalf
the worker. This is because I have concluded that the employer has not
established that either the actions to transfer the worker,
or the allocation of
subjects to her for term 1 in 2016 were respectively reasonable action taken in
a reasonable manner to transfer
the worker or reasonable administrative action
taken in a reasonable manner under s25(1A)(a) and/or (c). I set out my reasons
Reasonable action to transfer under s25(1A)(a)?
119. As a starting point, I accept that the transfer agreement
is, in itself, reasonable. I also accept that the worker was potentially
to a required transfer in 2016, having completed ‘eligible service’
at Riverside High School.
120. However, I do not consider that the employer
has demonstrated that the action taken to transfer the worker was taken in a
manner, as required by s25(1A)(a).
121. The first of the primary
goals of the transfer agreement is expressed to be to “Provide a fair,
transparent and equitable
process for managing the transfer of teachers between
schools and colleges.”
122. The key principles of the transfer
agreement are required to be read in conjunction with the primary goals, and
• All teachers to be considered for transfer under this
agreement will be given the opportunity to provide information that
is material
to the decisions regarding the location of their next assignment.
effecting transfers the Department will balance the need to provide staffing
stability in schools/colleges with the personal
and professional needs of
teachers and school/college renewal.
• The principle of ‘nature
justice’ will underpin all aspects of the implementation of this
123. The employer wrote to the worker twice whilst the
possibility of a transfer was in the offing, on both occasions referring to
worker’s ‘skill area’, and on one occasion advising her that
either her principal or a member of the Learning
Services team would
“provide an opportunity for consultation and exchange of
information” about a new appointment if
it was required. As it turns out,
the only contact the worker received after she completed the pro forma document
outlining her experience
and skill areas was the email at about 2:00am on the
first day of the term 3 holidays, letting her know that she was going to be
transferred.
124. In relation to that advisory email, evidence was provided
on behalf of the employer that the delivery of the email at that unreasonable
hour was an IT issue and probably something to do with the number of emails
being send out at the same time in relation to transfers.
There was additional
evidence that there is no expectation that teachers would have notifications
active on devices over the school
holidays. Whatever the reason, I consider that
that the delivery of an email advising the worker that she was to be the subject
a required transfer at 2:00am showed a complete disregard for the potential
impact that such communication could have upon a member
of the employer’s
125. Counsel for the worker pointed to what appeared to be a
breakdown in communication between Learning Services and Brooks High
whereby Ms Buchanan identified the worker as being a suitable transfer to Brooks
High School because she understood there
was a need for a teacher in the areas
of physical education and, to a lesser degree, home economics. Mr
Stevenson’s evidence
was completely to the contrary.
126. The execution
of the transfer itself appears not to have been performed in accordance with the
transfer agreement principle that
it be ‘fair, transparent and
equitable’, nor in consideration of the worker’s ‘personal and
professional
needs’, or the ‘principles of natural
127. In the circumstances, I do not consider that the
employer has demonstrated the transfer, whilst itself a reasonable action for
the employer to take under the transfer agreement, was taken in a reasonable
manner in accordance with s25(1A)(a).
Reasonable administrative action under s25(1A)(c)?
128. Similarly, I do not consider that the employer has
demonstrated that it can rely on s25(1A)(a) to avoid liability for the
129. I accept the allocation of the teaching load to the worker for
the commencement of first term in 2016 was administrative action.
130. However, I also accept the submission of counsel for the worker that
whilst the allocation of the subjects might have been in
accordance with the
general position of the employer as contained in Ms Fisher’s evidence
– that there was an assumption
that because the worker was university
trained and she possessed “key teaching competencies” that were
“transferable
across all subjects and year groups”, no-one at Brooks
High School apparently assessed or enquired as to whether that was actually
case before allocating the worker a full teaching load with which she was
completely unfamiliar.
131. I consider that apparent assumption, and failure
to make any enquiry or assessment at all of the worker’s capacity to take
on a completely foreign subject load was not action that was reasonably
undertaken. In some situations, the employer’s actions
reasonable. In the present case, I consider they were not.
132. Because I do
not consider the employer has demonstrated that the provisions of s25(1A) are
available to relieve it from liability
to pay compensation to the worker in
respect of her claim, the worker is entitled to compensation in accordance with
the Act, including
entitlement to a lump sum for Whole Person
Impairment.
Whole person impairment – psychiatric injury
133. Both Drs Ratcliff and Evenhuis assessed the worker’s
degree of whole person impairment in accordance with s71 of the Act
and, as with
their opinions in general, there was much agreement between them.
134. In his
report dated 6 August 2019, Dr Ratcliff assessed the worker’s whole person
impairment in accordance with the AMA
4 Guides as follows:
Care & Personal Hygiene
Social & Recreational Activities
Significant social withdrawal, requires a support person
Can travel with a support person for limited purposes such as routine
appointments
Social Functioning
Some tension in established relationship. Withdrawal limits
friendships.
Concentration, Persistence & Pace
Difficulty with reading concentration. Slower and more hesitant in
skilled manual tasks.
Cannot work at all in the same position. Can work at other tasks but
not continuously.
135. In his report dated 7 November 2019, Dr Evenhuis confirmed
that it was his view that the worker’s condition was stationary
stable, and undertook the same assessment as Dr Ratcliff. Dr Evenhuis set out
in his report:
“Based on the history provided, [the
worker] does not have significant deficits in self-care. In terms of travel,
she is capable
of travelling alone within the local area but struggles with new
locations and longer trips and hence qualifies for a mild impairment.
In terms of social functioning and relationships, she has maintained
strong family relationships but has decreased contact with friends
owing to her
agoraphobia. This is consistent with a mild impairment.
In terms of social and recreation functioning, she rarely attends social
events and would not do so unaccompanied. She qualifies
for a moderate
impairment.
In terms of concentration, persistence and pace she reports that she is
unable to read effectively or follow movies and that her levels
of energy and
motivation vary from day to day to the extent that some days she I unable to sew
despite this being an activity she
is very familiar with. She qualifies for a
moderate impairment.
In terms of adaptation, [the worker] is only capable of part-time work in
a less demanding role and does qualify for a severe impairment.
These ratings give rise to a median score of three and aggregate score of
15 giving rise to a whole Person Impairment of 15%. I would
award 1% for
treatment which is partially effective. There is no evidence that there was
pre-existing impairment or impairment resulting
from non-work related
conditions.”
136. The scores that Dr Evenhuis awarded to each of the areas
of function under the Psychiatric Impairment Rating Scale were the same
awarded by Dr Ratcliff. This means that the assessed median and aggregate
scores were also the same.
137. The only difference between the two
assessments of Drs Ratcliff and Evenhuis was that Dr Evenhuis then awarded a
further 1% for
treatment which is partially effective, bringing his assessment
of the worker’s whole person impairment up to 16%.
cross-examination, it was put to Dr Ratcliff that the only work that the worker
had given evidence she had been able to do
over several months was couple of
minor sewing jobs of a total value of $30. He was asked if he would agree that
that effectively
demonstrated that the worker, under Table 7.6, fell into Class
5 that she could not work at all, and he agreed with that
proposition.
139. Similarly, in cross-examination it was put to Dr Evenhuis
that if the evidence was now that the worker no longer had capacity
to engage in
pattern, and that in the recent six or so
months the only work she had done was
worth about $30 doing some minor sewing jobs involving zips and hems. Dr
Evenhuis was asked
whether, in his view, that would raise the worker’s
score under Table 7.6 to Class 5, and Dr Evenhuis agreed, with the effect
it would take the worker’s whole person impairment score up to 17%, based
on the PIRS.
140. He was asked whether, assuming the worker’s residual
earning capacity had diminished as described above, he would increase
for Table 7.5 from 3 to 4, Dr Evenhuis indicated that he would not go that far
without a formal re-assessment. Dr Evenhuis
confirmed that his assessment of
the worker’s overall whole person impairment included a 1% allowance for
his assessed effects
of treatment, and so if the worker’s adaptation score
under Table 7.6 went up to Class 5, her overall whole person impairment
141. Essentially the only difference between the opinions of Dr Ratcliff
and Dr Evenhuis in terms of the worker’s percentage
whole person
impairment is that Dr Evenhuis has made an adjustment for the effect of the
treatment that the worker was receiving
at the time that he made his
assessment.
142. I accept Dr Evenhuis’ opinion that it is appropriate
to adjust the percentage whole person impairment by 1% to take into
account the
effects of the treatment for the worker. I do so on the basis that at the time
Dr Evenhuis saw the worker to make the
whole person impairment assessment, it
was three months after Dr Ratcliff’s assessment. Dr Ratcliff, in his
report, observed
that the worker had “only recently” been prescribed
a particular anti-depressant medication. Dr Evenhuis was in a better
to assess the effect of that medication three months hence, and he noted
“some improvement with her mood”.
143. I find that the worker has
a percentage whole person impairment of 17%, based on the PIRS, together with a
1% adjustment for
the mild treatment effect identified by Dr Evenhuis.
Accordingly, the whole person impairment of the worker in relation to her
psychiatric
impairment is 18%.
The worker’s skin condition
144. In addition to the whole person psychiatric impairment
claimed by the worker, she also claimed whole person impairment in relation
skin condition on her hands.
145. The worker relies upon the opinion of Dr
Barry Gilbert, Public Health Physician and Occupational Medicine Consultant. It
Dr Gilbert’s view that the worker has chronic eczema of both hands and
forearms which is causally related to her employment
and in relation to which
she has a 16% whole person impairment.
146. In relation to the skin condition
on her hands, the worker gave evidence that in term 4 of 2015 she had a small
patch on her
hand to begin with, which spread over both hands over the period
term 1 into term 2 of 2016. She said generally the condition would
she was stressed. She said she had never had that condition whilst she had been
teaching home economics in the past.
147. In relation to the worker’s
skin condition at the time of the hearing, the worker said that touching paper
and fabrics
would cause her skin condition to flare, and that it could be
uncomfortable to write, but she said overall the flares of her condition
settling, and she was the best she had been for a while. She said if she was
sewing, the rough skin on the sides of her hands
would catch in delicate fabric.
Causation of the worker’s skin condition – Dr
148. Dr Gilbert saw the worker at the request of her solicitors
on 6 December 2019 for independent medico-legal assessment. Amongst
documentation, Dr Gilbert was provided with the report of Dr Ratcliff dated 6
August 2019 and the report of Dr Evenhuis dated
7 November 2019. Dr Gilbert
provided a report dated 6 December 2019 as a result of his assessment, and a
further report dated 13
April 2020.
149. The history taken by Dr Gilbert was
that of “a well documented recent occupational history of a psychiatric
and that the worker’s “psychiatric (and skin)
condition commenced gradually from mid 2015 when discussion about a forced
transfer to Brooks High School was first mooted by her employer”. Dr
Gilbert referred to the opinions of Drs Ratcliff and
Evenhuis, and noted the
concordance of opinions expressed in those reports in relation to perpetuation
of anxiety symptoms by the
claim for compensation, the nature of ongoing
symptoms and the extent to which the worker has a WPI as a result of her
psychiatric
condition. He went on to note “throughout her psychiatric
illness [the worker] has had chronic eczema, a new condition for
her and one
that has mirrored her mood and anxiety in intensity and severity. She had no
past history of previous skin complaints.”
150. In relation to the
worker’s condition at the time of assessment, Dr Gilbert noted :
worker] told me that her skin condition has never completely resolved. It is
currently as good as it has been for about
2-3 months. It started improving when
her daughter moved in and shared many of the domestic and housekeeping tasks and
of the chores that required contact with water.
When the condition does flare however it usually takes her a month or so
to regain control.
It has never healed to the extent that the skin appears normal, the best
it can be is dry, scaly skin around the palmar thumb and
medial border of the
hand. It is always visible even when well controlled, and palmar erythema and
itch comes and goes. It is always
worse in cold weather, the skin is drier and
itchier and she needs to wear gloves.”
151. In relation to the worker’s past history:
“[The worker] has osteoarthritis affecting
the fingers of both hands which is similar to her mother.
She was diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) 5 years ago which
was managed by diet alone until it became poorly controlled
during 2018. She is
now on medication
She has a history of stress incontinence which is worse if she becomes
panicked or anxious.
Family history:
[The worker] has no family history of atopia, specifically no hayfever,
asthma or eczema. Her Mother is alive aged 86 years and she
has osteoarthritis
and has had a hip replacement.
Her father died aged 87 after he had a back operation, then developed
leukaemia, he had no skin problems.
She has a brother 2 years older who has psoriasis, a younger sister and
another younger brother. None have any skin conditions.
There is no family history of diabetes mellitus.”
152. . Dr Gilbert later summarised the history in the following
“The history of chronic eczema has been
present since mid 2015 mirroring a particularly stressful time in her life and
the development
of a psychiatric illness in relation to her employment. She has
no other past history of relevance to her chronic skin complaint,
and no family
or past history of atopic disorders.”
153. In relation to his examination of the worker, Dr Gilbert
“[The worker] was a pleasant and
cooperative person in no physical distress at rest. I noted that she constantly
scratched the
scaly areas of both hands unless distracted.
She was emotionally labile at time in relation to her occupational history
in particular.
The hand examination is best described in pictures, bearing in mind that
the skin is currently the best it has been in some months.
There was no active
rash proximal to the wrists.”
154. Dr Gilbert annexed two photographs of the worker’s
hands to his report and said hand examination was “best described
pictures”, and noted that the skin was, on the worker’s report,
currently the best it had been in some months. He
commented that the first
photograph showed “left hand thenar eminence and volar wrist demonstrates
ichthyosis, splitting and
cracking of the skin with scale and pruritus (this is
when the skin is good and well controlled).” The second photograph,
Gilbert commented “right hand lateral view over the hypothenar medical
border of the hand and wrist. The skin is thickened,
lichenified, and scarred
with pigmentation and scale. In my experience the skin can flare and change
overnight and is subject to
the additional risk of sepsis.”
Gilbert was asked about his diagnosis. He responded:
“[The worker] has
chronic eczema of both hands and forearms. The term eczema is interchangeable
in this context with dermatitis.
The cause of eczema is usually unknown, but it is thought to be
multifactorial with a combination of genetics and triggers.
Eczema causes red, itchy and painful skin symptoms with
inflammation.
With eczema the skin can react in an allergic way to secondary triggers,
and is more often seen in atopic individuals who are also
prone to develop hay
fever and asthma.
Others develop a more sensitised reaction to irritants, many of which can
be occupational exposures.
The list of irritants is large, but commonly includes:
• Metals such as nickel
• Cigarette smoke
• Soaps, household cleaners, fragrances
• Antibacterial topical ointments and cleansers, baby wipes
• Shampoos, dyes, glues and adhesives.
whether it is a trigger or a secondary manifestation of depression and anxiety.
It is generally acknowledged that treatment
not only needs to address the
physical impact, but also the psychological impact of hand eczema
156. In relation to treatment, Dr Gilbert advised:
“Treatment is continuous with intermittent
escalation depending upon symptoms. Treatment relies upon primary and secondary
prevention strategies, and topical therapeutics. Current prescribed medication
is Eleuphrat cream 0.05% cream and ointment.”
Dr Gilbert commented that the worker’s skin condition was
being well managed, but would require regular review.
157. At the hearing, Dr
Gilbert gave evidence that eczema, or atopic dermatitis, comes on as an
insidious problem for many people,
and there may not be any past history of the
condition. He said the cause is unknown, although it is thought to be
multifactorial
in its origins with a combination of genetics and triggers. He
said it is more often, but not necessarily, seen in atopic individuals
that is, people who are prone to hay fever and asthma.
158. Dr Gilbert said
that eczema tends to appear on the periphery of a person’s body, rather
than centrally, and also tends
to appear on areas that are exposed, such as
hands, knees and elbows. Symptomatic flares and remissions are typical.
159. Dr Gilbert says that once eczema evolves, it then picks up a range of
secondary triggers, some of which may be physical substances,
but were not a
primary cause of the condition.,
160. Dr Gilbert’s opinion about the
causative connection between the worker’s skin condition and her levels of
and anxiety was given some support by Dr Evenhuis. Towards the conclusion
of his evidence, Dr Evenhuis was asked whether he had seen
Dr Gilbert’s
opinions, which he said he had not. He was asked some questions by counsel for
the worker about the worker’s
skin condition. Dr Evenhuis’s evidence
was that he was aware of the worker’s skin condition, and he agreed that
can be a trigger or aggravation of dermatitis, particularly for some
people, although some people are more prone than others and
it is not known why
this is so.
Causation of the worker’s skin condition – Dr
161. The employer, relying upon the opinion of Dr Therese
McGrath, Consultant Occupational Physician, says that the worker’s
condition in a contact dermatitis, and a natural progression of a constitutional
condition to which the employment has not been
the major most significant
contributing factor. Dr McGrath’s opinion is that the worker suffers a 6%
whole person impairment
in relation to that condition.
162. Dr McGrath saw
the worker for assessment on 24 February 2020. Dr McGrath had available to her
the report of Dr Ratcliff, two
reports of Dr Evenhuis, and Dr Gilbert’s
first report.
163. In relation to the history she took about the
worker’s skin condition, Dr McGrath detailed the following:
worker] reported that she'd had no history of eczema or asthma. She's had some
episodes of sneezing when exposed to dust,
but no treatment required. She has
two daughters and [the worker] is the second oldest with three siblings. Her
older daughter has
hay fever and her older brother has psoriasis. There is no
family history of asthma. [The worker] said she had no known allergies
than getting a rash if she left a Band Aid on for a couple of days. She has had
occasional rosacea on her nose.
In late 2015, [the worker] was working at Riverside School. She had been
informed at the end of Term 3 that she was to be transferred
to Brooks High
School in 2016. She said she was disappointed but felt okay because she thought
she would be performing a similar
role at Brooks High School to her teaching
role at Riverside High School.
Around this time, [the worker] developed a rash on her hands which
consisted of some cracking along the ulnar border of her right
hand that was
itchy and then spread into her palm. She had no rash on her fingers. [the
worker] saw her general practitioner who
prescribed Eleuphrat (Betamethasone
dipropionate) cream 0.05% twice daily and use of cotton gloves overnight with
Eleuphrat ointment
underneath and with glad wrap once weekly. [The worker] said
that there was no particular change in the skin rash.
[The worker] was asked about exposures of her hands to irritants and
chemicals at home. She enjoyed her hobbies of gardening and dressmaking.
garden she used Pyrethrum sprays and Seasol fertilisers but said there was no
particular exposure of her hands.
In 2016 [the worker] was having increased psychological symptoms of
crying, and she felt overwhelmed by the requirement to teach new
areas at Brooks
School. She discussed this with her general practitioner, but she had no
particular treatment. The rash on her hands
spread across onto her palm in the
right hand, and in mid-2016 spread onto her left hand. She avoided water,
changed shampoo and
conditioners and body wash and used supersensitive gloves
for washing up and cooking and occasionally cotton gloves for driving.
[The worker] consulted with a dermatologist in late 2016 who she saw two
or three times and she was advised to avoid water. In 2017,
she was teaching
cooking and she used cotton gloves under rubber gloves to avoid exposure to
water. [The worker] last worked at the
end of 2017.
In late 2018, [the worker] commenced psychological counselling with Mr Tim
Feely and antidepressant medication. She ceased work in
2018 taking long service
leave initially to help with care of her elderly parents, and she then remained
off work after this related
to her psychological symptoms.
The skin problems on her hands became worse towards the end of 2018. In
2019 [the worker’s] daughter and family were living
with her between
February 2019 and October 2019 while they were building a house and her daughter
did the cooking and washing up
and [the worker’s] hand rash improved and
was not cracking as often. Occasionally there were one to two cracks and they
healing quickly. There has never been any problem with infections. She
used a magnesium cream that her sister provided.”
164. On examination Dr McGrath recorded that the worker
“...had erythema and scaling over the ulnar border of her right palm
over the thenar eminence and palm. There was also some scaling over the left
hand eminence. There were heberden’s nodes
in the PIP joints, full range
of motion in the fingers, thumbs and wrists. There was no involvement of the
web spaces and no vesicles.
There was no evidence of skin involvement
elsewhere, no evidence of psoriasis.” It does not appear, from Dr
report, that she formally examined the worker’s left
165. Dr McGrath provided her summary in the report as follows:
“SUMMARY AND
[The worker] is a 62-year-old teacher who ceased work in 2018 related to
Major Depressive Disorder and Panic Disorder. She developed
a rash on her hands
from late 2015 which is consistent with contact dermatitis. Contact dermatitis
can be from exposure to irritants
or allergens. There are no clinical signs or
symptoms to differentiate between irritant contact dermatitis and allergic
Allergic contact dermatitis needs to be excluded by allergy
patch testing from a dermatologist. There is not a direct relationship
hand dermatitis and the stated mechanism of injury of a psychological illness.
Irritant contact dermatitis is caused by exposure
to irritants and exposure to
frictional or chemical trauma, such as water, frequent hand washing, wetting and
drying, soaps, detergents,
cleansers, shampoos, food preparation, food handling,
solvents, paper towels, paper products, dust, hard particles, heat, sweating.
Allergy patch testing is required to exclude allergic contact dermatitis but
factors to suspect this are usually if there is involvement
of eyelids and neck,
spread away from the hands, exposure to known allergens. Common allergens
include nickel, formaldehyde, fragrances,
rubber accelerators, chromate, dyes.
Treatment is avoiding exposure to irritants or allergens (if any are
demonstrated on patch testing).
Topical therapies with vigorous use of
emollients, topical steroids.”
166. Dr McGrath was asked a number of questions in relation to
her diagnosis, her assessment of the cause of the worker’s skin
and the degree of whole person impairment.
167. Those questions and her
responses are as follows:
“Q: What is
your diagnosis?
The Diagnosis is contact dermatitis which can be irritant or allergic and
allergy patch testing would be needed to exclude allergic
dermatitis.”
“Q: What is the cause of [the worker’s] current
The cause of irritant contact dermatitis is exposure to irritants which
can be water, chemicals, soaps, detergents, foods, friction
such as paper
towels, heat and sweating. Allergic contact dermatitis is from exposure to an
allergen and common allergens include
nickel, formaldehyde, fragrances, rubber
accelerators, chromate, dyes.”
“Q: In your opinion what condition has [the worker]
a. A natural progression of a pre-existing injury or disease:
recurrence, aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or deterioration of any
pre-existing injury or disease.
In my opinion [the
worker] has suffered a natural progression of a constitutional
condition.”
“In your opinion, if [the worker] has suffered a condition which
is a recurrence, aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or
deterioration of any
pre-existing injury or disease is employment the major or most significant
contributing factor to the recurrence,
aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation
or deterioration?
I cannot connect employment as being the major or most significant
contributing factor to the condition. There was no particular
exposure to
irritants in the workplace. It is possible that when [the worker] was working
as a cooking teacher in 2017, she had
frequent exposure to water, this could
have been an aggravating factor that that time.”
“If you do not consider [the worker’s] employment to be the
major or most significant contributing factor in the development
condition, please provide your opinion as to what is the major or most
significant contributing factor?
I do not consider [the worker’s] employment has been the major or
most significant contributing factor to the development of
her condition. The
major or most significant contributing factor to contact dermatitis is either
exposure to irritants or an allergen
and patch testing is required to show what
the allergen is.”
168. Dr Gilbert’s evidence in relation to causation is
supported by Dr Evenhuis.
169. The history of the worker’s skin
condition waxing and waning coincidentally with her psychological condition is
by all the medical histories, and the worker’s
170. Dr Gilbert’s evidence about the vulnerability to
secondary triggers once the condition has occurred appears also to be
by the history given by the worker and the advice she received from her
dermatologist.
171. There is no evidence of any exposure to an irritant or
allergen either at home or at work to support Dr McGrath’s hypothesis
172. I accept Dr Gilbert’s opinion in preference to
Dr McGrath’s, where Dr Gilbert has concluded the worker’s skin
condition is eczema/atopic dermatitis that is causally connected to the
worker’s psychological condition, with a strong temporal
connection with
that psychological condition, and I so find.
WPI– skin condition – calculation of percentage
173. Assessment of a whole person impairment for skin disorders
is undertaken in accordance with Table 2 of the AMA Guides to the
evaluation of
permanent impairment at page 280 of the Guides, and the Table for the Evaluation
of Minor Skin Impairment (TEMSKI)
which is at Table 8.1 of the WorkCover
Tasmania Guidelines. The TEMSKI scale also references the Activities of Daily
Living Tables
at page 317 of the AMA Guides.
174. The AMA Guides Table 2 in
relation to skin disorders sets out five classes for skin impairment, Class 1
covering impairment of
0% - 9% inclusive, Class 2 covering impairment of 10% -
24% impairment inclusive and the other classes covering impairment 25% and
above. The criteria for assessment under Class 1 in AMA Guides Table 2
• Signs and symptoms of skin disorder are present or only
intermittently present; and
• There is no limitation or a limitation in
the performance of few activities of daily living, although exposure to certain
chemical or physical agents might increase limitation temporarily;
• No treatment or intermittent treatment is required.
175. The criteria under Class 2 in the AMA Guides Table 2
• Signs and symptoms of skin disorder are present or
intermittently present; and
• There is limitation in the performance of
some of the activities of daily living; and
• Intermittent to constant
treatment may be required.
176. The AMA Guides also note:
signs and symptoms of disorders in Classes 1 and 2 may be intermittent and not
present at the time of examination. The
impact of the skin disorder on daily
activities should be the primary consideration in determining the Class of
impairment. The
frequency and intensity of signs and symptoms and the frequency
and complexity of medical treatment should guide the selection of
an appropriate
impairment percentage and estimate within any Class.”
177. The TEMSKI scale in the WorkCover Guidelines is used to
further divide Class 1 in the AMA Guides Table 2 into five further sub
covering separately 0% WPI, 1% WPI, 2% WPI, 3-4% WPI and 5-9% WPI. Assessment
under the TEMSKI scale is made on the basis
of four criteria, one of which is
Activities of Daily Living/Treatment. The Activities of Daily Living are
assessed in accordance
with the Activities of Daily Living table at page 317 of
the AMA Guides which sets out activities for assessment, and examples of
activities:
Self-care, personal hygiene
Bathing, grooming, dressing, eating, eliminating
Communication
Hearing, speaking, reading, writing, using keyboard
Physical activity
Intrinsic: Standing, sitting, reclining, walking, stooping, squatting,
kneeling, reaching, bending, twisting, leaning
Functional: Carrying, lifting, pushing, pulling, climbing,
Sensory function
Hearing, seeing, tactile feeling, tasting, smelling
Hand functions
Grasping, holding, pinching, percussive movement, sensory
discrimination
Riding, driving, traveling by airplane, train, or car
Sexual function
Participating in desired sexual activity
Having a restful sleep pattern
Social and recreational activities
Participating in individual or group activities, sports,
178. As indicated above, Dr Gilbert assessed the worker’s
Whole Person Impairment, attributable to the skin condition as being
The process he followed to make the assessment was explained in his
“Conditions to be considered in assessing
whole person impairment in relation to skin disorders includes assessment in
to disfigurement (13.4 AMA4 p279) and scars and skin grafts (13.5 AMA4
Activities of Daily Living (table p317 AMA4) have been assessed, in
relation to her skin condition including:
personal hygiene
She has to avoid all soaps and cannot use
Communication
the rash is extensive and sore it does affect her ability to do
handwriting.
It affects her ability to use the hands for
carrying, lifting, pushing and pulling when the skin is cracked and sore at the
flares. She has to wear gloves whenever her hands are in water, and
additional cotton gloves is she is hot or the hands are sweaty.
It diminishes dexterity and natural feel when it
It mainly affects gripping and grasping for fine
motor dexterity.
usually must cover up with gloves due to either cosmetic or
environmental factors
Not applicable
The flares of eczema become intensely itchy and sore,
sufficient to wake her from sleep and impair falling back to sleep.
recreational activities
From a social/cosmetic perspective
the rash is impairing. She also cannot get her hands wet in a chlorinated pool.
She likes to attend
her grandchildren's swimming lessons but cannot do so in an
active capacity since pool water acts as a secondary trigger for flares.
Taking into account her current clinical findings disfigurement and
scarring do not apply.
When I assess her condition according to table 2, p 280 AMA4 she has all
three criteria for skin impairment; signs and symptoms are
present, there is
limitation in the performance in some of the activities of daily living and
intermittent to constant treatment
is required.
She has a Class 2 impairment for skin disorders. The reason for that is
that when you assess Class 1 by TEMSKI (table 8.1, p63, WCT3),
the limitations
of activities of daily life and the need for constant treatment exceed the class
1 descriptors.
She does not meet the threshold for limitation of many of the activities
of daily living at Class 3.
Class 2 is a 10-24% impairment. Given her need for constant avoidance of
many secondary triggers in her daily life, and the constant
need for treatment
in my opinion her impairment is in the middle of that range, a 16% whole person
impairment.”
179. It can be seen from Dr Gilbert’s assessment that he
appears to have used a two pronged approach in reaching his conclusion.
assessed that the worker fitted within Class 2 of the AMA Guides Table 2, and
then looked at the TEMSKI scale which is for Class
1 under the AMA Guides and
confirmed that the worker’s impairment was greater than the highest level
of impairment on the TEMSKI
scale. Because TEMSKI covers Class 1 in the AMA
Guides Table 2, if the worker’s condition exceeds the TEMSKI scale, that
Dr Gilbert’s opinion that Class 1 of Table 2 was not
appropriate, and Class 2 was a better fit.
180. Dr McGrath undertook a WPI
also, and concluded that the worker’s WPI as a result of her skin
condition was 6%.
“If whole person
impairment is required then using WorkCover guidelines page 61 assessment of
skin conditions is based on Table
2 page 280 AMA 4, signs and symptoms,
limitation of activities of daily living and requirements for treatment. Signs
and symptoms
of skin disorder present or intermittently present, limitation of
performance of some of the activities of daily living and intermittent
constant treatment may be required.
With regards to activities of daily living page 317, AMA 4 [the worker] is
able to manage personal care, communication, physical activity,
function, hand functions, travel, sleep, social and recreational activities and
she is not particularly limited by her skin
condition. I will place her in class
1. There is limitation in the performance of few activities of daily living. The
impact of skin
disorder on daily activity should be the primary consideration in
determining the class of impairment.”
181. Dr McGrath was asked to comment on Dr Gilbert’s
assessment of the worker’s whole person impairment. She
“Q: Could you please critically assess
the assessments of permanent whole person impairment undertaken by Dr
Dr Gilbert has placed [the worker] in class 2 because he considers that
she is higher than the TEMSKI table in the WorkCover Tasmania
guidelines. I
would consider that there is limitation in only a few activities of daily living
because of the skin condition and
the class 1 would be best fit. Regarding
self-care, personal hygiene Ms Gibson is able to manage this changing to QV
soaps and shampoos.
I would not consider that there is significant impact on
communication, hearing, speaking, reading, writing, or using a keyboard.
Physical activity. No problems with standing, sitting, reclining, walking,
stooping, squatting, kneeling, reaching, bending, twisting
or leaning. She can
use cotton gloves to perform activities. Requirement to wear some cotton gloves
when driving at times is not
a significant accommodation. Sleep was reasonable
when the Fitbit app was examined, and I would assess the impact on activities of
daily living according to the Table on page 317 of AMA 4 being a few activities
rather than class 2 level.”
182. I prefer the opinion of Dr Gilbert over that of Dr McGrath
in relation to the extent of the worker’s whole person impairment
from her skin disorder.
183. Dr McGrath’s assessment appears to be
based on the worker’s presentation at the time she was seen by Dr McGrath,
which the worker confirmed was the best she had been for some time. The AMA
Guides Table 2 provides that symptoms and signs in Classes
1 and 2 may be
“intermittent and not present at the time of
examination”.
184. It does not appear that Dr McGrath has given any
consideration or weight to the impact on the worker’s activities of daily
living where there are flares in the worker’s condition, nor the
worker’s evidence about the need for ongoing treatment.
185. Dr Gilbert
has made a judgement as to where the worker’s percentage impairment sits
within the range allowed under Class
2, and has reached a concluded assessment
at 16% of the whole person for the worker. I accept his assessment in that
regard. I find
that the worker has a whole person impairment of 16% as a result
of the skin disorder on her hands.
186. S72(2)(b) of the Act provides that
in assessing a degree of impairment “the degree may comprise a combination
of impairments
arising out of the same incident or occurring on the same
date”. I consider the evidence of the worker’s skin condition
arising at about the same time as she was notified about her transfer from
Riverside High School and the temporal association of
the ebbs and flows of the
skin disorder in concert with the worker’s psychological condition is an
appropriate basis to combine
the impairments . Using the Combined Value
Table in the AMA Guides, the combination of 18% whole person impairment for the
psychiatric condition, combined with 16% whole person impairment
for the worker’s skin disorder gives a total of 31% whole
impairment overall.
The extent of the worker’s incapacity
187. The worker has been certified wholly incapacitated by her
general practitioner from 30 April 2018. I accept the evidence that
in fact has been incapacitated for any work since the date of her collapse on 20
March 2018.
188. When the worker was seen by Dr Evenhuis, and later Dr
Ratcliff, for the purposes of medico legal assessment they were of a similar
opinion that the worker was either fully incapacitated for work outside the home
(Dr Ratcliff) or extremely limited in her capacity
for work outside the home (Dr
Evenhuis). They both felt there was the potential for limited capacity for work
at home undertaking
dressmaking.
189. By the time the worker gave evidence
before the Tribunal about how few dressmaking activities she had engaged in for
an extended
period, both Dr Ratcliff and Dr Evenhuis were prepared to adjust
their assessment of the worker’s level of incapacity to consider
could not work at all.
190. The worker gave evidence that since the time she
had ceased work she had earned $3,246 undertaking dressmaking tasks.
find that the worker has been wholly incapacitated for work since 20 March 2018
as certified by her general practitioner, although
the worker’s earnings
in her limited dressmaking activities in that period ought to be taken into
account to offset the employer’s
liability to pay weekly compensation to
Disposition
192. The employer is liable to pay compensation to the worker
in respect of her claim dated 1 May 2018. I make the following
i) The employer is to pay weekly payments of compensation for total
incapacity to the worker for such periods since 20 March 2018
to the date of
this order where that incapacity has been supported by workers compensation
medical certificates in the prescribed
form, less the amount of actual earning
of the worker in the sum of $3,246.
ii) The employer is liable to pay to the
worker benefits in accordance with Division 2 of Part VI of the Act from 20
March 2018.
iii) The employer pay to the worker the whole person impairment
entitlement of 31%.
iv) The issue of costs is reserved.
COMMISSIONER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (358 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter