URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCCA/2025/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Director of Public Prosecutions v Coleman [2025] TASCCA 5 (17 June 2025)
[2025] TASCCA 5
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (COURT OF CRIMINAL
Director of Public Prosecutions v Coleman
[2025] TASCCA 5
: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
PROSECUTIONS
COLEMAN, Nikiya Lee
DELIVERED ON:
17 June 2025
HEARING DATE:
29 May 2025
JUDGMENT OF:
J, Brett J and Cuthbertson J
Criminal law – Appeal and new trial
– Procedure – Power to bring appeal – No
appeal from sentence passed on
appeal by Court of Criminal Appeal to a
differently constituted Court of Criminal Appeal.
Aust Dig Criminal Law
Legislation:
Criminal Code
(Tas), ss 400, 401, 402 and
Stewart v The King
[1921] HCA 17
(1921) 29 CLR 234
[1938] HCA 45
(1938) 60 CLR 431
Elliott v The Queen
[2007] HCA 51
Burrell v The Queen
[2008] HCA 34
; 238 CLR 2018
v A-G (Qld)
[2011] HCA 10
242 CLR 573
DJL v Central
[2000] HCA 17
(2000) 201 CLR 226
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Director of Public
Prosecutions
Judgment Number:
[2025] TASCCA 5
of paragraphs:
Serial No 5/2025
File No 1485/2025
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS v NIKIYA LEE
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
CUTHBERTSON
17 June 2025
of the Court:
Application
to extend time for appeal refused for want of jurisdiction.
File No 1485/2025
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS v NIKIYA LEE
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
17 June 2025
30 August 2024 this Court, differently constituted, allowed an appeal against
the respondent's convictions for murder and unlawfully
setting fire to property.
After quashing the convictions the Court re-sentenced the respondent for the
remaining charges on the same
indictment of which the respondent was also found
guilty but which were not subject to the appeal. In imposing the sentence the
allowed a discount on the basis that the respondent would co-operate by
giving evidence for the prosecution in the trial of two other
persons charged
with the same crimes.
appellant has filed a notice of appeal asserting that the promised co-operation
was not given and, as a result, the sentence
was manifestly inadequate and
should be increased. The appellant applies for an extension of time to bring the
appeal. An appeal
on that ground involves questions of fact alone, or mixed
questions of fact and law, and thus may be brought only with the leave
Criminal Code
, s 401(1)(b).
question first arises whether a Court of Criminal Appeal has jurisdiction to
determine an appeal against a sentence ordered by
a differently constituted
Court of Criminal Appeal. In my view, for the following reasons, it does
respondent, after a trial conducted by Jago J with a jury, was found guilty of
burglary, aggravated burglary, aggravated armed
robbery, murder and unlawfully
setting fire to property. She was acquitted of a charge of stealing. The charges
were separate counts
on a single indictment in which the respondent was jointly
charged with Mitchell Flanigan. Following the guilty verdicts the learned
judge convicted the respondent on each of the charges and imposed a global term
of imprisonment of 16 years with a non-parole
period of 8 years.
was the prosecution case at trial that on 23 January 2022 the respondent went
with Mr Flanigan and two other men, Blaise Baddeley
and Dane Pyke, to premises
at Spreyton in Tasmania intending to break in and steal. The owner and occupier
of that property, Dean
Jupp, was present. Mr Jupp died as a result of multiple
serious injuries which were inflicted upon him. The prosecution alleged that
or more of those four persons killed Mr Jupp and that, regardless of who
inflicted the fatal blow or blows, each accused was
criminally responsible by
operation of the
Criminal Code
, s 3 or s 4. Mr Baddeley and Mr Pyke were
separately indicted and were to be tried following the trial of the respondent
and Mr Flanigan.
the appeal against her convictions for murder and unlawfully setting fire to
property the respondent contended that the verdicts
on those two counts were
"unsafe and unsatisfactory" and inconsistent with Mr Flanigan's acquittal on
those charges. The respondent
also appealed the sentence on the sole ground that
it was "manifestly excessive". The Court of Criminal Appeal which heard and
the respondent's appeal was constituted by Estcourt J, Martin AJ and
Marshall AJ. Reasons were published to the parties on 30 August
2024. The Court
allowed the appeal against conviction on the two counts which were the subject
of the appeal. It ordered that those
convictions be quashed and verdicts of
acquittal entered.
a result of the acquittals the sentence was set aside and the Court of Criminal
Appeal re-sentenced the respondent. After canvassing
factors relevant to
sentence, Martin AJ, with the agreement of the other members of the Court,
determined that the respondent should
serve a term of imprisonment of three
years and six months from 21 February 2022 and that she "not be released until
she has served
1 year and 9 months of that sentence". By those words I assume
that his Honour intended to convey that the respondent not be eligible
for parole until she had served one year and nine months of the term
of the matters taken into account by the Court of Criminal Appeal in determining
the sentence to be imposed was an indication
which had earlier been given by the
respondent that she would co-operate with the prosecution authorities and give
evidence at the
trial of Mr Pyke and Mr Baddeley. She was interviewed by the
police after her arrest and made statements which were relevant to the
respectively played by Mr Baddeley and Mr Pyke which assisted the prosecution
case against those men. In the sentencing proceedings
before the trial judge,
the respondent's counsel referred to the respondent's hesitation in giving
evidence for fear of reprisal
but, after taking specific instructions, she made
the following submission:
"My instructions are that Ms Coleman will
give evidence, and cooperate at the trial, as well as the fact that there is the
I've explained to Ms Coleman that if she then does not go on and
cooperate at the trial, that she is at risk of whatever portion
your Honour
discounts for cooperation to be placed on top of the sentence that she receives,
through an appeal process. So she's
aware of the consequences if she does not
cooperate, but has indicated her willingness to cooperate at the future trial of
and Mr Baddeley?"
his Honour's reasons for decision in the Court of Criminal Appeal, Martin AJ
"In addition, the appellant's frank co-operation with
authorities stands in contrast to Mr Flanigan's attempts to downplay his role
and knowledge, and the evidence to be given by the appellant will be of greater
value to the authorities than that of Mr Flanigan.
I would allow a reduction of
30% in recognition of the appellant's co-operation with the authorities in
giving evidence against Mr
Pyke and Mr Baddeley.
After allowing a reduction of 30%, I would impose a sentence of imprisonment
for 3 years and 6 months commencing 21 February 2022
and order that the
appellant not be released until she has served 1 year and 9 months of that
follows that, without the 30 per cent reduction in sentence referred to by
Martin AJ, the sentence imposed on the respondent by
the Court of Criminal
Appeal would have been a term of imprisonment of five years. The Court of
Criminal Appeal allowed the respondent
the earliest opportunity to apply for
parole and gave no indication that a different course would have been taken had
the sentencing
discount not been allowed.
appeal which the appellant seeks to advance is on the following
"The single substitute sentence of imprisonment ... ordered
by the Court of Criminal Appeal on 30 August 2024 was manifestly inadequate
all the circumstances of the case, including the recognition of the respondent's
co-operation with the authorities in giving evidence
on the trial of Dane Ronald
Pyke and Blaise Christopher Baddeley on indictment 229 0f 2023 when she refused
to co-operate."
is asserted by the appellant in this appeal is that, although the respondent
gave evidence at the trial of Mr Pyke and Mr Baddeley,
it was not truthful
evidence and did not amount to the co-operation she had promised. In her
evidence she claimed that the statements
she made in her police interview were
not true, or that she had no memory of relevant facts. A challenge to a sentence
of that nature
is to be determined in accordance with the principles stated in
this State in
R v Stanley
(1998) 7 Tas R 357
Director of Public
Prosecutions v Dunne
[2021] TASCCA 5
Brennan v Tasmania
, and elsewhere in
[1992] SASC 3639
59 SASR 145
[2014] NSWCCA 311
[2016] NSWCCA 265
Haklar-McCarthy; R v Summerill
[2017] SASCFC 129
of Public Prosecutions v Connally
[2010] VSCA 301.
In substance, the error
asserted in such appeals is that the challenged sentence was imposed upon the
erroneous factual assumption
that a respondent would cooperate by giving
truthful evidence.
is no common law right of appeal:
Lacey v Attorney-General
[2011] HCA 10
242 CLR 573
. The existence of a right of
appeal depends on statute and it is the terms of the statutory grant of a right
of appeal which determines
its nature:
Elliott v The Queen
[2007] HCA 51
234 CLR 38.
Grierson v The King
[1938] HCA 45
(1938) 60 CLR 431
the High Court held
at 435 that the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal, in the appellate
system established in that State by
Criminal Appeal Act
had no further authority beyond that found in the statute. As to that appellate
system, the High Court stated in
Stewart v The King
[1921] HCA 17
(1921) 29 CLR 234
240 that the Act did not create or constitute a new Court distinct from the
Supreme Court, but merely directed that the Supreme
Court shall act as the Court
of Criminal Appeal. In
it was decided that the
did not confer jurisdiction to re-open an appeal which had been
heard on the merits and finally determined. As was explained in
Burrell v The
[2008] HCA 34
; 238 CLR 2018,
was followed by the High
Court on a number of occasions including in
. The question in
also concerned the power of a superior court of record to re-open
a proceeding and reconsider the orders that have been made. The
majority stated
at 225 [22], citing and quoting from
DJL v Central Authority
[2000] HCA 17
at 247, that "if the Court had power to reopen the appellant's appeals
and reconsider the orders it had made, that power 'must be
found in the text of
the governing statutes and any express or implied powers found therein'".
appeal may be distinguished from the series of High Court cases to which I have
referred which deal with an application to re-open
an appeal, and from cases
considering whether a court of appeal has jurisdiction to entertain a second
appeal, or an application
for leave to appeal, from conviction in circumstances
where leave to appeal had previously been refused after a hearing on the merits.
See the recent analyses of the authorities undertaken by the Victorian Court of
[2023] VSCA 10
and by the Court of Criminal Appeal
in New South Wales in
[2023] NSWCCA 103.
What is sought to be
advanced in this case is an appeal, in the nature of a separate proceeding,
against the sentence imposed by
the Court of Criminal Appeal following
determination of an appeal. It is not an application that the order of sentence
made in the
appeal be re-opened and changed or corrected. Assuming that the
Court's order in the first appeal was perfected,
and the cases
which follow it, make clear that the exercise of judicial power in that appeal
was spent. However, the principles stated
by the High Court guide an assessment
of the nature of and limits on the jurisdiction of the Court of Criminal Appeal.
is that the question of whether an appeal may be brought to this
Court against the sentence passed by the Court of Criminal Appeal
respondent's first appeal is determined by the terms of the legislation from
which the right to appeal is said to derive.
this State the Court of Criminal Appeal is constituted by Chapter XLVI of the
Code. The definition section is s 399. It provides
that the "Court" means the
Court of Criminal Appeal and the "court of trial" means "the court before which
an accused person has
been tried upon an indictment, or the court which passed
sentence upon a plea of guilty". The term "sentence" is defined as including
order made "by the court of trial" for the keeping in custody of any person
convicted, with reference to property or with reference
to any moneys to be paid
by a person convicted.
400 of the Code is entitled "Court of Criminal Appeal" and
(1) The Court of Criminal Appeal is duly
constituted for the purpose of exercising any of its jurisdiction if it consists
more judges of the Supreme Court, but, in relation to any particular
appeal, may be duly constituted by only 2 such judges if none
of the parties to
the appeal objects to the Court being so constituted for the purpose of hearing
the appeal.
(2) The determination of any question
before the Court shall be according to the opinion of the majority of the
judges, or in case
the judges are equally divided, according to the opinion of
the Chief Justice, or in his absence, of the Senior Judge.
(3) The Court shall be a superior court
of record, and shall, for the purposes of, and subject to the provisions of,
this chapter,
have full power to determine in accordance with this chapter any
question necessary to be determined for the purpose of doing justice
in any case
before the Court.
(4) The Associate Judge of the Supreme
Court is to be an Associate Judge of the Court.
(5) The Registrar, the Deputy
Registrar, and the Assistant Deputy Registrar of the Supreme Court shall,
respectively, be the Registrar,
the Deputy Registrar, and the Assistant Deputy
Registrar of the Court.
(6) Subject to the Rules of Court, the
Deputy Registrar or the Assistant Deputy Registrar of the Court may exercise any
of the functions
conferred by this Act or otherwise on the Registrar, and any
act or thing done by or before the Deputy Registrar or the Assistant
Registrar of the Court has the same force and effect as if it were done by or
before the Registrar.
do not see that these provisions require a different approach than that which is
to be applied in New South Wales under the
Criminal Appeal Act
in New South Wales, the Code directs that judges of the Supreme Court act as the
Court of Criminal Appeal. It is a court
of superior record.
basis upon which the Court of Criminal Appeal re-sentenced the respondent is,
with respect, not entirely clear. Martin AJ, at
[79]-[80] of his Honour's
reasons said:
"The appellant also appealed against the sentence of
imprisonment for 16 years, with a non-parole period of 8 years, on the sole
that it was manifestly excessive. Ultimately, in substance, counsel for
the appellant conceded that if the conviction for murder
was not set aside, she
would have significant difficulty in persuading the Court that either the
sentence or the non-parole period
were manifestly excessive. That concession was
rightly made.
In re-sentencing, in my view, it is appropriate to impose a single sentence
for the crimes of burglary, aggravated burglary and aggravated
in the passage just quoted, it was the Court's intention to convey that the
power to re-sentence the respondent derived from
the ground of appeal that the
sentence was manifestly excessive, I would respectfully disagree. The sentencing
judge imposed, in
accordance with the
Sentencing Act
single sentence for five offences. Once the convictions for murder and
unlawfully setting fire to property were quashed it was
unnecessary and
inappropriate to consider the appeal against sentence. The single sentence which
was imposed for offences which included
those counts could no longer stand as a
matter of law. Thus, the powers of the Court in the terms stated in s 402(4),
(4A), (4B),
(4C) and (4D) of the Code on hearing an appeal against sentence had
no application. The power for the Court of Criminal Appeal to
re-sentence the
respondent derived from s 403(1) which provided:
"If it appears to
the Court that an appellant, though not properly convicted on some count or part
of the indictment has been properly
convicted on some other count or part of the
indictment, the Court may either affirm the sentence passed at the trial or pass
sentence, whether more or less severe, in substitution therefor, as it
thinks proper, and as may be warranted in law by the conviction
indictment or part thereof on which it considers the appellant has been properly
convicted."
was also open to the Court of Criminal Appeal to refer the case to the trial
judge in accordance with s 403(3A) which provided:
"Where under the
foregoing provisions of this section the Court has power to affirm, or to pass a
sentence in substitution for, a
sentence passed on a person at his trial it may,
instead of exercising that power, refer the case to the trial judge, and, on the
case being so referred to him, that judge may himself exercise that power as if
he were the Court; and any power exercised by a judge
under this section has the
like effect as if it were exercised by the Court."
right of appeal against sentence is provided for by the Code, s 401, in the
following terms:
"(1) A person convicted before a court of
trial may appeal to the Court –
(c) against the sentence passed on his
conviction, unless the sentence is one fixed by law.
(2) The Attorney-General may appeal to
the Court –
(c) against the sentence.
(3) For the purposes of subsection
(2)(c), sentence, in relation to –
(a) a person convicted on indictment,
includes an order under the
Sentencing Act
(b) a person convicted under the provisions
of section 331C, includes an order under the
reference in s 401(2) to the Attorney General includes an officer appointed to
prosecute in any criminal proceedings. Other than
in subs (3), the terms of s
401 do not further explain the reference in subs (2)(c) to "the sentence". The
appellant submits that
the meaning is thus not confined to a sentence imposed by
a court of trial. However that submission cannot be accepted. When s 401(2)(c)
is read in the context of the appellate system created by Chapter XLVI, with
particular regard to s 401(1)(c) and the definition
of sentence in s 399, it
could only mean the sentence passed on conviction before a court of trial. The
reference to "the sentence"
in sub-section (2)(c) is a reference back to the
sentence in sub-section (1)(c). The definition in s 399 is an inclusive, rather
than an exclusive, definition, but nevertheless focusses attention on the
sentence imposed by a court of trial. Much the same can
be said of the reference
to "sentence" in s 402(3), which does not advance the appellant's
submission.
principal submission of counsel for the appellant on the jurisdictional question
relies on the reference in s 402(4) to the power
to, on an appeal against
sentence, "pass another sentence in substitution therefor”. For reasons
already stated the reliance
on s 402(4) is misplaced, but s 403(1) also refers
to passing a sentence "in substitution for" the sentence passed at the trial.
was submitted that the result is that the sentence imposed by the Court of
Criminal Appeal replaces, or is to be substituted for,
the sentence imposed by
Jago J, but in such a way that the right to appeal exists as it would have in
respect to the sentence first
imposed by the judge at trial. In support of that
construction of the legislation the appellant also relies on the terms of s
which refer to the Court having "full power to determine any question
necessary to be determined for the purpose of doing justice
in any case."
However, s 400(3) does not support the appellant's submission. It is to be read
in full. It provides:
"(3) The Court shall be a superior court
of record, and shall, for the purposes of, and subject to the provisions of,
this chapter,
have full power to determine in accordance with this chapter any
question necessary to be determined for the purpose of doing justice
in any case
before the Court."
power granted by that sub-section to do justice in any case is expressed to be
"subject to the provisions of chapter" and the
power is to be exercised "in
accordance with this chapter". The provision does not, as was suggested by the
appellant, create some
broader implied or inherent power to do justice. The
statutory power remains confined by the terms of Chapter XLVI. The submission
that use of the words "in substitution for" the sentence passed by the court of
trial means that the right of appeal exists as if
the sentence passed by the
Court of Appeal were the sentence passed by the trial judge must be rejected.
The sentence which the appellant
seeks to challenge in this appeal was passed by
the Court of Criminal Appeal, not the court of trial, although it was passed in
substitution
for the sentence passed by the court of trial. If the appellant's
submission was correct the result would be that a person, whether
convicted or the Attorney-General, who asserted error in a sentence imposed by
the Court of Criminal Appeal in substitution
for a sentence imposed by a court
of trial in any of the circumstances contemplated by Chapter XLVI of the Code,
would retain the
right to appeal to the Court of Criminal Appeal, the same
intermediate court of appeal which imposed the sentence. That scenario
contrary to the intention and purpose of the legislation. It would lead to the
absurd possibility of perpetual appeals and destroy
the principle of
deciding the question, the situation might have been different if the Court of
Criminal Appeal had referred the re-sentence
in accordance with s 403(3A) and
the sentence under challenge had been imposed by the trial judge. That question
requires a further
analysis of the terms of s 403(3A) which is not required in
this case because a different course was taken. Unlike some other jurisdictions,
in this State there is no legislative provision which specifically permits the
reconsideration of a sentence where it has been established
that the offender
has failed to comply with an undertaking of cooperation.
those reasons I would conclude that this Court is without jurisdiction to
determine this appeal. The grant of an extension of
time would be futile. In my
view the proper order is, because the Court is without jurisdiction to determine
the appeal or an application
for leave to appeal, that the application to extend
the time within which notice of appeal, or notice of an application for leave
appeal, may be given, should be refused.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS v NIKIYA LEE
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
17 June 2025
have read the Reasons for Judgment of Pearce J, with which I agree. I also
agree with the order proposed by his Honour.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS v NIKIYA LEE
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
CUTHBERTSON J
17 June 2025
I agree with the reasons of Pearce J. I also agree with his Honour's
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (199 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter