URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASSC/2025/55.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:21:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jordan v Community Housing Limited [2025] TASSC 55 (5 November 2025)
[2025] TASSC 55
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA
Community Housing Limited
[2025] TASSC 55
Lorraine Elizabeth
COMMUNITY HOUSING LIMITED
DELIVERED ON:
5 November 2025
HEARING DATE:
21 October 2025
Procedure – Civil proceedings in State and Territory
courts – Pleadings – Striking out – Disclosing
no reasonable
cause of action or defence.
Aust Dig Procedure
Supreme Court Rules
Journeaux (No 2)
[1935] HCA 48
Dey v Victorian
Railways Commissioners
[1949] HCA 1
General Steel
Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
Spencer v Commonwealth of Australia
[2010] HCA 28
Gunnarsson-Wiener v Iles
[2020] TASFC
REPRESENTATION
C Brimfield
Solicitors:
Judgment Number:
[2025] TASSC 55
paragraphs:
Serial No 55/2025
File No 714/2025
LORRAINE JORDAN v COMMUNITY HOUSING
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT PEARCE J
5 November 2025
Court has power to dismiss a claim which is so deficient that it would not be
appropriate to allow the proceedings to continue.
This is a clear case in which
that power should be exercised.
18 March 2024, Lorraine Jordan filed a writ commencing an action against
Community Housing Limited. Miss Jordan filed an amended
statement of claim in
the action on 23 September 2024. The action concerns a residential property in
Waverley in Tasmania. Miss Jordan
claims to be a tenant but the order sought by
her is that title to the property be transferred to her. The defendant's
application
for an order striking out the amended statement of claim and
dismissing the action should be allowed because none of the facts which
Jordan sets out in the amended statement of claim, or any combination of those
facts, even if proved, are capable of establishing
any legal right to that
defendant to the action was identified in the writ as "Community Housing
Limited, Property Management for Homes Tasmania. The
Eleri Morgan-Thomas". Miss Jordan intended the defendant to be Community Housing
Limited and the action
has only been prosecuted against that entity, which I
will refer to as the defendant. It was the only party which was served and
appeared. It is the only defendant which has been named on all the subsequent
court documents. In the endorsement to the writ, Miss
Jordan claimed possession
of the property. The endorsement also claimed other relief in these
"7 years of maintance (sic) and 5 years of deliberate mental
anguish inflicted on the plaintiff by way of retaliashional (sic) eviction,
envolving (sic), negligence, causing detriment to plaintiff."
not pleaded in the amended statement of claim, it is not contentious that Homes
Tasmania is the State government authority
responsible for provision of social
housing in this State, and the defendant manages properties for that entity. It
may safely be
assumed that the property is owned by Homes Tasmania but managed
by the defendant. The writ was filed in the context that Miss Jordan
that time, attempting to prevent the defendant from taking possession. It was
accompanied by a three page typed statement
of claim also dated 18 March 2024.
That document is directed to the defendant. It claimed, in very general and
mostly discursive
narrative terms, that Miss Jordan was a tenant of the property
and complained about her poor treatment dating back to 2018 by the
The statement of claim was primarily directed at what she referred to as a
"recent eviction attempt" and to prevent further
attempts by the defendant to
remove her from her home. The document referred to Miss Jordan's fear that she
would be "dragged from
her home" and claimed that she was party to a residential
tenancy agreement. There is no clear statement of the orders which are
the action except that the concluding paragraph refers to an attached
application for an injunction and continues:
"I am asking for the
property to be signed over to myself as it is the lesser of the two amounts for
compensation I could ask. I have
taken years of mental anguish. And the property
is worth less that an amount if I won, than calculated compensation for all the
and illegal actions I have endured over the years."
Jordan commenced parallel proceedings in the Magistrates Court under the
Residential Tenancy Act
. Her proceedings initially came before the
Magistrates Court where a magistrate determined that there was no jurisdiction
Act to resolve a dispute about the defendant's attempted termination
of the tenancy because there was no residential tenancy agreement
meaning of that term in the
Residential Tenancy Act
However, on 12
November 2024, Marshall AJ found that the magistrate's decision was wrong and
determined that Miss Jordan was a party
to a residential tenancy agreement. His
Honour found that the Tasmanian legislation created a legislative construct
whereby a residential
tenancy agreement may exist without proof of a "prior
agreement" or the existence of valuable consideration, requiring only the grant
of a right of occupancy for value:
Jordan v Community Housing
[2024] TASSC 63.
Miss Jordan's status as a tenant of the
property under that legislation was finally and authoritatively determined. No
Notwithstanding
her success in those proceedings, Miss Jordan wishes to continue this action. To
the extent that the endorsement
on the writ and the original statement of claim
sought "possession" of the property, the result of the order made by Marshall AJ
is that Miss Jordan retains possession of the property and has all of the rights
of a tenant under the
Residential Tenancy Act
. With the writ, Miss Jordan
also filed an interlocutory application seeking an order, in effect, that there
be no "eviction or sale"
of the property "until the matter can be heard". No
order was made on that application until it was dismissed by Daly AsJ on 30
2024, and there is no other basis for an order "for possession" in the
Jordan is not, and in this action has never been, represented by a lawyer. The
writ, the first statement of claim and the amended
statement of claim are all
documents she prepared herself. The pleading I am to primarily consider is the
amended statement of claim
dated 23 September 2024. Doing the best I can to make
sense of it, and using my language rather than hers, it asserts that she had
lived in the property for almost eight years having moved in with her son in
2017, that she was party to a residential tenancy agreement
Residential Tenancy Act
and paid rent and not breached any term of
the tenancy. The document then contains a lengthy description of her complaints
of bullying,
harassment, intimidation and threats of eviction by officers of the
defendant, the defendant's failure since 2018 to attend to repairs
maintain the property to an appropriate standard, and the anxiety caused to her
by the defendant's refusal to agree that she
was party to a residential tenancy
agreement and the defendant's attempts to remove her from the property.
amended statement of claim refers indirectly to other proceedings under the
Residential Tenancy Act
and asserts "five years of mental anguish" and
anxiety arising from these tenancy disputes, that the attempted eviction was
"retaliashional"
(sic) for her enforcing her rights, and to the financial burden
of the costs of the ancillary court proceedings.
importantly for present purposes, the document concludes, under the heading
"Orders Sought by the Plaintiff", by claiming the
"deeds for the property" under
Propperty Rights Act
" (sic) on the grounds that the defendant "broke
a fixed term lease agreement" by "an unlawful eviction process", breaching Miss
"quiet enjoyment" by not letting her "live in peace, from harrasement
(sic), intimidation, manipulation, threats and bullying" and
did not "deal with
urgent repairs" or "keep the property up to standard" and entered the property
"without due cause".
Jordan was asked at the commencement of the hearing of the defendant's
application to again consider and re-state the orders
she asked the Court to
make in the action. She confirmed that the order she sought was that "the titles
to the said property be handed
over, signed over to myself." She also said that
she had asked for "an apology". She later submitted that "it wasn't about money,
it's about the fact that I've put hard labour into the property." She continued
by asserting that she wished to have the defendant's
staff made "accountable" by
being "charged" or "found at fault" for their actions. In her submissions in
opposition to the application,
Miss Jordan contended, in substance, that she
wished to confirm her status as a tenant, that she was aggrieved by years of the
defendant's
failing to maintain the property, to show that the eviction attempt
in 2023 was unlawful and to demonstrate that she had not been
allowed "quiet
enjoyment".
Court's records of proceedings make clear that Daly AsJ, during various
interlocutory hearings, explained to Miss Jordan the
need to formulate her case
in a coherent way. On 30 August 2024 his Honour specifically referred Miss
Jordan to the rules of pleading
Supreme Court Rules
, r 227, and
the rule was read to her. This application was made on 13 February 2025. There
has been ample time since then for Miss
Jordan to consider her claim and obtain
advice about it. Despite what I do not doubt are her best efforts, the amended
of claim does not comply with
Supreme Court Rules
, r 227. It is
not brief, the material facts are not stated in summary form or divided into
paragraphs containing separate allegations.
There are numbered paragraphs but,
like the first statement of claim, the document retains the character of a
discursive narrative.
It does not give reasonably explicit notice to the
defendant of the grounds of action on which Miss Jordan intends to rely at the
trial. However, this application does not depend on whether there are technical
breaches of the pleading rules.
Court Rules
, r 259, authorises the dismissal of an action with
judgment accordingly where the pleading does not disclose a reasonable cause of
action, or where the pleading shows that the claim is frivolous or vexatious.
authorises the giving of summary judgment in favour of a defendant
where the action is frivolous or vexatious or the defendant has
a good defence
on the merits. The defendant did not apply for summary judgment within the time
limited by r 367, and no application
is made for an extension of time, but there
is the inherent jurisdiction of the Court to stop cases which clearly have no
of success. In this case there is no evidence relevant to the merits of
the plaintiff’s claim. The application is to be decided
on the basis of
the pleadings alone.
cause of action is every allegation of fact which the plaintiff must prove to
establish the right to the relief claimed, and a
reasonable cause of action
means a cause of action with some chance of success, when considering the
allegations of fact contained
in the challenged pleading alone:
v Magenta Nominees Pty Ltd
[1999] FCA 152
161 ALR 458
per Nicholson J
at [24]. Summary dismissal is a step which should only be taken if the case is
"very clear";
Dey v Victorian Railways Commissioners
per Dixon J at 91,
General Steel Industries Inc v
Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
112 CLR 125
Barwick CJ at 128–130 and
Cubillo v Commonwealth
at 549-551. As was explained by Blow CJ in
Gunnarsson-Wiener v Iles
[2020] TASFC 1
Shire of Bairnsdale
[1908] HCA 57
Pridmore v Magenta Nominees Pty
Von Stalheim v Anti Discrimination
[2009] TASSC 6
, when the word "frivolous" is
used to describe a court proceeding, it means that the claim made in that
proceeding is so obviously
untenable that it cannot possibly succeed. A litigant
is entitled to submit a claim he or she believes can be established, although
the foundation is slender, but the Court's dismissal power may be exercised when
a claim is so deficient that it would not be appropriate
to allow the
proceedings to continue:
Cox v Journeaux
[1935] HCA 48
52 CLR 713.
As to the approach to the application
generally see
Spencer v Commonwealth of Australia
[2010] HCA 28
Woods v Deputy Commissioner of Taxation
per Porter J at [19]-[24].
leeway may be given to Miss Jordan as a self-represented litigant. However, as
Nettle and Osborn JJA pointed out in
Karam v Palmone Shoes Pty Ltd and
[2012] VSCA 97
"A self‑represented litigant
cannot be allowed forever to stand behind the shield of his own ignorance;
especially when it continues
to subject other parties to cost and inconvenience
and to add pointlessly to the load on the Court's already limited resources.
comes a point at which a self‑represented litigant must be required
to take responsibility for his choices."
some cases, particularly involving unrepresented parties who are less able to
produce pleadings in an action, non-compliance with
the rules of pleading can be
matters of form rather than substance, and are capable of being cured by
amendment. However that is
not the case here. Miss Jordan does not claim to have
ever been anything more than a tenant. Her claim to a transfer of the property
to her cannot possibly succeed. Even if Miss Jordan's complaints about the
conduct of the defendant are proved, there is no legal
basis upon which a breach
of a term of a residential tenancy agreement, or unjustified attempts to
terminate a lease, could ever
entitle her to ownership of the property. An
amendment to the statement of claim to attempt to establish a claim for such
would be futile.
Tasmania there is no
Propperty Rights Act
(sic) and no other legislation
which entitles Miss Jordan to a transfer of the title to property. In the
amended statement of claim
reference is also made to asserted breaches of the
Residential Tenancy Act
Human Rights Act
Civil Liability Act
of Animals Act
1993 and the
Police Offences Act
reference is made to sections of these various statutes, no explanation is given
of how a breach might found a cause of action
against the defendant of the
nature asserted which is enforceable by action in this Court. None of the
various pieces of legislation
she refers to give rise to any right to the legal
relief she claims. This Court has no power to order an apology for past conduct,
or that anyone be charged with a criminal offence and her rights to possession
as a tenant have been established in separate proceedings.
A desire that someone
be "found at fault" is futile in the absence of a cause of action.
proposition that Miss Jordan could never be entitled to ownership of the
property is so obvious that it is hardly necessary to
point out also that there
is no pleading that the defendant was or is the owner of the property. If it is
not, no order against the
defendant concerning ownership of the property could
be made or enforced. Homes Tasmania is not a party to the action and no order
could be made affecting its interests.
is not part of the Court's function to provide Miss Jordan with legal advice, or
to cast around the many, mostly irrelevant, facts
asserted by her to attempt to
ascertain whether they may establish a cause of action for a remedy she does not
seek. It is not for
the Court to work out for her whether she may have an
action. That would be unfair to the defendant. To the extent that I should
for the risk of injustice by not allowing Miss Jordan a further opportunity to
re-plead a different claim, I would observe
that there is little prospect of any
reasonable cause of action being established by the pleaded facts. None of the
pieces of legislation
Miss Jordan refers to create any relevant private right of
action enforceable in this Court. No pleaded facts allege damage to property,
injury to person or financial loss arising from breach of contract or tort. One
possibility is an action for damages for "mental
anguish". To the extent that
such a claim may be based on alleged breach of contract, the amended statement
of claim does not plead
facts to establish a common law lease. What breach is
asserted and when it occurred throughout a period of six or seven years is
pleaded. A claim of that nature based on breach of contract would face many
Elisha v Vision Australia Ltd
2024] HCA 50
As to liability in negligence, the amended statement of claim asserts that
the defendant "breached Miss Jordan's, civil liability,
standard of care,
causing great mental anguish and high anxiety for 5 years." She asserts that the
defendant continued to deliberately
torment her despite an "obvious risk of
harm" and breached a duty of care. When and how this happened is not readily
apparent. However,
damages are not sought and such a claim would require proof
of duty, breach, causation and damage and faces the limitations on recovery
pure mental harm in the
Civil Liability Act
possibility that some claim for other relief might exist does not persuade me
that the statement of claim could be justly
cured by amendment and that the
order sought by the defendant should not be made.
Jordan's amended statement of claim does not disclose a reasonable cause of
action for the relief she claims. Her claim is frivolous
in the sense that it is
obviously untenable and cannot possibly succeed. To allow it to continue
would impose unnecessary injustice
and cost on the defendant. I order that the
action is dismissed and that judgment be entered for the defendant.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (149 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter