URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMACT/2019/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:17:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Harding v Motor Accidents Insurance Board [2019] TASMACT 2 (20 September 2019)
[2019] TASMACT 2
MOTOR ACCIDENTS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
Harding v Motor Accidents Insurance Board
HARDING, Roger
MOTOR ACCIDENTS INSURANCE BOARD
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
On the papers
DELIVERED ON:
20 September 2019
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Chairperson Webster
CATCHWORDS:
Traffic law – statutory compensation in respect of
motor vehicle accidents – claim for gratuitous care – jurisdiction
of Tribunal – to whom an agreed lump sum payment should be made
Motor Accidents (Liabilities and Compensation) Act
Accidents (Liabilities and Compensation) Regulations
Australian Postal Commission v Hayes
[1989] FCA 176
Repatriation Commission
[1992] HCA 47
(1992) 175 CLR 408
Accidents Insurance Board v Korajzl
[1993] TASSC 159
DETERMINATION:
The Tribunal has the power to make an order in favour
of the claimant. The Motor Accidents Insurance Board is to pay the agreed
of $612,500.00 to the claimant and it is to pay the claimant’s costs of
and incidental to this referral.
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Murdoch Clarke
[2019] TASMACT 2
Chairperson Webster
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. On 1 November 2017 the claimant filed, on behalf of his
daughter, Grace, a referral as he was aggrieved by a determination of the
respondent on 13 October 2017 to reject his claim for gratuitous care which was
made on behalf of his daughter who was injured in
a motor accident on 14 April
2005 when aged 3 years. As a result of the motor accident Grace suffered
personal injury which included
a severe closed head injury.
2. The parties
attended a number of teleconference which were conducted by the Secretary of the
Tribunal before the matter proceeded
to conciliation in Launceston on 19
February 2019.
3. By letter from the claimant’s solicitor dated 6 May
2019 the Tribunal was advised:
[of the conciliation conference referred to in paragraph 2]
pleased to report that subject to one matter agreement has been reached between
the parties to resolve this reference.
As the attached correspondence from Murdoch Clarke to me dated 26 March 2019
and my letter to Murdoch Clarke dated 15 April 2019 reveals
quantum has been
agreed. What however is not agreed is as to whom the agreed quantum should be
4. The matter therefore came before me on 17 May 2019 and by
consent a timetable was ordered for the provision by the parties of some
facts and written submissions.
5. A further directions hearing was held on 20
June 2019 at which counsel for the claimant indicated he could provide a
of his client in order to complete the factual matrix. The matter was
therefore set down for hearing in Launceston on 16 July 2019.
Subsequently a
statement of the claimant dated 27 June 2019 (“the claimant’s
statement”) was provided to the respondent
and the Tribunal.
July 2019 the respondent advised, by its solicitors, the claimant’s
statement could be submitted to the Tribunal as
an agreed statement and that no
cross-examination was required. The respondent’s solicitors asked the
Tribunal to make its
determination based upon the agreed facts and submissions
that had been provided without proceeding to hearing on 16 July 2019.
solicitor for the claimant agreed to that course. I have therefore proceeded on
that basis.
The Referral
7. The referral is in the following terms:
Harding of ... being a person who is aggrieved by a determination of the Motor
Accidents Insurance Board on 13 October
2017 rejecting my claim for gratuitous
care or other services, on behalf of my daughter Grace who was seriously injured
vehicle accident on 14 April 2005 when aged 3 years
refers the matter to the Tribunal under
section 28(2)
Motor Accidents
(Liabilities and Compensation) Act 1973
on the following grounds of
claims made by way of my letter to the Motor Accidents Insurance Board dated 26
June 2015, supported by the reports of Ms Susan
Dinley of ABC Rehab dated 5
April 2015 and 26 May 2015, are reasonable and the Motor Accidents Insurance
Board should be ordered
to pay those claims for the one year claimed, and for a
further five years as the Tribunal sees fit.”
8. It is implicit from the referral the claimant seeks payment
of gratuitous services for the period of 12 months prior to the claim
in June 2015 and for a further period prior to June 2014 and accordingly an
extension of time is sought pursuant to clause
8(2) of Schedule 1 of the Motor
Accidents (Liabilities and Compensation) Regulations
Regulations”).
The Evidence and Findings of Fact
9. The claimant proposed the following facts for
(a) At all relevant times Grace Harding
(“Grace”) was an infant who was born on 21 June 2001.
was involved in a motor vehicle accident on 14 April 2005 as a result of which
she suffered personal injury including a
severe closed head injury.
the accident to the present, the Motor Accidents Insurance Board (“the
Board”) has:
(i) paid scheduled benefits for and on behalf of
(ii) treated Grace as a person requiring daily care by reason of her
personal injury resulting from the
(d) Grace's
mother, Sylvia Harding, died on 2 June 2010.
(e) On 26 June 2015, Grace's
father, Roger Harding, made a claim on the Board for the payment of scheduled
benefits in respect of
attendant care and domestic services, gratuitously
provided for Grace by Mr Harding during the period of 12 months preceding the
date of the claim (26 June 2014 – 26 June 2015) and additionally during
each period of years preceding that period since 26
June 2010, shortly after the
death of Sylvia Harding.
(f) The gratuitous services provided by Mr Harding
were provided for Grace’s maintenance and at all relevant times Mr Harding
had lawful custody and control of her.
(g) Subsequently Mr Harding made
further claims for the payment of disability benefits in respect of attendant
care and domestic services
gratuitously provided for Grace after 26 June 2015,
during the years 2016, 2017, 2018 and to 31 March 2019.
(h) The gratuitous
services provided by Mr Harding to Grace were provided periodically, that is
every week, on a daily basis, and
continuously during the period 26 June 2010 to
31 March 2019, and since then.
(i) The further claims referred to in
paragraph (g) have been accepted by the Board as forming part of the issue for
determination
by the Tribunal pursuant to Mr Harding’s referral
(j) On 26 March 2019 the Board and Mr Harding reached
“agreement” to resolve the claims for payment of disability benefits
upon the following terms:
(i) the Board will pay a lump sum of $612,500.00
for disability benefits under clause 5 in Part 6 of Schedule 1 to the
Regulations;
(ii) that amount is to be paid in respect of all the periods
during which Mr Harding has gratuitously provided attendant care and
services to Grace, referred to in paragraphs 9(e) and (g) above;
benefits payable, comprising the total lump sum, have been calculated at
$70,000.00 per annum;
(iv) $70,000.00 per annum constitutes an offer by Mr
Harding calculated by him as a compromise between the assessments of two
occupational
therapists of the appropriate hourly and weekly requirements for
Grace’s domestic and attendant care, extrapolated from hourly
(v) the total amount of $612,500.00 is intended to cover benefits
payable under clause 5 in Part 6 of Schedule 1 to the Regulations
from 26 June
2010 to 31 March 2019 which is the period in respect of which Mr Harding claimed
those benefits;
(vi) the total amount of $612,500.00 is not payable in
respect of any attendant care and domestic services gratuitously provided for
Grace by Mr Harding or by any other person after 31 March 2019 or that might be
provided at any future time, and it is not intended
that payment of that amount
will extinguish any future liability to make further payment of any scheduled
benefits that might otherwise
be payable to Grace, or impose a bar against any
future claim for such benefits.
10. In the Board’s written reply it indicated paragraphs
9(a) to (e), (g) and (i) were accepted which I confirmed at the directions
hearing on 20 June 2019 meant they were admitted. In addition the fact Mr
Harding had lawful custody and control of Grace as set
out in paragraph 9(f) was
admitted but the rest of that paragraph was not admitted. The Board, in its
written reply to Mr Harding’s
submissions, did not admit paragraph
11. At the directions hearing on 20 June 2019 counsel for the Board
then admitted paragraphs 9(j)(i), (ii), (iii), (v) and (vi).
That left part of
paragraph 9(f) identified in paragraph 10 and paragraphs 9(h) and 9(j)(iv) in
12. Mr Harding’s statement, which is referred to in paragraph
5, indicates he is the father and guardian of Grace who was born
2001. As mentioned in paragraph 6, the contents of that statement are not in
dispute. He says the following in his statement:
note that the attendant care and domestic services which I have provided to
Grace since 2010 has been the subject of extensive
analysis by Ms Susan Dinley
an occupational therapist from Sydney engaged on my behalf, and Ms Bernadette
O’Brien, an occupational
therapist from Hobart engaged on the MAIB’s
behalf. In short, as I understand it, Ms Dinley’s opinion is to the
that the number of hours by way of attendant care and domestic services
which I provide to Grace beyond that which would be expected
of a parent without
a disabled child amounts to a minimum average 59.5 hours per week; whereas in Ms
O’Brien’s opinion
the same amounts to an average 31 hours per week.
My settlement offer to the MAIB was based upon a compromise between the opinions
of Ms Dinley and Ms O’Brien.
the demands of providing care and domestic services to Grace have changed over
the years since 2010 and have varied between
school terms compared to periods
away from school, they can broadly be summarised as follows:
Grace can initiate the showering process when prompted but cannot organise
herself. She has to be supervised whilst showering to
ensure that she completes
the task. She does not always clean herself properly. She needs supervision
turning on/off taps to regulate
the temperature to avoid scalding. She is
unable to calibrate the amount of shampoo required. She dries herself but
exceeds the
task resulting in copious towels on the floor. She needs
supervision as she takes an inordinately excessive time to complete her
showering. Often, she will leave taps dripping. A significant clean-up is
required afterwards. Grace is unable to manage her hygiene
independently.
Grace requires supervision when choosing clothes as she has difficulty
matching clothes and choosing appropriate clothes for the given
Often, she is unable to find items of clothing and she requires assistance with
that. Whilst I encourage her to manage
her clothing in her cupboards and
drawers, items invariably go missing. She is always asking for help.
Nightly bedwetting has been a consistent problem with Grace resulting in the
use of pads. Coupled with her nightly sweating, frequent
bed changes at night
are required at times but needs regularly nightly periodic checking.
Additionally, Grace is unable to calibrate the amount of toilet paper used
and often clogs the toilet. She forgets how to dispose
of her menstrual pads
appropriately. Many plastic bags etc have been flushed by Grace where I
periodically use a rod to unjam the
sewage pipes.
Personal hygiene
Grace needs supervision to ensure that she brushes her teeth. She needs
supervision and instruction with regard to brushing her hair
to ensure she
leaves home neatly and appropriately presented. She needs reminding to brush
her teeth at night. She needs assistance
with drying her hair.
As a result of her condition Grace has developed an excessive amount of body
hair which I have to assist her with managing and which
I am regularly required
to take her to the beautician.
I need to ensure that she has feminine hygiene products, and when
menstruating, I need to ensure that she takes extra underwear with
her when she
leaves the home.
Grace needs supervision with regard to her appearance, as she often presents
with toothpaste on her face, shampoo left in her hair,
and her hair not brushed
and fixed properly. She uses excessive amounts of paper, shampoo, deodorant and
toothpaste if not supervised.
Grace is a compulsive eater and her food intake requires close monitoring to
manage her weight. She needs assistance to cut her food
and supervision while
eating. She is a compulsive eater spooning food into her mouth and not chewing
Grace is a devout vegetarian which means that I have to especially provide
and manage her diet; neither I nor Grace’s sister
vegetarians.
Grace is unable to self-medicate, although her only medications are taken for
colds, the flu etc although she does take some vitamins
which I need to manage
with her (e.g. Iron pills, B12 pills).
Grace is unable to shop alone. She is unable to shop for herself. She gets
lost. She is unable to distinguish between items to
be purchased. She cannot
comprehend or understand shopping lists. She does not understand the value of
money adequate to shopping
I provide Grace with pocket money as an aid to teaching her how to manage
money. Grace however does not spend her pocket money.
She saves it and every
now and then I take her to the bank to deposit it in her bank account (although
this depositing is now rare).
I take Grace grocery shopping and encourage her to select the fruit and
vegetables that she likes. She is unable to determine what
would be an
appropriate number of, for example, oranges to place in a bag for the next few
days or a week. She tends to select excessive
amounts of fruit and vegetables.
She cannot determine what would be appropriate.
Meal preparation
I have encouraged Grace to help prepare meals. I will often work through a
recipe with her, we will find the necessary items, calibrate
the items and
coordinate what is required to prepare the meal. However, Grace is not able to
do this unassisted, and when she tries
to she makes a huge mess and is unable to
clean up satisfactorily. In short, Grace is unable to provide food and
sustenance for
herself. I have to provide for and prepare all her meals. She
is unable, for example, to distinguish stale from fresh food.
I maintain a herb garden which I often encourage Grace to locate herbs from
the garden for me when undertaking meal preparation.
Unfortunately, she cannot
tell which herb is which or pick the appropriate amount required.
I have to supervise Grace clean her own bedroom as she tends to make a huge
disorganised mess almost daily. She rarely puts anything
away without me
prompting and watching her when she does so. Without me, she would be a
For example, I have a regular routine with Grace by which I initiate her
vacuuming her bedroom, putting her dirty linen in the laundry
basket, hanging
out the washing and putting her clean laundry away in her bedroom. This all
requires direction and supervision.
She could not do any of this
independently.
Washing/ironing
With my supervision Grace assists with the washing of sheets, towels and some
clothes. She could not do so independently. Grace
has excessive amounts of
washing to do because of her eating habits, as she tends to drop food onto her
clothes, and regarding her
general laundry needs, i.e. sheets, towels etc. She
is unable to do the ironing. She could not maintain herself in these respects
independently. She can’t tell clean versus dirty clothes so regularly
tries to wash clean clothes.
I expect Grace to make her bed every day; I have to initiate that occurring
and supervise her when she does so. Grace is not however
able to strip the
sheets and re-set clean linen on the bed including a clean doona and
Grace can feed our/her dog, but forgets without prompting and supervision to
do so on a regular basis. She will often feed the dog
at any time of the day,
and may feed the dog many times per day contrary to instruction. She sometimes
and the fish.
Grace is unable to use public transport, including the school bus. She is
permanently disoriented, gets lost and becomes anxious.
I still have to
transport her to her tutoring four times a week now that she has left school.
Until she finished supported schooling
at the Grammar School I have always had
to transport her to and from school from our home at Grindelwald. Grace is
unable to live
outside the family home independently.
Appointments
She cannot get to and from her appointments independently, e.g. medical,
beautician etc. She needs prompts and periodic help daily
throughout the day to
practise flute and find the components needed.
During her schooling years I have had to undertake the following
responsibilities:
packing/unpacking
her school bag;
reading and
interpreting her daily timetable for her;
her uniform;
assisting her
in the completion of projects and assignments;
interpreting
and facilitating her homework requirements;
liaising with
the Launceston Church Gramma
School to streamline and make
consistent the information processes on both sides to maximise Grace’s
educational experience
and reduce her anxiety in attending school;
liaising with
a private tutor which I have been forced to fund to maximise Grace’s
limited learning abilities and reduce her
educational anxiety;
by providing
repetitive feedback and tuition with Grace, i.e. reciting tables, practising
maths and attempting to put into a practical
sense, reading and re-reading to
improve her reading, spelling and comprehension skills, and practising her
Whilst at school from 2010 the MAIB funded a
teacher’s aid for Grace for varying periods of 20-30 hours per
Social life
Because of her condition Grace has found it impossible to establish
friendships or establish a social life with her peers. As a result,
I have gone
out of my way to take Grace for walks, take her bushwalking, walking the dog, to
the movies on the weekends, and to create
special experiences for her during
school holidays, i.e. we often have holidays which I organise especially with
Grace, and which
are centred around her needs.
short, Grace is incapable of functioning independently. I have substantially
devoted my life to her maintenance and care since
my late wife Sylvia died on 23
have provided the care and maintenance to Grace referred to in paragraph 4 above
daily, weekly and continuously since Grace’s
mother died.
I would like to emphasise that Grace’s most serious functional disability
is her Topographic Navigation Dysfunction
which necessitates daily surveillance.
In other words she has to be actively managed as she gets hopelessly lost and
disoriented.
She needs care at all times when moving from place to place, e.g.
have not held paid employment since June 2010. Outside my commitments to Grace
and the family I have endeavoured to manage my business
and investment affairs
which has been less than optimal given how consuming Grace’s needs have
13. Given the concessions made by the Board I make findings of
fact with respect to paragraphs 9(a) to (e), (g) and (i).
14. In relation to
paragraph 9(h) Mr Harding’s statement quite clearly shows he has provided
services to Grace on a periodic
basis; that is each day of every week since his
wife died on 23 June 2010. There is no evidence he has been paid for those
and the Board did not contend that to be the case. I therefore make a
finding in the terms of paragraph 9(h) above.
15. Insofar as paragraph 9(j)
is concerned it is clear from Mr Harding’s statement he made a settlement
offer to the Board which
was based upon a compromise between the opinions of Ms
Dinley and Ms O’Brien and it is clear from the written submissions of
parties and the letter from the Board’s solicitors to the claimant’s
solicitors of 26 March 2019 which was attached
to the letter from the
claimant’s solicitors to the Tribunal of 6 May 2019 the offer made by Mr
Harding to the Board was that
it pay the sum of $70,000.00 per annum. I
therefore make a finding in the terms of paragraph 9(j)(iv). The remaining
subparagraphs
in paragraph 9(j) are admitted and I therefore make findings of
fact in those terms as well.
16. The only remaining fact in issue between the
parties is therefore part of paragraph 9(f) which provides:
gratuitous services provided by Mr Harding were provided for Grace’s
maintenance...”
The word “maintenance” in that paragraph is crucial
because it appears in s25 of the Act and each party places a different
interpretation on the effect of s25.
17. The term “maintenance”
is not defined in either the Act or the Regulations. In my view the ordinary
and natural meaning
of that word should be employed in this instance. The
parties did not suggest otherwise. The Macquarie Dictionary defines the word
“maintenance” as:
• being maintained;
• the provision of the means
of subsistence;
• to provide with the means of
18. The services provided by Mr Harding are wide ranging. They
include assisting Grace with showering, dressing, toileting, her personal
hygiene, feeding, taking medication, shopping, meal preparation, housework,
washing/ironing, bed making, feeding pets, transport,
attending appointments,
her schooling and social life. There is no doubt in my mind Mr Harding is
providing his daughter with the
means of subsistence and support. He is
maintaining her. I therefore make a finding in terms of paragraph 9(f)
19. In summary I make findings of fact in the terms of paragraphs 9(a)
to (j). The Board has not raised any point as to time and
it is implicit from
the admitted facts time is not in issue.
The Submissions
20. Who is entitled to receive the agreed sum in this referral
is dependent upon an interpretation of s25 of the Motor Accidents (Liabilities
& Compensation) Act 1973 (“the Act”). That section
“25. Payment
of scheduled benefits to infants
(1) Subject to
, where a scheduled benefit becomes payable to an infant that benefit
shall unless the Supreme Court otherwise orders be paid to The
Public Trustee to
be held on trust for that infant.
(1A) For the purposes of
an order of the Supreme Court may be sought by an informal application
on affidavit, and any such application may be heard in chambers.
(1B) Where a scheduled benefit, being a periodical
allowance for the maintenance of an infant, becomes payable under this Act that
allowance may be paid to the person who has the lawful custody or control of the
(2) Notwithstanding anything in the
Trustee Act 1930
The Public Trustee may apply the whole or any part of any
sum received by it under this section in trust for an infant, or of the
thereof, for the maintenance, education, or advancement, or otherwise for the
benefit, of the infant during his minority or
may pay the same to some other
person to be so applied without seeing to the application or being answerable
for the misapplication
or non-application thereof.
(3) The expenses incurred by The Public Trustee in
the carrying out of any trust under this section and any fees or other charges
payable to The Public Trustee under the
Trustee Act 1930
in respect of that trust shall be defrayed by the
21. The Board contends the payment of the value of gratuitous
services is not a periodical allowance within the meaning of the Act
therefore s25(1B) is not enlivened. Even if the sum payable was a periodical
allowance, it was contended by the Board s25(1B)
creates a discretion so the
Board may pay the allowance to the person who has lawful custody or control of
the infant but it has
determined that sum should be paid to the Public Trustee
for Grace unless the Supreme Court directs otherwise. It was submitted
Supreme Court has been given a supervisory role in order to protect vulnerable
litigants, namely infants, and it was contended
that role must prevail if it is
sought that the lump sum be paid otherwise than to the Public Trustee. It would
therefore be up
to Mr Harding to make an application to the Supreme Court if he
wants the money paid to him rather than the Public Trustee.
22. In addition
it was contended that if the benefit which is payable is a periodical allowance
for the maintenance of an infant then
s25(1B) gives the Board a discretion,
through the use of the word “may” to pay that particular type of
benefit to the
person who has lawful custody or control of the infant rather
than to the Public Trustee but in this case the Board has determined
agreed sum to the Public Trustee for Grace subject to any order made by the
Supreme Court.
23. The claimant contended the sum of $612,500.00 should be
paid to him and the Tribunal had jurisdiction to determine, pursuant to
of the Act, that sum be paid to him. Section 25(1B) does not involve any
determination about the proper exercise of a discretion.
The issue depends
entirely on whether the payment that will be made involves the payment of
“a periodical allowance for the
maintenance” of Grace. If it does
not, then s25(1) mandates payment to the Public Trustee, however if it does then
enables payment instead to Mr Harding.
24. As at 14 April 2005, s23(1) of the Act provided:
Board must pay the benefits prescribed by the regulations if a person who is a
resident of this State suffers personal
injury resulting directly from a motor
accident and –
(a) the motor accident occurs in this State;
(b) the motor accident occurs in another State
or a Territory of the Commonwealth and involves a motor vehicle registered in
25. There is no dispute between the parties the Board is liable
to pay the benefits prescribed by the Regulations in this case.
26. As at 14
April 2005 the Regulations referred to in paragraph 8 were in force. Those
Regulations commenced operation on 10 May
2000. When the Regulations came into
force they consisted of 15 regulations and Schedule 1 which was entitled
Scheduled Benefits.
Regulation 8 provided:
benefits payable by the Board under section 23(1) of the Act and the provisions
in accordance with which those benefits
are payable are specified in Schedule
27. That Schedule is entitled “Schedule 1 –
Scheduled benefits” and initially consisted of the following
• Part 1 – Persons to whom death benefits are
• Part 2 – Medical benefits;
Funeral benefits;
• Part 4 – Death benefits;
– Disability allowances.
28. Part 6, entitled Disability benefits, was inserted by
statutory rule 86 of 2002 with effect from 1 August 2002 whereas Part 7,
entitled Counselling Services Benefits, was inserted by statutory rule 95 of
2007 with effect from 1 December 2007.
29. Clauses 3, 4 and 5 of Part 6
provided as follows:
“3. Attendant
If a person suffers personal injury resulting directly from a motor accident,
such expenses as are reasonably incurred by, or on behalf
of, that person for
the provision of attendant care reasonably required by the person as a result of
having suffered the injury are
payable as disability benefits.
4. Domestic services for person requiring daily care
If a person suffers personal injury resulting directly from a motor accident
and requires daily care in respect of that injury, such
expenses as are
reasonably incurred by, or on behalf of, that person for the provision of
domestic services reasonably required by
the person as a result of having
suffered the injury are payable as disability benefits.
5. Gratuitous services to persons requiring daily care
(1) If a person, who requires daily care in respect to personal injury
resulting directly from a motor accident, requires attendant
care or domestic
services in respect of that injury, and the attendant care or domestic services
are provided gratuitously, disability
benefits are payable in respect of the
attendant care or domestic services.
(2) The amount of the disability benefits payable under subclause (1) is to
be calculated by reference to the reasonable value of
providing the attendant
care of domestic services in the circumstances in which they are
It is under clause 5 of Part 6 of the Regulations that Mr
Harding has made the claim in this case.
30. In my experience, both in this
Tribunal and in practise, many aspects of a claim for gratuitous services might
be disputed by
the Board. For example there may be a dispute as to whether a
person requires daily care, whether the personal injury which results
need for daily care resulted directly from a motor accident, whether a person
having satisfied those matters actually requires
attendant care or domestic
services in respect of that injury or the number of hours required or whether
the attendant care or domestic
services are provided gratuitously. There might
also be a dispute as to the reasonable value of providing the attendant care or
domestic services.
31. In this case there is an agreement with respect to all
matters surrounding the Board’s liability to pay disability benefits
except to whom the agreed sum is to be paid. As is clear from paragraph 12 on
page 2 of the Board’s submissions dated 22 May
2019, the Board made a
determination subsequent to the mediation on 19 February 2019 as to who the
agreed sum was to be paid which
was not a term of Mr Harding’s offer. It
determined it would pay the sum of $612,500.00 to the Public Trustee on
behalf subject to any order made by the Supreme Court of Tasmania.
In its letter to the claimant’s solicitors dated 26 March
Board’s solicitors said:
order for the claim to be settled in accordance with law it will need approval
from the Supreme Court, amounting to compromise
of a claim for a person under
disability...
The MAIB sees the appropriate way to proceed now is for an Application to be
made to the Supreme Court to obtain the approval of the
Supreme Court to
compromise the claim for Grace and to approve and have the sum of $612,500.00
paid to the Public Trustee, with the
usual orders for investment for the benefit
of Grace Harding.”
32. Clearly, given the Board’s submissions in paragraph
21, the representations made in the letter set out in last paragraph
incorrect. There is no need for an application to be made to the Supreme Court
if the parties agree the amount payable is to
be paid to the Public Trustee
given the terms of s25(1).
33. In this case neither party bears a legal onus
of proof. However, given the determination of the Board of 26 March 2019 not to
pay the funds to Mr Harding, the Board bears a practical burden to make and
support its case: Australian Postal Commission v Hayes
[1989] FCA 176
34. The Tribunal’s obligation is to reach the “correct and
preferable” decision in all the circumstances of the
case: Bushell v
Repatriation Commission
[1992] HCA 47
(1992) 175 CLR 408
at 425 per Brennan J.
Accordingly the Tribunal must determine whether the Board, as the decision maker
in this case, has discharged
its duty by arriving at the correct or preferable
determination. If it is determined by the Tribunal the Board has not discharged
that duty then I must substitute my decision for that of the decision maker
given the Tribunal’s role is as a substitute decision
Tribunal has jurisdiction when a “matter” is referred to it under
s28(2). In this case Mr Harding filed his referral
dated 31 October 2017 on 1
November 2017 pursuant to s28(2)(a).
36. The matter which Mr Harding referred
to the Tribunal is the Board’s determination under s28(1)(b) of the Act to
pay scheduled benefits in the form of disability benefits under Part 6
and specifically those benefits which are payable pursuant
to clause 5 of Part
6. Those benefits claimed are in respect of attendant care and domestic
services provided gratuitously to Grace
by Mr Harding in respect of her injury
suffered on 14 April 2005 during the periods mentioned in paragraphs 9(e) and
37. As to the term “matter” in s28(2) that has been
given a very wide meaning. In Motor Accidents Insurance Board v Korajzl
, Underwood J, as he then was, said the following as to the meaning of
appellant was aggrieved by the Board’s determination to stop payments of a
self employed person’s allowance.
‘The matter’ that he
referred to the Tribunal was that determination. Although the terms of the
condition precedent
to the entitlement becoming payable changed with the lapse
of time after the occurrence of the injury, the matter put in issue by
Board’s refusal to pay was the entitlement to payment of an employed
person’s allowance. This was ‘the matter’
referred to the
Tribunal. The meaning of the word ‘matter’ in this statutory
context is very similar to its meaning
Workers Compensation Act 1988
There it has been given the widest possible construction. I venture to repeat
part of that which I wrote in
Atkinson v Nipper Cleaning Services Pty Ltd
trading as Burrell Hy-Tech Cleaning Service
‘Whilst it is trite to say that words must be construed in their
statutory context, ‘matter’ is a word that has
consistently been
given a wide meaning. With respect to its use in the
Constitution
‘all matters between States’ – Griffith CJ said in South
Australia v Victoria
[1911] HCA 17
(1910-1911) 12 CLR 667
at 675: 'The word
‘matters’ was in 1900 in common use as the widest term to denote
controversies which might come before
a Court of Justice.' With respect to the
extent of the jurisdiction of the High Court to issue a writ of mandamus or
prohibition
the words, 'all matters' in the
Constitution
, have also been
given the widest construction. See R v Drake-Brockman Ex parte Natural Oil Pty
[1943] HCA 35
(1943-44) 68 CLR 51
at 57-58; Adamson v West
Perth Football Club Incorporated and Ors
[1979] FCA 81
(1979-80) 27 ALR 475
at 498. In Goscombe v
Cadbury Schweppes Pty Ltd as yet unreported A23/1993, Zeeman J held that 'the
included an inquiry as to the correctness of the facts and
opinions in a medical certificate relied upon as the basis for terminating
weekly payment. At 12 he cited a passage from the judgment of Brennan J in W A
Pines Pty Ltd v Bannerman
[1980] FCA 79
(1979-1980) 30 ALR 559
at 565 that dealt with the
meaning of 'matter' in the Trade Practices Act, s155(1). Part of the passage
cited read: '"Matter", said
Franki and Northrop JJ in Melbourne Home of Ford Pty
Ltd v Trade Practices Commission
[1979] FCA 15
(1979) 5 TPC 26
at 47 ... ‘is to be
construed in its ordinary sense of an affair or a thing.’ It refers to a
body of facts, a body of
facts which ‘constitute’ or ‘may
constitute’ a contravention’.’
[10] The same approach should be taken to the word ‘matter’ as
enacted in the Act, s28(2) so as to confer jurisdiction
on the Tribunal to deal
with all matters relating to the issue referred to it, including entitlement to
payment up to the date of
the Tribunal's
38. Therefore although Mr Harding’s referral did not
stipulate to whom the entitlement to the disability benefits was to be
matter which he referred to the Tribunal was his daughter’s entitlement to
payment of the disability benefits up
to the date of the Tribunal’s
decision and all matters relating to that issue. In my view this must,
following Motor Accidents
Insurance Board v Korajzl (supra) include to whom the
disability benefits are to be paid.
39. Insofar as the payment of medical
benefits under Part 2 of the Schedule to the Regulations is concerned, they
became payable when
a person suffers personal injury resulting directly from a
motor accident and medical expenses are reasonably and necessarily incurred
the person for the provision of treatment required as a result of the injury.
In those circumstances the medical benefits would
be payable to that
40. Insofar as funeral benefits under Part 3 of the Schedule are
concerned, they are payable if they are reasonably incurred. Part
direct to whom the benefits are to be paid. Those expenses might be incurred by
a deceased estate or by a family member
and in those circumstances could be paid
to either the estate or the family member. I recall from my days in practise
would often pay the funeral home direct on the presentation of the
41. In the case of death benefits payable under Part 4 of the
Schedule they are payable to the dependants of the deceased in accordance
clause 1(4) and insofar as a dependent child under the age of 18 years is
concerned, clause 1(4)(c) provides those benefits
are payable to the Public
Trustee on behalf of that child.
42. An entitlement to an employed
person’s allowance, a self-employed person’s allowance or a
housekeeping allowance payable
under Part 5 of the Schedule arises if the
injured person satisfies the tests in clauses 2, 3 and 4 of Part 5. Although
Part 5 does
not stipulate to whom the benefits are to be paid the inference and
practice of the Board is to pay the benefits to the injured person.
can be said of disability benefits payable under Part 6.
43. Family members
are entitled to receive payment for the expenses reasonably incurred by or on
behalf of that family member for
counselling services under Part
44. Accordingly, it follows if Grace is entitled to benefits under clause
5 of Part 6 of the Regulations then they are payable to
her, however that does
not resolve the question of to whom they are to be paid because during the
periods which this benefit is claimed,
Grace was an infant.
45. Because Grace
was an infant during the entire period covered by the referral, whether the
benefits are payable to the Public Trustee
or Mr Harding is to be determined in
accordance with s25.
46. The opening words of
require that section to be read subject to s25(1B). Section 25(1) goes on to
say when a scheduled benefit becomes payable to an
infant, that benefit is to be
paid to the Public Trustee to be held on trust for that infant unless the
Supreme Court orders otherwise.
The expenses incurred by the Public Trustee in
carrying out the trust and any fees or other charges payable to the Public
in respect of the trust are to be paid by the Board: see s25(3). If a
party seeks an order that the scheduled benefit which becomes
payable to an
infant is to be paid otherwise than to the Public Trustee, then s25(1A) provides
that an application seeking such an
order can be made to the Supreme Court which
is supported by an affidavit.
47. By virtue of s25(1B) if the scheduled
benefit is “a periodical allowance” for the maintenance of Grace
then that allowance
may be paid to Mr Harding given he has lawful custody or
control of her. It is clear no order of the Supreme Court is required in
circumstances given s25(1) is expressly subject to s25(1B). If the benefits
payable to Grace are not “a periodical allowance
maintenance then s25(1) applies unless the Supreme Court orders otherwise.
Accordingly, whether s25(1) or s25(1B)
applies in this case; i.e. to whom the
periodical allowance is to be paid is part of the “matter” referred
to the Tribunal
under s28(2)(a) of the Act.
48. Although a lump sum has been
agreed for the period between 26 June 2010 and 31 March 2019, that lump sum is
based upon a yearly
figure which is in turn based upon a compromise of the
appropriate hourly and weekly requirements for Grace’s domestic and
attendant care recommended by the occupational therapist retained by Mr Harding
and the occupational therapist retained by the Board.
It represents a lump sum
for the payment of a benefit that, given Mr Harding’s statement, was
provided periodically and would,
save for the Board’s initial
determination of 13 October 2017, have ordinarily been paid on a periodical
basis. I say this
because, in my experience in acting for and against the Board
for over 25 years prior to taking up my current role, disability allowances
payable under Part 5, payments made to third party providers such as Anglicare
for the provision of attendant care payable under
clause 3 of Part 6 or to a
third party for domestic services payable under clause 4 of Part 6 and for
gratuitous services provided
by a family member under clause 5 of Part 6 were
ordinarily paid on a fortnightly basis.
49. It is clear from the agreed facts
the lump sum does not constitute the redemption of a liability to continue to
make future payments
and therefore s28A of the Act which provides for the
redemption of periodical payments is not relevant in this case.
50. Counsel
for the Board has submitted that any reference in the Act or the Regulations to
periodical allowances is limited to allowances
falling within Part 5 and that
disability benefits payable under Part 6 cannot be periodical allowances and
that is the effect of
the decision of Motor Accidents Insurance Board v Korajzl
(supra) at [9]. I disagree. If one reads that decision carefully there
nothing in it or in paragraph 9 that supports that proposition. The Court in
Motor Accidents Insurance Board v Korajzl (supra)
would not have contemplated
the difference between disability allowances and disability benefits given Part
6 of the Schedule to
the Regulations which provides for disability benefits was
not introduced until
There is no authority other than Motor Accidents Insurance Board v Korajzl
(supra) which the Board cites in support for this argument.
If one considers
the relevant provisions of the Act and Regulations it is clear the term
“benefit” and the term “allowance”
interchangeably and/or inclusively. The clearest example which shows the
Board’s submission, that a disability “benefit”
“allowance”, is incorrect appears in s23(1) which commences with the
words “The Board must pay the benefits
prescribed by the Regulations
if...” It cannot be the case the Board has no liability under s23(1) to
pay anything at all
under Part 5 of the Schedule because there is no mention in
s23(1) of “allowances”. Similarly s2 of the Act defines
“scheduled benefits” not “scheduled benefits and
allowances” and the definition of “scheduled benefits”
is “the benefits specified in the Regulations”, not “the
benefits and allowances specified in the Regulations”.
51. In addition
clause 6(2) in Part 6 of the current
Regulations
benefits payable under clause 5 in respect of services provided gratuitously in
a way that plainly contemplates there will
be a periodic liability. It imposes
a limit on “the total amount payable under clause 5” that is to be
calculated by
reference to “the total daily or weekly expenses
payable” if the person was being provided with those services in available
purpose-group accommodation.
52. In my view there is no magic in the word
“periodical” in s25(1B); it simply means insofar as payment is
that it occurs at regularly occurring intervals. I am in no doubt
that if these services were being provided commercially by one
Board’s contracted attendant care providers rather than gratuitously the
benefits payable in respect of the expenses
incurred for the provision of those
services would be paid pursuant to clauses 3 and 4 in Part 6 on a periodical
basis; that is not
in a lump sum long after those services were
53. The only reason there is a lump sum payment in this case in
respect of the disability benefits payable to Grace up until 31 March
clause 5 of Part 6, rather than those benefits being paid periodically during
the periods for which it is now agreed they
were payable, is the Board’s
delay in accepting the claim for gratuitous care.
54. The issue this Tribunal
has been asked to determine, which in my view given the reasoning in paragraphs
37 and 38 it has jurisdiction
to determine, is not about the lump sum but it is
periodically,
liability for which has now been amortised in the agreed lump
55. Section 25(1B) refers not merely to an “allowance” but
to a “periodical allowance for the maintenance of an
(emphasis added). “Maintenance” has a well understood meaning in a
legal context and extends beyond the
provision of money
In this context the “allowance” is the sum of money payable by way
of a scheduled benefit and “maintenance”
refers to the non-monetary
benefit secured by the payable benefit.
56. The only benefits that are
payable under the Schedule, by virtue of s23(1) of the Act and r8 of the 2000
Regulations or r9 of
the 2010 Regulations, that clearly fall within the
description of “maintenance” are those payable under Part 6. Some
of the benefits payable under Part 2, for example some of the medical benefits,
could be described as “maintenance”
but nothing that is payable
under any other part of the Schedule could, in my opinion, be described as
“for the maintenance
of” a person to whom they are payable. In
addition some of the benefits payable under Part 6 might not properly be
as “maintenance” nor are they likely to be payable
periodically, e.g. see clause 1 which deals with prostheses and other
appliances. However, attendant care under clause 3 and domestic services under
clause 4 in my view amount to “maintenance”.
57. Accordingly if
the benefits are paid in the manner in which the legislation contemplates they
would ordinarily be paid, and are
calculated in the way that clause 6(2)
requires, then the benefits payable under clause 5 in Part 6 for attendant care
and domestic
services provided gratuitously for an infant who requires daily
care fall within the description of “periodical allowance for
maintenance of an infant” in s25(1B).
58. In my view then, the Tribunal
does have jurisdiction to determine that pursuant to s25(1B) the benefits that
are now payable under
clause 5 in Part 6 may be paid to Mr Harding because what
is now payable is the amortisation of a periodical allowance for which
is accepted as having been for the maintenance of Grace.
59. Section 25(1B)
permits the payment of the benefit to the guardian, Mr Harding, but that does
not involve any determination about
the proper exercise of a discretion. The
issue depends entirely on whether the payment that will be made involves the
“a periodical allowance for the maintenance of” Grace.
If it does not then s25(1) requires payment to the Public Trustee
whereas if it
does s25(1B) enables payment instead to Mr Harding.
60. There is no
discretion in s25(1B). That provision is enabling or facultative rather than
discretionary. It needs to be read
in context. It provides an exception to the
mandatory obligation imposed by s25(1) where the circumstances are as described
in 25(1B). The use of the word “may” is to enable payment to
be made otherwise than in accordance with s25(1) where
the relevant
circumstances exist because otherwise payment must be made in accordance with
s25(1). It does not create a discretion
to pay otherwise than in accordance
with s25(1). It is to release the Board from the obligation imposed by s25(1)
in specified circumstances.
In support of this view it is significant that
“may” in s25(1B) is not accompanied by words such as “if the
thinks fit...” or “the Board may in its
discretion...”
61. Section 10A(1)(c) of the Acts Interpretation Act
which provides “may” is to be construed as being discretionary or
enabling, as the context requires, does not apply by virtue of s10A(2), however
that provision reflects the common law in any event.
It therefore follows that
the words in s25(1) “unless the Supreme Court otherwise orders” are
not relevant to the operation
of s25(1B). Those words operate only within the
context in which they appear in s25(1). They give the Supreme Court the power
order a payment be made otherwise than to the Public Trustee where s25(1)
otherwise requires that. This is a very broad discretion
which it seems, given
s25(1A), can be invoked and exercised in a summary way. Section 25(1B), on the
other hand, enables payment
to be made to a guardian notwithstanding s25(1)
given that s25(1) is confined by the opening words therein; i.e. that it is
to s25(1B). Those opening words operate entirely separately from the
words “unless the Supreme Court otherwise orders”
but they also
qualify those words. In addition even the Supreme Court’s jurisdiction to
order that payment be made otherwise
than strictly in accordance with s25(1) is
“subject to subsection (1B)”. Those words mean that where the
precondition
specified in s25(1B) exists, the requirement in s25(1) is
displaced; that is it has no work to do and payment to Mr Harding is permitted
with no order from the Supreme Court being required.
Disposition
62. While considering the written submissions of the parties I
note Grace turned 18 years of age in June this year. While any further
for benefits under Part 6 of the Regulations will have to be made by a guardian
or administrator appointed under the Guardianship
& Administration Act 1995,
the claim which is the subject of this referral seeks a determination with
respect to a state of affairs
as at 31 March 2019 for gratuitous care provided
up until that time while Grace was an infant. The fact Grace has turned 18
of age since then has no bearing on my determination.
63. Accordingly
the Tribunal has jurisdiction to determine who the agreed sum is to be paid to
and for the reasons set out above it
is determined the agreed sum is to be paid
by the Board to Mr Harding. I will make an order in those terms. It will also be
the Board is to pay Mr Harding’s costs of and incidental to this
CHAIRPERSON
These are the
Regulations in force at the time of Grace’s accident.
Pursuant to s23 of the
Pursuant to s2(5) of the
The text of 25 is set out
in paragraph 20.
See paragraph
Accidents(Liabilities and Compensation) Regulations 2010
Kallin v Kallin
[1944] SAStRp 31
[1944] SASR 73
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (211 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter