URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMC/2025/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Director of Public Prosecutions v Rosemary Gamble T/A Taz-Zorb [2025] TASMC 3 (6 June 2025)
[2025] TASMC 3
: MAGISTRATES COURT OF TASMANIA
Director of Public Prosecutions v Rosemary Gamble T/A
[2025] TASMC
DIRECTOR of
PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
ROSEMARY GAMBLE t/as TAZ-ZORB
DELIVERED ON:
6 June 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
5-8, 11-15, 18 November 2024 and 17 February
DECISION OF:
Magistrate R Webster
Work, health and safety legislation – Duties and offences
Health and Safety Act
2012 (Tas) (
Failure to comply with health and safety duty - Wind event – Risk of death
or serious injury - s19(2)
– whether defendant in
conducting a business ensured, so far as was reasonably practicable, the health
and safety of other
persons was not put at risk from the operation of the
business, s17
– Management of risks - s18
– What is reasonably practicable in ensuring health and
Work Health and Safety Act
2012(Tas), ss 17, 18, 19, 32.
Saunders Civilbuild Pty Ltd v SafeWork New South Wales
[2023] NSWCCA
Whittaker v Northern Beaches Council (No 3)
[2018] NSWLEC 143
Bulga Underground Operations Pty Ltd v Nash
[2016] NSWCCA 37
, 93 NSWLR 338;
Simpson Design
Associates Pty Ltd v Industrial Court of New South Wales
[2011] NSWCA 316
, 213 A Crim R 340
Resource Pacific Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2018] NSWSC 45
Baiada Poultry Pty Ltd
v The Queen
[2012] HCA 14
Laing O'Rourke (BMC) Pty Ltd v
[2011] WASCA 117
Kent v Gunns Ltd
[2009] TASSC 30
MR & RC Smith Pty Ltd t/as Ultra Tune (Osborne Park) v Wyatt
[2012] WASCA 110
Director of Public Prosecutions v JCS
Fabrications Pty Ltd and JMAL Group Pty Ltd
[2019] VSCA 50
[2000] VSCA 16
R v AN; R v LM
[2022] NSWSC 776
(2002) 187 ALR 233
[2002] HCA 4
Ussher-Clarke v R
[2018] NSWCCA 61
National Foods Milk
Ltd v Smith
[2006] TASSC 24
Chugg v Pacific Dunlop Ltd
[1990] HCA 41
(1991) 170 CLR 249
Chugg v Pacific
Dunlop Ltd (No 2)
[1993] 3 VR 934 at 940 – 945;
Australian Char Pty Ltd
[1999] 3 VR 834
Lurgi (Australia) Pty Limited
[2001] HCA 6
(2001) 205 CLR 304
Dinko Tuna Farmers v
[2007] SASC 166
(2007) 98 SASR 96
Wyong Shire Council v Shirt
[1980] HCA 12
Tenix Defence Pty Ltd v MacCarron
[2002] WASCA 165
REPRESENTATION
Prosecution:
: C Dockray
Solicitors:
Prosecution:
Director of Public
Prosecutions
: Clyde and Co
Decision Number:
[2025] TASMC 3
Number of paragraphs:
Table of Contents
Expert Evidence: Dr
Earl-Jones..................................................................................................................30
Serial No: 3/2005
File No: 91520
DIRECTOR of PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS v ROSEMARY GAMBLE t/as
REASONS FOR DECISION WEBSTER, R
6 June 2025
INTRODUCTION
Thursday 16 December 2021, students and staff of Hillcrest Primary School (the
School), situated at 5 Lawrence Drive Devonport,
were celebrating the end of the
school year with an activities day called the “Big Day In”. The Big
Day In was held at
the School with various activities split between four
separate zones at the School, with students rotating through the activities
the course of the day. One of the zones was on the School oval. A teacher at the
School had engaged the defendant, Rosemary
Gamble (Ms Gamble), to provide and
operate an inflatable jumping castle and zorb balls together with an inflatable
border (the zorb
ball arena) which was used to contain the zorb balls when in
use. Ms Gamble was assisted in the operation of the inflatable devices
Big Day In on the School Oval by Robert Monte and Jesse Barrett.
jumping castle had been inflated and pegged down to the ground in four places.
The jumping castle was connected to a yellow fan
(the blower) which was used to
inflate the jumping castle. The blower was plugged into a power socket in a
nearby classroom using
an extension cord. In addition to the jumping castle, Ms
Gamble provided four zorb balls, which were contained inside an inflatable
ball arena or barrier which was inflated and not connected to a blower. The zorb
ball arena was pegged down in six places. The
defendant also set up a three
metre by three metre gazebo between the jumping castle and zorb ball arena, to
sit under and use as
a workstation. This was secured by four pegs. At the time
the inflatable devices and the gazebo were setup, it was calm and sunny,
was no wind, just dry heat, with perhaps the slightest breeze.
approximately 10:00am witnesses describe a strong wind which came out of
nowhere. The prosecution case is that at this time, three
students, namely JW,
DB and AP, were in zorb balls in the zorb ball arena. The fourth ball, a purple
one, was being repaired by Mr
Monte and it was ripped out of his hands by the
wind. The three balls containing the students were lifted into the air. The pink
zorb ball containing DB landed heavily near the soccer goals, JW’s zorb
ball landed on the western side of the oval and AP
was assisted out of her zorb
ball by friends. At the same time, Jye Sheehan, Jalailah Jones, Zane Mellor,
Chace Harrison, Peter Dodt,
LR and BM were on the jumping castle when it was
lifted into the air by the wind. BM fell from the slide of the jumping castle as
it became airborne. Master Sheehan fell from the jumping castle shortly
afterwards, and the remaining children were carried on the
jumping castle by the
wind to the eastern side of the oval where the castle landed. In addition, the
prosecution allege Addison Stewart
was lined up to take a turn on the zorb balls
when the jumping castle became airborne. As that occurred the blower attached to
jumping castle was also lifted and it hit her in the head. Tragically six
children died in this incident and others suffered serious
injuries to varying
degrees (the incident).
to the commencement of the hearing, I conducted a view at the School Oval and of
the jumping castle, zorb ball arena, zorb balls
and blower on 4 November
PROSECUTION CASE AND THE DEFENDANT’S POSITION
Gamble has been charged on Complaint 91520/2023 with a failure to comply with a
work, health and safety duty, contrary to s32 of
Work Health and Safety
2012 (the Act). That provision is as follows:
person commits a Category 2 offence if –
(a) the person has a health and safety duty;
(b) the person fails to comply with that duty;
(c) the failure exposes an individual to a risk
of death or serious injury or illness.
Penalty: In the case of –
(a) an offence committed by an individual
(other than as a person conducting a business or undertaking or as an officer of
conducting a business or undertaking), a fine not exceeding
$150 000; or
(b) an offence committed by an individual as
a person conducting a business or undertaking or as an officer of a person
a business or undertaking, a fine not exceeding $300 000;
(c) an offence committed by a body corporate,
a fine not exceeding $1 500 000.”
Parliament has determined the penalty for this offence is a fine. That is
imprisonment is not a sentencing option with respect to
someone who is found
guilty of this offence.
prosecution allege that on 16 December 2021, Ms Gamble was a person conducting a
business or undertaking within the meaning of
the Act. Accordingly, Ms Gamble
owed a duty pursuant to s19(2)
the Act to ensure, so far as is reasonably practical, that the health and safety
of other persons was not put at risk from work
carried out as part of the
conduct of the business or undertaking. It is alleged Ms Gamble failed to comply
with this duty and exposed
individuals to a risk of serious injury or
particulars set out in the Complaint are as
(a) At all material times Ms Gamble operated a business trading as Taz –
(b) At all material times Ms Gamble was a person conducting a business or
undertaking within the meaning of the Act who owed health
and safety duties to
ensure that others were not put at risk from work carried out as part of the
conduct of the business or undertaking.
(c) At all material times Ms Gamble operated a business or undertaking that
provided inflatable amusement devices for hire.
(d) At all material times Ms Gamble was engaged by the Crown in right of
Tasmania (Department of Education) to operate inflatable
amusement devices at
Hillcrest Primary School for the end of school year celebrations.
(e) On 16 December 2021 Ms Gamble and two workers arrived at Hillcrest Primary
School and set up the inflatable amusement devices,
comprising an inflatable
jumping castle model number E2 – 030 Crayon jumping castle
“inflatable jumping castle”,
zorb balls and a zorb ball arena.
(f) The inflatable jumping castle was inflated by an electric blower which was
attached to the device and provided continuous airflow
in order for the device
to remain inflated.
(g) The inflatable jumping castle had eight anchorage points to secure the
device to the ground.
(h) The inflatable jumping castle was tethered to the ground using pegs at four
of the anchorage points.
(i) Students of Hillcrest Primary School were allowed to take turns to play on
the inflatable jumping castle.
(j) At approximately 10:00am on 16 December 2021 seven students were on the
inflatable jumping castle when a significant weather
event occurred which lifted
the inflatable jumping castle causing it to become dislodged from the anchorage
points and to become
airborne. Students playing on the inflatable jumping castle
were carried on the device and lifted into the air by the wind.
(k) Students fell from the inflatable jumping castle and suffered serious
injury and/or death. Further, the blower was lifted from
its position and hit a
student in the vicinity of the inflatable jumping castle.
giving rise
the risk, was the failure of the anchorage system to anchor the inflatable
device to the ground.
arising out of
the said hazard was the risk of death or serious injury associated with falls
from height and/or being struck by the
inflatable device or any part attached
thereto, due to the inflatable device becoming dislodged from the anchorage
points and becoming
(n) Ms Gamble failed, so far as was reasonably practicable to ensure the health
and safety of other persons was not put at risk
from work carried out as part of
the conduct of the business or undertaking, in that she failed to:
the provision and maintenance of safe systems of work, in that Ms Gamble failed
to ensure that the anchorage system was sufficient
to prevent lift of the
inflatable device, in that she failed to do one or more of the following;
(i) Failed to ensure a peg was installed at each of the anchorage points on the
inflatable jumping castle, in accordance with the
manufacturer’s
instructions; and/or
(ii) Failed to ensure that each face of the inflatable jumping castle was
secured by installing pegs at each anchorage point; and/or
(iii) Failed to use the pegs recommended by the manufacturer for use on the
inflatable jumping castle or a suitable alternative
as recommended by a
competent person; and/or
(v) Having departed from the manufacturer’s recommendation to install
pegs at each of the anchorage points, did not engage
a competent person to
recommend a suitable alternative anchorage system and implement that
recommendation and/or
(vi) Having departed from the manufacturer’s recommendation to install the
manufacturer’s pegs, did not engage a competent
person to recommend a
suitable alternative anchorage system and implement that recommendation; and/or
(viii) failed to use a continuous wind monitoring anemometer; and/or
(ix) failed to apply the controls that had been identified in previous risk
assessments, namely the use of star
the safe use, handling and storage of plant, structures and substances; in that
Ms Gamble failed to do one or more of the
Particulars
(i)-(ix) listed under a. were repeated under
the provision of any information, training, instruction or supervision that is
necessary to protect all persons from risks
to their health and safety arising
from work carried out as part of the conduct of the business or undertaking in
that Ms Gamble
failed to do one or more of the following:
(i) Failed to provide the workers with information including the
manufacturer’s operating manual for the inflatable jumping
castle; and/or
(ii) Failed to provide the workers with training and instruction in accordance
with the manufacturer’s operating manual for
the inflatable jumping
castle, including the requirement to use each of the anchorage points; and/or
(iii) Failed to provide the workers with training and instruction in accordance
with the manufacturer’s operating manual for
the inflatable jumping
castle, including the requirement to use the manufacturer’s pegs;
(iv) Failed to provide workers with adequate supervision during the set up of
the inflatable jumping castle.
Contrary to s19(3)(c), (d) and (f) of the Act.
(o) The measures referred to above were reasonably practical because:
(i) The manufacturer’s instructions were available to be downloaded and
clearly stated that all anchorage points were to
(ii) The manufacturer’s instructions were available and clearly stated
the requirements of the retention pegs;
(iii) The manufacturer supplied retention pegs that accorded with their own
manufacturer’s requirements;
(iv) Ms Gamble had a sufficient number of pegs available to her to use at each
of the anchorage points;
(v) A suitable alternative to the retention pegs, in the form of star pickets
were available on site for use;
(vi) Weather monitoring devices or anemometers had been used in the past and
were available commercially;
(vii) A competent person could be engaged to provide advice about suitable
alternative anchorage systems;
(viii) The manual contained illustrations of how the pegs should be inserted
into the ground.
(p) Ms Gamble’s failure to take the steps particularised in paragraph
(n) either individually or in combination exposed others
to the risk of serious
injury and/or death.
summary the prosecution says Ms Gamble owed a health and safety duty to others
to ensure that the jumping castle was securely tethered
to the ground, and that
the anchorage system did not fail.
The risk being, that if the anchorage system failed and the jumping castle
became airborne, that those playing on the jumping castle
might suffer serious
injury or death, from falls from height, or from being struck by the device
itself, or any part attached to
it. The prosecution alleges Ms Gamble failed to
discharge her duty to eliminate or mitigate the risks to health and safety, so
as was reasonably practical, by failing to implement the measures
particularised in paragraph (n), that those measures were reasonably
practicable
because of the matters pleaded in paragraph (o) and her failure to implement
those measures either individually or in
combination exposed others to the risk
of serious injury and/or death as pleaded in paragraph
order to prove the charge the prosecution must therefore establish, beyond
reasonable doubt
(a) Ms Gamble had a health and safety duty: s32(a) of the
(b) She failed to comply with that duty on 16 December 2021: s32(b) of
the Act, which requires proof, by reference to s19, that;
(i) she was conducting a business or undertaking at the
relevant time;
(ii) there was a risk to health and safety arising from the
conduct of that business or undertaking;
(iii) she failed to take the steps
particularised in the Complaint at paragraph (n) a, b and c contrary to
s19(3)(c), (d) and (f)
of the Act; and
(iv) it was reasonably practicable for
her to have taken those steps as pleaded in paragraph (o) of the Complaint;
(c) Ms Gamble’s alleged failure exposed individuals to a
risk of death or serious injury as pleaded in paragraph (p) of the
s32(c) of the Act.
Gamble’s position with respect to paragraph 9 is she:
(a) admits she had a health and safety duty to those present:
s32(a) of the Act;
(b) denies she failed to comply with that duty, asserting
that she took all reasonable steps to discharge that duty: s32(b) and s19;
in doing so she:
(i) admits she was conducting a business or undertaking at the
(ii) admits there was a risk to health and safety arising from the
conduct of that undertaking, but says that the extent or content
of her duty
required her to guard against normal, unusual or unexpected natural phenomena,
which fall within the range of ordinary
human experience, as opposed to the
extraordinary, overwhelming, unpredictable and unprecedented operation of
natural forces, which
fall outside the range of ordinary human experience, and
in particular, in this case, the dust devil;
(iii) says that there were no
reasonable or practicable measures which she could have taken which would have
eliminated or reduced
the hazard giving rise to the
position set out in paragraph 10(b)(iii) was based upon a wider definition of
than that contended by the prosecution which is set out in
paragraph 7(l). Ms Gamble says
should be defined
“The hazard giving rise to the risk, was the failure of
the anchorage system to anchor the inflatable device to the ground due
application of vertical wind force, and in particular the dust
definition was correctly objected to by the prosecution in
submissions
and Mr Dockray SC
conceded in his closing address
this definition was too narrow and that he would be content with a definition of
hazard as set out in paragraph 11 but with the words
particular the dust devil”
omitted. That said, he still contends the
failure of the anchorage system was due to the application of a vertical wind
force as distinct
from a horizontal wind force or wind simpliciter.
the definition in paragraph 11 is too narrow can be appreciated if regard is had
to the guiding principles that relate to the
duties imposed by s19 of the Act.
Saunders Civilbuild Pty Ltd v SafeWork New South Wales
[2023] NSWCCA
Walton J, with whom Beech-Jones CJ (as he then was) and McNaughton J agreed
considered the general principles concerning s19 of the
Act at [154]-[178]. The
relevant principles in summary are:
a) The offence is directed to the
to health and safety and not
dependent on the manifestation of the risk. (see
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Vic) v Vibro-Pile (Aust) Pty Ltd
(2016) 49 VR 676
[2016] VSCA
b) The risk must be identifiable:
Kirk v Industrial Relations Commission of
New South Wales
(2010) 239 CLR 531;
[2010] HCA 1
breach may occur as a consequence of a failure to take a measure that would have
the risk, even if the measure does not entirely
eliminate the risk:
Bulga Underground Operations Pty Ltd v Nash
[2016] NSWCCA 37
Saunders Civilbuild Pty Ltd v SafeWork New South Wales
Walton J observed:
“Thus, it is wrong, in considering
whether a breach occurred to reason from the actual incident causing injury
an approach may lead to a misunderstanding of the real facts on
which a charge is based.” (citing Morrison v Powercoal Pty
[2004] NSWIRComm 297
[161] his Honour adopted the comments of Basten JA in
Unity Pty Ltd v Safe
[2018] NSWCCA 226
which are as
“While prosecutions for breach of occupational
safety laws are rarely, if ever, brought where there has not been a serious
the test of a breach of duty nevertheless remains
prospective
. However, there are different levels of particularity at which
risks can be assessed. Prospectively,
a reasonably broad approach may be
appropriate; by contrast a retrospective analysis of the precise circumstances
of an injury or
fatality may lead to a narrow description of the risk which
materialised
. While an accident may demonstrate the existence of a risk, it
may not demonstrate that the risk was prospectively foreseeable, nor
consequences were necessarily serious; generally the precise circumstances of
the accident should not be relied on to define
the same reasons I also think it is an error for the definition of hazard to
include any reference to vertical wind force as contended
by the defence in
paragraphs 11 and 12. I do however agree with the defence’s submission
that the definition of hazard as framed
in paragraph 7(l)
sufficiently broad so as to constitute, effectively, the failure of the jumping
castle anchorage system for any reason at
all, and in any circumstances, weather
related or not.”
Wilson SC conceded during submissions, quite properly in my view, the risk as
pleaded being the failure of the anchorage system
to anchor the inflatable
device to the ground was inextricably linked to
She submitted the pleaded
hazard was permissible in its current form but to the extent there was any
inadequacy she indicated there
would be no objection to the addition of the word
that is wind
, not dust devils, cyclones, typhoons or
or any reference to
vertical force.
is not defined in the Act. By reference to the ordinary and
natural meaning of the word it is defined by the Macquarie
a risk; exposure to danger or
2..the cause of such a risk; a potential source of harm,
injury, difficulty, etc.”
Whittaker v Northern Beaches Council (No
in the context of a
planning case in the NSW Land and Environment Court, Pepper J said:
“66... it is nevertheless necessary in light of the way in which the
Council put its case to also have regard to the definition
“hazard”. The Macquarie Dictionary (online ed) defines the term as a
exposure to
danger or harm”. The Oxford English
Dictionary (online ed) has a similar definition, viz, ‘a risk of loss or
harm posed by something’
(emphasis added).
adopting the first definition in
paragraph 18 cannot be the correct interpretation as to do so would mean there
is no distinction
between those terms in the Act when it is clear Parliament
intended there would be a distinction between them. It is
“harm posed by something”
, that is the
happening of an event or circumstance, in this case wind
forms a constituent element of the hazard and is therefore a necessary part of
its definition.
therefore determine the hazard giving rise to the risk, in this case, was the
failure of the anchorage system, due to the application
of wind on the jumping
castle, to anchor the jumping castle to the ground.
was no disagreement between the parties as to the characterisation of risk, in
this case, as is particularised in paragraph
7(m); that is the risk arising out
of the hazard was the risk of death or serious injury associated with a fall
from height and/or
being struck by the inflatable device or any part attached
thereto, due to the inflatable device becoming dislodged from the anchorage
points and becoming airborne. I also agree with that characterisation.
regard to the relevant legislative provisions and the wording of the Complaint,
my task is to consider whether I am satisfied
beyond a reasonable
of the following
That Ms Gamble,
as a person conducting a business or undertaking, had a duty to ensure, so far
as was reasonably practicable:
(a) the provision and maintenance of safe systems of work, and
(b) the safe use, handling and storage of plant, structures and substances,
(c) the provision of any information, training, instruction or supervision that
is necessary to protect all persons from risks to
their health and safety
arising from work carried out as part of the conduct of the business or
undertaking: ss19(3)(c) (d), (f)
and 32(a) of the Act;
That Ms Gamble
failed to comply with one or more of those duties in one or more of the respects
alleged in the particulars of the
Complaint: s32(b) of the Act; and
Gamble’s failure or failures exposed children at the School to a risk of
serious injury or death: s32(c) of the Act.
to s32(c) the question is whether any failure or failures by the applicant to
comply with its duties was or were a
"substantial or significant cause"
of the risk of serious injury or death, as distinct from the sole cause of such
Bulga Underground Operations Pty Ltd v Nash
[2016] NSWCCA 37
, 93 NSWLR 338 at
Design Associates Pty Ltd v Industrial Court of New South Wales
[2011] NSWCA 316
213 A Crim R 340
v Resource Pacific Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2018] NSWSC 45
The prosecution must prove a relevant failure on the part of the defendant and a
causal link between the defendant’s acts
or omissions and the consequent
risk to health and safety. Causation is to be viewed in a common sense way.
REASONABLE DOUBT AND THE ONUS OF PROOF
basic principle of the criminal justice system in this country is the
presumption of innocence. This means Ms Gamble is presumed
to be innocent unless
and until the prosecution persuades a magistrate that she is guilty beyond
reasonable doubt. The obligation
or burden to prove Ms Gamble’s guilt is
placed on the prosecution with respect to every element or essential fact that
up the offence with which she has been charged. The burden never shifts to
Ms Gamble and she is not obliged to prove any fact or
issue that is in dispute.
It is not for her to prove her innocence but for the prosecution to prove her
Ms Gamble’s guilt beyond reasonable doubt is the standard of proof the
prosecution must achieve before a magistrate
can convict her. The words
“beyond a reasonable doubt”
are ordinary everyday words which
mean exactly what they say.
Proof of a matter beyond reasonable doubt involves rejection of all reasonable
hypotheses or any reasonable possibility inconsistent
with the prosecution
If there is a reasonable
possibility of some exculpatory factor existing then a magistrate should find in
favour of Ms Gamble. It
is for the prosecution to
“eliminate any
reasonable possibility”
of there being some exculpatory
deciding this case I am only permitted to take into account the evidence that
has been admitted at the hearing. This includes
the answers witnesses have given
to questions while in the witness box and any documents or other exhibits that
have been taken into
evidence. I will not take anything else into account.
Attached and marked “A” is the list of exhibits.
prosecution bears the onus of proof of a breach of duty in s19(2), including the
question as to whether reasonably practicable
precautions were available to
eliminate or reduce the risk.
Baiada Poultry Pty Ltd v The Queen
[2012] HCA 14
Court said at [55]:
“The language of "defences". The parties
persistently, though not universally, spoke of the appellant's "defences".
as Nettle JA recognised in his dissenting judgment, this terminology is
inappropriate. These "defences" were not matters on which
the appellant as the
accused bore any burden of proof, whether legal (ie persuasive) or evidential.
They were not matters which the
appellant as the accused was required to
establish in order to avoid the prosecution's prima facie entitlement to a
conviction. Rather,
they were denials of essential ingredients in the
prosecution's case. They were matters on which the prosecution bore a legal (ie
persuasive) burden of proof beyond reasonable doubt. Thus, in relation to the
first "defence", it was for the prosecution to establish
beyond reasonable doubt
that the appellant did have control, or a right to control, over forklift
traffic management outside broiler
sheds at grower farms. And, in relation to
the second "defence", it was for the prosecution to establish beyond reasonable
that there were reasonably practicable measures open to the appellant
additional to its engagement of subcontractors.”
the WA Court of Appeal, Murphy JA in
Laing O'Rourke (BMC) Pty Ltd v Kirwin
[2011] WASCA 117
“ 37.The prosecution bears the onus of
proving a breach of duty in s19(1), including the question of practicability:
Sons Pty Ltd v Stewart (Unreported, WASC, Library No 8829, 24 April
1991); Chugg v Pacific Dunlop Ltd (260 ‑ 263). A finding
of breach cannot
be based upon speculation. Each element must be proved by evidence: Interstruct
Pty Ltd v Wakelam (110) (Wallace
J, Rowland J agreeing); Ball v Stewart.
72. Senior counsel for the respondent, in
effect, submitted in response that the prosecution did not bear the onus of
proving what,
in the circumstances, it was practicable for the appellant to do.
That submission of the respondent cannot be accepted. The requirement
practicability is an integral part of the employer's duty and is, therefore, an
essential element of the offence which must be
proved by the prosecution beyond
reasonable doubt: Chugg v Pacific Dunlop Ltd; Interstruct Pty Ltd v Wakelam
(110); Ball v Stewart
parties in this case agreed a number of facts pursuant to
section 191
Evidence Act 2001
so that the following facts are not in
The parties
all material times, Ms Gamble:
a) operated a business trading as
Taz-Zorb (ABN 64 344 167 401) (Taz-Zorb); and
b) operated a business of hiring inflatable amusement devices.
Gamble had operated Taz-Zorb as a sole trader since 1 March
Taz-Zorb engagement
4 November 2021, Jamie-Lea Ackerley (Ms Ackerley), on behalf of the Department
of Education contacted Taz-Zorb and arranged for
the supply and operation of
inflatable amusement devices, including a jumping castle and zorb balls at the
Hillcrest Primary School
(the School) located at 5 Lawrence Drive, Devonport,
for the end of school year celebrations known as the ‘Big Day In’
held on 16 December 2021 (the Big Day In).
was engaged to operate inflatable amusement devices as part of the Oval
activities.
16 December 2021 (Incident Date), Taz-Zorb supplied and operated the following
amusement devices and associated devices at the
a) One (1) inflatable jumping castle model number E2-030 Crayon jumping castle
(the jumping castle). The jumping castle was:
the shape of a crayon and had a slide for participants to play on or exit the
jumping castle;
approximately
five (5) metres in length, five (5) metres in width and five (5) metres in
height; and
eight (8) anchorage points.
b) Four (4) inflatable zorb balls (zorb balls) and one (1) inflatable zorb ball
arena (zorb ball arena).
zorb ball was:
identifiable
by different colours: purple, red, green and pink; and
and weighed approximately 45.3kg to 45.8kg without any participant
zorb ball arena was:
and weighed approximately 82.5kg; and
42 metres in length and was approximately 800mm in height.
(Collectively referred to as “Amusement Devices”).
gazebo, anchorage pegs, electric blowers, tools and all other items used to
erect, anchor and operate the Amusement Devices.
volunteers, Robert Monte (Mr Monte) and Jesse Barrett (Mr Barrett) attended the
School for the Big Day In with Ms Gamble. Mr Monte
and Mr Barrett assisted with
the set-up, operation and supervision of the Amusement Devices for
The set-up of amusement devices
to the Incident Date, Taz-Zorb had been engaged and attended the School for end
of year celebrations in 2020. At that time,
Taz-Zorb set-up a jumping castle on
the School oval in a location as directed by Ms Ackerley. Ms Ackerley directed
Taz- Zorb to set
up the Jumping Castle on a flat section of the School
oval at the School is located on the eastern side of the School. The Amusement
Devices were set up on a flat surface approximately
three (3) to four (4) metres
from the hill on the School oval.
was one (1) gazebo set up between the Amusement Devices. Exhibit P2 is an aerial
(photoshopped) photograph showing the position
of the jumping castle and zorb
ball barrier prior to the wind event. Exhibit P3 is a video taken of the set up
on the morning of
the Incident Date prior to the incident.
5/6 teacher Gaye Kelly (Ms Kelly) provided Mr Monte with an outlet to connect
the extension cord to the jumping castle blower
to inflate it. Otherwise, no
employee or teacher employed at the School provided direction, assistance or
supervision during the
set-up of the Amusement Devices on the Incident
Ackerley had no involvement and was not present on the oval during the set-up of
the Amusement Devices on the Incident Date.
the Incident Date Taz-Zorb set-up the Amusement Devices on the School oval in a
location it had been directed to set-up during
a previous event at the
Jumping castle
the Incident Date:
a) Taz-Zorb commenced the setup of the jumping castle at 8:10am.
b) Mr Monte inflated the jumping castle.
c) The jumping castle was tethered to the ground with metal anchorage pegs
hammered down through the D-rings connected to the jumping
d) Two (2) anchorage pegs were inserted before inflating the jumping castle to
put it in position, and then two (2) anchorage pegs
were hammered in after the
jumping castle was inflated.
e) In total, four (4) anchorage pegs were hammered through the D-rings in the
corners of the jumping castle.
f) Mr Monte hammered in two (2) anchorage pegs on the left sided corners of the
jumping castle and Mr Barrett hammered in the other
two (2) anchorage pegs on
the right sided corners of the jumping castle.
g) The four (4) anchorage pegs were hammered into the ground until they reached
the point where their tops were flush to the ground.
h) The jumping castle was then deflated until the students were ready to use
Gamble checked the four (4) anchorage pegs after Mr Monte and Mr Barrett had
installed the pegs on the Jumping Castle.
and Zorb Ball Arena
the Incident Date:
a) Mr Barrett repaired the red zorb ball in the morning prior to the
b) The purple, red, green, and pink zorb balls were in use.
c) Mr Monte inflated the zorb balls and zorb ball arena.
d) The zorb ball arena was anchored into the School oval using anchorage pegs
inserted into D-rings which were attached to one (1)
to two (2) bungee cords.
e) Mr Monte and Mr Barrett anchored the zorb ball arena using six (6) anchorage
f) Mr Barrett hammered in four (4) anchorage pegs to secure the zorb ball arena.
Mr Monte hammered in two (2) anchorage pegs to secure
the zorb ball arena.
g) The zorb ball arena was anchored using anchorage pegs supplied by
h) The anchorage pegs were hammered at a 10-degree
until the top of the
anchorage pegs were flush with the ground.
Gamble inspected the anchorage pegs after Mr Monte and Mr Barrett had completed
anchoring the zorb ball arena.
Operation of the
Amusement Devices
Jumping castle
the Incident Date:
a) Ms Gamble supervised and directed students using the jumping castle.
b) Prior to using the jumping castle, students were required to remove their
c) Students were permitted entry and play time in the jumping castle for five
(5) minutes at a time.
Zorb balls and zorb ball arena
the Incident Date:
a) Mr Monte supervised and directed students of the School while using the zorb
balls and zorb ball arena.
b) One student could use one zorb ball at any one time.
c) Students were only allowed to participate in the zorb balls for three (3)
minutes at any one time due to the heat.
d) The zorb ball arena was hit by the zorb balls while in use and did not move.
the Incident Date, Mr Barrett assisted with all Amusement Devices where
Principal, Mr Jerome Pape (Mr Pape), was allocated the task of supervising
students on the oval.
Weather and wind event
weather on the Incident Date was described by witnesses as “
beautiful day
” prior to the incident.
approximately 10:00am witnesses at the School described a
happened out of nowhere. No warning or
nothing. It was just instant wind
”. It has also been described by
witnesses as “
two gusts of wind, um going towards each other and formed
” (collectively referred to as the “Wind
change in the wind conditions on the Incident Date that occurred around 10:00am
was not forecast by the Bureau of Meteorology.
approximately 10:00am, the Wind Event occurred and the Amusement Devices became
Jumping Castle was carried approximately 62 metres across the School Oval, as
determined by using a Lufkin measuring wheel.
number of students were either hit by or carried in or on the Amusement Devices
and were injured or died.
The aftermath
Tasmania, Tasmania Police, and employees/volunteers of the School provided
medical and emergency services to the students
involved in the incident on the
School oval and down an embankment beside the oval. Students of the School were
directed by employees
of the School to classrooms.
Joseph Pawlasty, Duty Manager of Ambulance Tasmania (Mr Pawlasty), was first
called around 10:04am regarding the incident at the
School. Mr Pawlasty:
a) Arrived at the scene at 10:09am.
b) Observed there was at least one (1) ambulance car, and two (2) or three (3)
ambulance vehicles on site.
c) Observed multiple people on the ground and observed that there were
ambulance staff concentrated at two sites, at the northern
and southern side of
the School oval.
d) Coordinated the medical response and arranged, inter alia, transport for the
injured children to hospital, allocating Ambulance
Tasmania resources and
supporting Tasmania Police resources. Two helicopters were despatched, and he
requested that one of those
be sent directly to the scene.
e) Left the scene at 12:50pm after all other Ambulance Tasmania resources had
left the site.
John King arrived at the School at 10:21am. He observed two children on the
western side of the oval being attended to by
police and ambulance officers.
These children were Addison Stewart and Jye Sheehan. He also observed a male
child lying on the northeast
side of the oval near the soccer goal posts being
attended to by two police officers; this was DB. He further observed five
on the eastern side of the oval down an embankment.
a result of the investigations carried out and photographic evidence taken in
this matter, an aerial plan of the oval and the approximate
positions of the
children was prepared by First Class Constable M Johnston. Exhibit P4
the aerial plan showing the approximate positions of the
Students involved in the incident
the Incident Date, at approximately 10:00am, there were:
a) Approximately six (6) students from the School situated on or around the
jumping castle;
b) Approximately three (3) or four (4) students from the School situated on or
around the zorb balls; and
c) At least one student from the School situated near the entrance to the zorb
ball arena.
(collectively referred to as “Incident Location”).
students of the School in the Incident Location were:
a) Peter Anthony Dodt;
b) Jalailah Jane-Maree Jones;
c) Zane Mellor;
d) Jye Sheehan;
g) Chace Craig Harrison;
k) Addison Stewart.
Fatalities and injuries
a consequence of the Wind Event/incident, the following fatalities occurred:
a) Peter Anthony Dodt (DOB 22 August 2009), who died at the Launceston General
Hospital on 16 December 2021. The cause of his death
was multiple (head, thorax,
pelvic and limb) injuries caused by a fall from
b) Jalailah Jayne-Marie Jones (DOB 2 April 2009), who died at the scene on 16
December 2021. The cause of her death was multiple
(head, trunk and limb)
injuries, caused by a fall from
c) Zane Timothy John Mellor (DOB 2 November 2009), who died at the scene on 16
December 2021. The cause of his death was multiple
(head, neck, trunk and limb)
injuries, caused by a fall from
d) Jye Max Sheehan (DOB 10 September 2009), who died at the Mersey Community
Hospital on 16 December 2021. The cause of his death
was multiple (head, neck,
trunk and limb) injuries caused by a fall from
e) Chace Craig Harrison (DOB 3 October 2010), who died at the Royal Hobart
Hospital on 19 December 2021. The cause of his death
was hypoxic brain injury
due to, or because of, post-traumatic cardiac arrest due to, or because of,
head, brain and chest injuries
due to, or because of, a fall from
f) Addison Tabitha May Stewart (DOB 14 January 2010), who died at the Mersey
Community Hospital on 16 December 2021. The cause of
her death was a head injury
caused by blunt force trauma. The blunt force injury pattern is consistent with
one or more impacts on
a hard surface or from a heavy object either secondary
to, and associated with the momentum from, an uncontrolled fall from height,
from another mechanism in which the force is derived from a moving object. The
possibility that the injury was caused by a heavy
object falling onto her head
cannot be excluded.
following students sustained injuries as a result of the incident:
a) DB who was in a zorb ball at the time of the incident was taken to the
Mersey Community Hospital, where multiple injuries were
diagnosed including a
laceration across the entire mid portion of the right kidney with a small
perinephric haematoma, comminuted
fractures of the right iliac bone and left
sacral alar with fractures through the right traverse processes of L2/3/4/5,
spinous processes
of L4 and L5, dislocated left hip and lung contusions. DB was
later transferred to the Royal Hobart Hospital and discharged on 31
b) LR was identified by witnesses as being on the jumping castle at the time of
the incident. Wedge compression fractures of the
T3 and T5 vertebral bodies, a
minimally displaced fracture of the manubri sternum, a minimally displaced
supratrochanteric fracture
of the right femur, a moderate to large right
pneumothorax, a small left pneumothorax, a large pneumomediastinum and
significant
subcutaneous emphysema over the chest, neck and face were suffered.
LR was taken by ambulance to the Mersey Community Hospital. That
same evening, a
transfer to the Royal Hobart Hospital by helicopter took place together with an
admission to the Intensive Care Unit
with intubation until 21 December 2021. On
the 22 December 2021 there was a transfer to the paediatric ward until discharge
29 December 2021.
c) BM had just descended the slide on the jumping castle when the Wind Event
occurred. He says he was hit in the face by a camp
chair before being lifted
into the air on the jumping castle, then he fell to the ground. BM remained
lying on the ground for a couple
of seconds before walking to the School office.
He was taken to the Mersey Community Hospital by his mother, before being
transferred
to the North West Regional Hospital by ambulance. BM suffered a
right reduced distal radial fracture and moderate swelling and bruising
left maxilla.
following students were also involved in the incident:
a) JW was inside a zorb ball at the time of the incident. JW’s leg was
hurting from the knee down to the ankle, and an arm,
shoulder and neck were
b) AP was inside a zorb ball at the time of the incident. AP sustained bruising
and a jarred tail bone.
Witness accounts
number of statements or transcripts of video recorded statements which describe
the incident, the Wind Event, and its aftermath
were tendered on the hearing by
consent as the evidence of each witness. Those exhibits were marked P11 to P69
and they appear in
Annexure “A”.
24th February 2022 Detective Senior Sergeant Simon Conroy attended the School
with Constable Wotherspoon (drone pilot) to ascertain
the height the jumping
castle reached in reference to the perspective of witness Lisa Shepherd.
Constable Wotherspoon and Detective
Senior Sergeant Conroy assessed where the
jumping castle would have had to have been when she observed it and Constable
Wotherspoon
deployed a drone to lift vertically from that location. The officers
ascertained that from the position that Ms Shepherd stated she
was at, the drone
came into vision at a height of 16 metres from where it was launched. The line
of sight included across the School
hall which is how Lisa Shepherd described
her observations. Tendered on the hearing and marked P70 is a photograph of the
that Ms Shepherd was standing in when she made her observations.
investigations revealed that there was no CCTV footage of the incident available
from the School.
Class Constable Colin Wilcox assisted forensics at the scene where the jumping
castle had been located on the western side of
the oval, prior to the incident.
He observed a number of pegs, both still in the ground and also on the ground.
There were also carabiners
and broken strapping on the ground. Constable Wilcox
assisted with marking the locations of these items of relevance.
Sergeant Russell Judges led a team who conducted a line search of the area of
and surrounding the oval where the jumping castle
was situated. He and his team
were tasked with locating any evidence that may relate to the jumping castle.
They were particularly
briefed to be alert for small metal objects such as
eyelets. The search was conducted as a close quarters line search. Officers were
within one metre of one another. Several items which may have been associated
with the jumping castle were located. When this occurred
Forensic Services
members of Tasmania Police were notified, and the position was marked by them,
and the item catalogued by
WEATHER EVENT
principal of the School, Jerome Pape, says in his statutory declaration dated 16
December 2021:
“When the jumping castle was set up I would
describe the conditions as very calm, a beautiful day with little to no
felt a strong breeze which came out of nowhere. The balls lifted up,
I don’t know how high, I am guessing three to five metres,
but it is a
guess... The jumping castle took off and flew to the other side of the oval, so
maybe 75 metres away... This entire wind
event was over in seconds. Apart from a
strong breeze and then a whoosh happened but it was a flash event and gone as
I have been here for the rest of the day and there
has been no further strong wind or breeze. It appeared to me an absolutely freak
event, in no way foreseeable or preventable.”
Fenn, a teacher at the School, in his affidavit dated 16 December
“The gust was like a whirlwind motion going
around and lifting debris off the ground such as grass and dust. I thought this
was unusual but within seconds it had increased in energy and then started
lifting everything off the ground... I thought that it
was very unusual because
it was going in a circular motion and was like a whirlwind. It started lifting
the surround of the zorb
balls in the air. The surround was a one metre high
inflated sausage that went around the perimeter of where the zorb balls were
used. It was pinned down to stop it moving when the zorb balls hit it. It was
quite secure. The zorb balls were hitting it continually
and it wasn’t
moving anywhere...Not long after (less than twenty seconds) I saw the jumping
castle hit the ground on the oval
on the eastern edge before the land drops
down. I was looking around at the time trying to find it so I didn’t
really see how
hard or fast it hit the ground I just saw the last part of it
where it hit the ground. It lifted up again about 20 metres into the
then came down again in around the same spot...The oval is about 70 metres wide.
The jumping castle would have hit down around
70 metres from where I
teacher at the School, Gaye Kelly, in her affidavit dated 16 December
“Around 10:00 a.m., I was standing on the
oval, when I felt a cool breeze come through. It felt nice and refreshing while
was standing in the sunlight. There hadn't been much of a breeze throughout
the morning. I looked up and could see, Stephen Fenn
holding onto the gazebo as
it was lifting off the ground. That's when I realised the breeze was stronger
than I'd first thought.
I remember seeing the wind picking up dust and swirling,
like a mini-tornado. It was narrow, but it would have been 2-3 metres high.
was about to help Stephen, when I noticed that a zorb ball was in the air. I saw
it come to the ground, near the embankment at
the edge of the oval. I went over
to the ball and found one of the students, JW, inside. J seemed to be okay. He
got out of the zorb
ball by himself and said something similar to, ‘I need
to sit down’. I then looked up and noticed that the jumping castle
the opposite side of the oval. I can't remember if it was deflated or not. I
also saw a blue
inflatable boundary marker, which had been used to mark
the zorb ball boundary, in a tree.”
Kelly’s son, D, who was 15 years of age decided to come and assist at the
School’s end of year
celebrations.
He says in his
affidavit dated 16 December
“We lined up and took our shoes off ready
as we did this Brock took his hat off and sat it with his shoes. As it was about
be our turn a strong gust of wind came through and blew Brock’s hat got
blown away.
Brock ran off to go get his hat, as he did this I
noticed that the gazebo roof ripped off the metal frame in the wind. I also
an inflatable barrier that was keeping the zorb balls in place was
starting to lift up so I rushed over and put my weight down on
the barrier to
stop it from flying off in the wind.
I then noticed the jumping castle had lifted off
the ground, it flew a couple of metres in the air, I’m not sure [how] high
it reached however it reached the height of a large gum tree I would guess is
The castle started spinning and around in the
Willett, a teacher’s assistant at the School, in her affidavit dated 16
December 2021
“I saw the jumping castle was in the air.
It was a long way up, a couple of stories easy. I could see the jumping castle
the trees. It was high. I could see the air/wind moving around like a
tornado/cyclone. The zorb-balls were also spinning around off
the ground. They
went flying across the oval also. There was a blow-up plastic barricade that
surrounded the zorb ball area. This
barricade also went up in the wind and this
caused the zorb-balls to raise from the ground and fly everywhere. I remember
the barricade spinning with the wind in a circular motion.
...it went up initially, then went back down, and
then it went up a second time and slammed into the trees.”
Shepherd, a teacher’s assistant at the school, in her affidavit dated 16
December 2021
“... and I turned around and I saw a
jumping castle up in the air. It was blue. I didn’t see it lift into the
was just up in the air already.
I could see the jumping castle up in the air over
the top of other buildings. From where I was, I had to look over a classroom and
over the top of the hall. The jumping castle would have been at least 10 metres
in the air. I didn’t feel any wind where I
was standing.
It didn’t look like a jumping castle, it
was all crumpled and mixed up. It was rotating horizontally while in the
Boutcher, who lived across the road from the School in Lawrence Drive,
Devonport, says in his affidavit dated 17 December
“It was really weird as there was not a
gust of wind when I was out for my bike ride. The gust of wind came out of
I saw that the castle which was dark blue was completely off the
ground. It looked like it was trying to turn in the air in a horizontal
It was probably two or three metres, maybe a bit more. My house sits below the
level of the school so I look up hill at the
The jumping castle was gusted into the air and
started to twirl around”.
a student, in a recorded interview conducted on 21 December
“...wasn’t, like really a gust of
wind because otherwise it would have pushed them along the oval and, but it
kind of like um, up, pushed up and I would just call it a mini tornado
honestly....
..so there was things just flying round in
circles and stuff moving, it, I would say that the tornado was kind of like
spinning up
and throwing stuff in the air but also pushing stuff one way, so it
sort of like, you could say it was on sort of an angle and going
Well I know it was barely even a breeze before
the mini tornado came and afterwards there was still barely a breeze, it was
“Woosh” and then nothing.”
a student, in a recorded interview conducted on 18 December 2021
“No one was expecting the moment to
happen... It was just like today just sunny, no wind, no nothing and all of a
just struck.
So after I went down I seen all these leaves like
start floating up and start twisting around and everything...and it was pretty
scary...and
I look up and it’s just like a whole bunch of leaves and, or
leaves getting pulled off trees and everything like that yeah...
Then it picked
up the jumping castle and the zorb balls and everything and, like it was just
spinning around, the jumping castle
and I got flung out of it and that’s
when it must of shot, like towards trees and everything down the back of the
oval because,
it was like halfway down the bank.”
a student, in a recorded interview conducted on 8 February 2022
“... there was a big gust of wind and all
of a sudden it got really windy and ... everyone shot up
Pretty high, I was...I’m pretty sure it was
a bit higher than a telegraph pole...It looks higher when you’re up,
the distance to the ground was higher than a telegraph
pole. And about like, so
another like 4, 5 metres higher than that.
And when your zorb ball went in the wind, how was
Well, in the air, it was goin’ straight
up...then just goin’ side to side while I was in it, before I... think I
out... I’m pretty sure it just went straight up and kept goin’
while I was going straight up.”
a student, in a recorded interview conducted on 21 December 2021
“... everything just went up into the sky,
even me...”
Okay, can you describe to me what um, what the
jumping castle was doing in the sky?
It was spinning around and going into the sky and
making the sound, clip bang, clip bang.”
a student, in a recorded interview conducted on 22 December 2021
“So when you say the jumping castle went up
twice, what do you mean by that?
So it went up and came down and went up
... and so you said that the jumping castle went
up and back down then up again. When it first went up do you know how high it
Um, about like fifteen metres.”
... well they were, they were like on the zorb
balls and then all of a sudden they went up and I saw one person fall
when you first seen him floating up, how high did
he, was his zorb ball going?
Higher than the jumping castle.
D went up like really high, probably higher than
C but he didn’t fall out.
J went about the same height as me...
what happened to [the jumping castle]?
Um, it just blew away... Far away.”
Hays, the mother of a student and a volunteer at the school on the day in
question says in her affidavit dated 20 December
“When I got down to the oval, it was a
beautiful day. The kids were laughing and having a great time... The wind
get up a bit and the kids on the bank were getting a bit worried. I
wanted to turn around and tell them not to worry and then the
jumping castle
started to lift. The wind kept getting stronger and stronger and it just looked
like a twister. It picked them up
and twisted them in the air. I thought it
would just lift a little and resettle but it just kept lifting and lifting. I
saw the jumping
castle become airborne and it went high. I reckon it was at
least ten metres in the air. It flipped in the air and when the wind
stopped, it
just came down but upside down. It kept getting higher and higher and the zorb
balls also lifted off the ground and kept
going and going. The wind stopped
suddenly and all the stuff came down. As quick as the wind came, it
a student, in a recorded interview conducted on 20 December 2021
“...I don’t remember it going up in
the air but I remember it being in the air and two zorb balls and it
windy at all that day so I think it was like a mini tornado cause
that’s what it looked like, it looked like a mini tornado...
it’s completely sunny and a really nice day and then it just
happened...”
...when you saw the wind, what did it look
A tornado, I didn’t, it was all spinning up
in the air... And there was lots of dirt going up in the air as well... Yeah, it
was a perfect sunny day and then just wind and I thought it was just a massive
gust of wind...but then mentioned a mini tornado and
yeah, that’s what it
seemed like a mini, a miniature tornado.”
a student, in a recorded interview conducted on 20 December 2021
“..., it went from just a breeze to a huge
gust of wind because it knocked over a lot, it knocked over a few people, like
with the wind.”
a student, in a recorded interview conducted on 22 December 2021
“...it was just like a little daydream to
me until I turned around and everything was like bang.”
a student, in a recorded interview conducted on 20 December 2021
“...until that happened it wasn’t
actually windy at all.
...it was all swirling around and then it was
swirling, the jumping castle around for a bit and then sort of just took it over
the tree down the back of the oval... It was just spinning around up in the
a student, in a recorded interview conducted on 20 December 2021
“I played around on, on the jumping castle
and when I was lining up to go on the zorb ball um, a gust of wind picked up and
or the tornado, and um, and launched the jumping castle and zorb balls up into
the air with the kids inside them.”
...first it was kind of like a soft breeze then
it just picked up and formed a tornado.
what about when the wind, did you feel the wind?
Could you feel the wind?
Um, not really.”
a student, in a recorded interview conducted on 22 December 2021
“...I went to, to the line with the zorb
balls with a couple of my friends then out the corner of my eye I see this
hand) I think, either it was a tornado, whir...,whirl, or,
mini-whirlwind and that took off with the jumping castle and the zorb
So I think it happened so sudden, so suddenly I
didn’t even think I’d have time to recognise what to do”
a student, in a recorded of interview conducted on 20 December 2021
“It um, flew to the back of the oval and
then a tornado, mini tornado it started spinning around in circles and you could
like leaves and like branches inside the tornado and then the castle fell
into the tree at the back of the oval.
So um, the castle flew up into the air and, like
really high um, it went high and then it went that way on an angle and then over
there it started spinning around and around and then it landed kind of in a
tree at the back.
It just went up and it was like just started
spinning in circles and then it just flew down, more down the hill.
And how long did that take?
Like fifteen seconds, it wasn’t that
another student, in a recorded interview conducted on 22 December 2021
“Okay, and I know you said, I’m just
going back a little bit but you said the jumping, you saw the jumping castle
a little bit.”
(nodding yes)
Yeah, was it, when the jumping castle blew up,
did it go, did it spin in a fast sort of way or sort of medium or something
a student, in a recorded interview conducted on 21 December 2021
“...it just kind of like a nice day just
muckin’ around on the oval and jumping castle and zorb balls and then um,
next in line for the zorb balls and all of a sudden the grass started to
flip up, all of the grass had been cut just left on top
and people’s hats
were flying and the gazebo was um, like flapping around and then the zorb balls
and jumping castle were in
the air...”
a student, in a recorded interview conducted on 20 December 2021
“...the wind came and picked everything
up... It was like just instant, like couple of seconds and it blew the wind and
a whole heap of wind and everything just started picking up.... Like I
remember seeing the jumping castle just go and then it started
doing circles and
then it’s gone near the tree and then... I don’t really know what
the zorb ball done but I remember
seeing the thing that holds the zorb balls
just coming up in the sky and just flipping around.”
a student, in a recorded interview conducted on 20 December 2021
“...I saw a little circle of dirt or dust,
I’m not sure, it was just circling about a metre from the jumping castle
as soon as I looked back they started going up in the air and then the zorb
balls were going round in a circle and then they went
down and so did the
jumping castle. The jumping castle went down and people, went back up and
people fell out and it folded in half.”
...first I saw the jumping castle go in the
air... then I saw the zorb balls and the thing going around the zorb
...what about this, the swirl, how did you see
that move? Did you see that at all?
I just saw it going round and round... and it
didn’t move at all it was just in the one spot.”
Brown, who lives on Arden Avenue and who could see the School from her house,
says in her affidavit dated 17 December
“I was in my loungeroom when I heard a
really loud bang and I thought it was a car tyre exploding. I looked out the
window and I saw a part of the jumping castle flying through the air.
I came outside and then I realised that the whole jumping castle
was in the air.
The thing that I saw flying through the air was blue. I could see the castle in
the air and bouncing along.
It was really weird. There was no wind at all. It
was a beautiful day.”
Class Constable Colin Willcox, in an affidavit dated 11 January 2022
“At the time of my arrival at the
the weather was
fine and clear. There was minimal wind present throughout the entire time I
spent at the scene”.
Monte said in his record of interview with the Regulator, WorkSafe Tasmania
(WorkSafe):
“... all of a sudden the wind was
...the whole lot was done-over and done with in
Barrett said the following in cross examination:
“Can you remember where you were um on the
oval when this event unfolded?
Ah I believe I was inside the Zorb ball
...what about the wind?
Um I just felt it, the wind, and then I heard
like, you know, like a bit of yelling and um I do remember like flapping, a
sound now. I don’t know whether it was the gazebo or what. Um and
then yeah that the wind, like it was going around and
Did you notice then either of the amusement
devices, inflatables, at that time?
Um yeah after Rosemary I looked over my right
shoulder and the jumping castle was in the
Barrett said in his record of interview with WorkSafe:
“And could you just describe the wind event
Yeah, it just happened out of nowhere. No warning
or nothing. It was just instant wind. When I looked at Rosemary the gazebo roof
tent thing was flapping and then I looked up and it was just in the sky. There
was no strong wind before it. It was straight –
And can you just explain to us the wind
So I remember – I think I was crouched down
and the wind picked up, and I looked to my left and saw Rosemary holding down
gazebo, and then I looked to my right and the bouncy castle was up in the
sky. And then I looked at Bobby,
So the wind event came and there was no warning,
Yeah, no warning at
Okay, Jesse, we’re just going to talk about
the wind event. What do you remember about the wind event in your own
It was very quick. It was real, real strong wind.
It was out of nowhere, no warning. Yeah, it was circling. It wasn’t just
It circled. Yeah, that’s pretty much
So from the other side of the school to where the
car park is?
...You couldn’t hear it coming or anything.
It just hit.
And, sorry, how long do you think it
“Thirty seconds or
something.”
Barrett gave evidence he was inside the zorb ball arena when the weather event
unfolded. He became aware of the wind going “
”, heard a flapping sound and yelling. He noticed Ms Gamble
holding the gazebo down and the fabric roof was flapping around.
He then looked
over his right shoulder and observed the jumping castle 10 metres high in the
probably 15-20 metres
” towards the middle of the
School oval.
Monte and Mr Barrett ran after the jumping castle. Mr Barrett noticed the
jumping castle and the zorb ball arena spiralling in
the air while he was
running. As Mr Barrett was running, the zorb ball arena came down and hit Mr
Monte and the wind knocked Mr
Barrett to the ground and he was also hit by the
zorb ball arena.
The zorb ball
arena came back to the ground, and “
came around again but I managed to
duck it. Then I got up and started running after the castle
Barrett described how the jumping castle was going “
around and around
but further towards the outside of the
The jumping
castle touched the ground “
for a little, for a split second
and that is when the children fell out of the jumping castle, and then the
jumping castle went back up.
Barrett was directed by Mr Monte to see whether there were any children
remaining inside the jumping castle once it landed. He
checked and noted there
were no children remaining inside the jumping castle. Mr Barrett noticed the
zorb ball arena landed in
“one of the
walking past the original position where the jumping castle had been erected, Mr
Barrett noticed one of the jumping castle
pegs still in the ground, along with a
folded out piece of metal.
he saw is consistent with the photograph which is depicted at page 41 of Court
Book Volume 2.
a student, in her record of interview conducted on 21 December 2021
she was at the volleyball
area when she felt a big gust of wind which knocked over the volleyball net. Her
friend was unable to pick
it back up because the wind was too strong. She said:
“I watched the castle in the air. It kind
of looked like a tornado, but at the same time it didn't.”
“the jumping castle lift up into the air, three corners went
up and then there was another bit that was still attached to the
inflates it, ...and then it just went up... It was very quick... And then it
launched up into the air and I think it deflated
a little bit, but it was air,
but still had air in it.”
student, BB, was playing dominos above the stairs which lead down to the School
oval when she became aware that the inflatables
were going up in the air. With
respect to the weather she said:
“It was really windy, and then just a
random gust of wind came and just blew it up in the air, and then I don't really
what happened after that
.” She said two zorb balls
landed not far from where they were set up...And I couldn’t see the other
two... and the bouncy castle was near where
the dip of the hill was to go down
to there and it ended up on the complete other side of the oval, so pretty far
The ring from the zorb balls
“was in a tree... on the
other side as well....”
a student at the School, says in his record of interview conducted on 21
December 2021:
“I was playing volleyball with some of my
friends, and... the volleyball pole fell down because of this big gust of
The jumping castle was in the air
“like sideways...
the zorb balls were like the jumping castle and flying around everywhere in the
With respect to the weather he said:
“it was sunny um,
very warm, there was no wind until it happened.”
a student at the School, says in her record of interview conducted on 22
December 2021:
“...it was all very sudden...the jumping
castle just sort of picked up in the wind, it slid on the grass a little bit and
it went in the air... one kid... he flew out of it and like
like near me... It was a huge gush of wind... it was very sudden, it happened
very quickly...”
a student at the School, says in her recorded interview conducted on 21 December
“...first it was the zorb balls and like
the base around keeping everything in, it also went up, up into the air and the
balls went into the air, and then another few seconds the jumping castle
went into the air.”
She described the wind as getting more windy as the seconds went by. She
described the zorb ball barrier going into the air at probably
a student at the School, says in her recorded interview conducted on 22 December
“I saw dirt from the dead patch of grass
start um, like going into the air and then I saw the jumping castle go up and I
one of my friends fall out and then I saw the zorb balls go and then the
ring around the zorb balls and then I um, saw people fall
out over the hill and
then two of my friends helped one of my friends out of one of the zorb balls and
then we got moved to one of
the classrooms...when I got to the oval... I saw
like all the dirt go up and then everything else happened. ..all the dirt
going up and it was like, and then it went to the jumping castle... it
had hit the tornado, I saw like the front bit,” talking
of the jumping
castle, “go up and then the rest of it go up and then one of my
friends,” who she named as a survivor,
“fell out.”
McCormack lives next to the school. As he was driving on Arden Drive, he had an
unobstructed view of the school grounds. He told
police in his statement of 16
December 2021:
“As I drove down it dips and you lose sight
of the school grounds... At this time, I could see a large bouncy castle in the
air, being tossed around. The castle was of bright and light colours. I hadn't
seen this before and I didn't know that there was
an event at the school. There
is a large gum tree on the grounds of Hillcrest Primary School between the oval
and the school itself.
I would estimate that the bouncy castle was at around 75
to 80% of the height of this tree. I would estimate this would be 8 to 10
metres. I lost sight temporarily, as I said, as the bouncy castle was drifting
in the air across the oval towards another tree. I
pulled into my address in my
car and walked to the backyard. I had no sight at this point, but I heard a very
loud bang and I immediately
thought it was the castle hitting and popping on a
tree. I went back to my back fence for a look and I could see what looked like
the remainder of the bouncy castle wrapped around the tree.”
Impact of the
dust devil on the amusement devices
First-Class
Constable Wotherspoon arrived at the School at about 10:30am on the 16 December
the incident the yellow blower which had been connected to the jumping castle
was found under a tree near the
on the bank situated
on the western side of the School
On inspection of the
yellow blower, the fan was off-centre and a number of electrical wires were
disconnected from their
joiners/connectors.
In addition
there was a broken fan mount on the base of the fan and rusty material on a
rectangular section of the
First-Class
Constable Wotherspoon weighed the Zorb ball arena which he found to be
82.5 kilograms.
zorb ball was deflated and weighed 45.3
and the green, pink
and red zorb balls weighed 45.8
The jumping castle
weighed 137.3 kilograms
Pegs contained at cones marked 1, 2 and
were provided to WorkSafe
Inspector James Day on 17 October
Their measurements
i. a J-shaped peg at cone 1 which was 30 cm long and which had
a diameter of 11.9
J-shaped peg at cone 2 which was 30 cm long and which had a diameter of 11.9
iii. a folded peg at cone 3 which was 34.5 cm long and which had a diameter
First-Class
Constable Wotherspoon gave evidence regarding close up photographs taken of a
peg at cone 5 which was attached to a D-ring,
shock cord and two accessory
carabiners.
Evidence: Dr Earl-Jones
Nicholas Earl-Jones gave expert evidence on behalf of the prosecution. He was
the only weather expert to give evidence in this
case. He was eminently
qualified to do so.
expertise and evidence was not disputed. Dr Earl-Jones and his colleague Mr Ben
Weeding provided a detailed meteorological report
dated 15 December
(the report) and Dr
Earl-Jones provided an undated supplemental proof of evidence, which was served
on Ms Gamble’s legal representatives
on 1 November
Earl-Jones says in the report the evidence he reviewed by way of witness
suggests a tornado
like feature although he says an actual tornado would be impossible given the
weather conditions. In addition
he says the weather conditions, together with
the local nature of the extreme winds and evidence of other dust devils in the
by which he refers to evidence from the Devonport
indicate that a dust
devil was the only realistic
possibility.
“absolutely certain”
that this Wind Event was a dust
to wind speed the report says “[i]t is almost impossible to accurately
measure the speed within a dust devil...as dust devils
are very small and the
wind speed within varies greatly in time and space, and from one dust devil to
the next.” However Dr
Earl-Jones estimated that wind speeds can reach 100
km/h or faster and that “the Devonport dust devil would have been at least
60-80 km/h.”
“[i]t was not the speed of the winds however which is what
provided the lift, but the pressure drop in the middle of the vortex,
up to 1000 Pa... lower than the immediate surrounding atmospheric pressure. This
had the effect of sucking the inflatables
into its centre of the dust devil and
up off the ground in the associated
on the eyewitness statements, the direction of travel of the inflatables and the
direction of the sea breeze as it moved over
the School grounds Dr Earl-Jones
concluded the dust devil was travelling from the north-west of the oval, from
the school car park,
parallel to the direction of the sea breeze, which was
moving over the area from the north-west. He says the dust devil then moved
across the oval to the eastern side of the oval in an east – south-east
direction. It is likely to have dissipated in the trees
to the east of the
school as dust devils need a constant source of heat/energy to be maintained or
it moved along the sea breeze
towards the
south-east.
In addition he
says the dust devil is likely to have formed at a point at which the north
westerly winds from the sea breeze met
the southerly winds from the synoptic
flow which he says Devonport experienced throughout the morning. He says there
are many different
land use types in the vicinity of the school such as the hot
asphalt car park and nearby wooded areas and this could have triggered
intense convection and updrafts which formed the dust
the report Dr Earl-Jones says:
“...given a pressure drop of 1000 Pa in the
centre of the dust devil over a surface area for the jumping castle of
approximately
16 square metres, this would result in a force equivalent to 1.6
metric tons in weight – equivalent to a medium sized car...
estimated mass of the jumping castle and occupants of 300 kg, this force would
be sufficient to cause extremely rapid acceleration
of the jumping castle and
occupants once the securing pegs had been pulled from the ground by the force of
the dust devil.”
to the duration of the dust devil Dr Earl-Jones says:
“Dust devils in general can last from a few
seconds to hours, though given the rough and varied terrain, this one was likely
relatively short (seconds or a
Earl-Jones was asked to provide his opinion on the likelihood of occurrence of a
dust devil in the following locations:
At the School oval: “A dust devil of this
intensity is unprecedented in the area in my
In Devonport generally: “... dust devil
occurrences in Devonport are very rare and one of this intensity is
unprecedented in
opinion....”
In Tasmania generally: “... occurrence in
Tasmania is very rare and one of this intensity is unprecedented in my opinion.
are no media reports or scientific literature mentioning such severe dust
devil events in Tasmania.”
prosecution asked Dr Earl-Jones what indicators increase the potential for such
a meteorological event to occur. He says the following
factors increase the
potential for dust devil formation:
conditions,
relatively calm
conditions,
a clear day with
strong sunshine,
slope facing the
morning sun heating up quickly,
temperature gradient, relatively cool air above a hot surface,
dry oval exposed to the sun, with cooler areas (not sun facing, and tree
covered) in the vicinity, leading to low level convergence
and the creation of
convective updrafts, and
breeze formation with uplift on the
these factors Dr Earl-Jones goes on to say that it is
“essentially
impossible to predict such an event with any degree of accuracy. Even once
formed, dust devils move sporadically
and unpredictably...to predict the dust
devil of such severity is in this exact location not
realistic.”
Earl-Jones acknowledged it is straightforward to predict the conditions that are
conducive to dust devil formation however:
“predicting the formation of a dust devil
of the magnitude observed at a specific location in a climate like Tasmania
be impossible.”
“It is essentially
impossible to have predicted the occurrence of this event”
and from what he could
“...no meteorological agency provides dust devil
“[w]ith the unprecedented nature of this event, there was no indication
of dangerous weather that would have been of concern.”
Earl-Jones says there was no response to the Wind Event which occurred at the
School on 16 December 2021 which the operators of
Taz-Zorb could have taken. He
“[t]here was no indication of gusts above
40 km/h (or even above 20 km/h) in the weather forecast, and no observation
recorded gusts of that magnitude. Therefore, the operator of Taz-Zorb
followed the relevant
guidelines.”
his supplemental proof Dr Earl-Jones says the winds of the dust devil would not
have been coming from a single direction. They
are very chaotic and variable as
it pulls in the air around it.
“The dust devil would likely have pulled
air underneath the jumping
his evidence Dr Earl-Jones said dust devils form when there is a huge
temperature contrast “
between the surface and higher up
causing a “
big temperature contrast
” similar to boiling a pot
the bubbles
” come up. The air is warm below which rises
and if that air becomes “
disturbed then it can start spinning and um
that can form a dust devil which then sucks in the energy from around
” as it pulls in air from around
If there is cooler air
around the dust devil, the energy it gains is “
from that bottom half a
metre, above the surface
”. The scale is “
” between one metre diameter and the biggest is 50 metres in
The dust devil
moves around picking things up and it moves to different heat
and once it moves to
cooler ground, it loses energy, such as when you have trees creating shade on
the ground.
If the dust devil
collects no debris, it is
Exhibit P95
demonstrates the lifecycle of a dust devil.
Earl-Jones said that the conditions that give rise to a dust devil are
predictable however whether a dust devil will form in these
conditions is
unpredictable.
video taken in America in 2023 or
demonstrated a jumping
castle being lifted into the air vertically rather than horizontally and how
localised the dust devil was
because only metres away, there was no wind visible
This exhibit
demonstrates how powerful and destructive the vertical suction force of a dust
devil can be.
Earl-Jones referred to an article in his
which noted that
between 1 January 2000 and 31 December 2021, there had been 132 reported
incidents worldwide involving jumping castles
and wind events, which resulted in
479 injuries and 28 deaths.
This article and the associated website does not refer to any reported jumping
castle incidents involving wind events in
Earl-Jones said with respect to the predictability of dust devils that
“[i]t’s not completely impossible because they do form- in other
parts of the world...at certain types of times of day...
scientists have studied
these in places like ah the Arizona desert where the conditions are very often
ideal for the formation of
dust devils...in that kind of situation they can be
predicted. But in Devonport it’s impossible to predict a dust devil in
opinion, with any kind of
Earl-Jones said in evidence that at 10:00am on 16 December 2021, north westerly
winds from the sea breeze met southerly wind from
the background weather
conditions at that boundary and it was at that boundary the dust devil
A dust devil forms
“ground is very dry and the sun is very
strong, then you get very strong surface heating”
it’s dry no energy is lost in evaporating water so all the sun’s
energy turns into heat energy... this creates
the - what’s known as a
thermal... a thermal is when you have just upward motion of air in certain areas
um and um when the
sea breeze front has come over the school one of these
thermals has started to spin and um this basically creates a kind of um a
of chimney-like structure in the atmosphere um and then that kind of retains the
heat ah in the system and it literally sucks
in the air from the surface around
it um and um and as it gets taller the spin gets faster. Um and it’s
it’s basically
self-sustaining um if there’s a energy
Earl-Jones was of the view the thermal
“gained energy from the large
tarmacked road in front of the school as it was coming from the north west and
um and of the
carparks in the er associated with the
Earl-Jones said the dust devil travelled from the carpark, travelling northwest
which was parallel to the sea breeze and then
it dissipated in the
gaining energy from
the dark tarmac of the carpark which
“would’ve been very warm um
compared to the other areas around it so that would’ve had lots of...
energy, lots of
heat energy and it would’ve sucked in that energy and that
would’ve given the dust devil a
Earl-Jones estimated the speed of the dust devil moving along with the sea
breeze was approximately 10 – 20 kilometres per
As to the wind speed
inside the dust devil, Dr Earl-Jones said it is “
very difficult to
” because dust devils are “
highly variable
vary along their own life cycle
between dust devils
”. Dr Earl-Jones said, consistent with his report,
people have measured within dust devils, um I believe around 60 to 80
kilometres an hour
” which is described as a “
pretty typical
um wind speed within the dust devil
it is impossible to estimate how far the dust devil actually
however it’s
duration was likely short because there is evidence of “
multiple dust
devils on this ah sea breeze front, so I believe that this specific one um is
likely to have dissipated after ah leaving
Earl-Jones said it was hard to say how the dust devil picked up the amusement
devices because he had not seen a video of this particular
dust devil however
its scale may have grown once it got onto the oval because it
“would’ve got some energy from that dry hot area. So it
could’ve been metres across
[in diameter]
. So yeah technically it
could’ve picked up both”
the zorb ball arena and jumping
The dust devil was a
chaotic system moving along the sea breeze and to where the source of energy was
so it would pick up some things
and not others and so while it travelled the
75-metre distance across the School oval, the dust devil could have picked up
jumping castle and zorb ball arena which he noted was implied from the
witness statements.
that journey, the dust devil would gain energy, lose energy and regain energy
again. This explains some of the evidence that
the jumping castle was observed
to come back down to the ground before rising into the air
Earl-Jones said if an anemometer was available at the time, it would have read
light southerly winds and then as the dust devil
and sea breeze front
approached, air would have sucked into the anemometer, sending it into chaos and
it too would have likely lifted
with the dust devil if it was not tied
He said that an
anemometer would have been
“useless in the
circumstances.”
OF MS GAMBLE’S COMPLIANCE WITH THE AUSTRALIAN STANDARDS
prosecution called Mr Roderick McDonald whereas the defence called Professor
David Eager. Both witnesses gave expert engineering
evidence. Three Australian
Standards were referred to by Mr McDonald and Professor Eager and they
(a) AS 3533.4.1:2005 – Amusement rides and devices
Specific requirements – Land-borne inflatable
3533.1:2009 – Amusement rides and devices –
Construction;
(c) AS 3533.2:2009 – Amusement rides and devices –
Operation and
Maintenance.
McDonald and Professor Eager agreed, consistent with the Preface to the
Standards, that the
amusement devices Standard, AS
3533.4.1:2005, takes precedence over corresponding requirements of the
Standards, AS 3533.1:2009 and AS 3533.2:2009, where
there is conflict between
Standards contain a number of appendices, some of which are marked
“Normative” and others “Informative”.
'normative' appendix is an integral part of a Standard, whereas an 'informative'
appendix is only for information and
Ms Gamble’s compliance with the Australian
McDonald advised Ms Gamble’s operation of the jumping castle was not
compliant with a number of aspects of the Australian
Standards or he advised he
could not determine from the evidence whether or not she had complied with the
Standards. See for example
his comments with respect to:
(a) AS 3533.4.1:2005:
Section 15:
Inspection;
Maintenance;
Supervision;
(b) AS 3533.2:2009:
Section 2.1
– Assembly and
– Maintenance, Replacement, Repair and
The correlation between Ms Gamble’s asserted failure to
comply with the Australian Standards and East Inflatables failures to
with the Australian Standards
failure to comply with the Australian Standards is not particularised in the
Complaint, it was central to Mr McDonald’s
analysis of the failure of the
anchorage system of the jumping castle. He accepted there appeared to be a
direct correlation between
Ms Gamble’s non-compliance with the Australian
Standards and the non-compliance by East Inflatables with their obligations
under the Standards with respect to the following
(a) AS 3533.4.1:2005:
Section 15:
Inspection;
Maintenance;
Supervision;
With respect to the alleged breaches of AS 3533.2:2009:
Section 2.1
– Site Layout;
Section 2.2
– Assembly and erection;
Section 3.1
Section 3.2
– Operation; and
Maintenance, Replacement, Repair and Inspection;
McDonald advised because the specific standard (AS 3533.4.1:2005) prevails over
the general standard (AS 3533.2:2009), those parts
of AS 3533.2:2009 which are
also covered by AS 3533.4.1 would not be
applicable,
acknowledged the Australian Standards are complex and difficult to
understand.
Design of System by “Competent Person”
concern raised by Mr McDonald about Ms Gamble’s operation of the jumping
castle was that in the absence of sufficient
information or a compliant
amusement device, she should have engaged a
to provide advice as to the design and operation of the
jumping castle.
definition of
“competent person”
relied upon by Mr McDonald
in the context of design is contained in clause 1.3.8 of AS 3533.1:2009 with
reference to Appendix B which
suggests what training, qualifications or
experience it is appropriate for the various competent persons, set out in that
to have. This appendix stipulates it is
“informative”
only. Clause 1.3.8 and Appendix B contains a different definition of
“competent person”
to that which appears in the operation
standard: AS 3533.2:2009 at clause 1.3.10 and Appendix B.
3533.1:2009, the design standard, at clause 1.3.8 and Appendix B
“1.3.8 Competent Person
A person who has acquired through training, qualifications or experience,
or a combination of these, the knowledge and skills enabling
that person to
perform a specified task.
NOTE: Appendix B
provides suggestio
ns for the training,
qualifications or experience considered appropriate to possess for the various
competent persons referred to
in this Standard.
Suggested Training, Qualifications and Experience for
Competent Persons
Informative
Role/responsibility/task:
Training/Qualification/ experience:
Design, or other individual (whether or not nominated by the designer)
responsible for undertaking work for which the designer would
normally be
responsible in accordance with this Standard.
This person should possess formal (tertiary) qualifications in
engineering and sufficient experience to fully comprehend the concept
amusement device, its probable mode and environment of operation, and the
provisions relative to its maintenance.
Gamble relied upon East Inflatables’ assurance the jumping castle was
compliant with the Australian Standards. She was therefore
not aware of any
deficiencies in the design of the jumping castle, nor the fact that East
Inflatables was in breach of its obligation
to provide information in compliance
with the Australian Standards. She was also not aware that the information she
obtained from
the manual which she downloaded was deficient. There is no
suggestion in the evidence that her reliance on the assurance she was
the information she was provided by East Inflatables or obtained herself was
unreasonable. It was put to Mr McDonald that
his position, against this
background, was Ms Gamble ought to have understood and applied the relevant
standards. In response to
that proposition Mr McDonald said:
“I would say she should have sought help. The trigger
for knowledge of whether you need help is maybe the
questioned about what the
for seeking assistance
was, Mr McDonald said that the
was the provision of
only four pegs, when the one page manual referred to 8
When directed back to
one of the assumptions which underpinned his cross examination, namely that the
only manual which Ms Gamble
had was the two page manual which she downloaded
from the East Inflatables website, Mr McDonald conceded:
“Yes, that trigger doesn't exist with that
fact that Ms Gamble had operated the jumping castle in excess of 100 times
without incident prior to the Wind Event is relevant
to whether or not she
needed to obtain advice particularly when her system of operation is considered.
This system is considered
at paragraphs 223 to 324.
Ms Gamble reasonably believed the jumping castle complied with the Australian
Standards, her lack of knowledge of any defects,
and her experience in operating
the jumping castle for in excess of five years without incident prior to the
Wind Event leads me
to conclude she was not under any obligation to obtain the
advice recommended by Mr McDonald. My conclusion is influenced by the
of Murphy JA in the WA Court of Appeal decision of
Laing O’Rourke
Pty Ltd v Kirwin
[2011] WASC 117
“In my respectful view, by concluding that the
appellant was required to carry out its own inquiries and investigations,
by obtaining engineering advice, into the design and fabrication of
the dongas for the purpose of assessing their suitability for
conditions, his Honour ascribed a content to the duty under
beyond what was reasonably practicable in the
circumstances”
Was Ms Gamble a “competent person” to operate the
jumping castle?
is not defined in the specific amusement devices Standard:
AS 3533.4.1:2005.
operation standard defines
“competent person”
1.3.10 and Appendix B as follows:
“1.3.10 Competent person
A person who has acquired
through training, qualifications or experience, or a combination of these, the
knowledge and skills enabling
that person to perform a specified task.
Appendix B provides suggestions for the training, qualifications or experience
considered appropriate to possess for the various
competent persons referred to
in this Standard.
SUGGESTED TRAINING, QUALIFICATIONS AND
EXPERIENCE FOR COMPETENT PERSONS
(Informative)
Role/responsibility/task
Training/qualifications/experience
set up, operation, dismantling and transportation of amusement rides and devices
(and supervision thereof)
Persons involved in such operations should have sufficient experience
and knowledge of the device to enable such operations to be
carried out safely
and in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions
Hazard identification and risk assessment
Any person conducting a hazard identification and risk assessment on an
amusement device (or any part or component thereof) should
have a thorough
knowledge of the operation of the device, and of the general history of such a
device. This person should be able
to complete such a hazard identification and
risk assessment to the satisfaction of the relevant regulatory
Maintenance, replacement and repair of amusement devices or components
Persons undertaking maintenance, replacement and repair of amusement
devices or components thereof should, where necessary, possess
certificates of competency. Where formal qualifications are not required (e.g.
for routine tasks), persons should be fully
trained in the requirements of the
task to be performed
(emphasis added)
Eager was of the view both Ms Gamble and Mr Monte were
within the meaning of clause 1.3.10 of AS 3533.2:2009 as
operators of the jumping castle, because:
(a) Ms Gamble and Mr Monte had operated the jumping castle
100-200 times over five
completed risk
assessments;
(c) they used the device diligently and competently in the absence of any
adequate instructions from the
manufacturer;
(d) their system of work had proven to be safe and reliable.
Eager also said
“competency”
is relative to the particular
amusement device so for a class five ride like a roller coaster you need an
engineer. However for a
class two device like this jumping castle
we've got is sufficient experience and knowledge of the device to enable such
operations to be carried out safely and
in accordance with the
manufacturer’s
instructions.”
Eager referred to Appendix B of AS3533:2:2009 and said:
“The suggested training, qualifications and experience
for the assembly, set up, operation, dismantling and transportation of
rides and devices (and supervision thereof) ‘is sufficient experience and
knowledge of the device to enable such
operations to be carried out safely and
in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions.’”
Eager’s view was
“based on the evidence reviewed, the assembly
and erection of the inflatable devices was carried out by or under the direction
supervision of competent persons [Gamble and Monte] in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions”
; those instructions being the two
page manual which Ms Gamble accessed
Accordingly Ms Gamble
and Mr Monte were “competent persons” to assemble, set up, operate,
dismantle and transport the
jumping castle safely. This view is supported by the
system of work analysed at paragraphs 223 to 324.
do not accept Mr McDonald’s view that the use of four pegs rather than
eight is a design issue. This is because, as Professor
Eager pointed out, the
use of four pegs rather than eight was an operational issue in the sense that
the jumping castle was not set
up or operated in the manner in which the
anchorage system had been designed to be
APPLICABILITY
OF THE AUSTRALIAN STANDARDS
parties agree the Australian standards have no legal application unless adopted
and applied by contract or
They may however
still be relevant if the standards are accepted as representing a consensus of
professional opinion and practical
experience about sensible, safe
precautions.
issue was dealt with in Tasmania by Justice Porter, as he then was, in
[2009] TASSC 30
(2009) 18 Tas R 454
, where his Honour said the
following at [47]-[52]:
“[47] Counsel for the applicant submitted that the
respondent had a "clear duty to comply with AS-1755 and had it done so the
machine would have been guarded prior to the events of 24 August 2006." He
observed that as the magistrate had made no mention of
the Standard, it was not
possible for this Court to ascertain what, if any, consideration the magistrate
gave to the "requirement"
under the Standard.
[48] The issue which needs to
be considered is the status of the Standard in the sense of whether and to what
extent, if any, it governed
or affected the activities of the respondent on and
before the date of the accident. As I have noted, the Standard was tendered
consent. There was no evidence relating to it other than Ms Rabe's stated
familiarity with it. A similar situation arose in
Chicco v City of Woodville
(1990) Aust Tort Reports 81-028. At 67,895 King CJ said:
"Publications
containing safety standards approved by the Standards Association of Australia
were admitted by consent. These standards
do not have legal force, except, of
course, to the extent that they may be given such force by a particular statute.
They had no
legal force in the circumstances of the present case.
is permissible for an expert on safety to have recourse to such published
standards, if he sees fit, as one of the sources from
which he informs himself
as to matters relating to the subject on which he is expert. But the standards,
of themselves, have no legal
or evidentiary force."
[49] At the same page, Cox J said that viewed "testimonially",
the standards appeared to be expressions of opinion. At 67,897, Millhouse
said that the standards were "merely the expressions of opinion of people
speaking under the aegis of the association". Later,
his Honour said:
"I suggest tender of
the Standard should not have been allowed. As it was, it got in by consent and
there it is. I reiterate though,
that such a 'Standard' is not evidence."
[50] In short, a Standard such as AS-1755 is merely a guideline
without any legally binding effect. In the absence of statutory embodiment,
their relevance in any proceedings would only be to the extent that there has
been expert evidence as to the extent to which they
express good practice; see
Reed v Peridis
[2005] SASC 136
and Hughes v Van Eyk
[2008] NSWSC 525
[51] There is no law, and there was no evidence before the magistrate,
to suggest that AS-1755 was something that the respondent was
required to obey
or would have been well advised to observe. Of itself, the Standard added
nothing to the appellant's case before
the magistrate. Although count 2 was
particularised as including a failure to provide and maintain guards in
accordance with AS-1755,
there was also a particular relating to a failure to
provide guards so as to ensure persons using the conveyor were not exposed to
risks to health and safety. That particular contained no reference to the
Standard. The case as to count 2 was thus squarely put
on the basis of a
failure to guard the conveyor, and in his reasons, the magistrate addressed the
absence of the guard at the time
of the accident and the later installation of
the switch/guard.
[52] The Standard added nothing to the appellant's case
at the hearing. From all of that, it follows that this ground is without
(emphasis added)
addition Pullin JA in the WA Court of Appeal in
MR & RC Smith Pty Ltd
t/as Ultra Tune (Osborne Park) v Wyatt (No 2)
[2012] WASCA 110
(Ultra Tune) said:
“[69] The trial judge said the Australian Standard was
'relevant' but did not explain why this was so. Standards Australia or
predecessors have existed since 1922. See the history set out in Benchmark
Certification Pty Ltd v Standards Australia International
[2004] FCA 1489
(2004) 212 ALR 464
[16] [19]. Standards published by Standards Australia have no
legal application unless adopted and applied by statute or by
[70] However, even if there is no statutory or contractual
application of an Australian Standard, it may still be relevant in evidence
it is accepted as representing a consensus of professional opinion and practical
sensible, safe precautions. In that way, an Australian Standard can assist the
court in determining whether some aspect in the construction
of a building
constitutes a danger which must be guarded against by the exercise of reasonable
care: see Fitzpatrick v Job
[2007] WASCA 63
only reference to the Australian Standards in the Tasmanian Work, Health and
Safety legislation is a reference to the registration
of amusement devices in
of Schedule 5 of the
Work Health and Safety Regulations
Accordingly other
than the requirement for registration of certain amusement devices, it follows
that Ms Gamble was under no obligation
imposed by law to comply with the
Australian Standards.
the Standards are relevant, assessing their probative value is a matter for the
, Pullin JA said:
“[21] Whether the Building Code of Australia or the
Australian Standard applied to the construction of the building by statute
matter for the court to decide as a matter of law. Construing the provisions of
the relevant Building Code of Australia and
Australian Standard was also a
matter for the court to decide as a matter of law. The opinions of witnesses
of domestic statutes do not bind a
submissions Ms Gamble argued with respect to the interpretation of consensus as
set out in paragraph 152 above that it might be:
• consensus between the two engineers who gave
evidence about Ms Gamble’s compliance; that is Mr McDonald and Professor
Eager and there was no consensus between them on that
• consensus of the standards committee which drafted the
Standards which only Professor Eager can give evidence about given
chair of the committee when AS 3533.4.1:2005 was drafted and he advised the
committee reached “a consensus from
all the divergent views within the
in writing the standards. As such it was submitted his interpretation of the
standards and their application to Ms Gamble’s
amusement devices can be
accepted as the consensus view of this committee, or
represented a consensus of professional opinion about sensible, safe
precautions.
my view, what Pullin JA is referring to is not the first two interpretations of
consensus but the third given that the reference
is to consensus between
professionals and those with practical experience of sensible safe precautions.
This interpretation is supported
in the evidence as follows.
Shahandeh, the geotechnical engineer, gave evidence about the role of various
Australian Standards which he referred to in his
He said it was
industry standard and considered best practice for any construction works in
Australia to follow the relevant standard.
Although it was a voluntary document,
it was often turned into law by references in legislation. He said that if there
was an Australian
Standard for a job, or work, or services, the preference is to
refer to and follow that
this issue Mr McDonald said the following in evidence:
“...the best way to think of Australian Standards,
they're they’re a a body of knowledge by an industry panel of experts
has been built up in consensus to provide a series of controls that are relevant
to the device. So within the part 4 part 1,
it basically tells you what the
minimum practice of what you should be doing within the use of an inflatable
[Indistinct word(s)].
It tells you the minimum practice of what you should be
doing in regards to inspection and and design, and construction and operation.
It it really steps it out.”
was the following exchange with Professor Eager when he gave evidence:
“Professor Eager, isn’t it a case that the stan
– Australian Standards essentially set out a bare minimum standard
accordance with a particular aspects of a standard that are being
identified?..... I don’t say bare minimum, um the committees
chaired and the committees that I’m on, they’re are minimum safety
like like a a technical standard for safety
there was no legal obligation upon Ms Gamble to comply with the Standards, they
provide a measure of what is reasonably required,
according to industry
standards, in order to implement sensible, safe precautions with respect the
design, operation and use of the
inflatable amusement devices. As such these
Standards provide the guidelines against which
“reasonably
practicable”
steps should be measured.
said that it is clear from the evidence the Standards are complex and in some
instances ambiguous and deficient. Mr Shahandeh
said AS 3533.4.1:2018 which
superseded AS 3533.4.1:2005, which was applicable at the time the jumping castle
was purchased in or
2005 version, significantly lacked information and required revision
“to provide a more appropriate specification of suitable anchor types
and dimensions and practical methods for operators to
assess soil conditions, a
prescriptive empirical methodology to assess the anchor retention capacity and
appropriate methods of
installation.”
Mr McDonald
understanding the standards was complex and difficult and it follows that would
be particularly so for someone like Ms Gamble
who is not a qualified
GAMBLE’S BUSINESS
Purchase of the
jumping castle
Ms Gamble’s response to WorkSafe’s request for information pursuant
to s155 of the Act she looked at the East Inflatables
Manufacturing Co
Ltd’s (East Inflatables) website which said its jumping castles complied
with Australian Standards and it
listed AS 3533.4.1 which I infer is
AS3533.4.1:2005.
In evidence
Mr Monte said both he and Ms Gamble had a discussion about the significance to
them of the reference to Australian Standards
“we were trying
to make sure it was legal here in Australia, up to Australian
Standards.”
5 November 2015, Ms Gamble purchased an E2-030 jumping castle from East
Inflatables for USD
Ms Gamble believed
she was purchasing the jumping castle from the East Inflatables Sydney warehouse
located at 1/35 Amsterdam Circuit,
Wyong NSW 2259 (website:
www.east-inflatables.com.au
evidence with respect to this appears:
In Mr Monte’s record of interview with
“Do you know how the jumping castle was purchased? Direct
from the manufacturer or...
...The manufacturer was overseas we found out. But we thought
it was actually here in Sydney. They have a warehouse in Sydney. And
onto the site it’s– it’s all up to the Australian Standard for
In evidence Mr Monte said:
“...see the phrase there that ah the jumping castles,
they were especially designed to comply with Australian Standards, AS3533.4.1?
See that? Do you-
That’s exactly right. I think that’s, yeah, exactly
And did you Rosemary have a discussion about the significance
of that – of the reference to the Australian Standards?
Of course. We – we were trying to make sure it was legal
here in Australia, up to Australian Standards. We always
In Ms Gamble’s response to the s155 Notice from
WorkSafe she advised in response to a request for “[d]etails of the
of the inflatable amusement devices”:
Ms Gamble first contacted East Inflatables via email believing
she was purchasing a jumping castle directly from a Sydney warehouse
were Sydney contact details on the East Inflatables website
www.east-inflatables.com.au with a Sydney warehouse location
at 1/35 Amsterdam
Circuit, Wyong NSW 2259: Phone: 02 8091
East Inflatables website represented it was a member of the International
Association of Amusement Parks and Attractions (IAAPA):
Member No. 385887.
According to its website, their inflatables are said to be designed to comply
with Australian Standards, specifically
was not until 14 November 2015 after a number of emails from Ms Gamble to
, 9 days after payment had been made and the purchase
completed, that
“This unit is in
China factory stock and we deliver it to you by
the jumping castle arrived:
• Mr Monte was working with Ms Gamble and was present on
the day she opened the package containing the jumping castle received
Inflatables.
Monte confirmed Ms Gamble’s s155 response that the jumping castle arrived
with four (4) anchorage
a catalogue booklet detailing
other jumping castles available for purchase from East
Inflatables
• Mr Monte said East
Inflatables did not provide eight (8) anchorage pegs with the jumping castle
which is contrary to what
East Inflatables advised WorkSafe in its s155
• There was no operating manual received with the jumping
Specifically, the one page E2-030
or the 13 page operating
were not included with the
jumping castle.
• Ms Gamble had to download a
East Inflatables website.
Mr Monte said
in evidence Ms Gamble showed the two-page
which she had downloaded to him
“later on”.
Mr Monte said he
read that manual.
He advised that
manual’s instruction at paragraph 7 “Extend the strap drive the
provided stakes through the ring at
the end of the strap” was interpreted
by him and Ms Gamble to mean that the number of pegs required to install
the jumping
castle was four stakes,
which equated to the number of pegs supplied by East
Inflatables.
• Ms Gamble confirmed in her s155 response to WorkSafe
that on 20 September 2021, Taz-Zorb purchased a new Huawei electric blower
the jumping
Representations
made by East Inflatables to Ms Gamble
Compliance with the Australian Standards:
advised Ms Gamble in an email of 4 November 2015:
“Our products are produced according to Australian
standards, even certified by the most strict European standards.
don’t worry about our product
Additionally, Mr Heikkilae, an information technology specialist, gave
evidence that on a number of dates from the time of purchase
up to 9 December
2021 East Inflatables represented on its website that the jumping castle
complied with Australian
an email exchange on 29 March 2022 between
Inflatables and James Day at WorkSafe the following representations were
“Could I please request from you additional information
in relation to the bouncy castle, namely;
Any information pertaining
to testing or certification to Australian Standards”
“We have EN 14960, pvc material and blower certificate.
See attached.
What's more, we produce inflatables according to Australian
standard enclosed.”
McDonald confirmed in his report that:
“As stated above,
East Inflatables provided, in my opinion, self-declarations in communications,
on their website and in a document
entitled “Our Castles Meet
AS3533.4-2005" of conformity to the
East Inflatables email correspondence regarding
purchase and delivery:
wrote to Ms Gamble about the jumping castle on 4 November 2015 indicating
“This unit is in stock and ready to ship now if
interested.
It takes around 5 working days to deliver to your door
Our products are produced according to Australian standards, even
certified by the most strict European standards.
Hence, dont worry about our
Gamble responded to that email in the following terms:
“Fantastic, thank you Fiona, I will buy it ..
send me an invoice for payment of crayon playland.
can we do western union
Gamble paid for the jumping castle on 5 November 2015 and provided her shipping
details to East Inflatables by email on 5 November
then until 13 November 2015 Ms Gamble made six requests for
to provide the tracking number, including contacting
DHL directly to request details of the parcel/tracking
On 13 November 2015
Ms Gamble emailed
in the following
“I have had no reply from you regarding the crayon
castle, no tracking number, NOTHING. I needed this castle for my business
therefore will be losing business because of your company.
I have called the
Sydney office and no one answers !!!!!!!
If I do not receive a legitimate
tracking number by end of business today I will be requesting my money back and
if needed begin legal
A tracking number was supplied by
but Ms Gamble
learnt, on checking, the jumping castle was in Hong Kong. Upon querying this
Ms Gamble was advised by email on 14 November
“[t]his unit is China factory
jumping castle was shipped to Australia by East Inflatables Ms Gamble
required an invoice for customs import duty purposes,
which she requested on 17
November 2015.
sent Ms Gamble an invoice for the incorrect amount
which she explained in the following terms:
“I help amend your invoice amount to be $660 to help you
lower your tax.
Hence, you should tell them the product is $660.
to your country policy, you won’t be charged for tax until your product
exceeds $1000.”
evidence of East Inflatables’ misrepresentations about the shipping of the
jumping castle to Ms Gamble appears on the
Quality Assurance document for that
product which is dated 15 November
This document suggests
the jumping castle could not have left the factory before that date because it
had not been cleared to do
so – despite the representations made by
to Ms Gamble between 4 November 2015 and 13 November
2015 to the contrary.
therefore find East Inflatables induced Ms Gamble to believe the jumping castle:
• met Australian Standards when it did
in stock and ready to be shipped from East Inflatables’ Sydney warehouse
when it was not;
• had been collected by DHL and was in transit
shortly after it had been purchased when it was not. When pressed a tracking
number was provided by “Fiona” on 13 November
Ms Gamble enquired of DHL and determined the tracking number was incorrect as
the delivery address was Hong Kong. It was not until
“Fiona” admitted the jumping castle was being shipped from the East
Inflatables’ factory in China;
• East Inflatables then invited Ms Gamble to deceive
Australian Customs; an invitation which she
Representations
made by East Inflatables to the Regulator
Inflatables made the following claims on 24 March 2022 in its s155 response to
Hello James,
We would like to response you as
2. See attached generic jumping castles operation manual and
E2-030 manual.
3. For E2-030
, it comes with blower, pegs, ground sheet and
repair kits.
4. We provide blower, pegs, ground sheet and repair kits for
each castle, this is the standard factory configuration. Our accessories
are attached.
5. E2-030 comes with 8 pegs.
6. The length of peg is 47cm,
diameter is 1cm, weight is about 600g. It is J shape. Material is deformed bar.
Peg photos are attached.
7. We provided all accessories and instructions, see
9. E2-030 comes with 8 pegs, floor plans are
11. Due to the long time gap, we only can find the invoice
at the moment.
Sincerely Yours,
Candy ( Sales Manager )
the evidence of East Inflatables on these matters is inconsistent with that of
Ms Gamble and Mr Monte, I accept the evidence
of Ms Gamble and Mr Monte. The
only evidence contrary to their evidence on these issues is the evidence of East
Inflatables which
is not credible given that company’s misrepresentations
highlighted in paragraph 176 and the unimpressive evidence of Mr Chen
discussed below.
therefore do not accept the claims made by East Inflatables because in order of
those made in paragraph 177:
2. neither the generic (13 page) operation manual nor the
specific (1 page) E2-030 manual were supplied with the jumping castle;
blower was supplied;
4. the accessories photograph shows accessories which
were not supplied, i.e. 8 x 470 mm pegs, blower, different repair kit, 13 page
operation manual and E2-030 1 page manual;
5. only 4 x 300 mm pegs were
6. the pegs both described and depicted in the photographs were not
those supplied;
7. not all of the accessories were supplied, and by
“Candy’s” own admission they could only allegedly find the
This does not establish what accessories were supplied;
pegs were supplied, no floor plan was attached to the response, nor was it
provided on purchase; and
11. the “Pro Forma
supplied is clearly a reconstruction and does not match that produced to
WorkSafe by Ms Gamble.
Heikkilae gave evidence regarding the East Inflatables website as
• in his first report dated 14 October
able to establish by snapshots
November 2017,
4 May 2018, 11 May 2018
and 13 April 2020 that only the 2 page manual downloaded by Ms Gamble was
available for download/printing
from the East Inflatables website on those
• he was also able to conclude that 8 snapshots of the 13 page
manual “East-Inflatables-Manual.pdf” were available
between 29 June
2022 and 26 October 2023. While the 29 June 2022 snapshot was incomplete,
corrupted or otherwise unreadable, the
second snapshot, dated 1 November
an identical copy of the 13 page manual. It follows that it is likely that the
first time that a snapshot of the 13 page
manual was available online was 29
June 2022. That is after the Wind Event;
• in his second report dated 3
November 2024
he examined the home page of the East Inflatables website, and specifically the
links in the footer of the Website to “Manual”
(which he determined
to be a link to the 2 page manual) and to “Operation Manual” (which
he determined to be a link to
the 13 page manual). The first time that a link
appeared to an “Operation Manual” (13 page manual) was on 24 March
No link appeared to the
“Operation Manual” on a snapshot of the website on 23 March
These dates are after the Wind
• at no time was Mr Heikkilae able to find the 1-page E2-030
manual available for downloading/printing online.
• having regard to Mr Heikkilae’s findings,
noting that the s155 Notice was served on East Inflatables via email on 23
on the following day, for the first time, the link to the “Operation
Manual” (13 pages) appears on the East Inflatables
website. This is
unlikely to have been a coincidence.
Inflatables obligations under the Standards and its compliance with those
East Inflatables obligations as to design and
manufacture
the time of purchasing the jumping castle in early November 2015, the following
Australian Standards placed mandatory obligations
Inflatables:
• AS 3533.1:2009, Amusement rides and devices Part 1:
Design and construction, provides the technical requirements for design
construction of amusement rides and devices. It required East Inflatables to
ensure the jumping castle was fit for
• Section 2.1 Classification - The design of the jumping
castle by East Inflatables affects the classification of the jumping
jumping castle was classified as higher than a class 2 device, Taz-Zorb was
required to register the jumping castle with
WorkSafe in accordance with the
Work Health and Safety Regulations 2012
. There is no evidence East Inflatables
informed Taz-Zorb or provided any information which would assist in classifying
in accordance with clause 2.1 of AS 3533.1:2009. Mr Monte gave
evidence his understanding was the jumping castle was classified
as a class 1
device because the slide platform was less than 3 metres in
This understanding was gleaned
from information obtained from Safe Work Australia with respect to how to class
the jumping castle.
Testing - This section requires the jumping castle to be load tested by East
Inflatables.
There is no evidence East Inflatables performed any load testing in accordance
of AS 3533.1:2009.
Information – This
section requires East Inflatables to provide Ms Gamble with all information for
the safe deployment and
operation of the jumping
• AS 3533.4.1:2005 Amusement rides and devices
Specific requirements – Land-borne inflatable devices also places
mandatory obligation on East Inflatables which will be highlighted
is agreement between Mr McDonald and Professor Eager that despite the jumping
castle being a class two device (although Ms Gamble
and Mr Monte believed it was
a class one device) it did not require
registration.
addition there is evidence from Mr McDonald, Professor Eager and Dr Peiris as to
breaches of the Standards by East Inflatables
as the manufacturer,
▪ AS 3533.1:2009:
The failed D ring and the tested D ring revealed
that the anchors were not load tested by East
Inflatables;
East Inflatables did not provide Ms Gamble with the information required for the
safe deployment and operation of the jumping
There were deficiencies in marking, particularly as to the classification of the
device under the Australian
▪ AS 3533.4.1:2005:
Information, in particular a failure to provide a
report as to the device’s status in conformity with this standard, or any
installation, inspection, maintenance and operations
information;
Marking: failure to provide classification of the device in accordance with AS
3533.4.1:2005
Inflatables obligation to provide information
of AS 3533.4.1:2005
imposed a mandatory obligation on the manufacturer or supplier to provide
information with respect to:
general product
information;
installation
information;
• s13.2.2: inspection and maintenance
information;
• s13.2.3 operating
information.
McDonald said that
“[t]he information provided by East Inflatables is
predominately generic and general in
with Professor Eager that East Inflatables, as the manufacturer, did not comply
Clause13.1 provides:
“13.1 General product information
General product
information shall be provided by the manufacturer and supplier and shall:
• be printed legibly in English and in simple form; and
• use illustrations wherever possible.
The information shall include, as a minimum, details of
installation, operation, inspection and maintenance, in particular the
(i) The height clearance and space required to operate the
equipment safely.
(ii) Any restrictions relating to operation, operating
surfaces and anchorages.
(iii) Intended restrictions for patrons expressed
in height and weight.
(iv) Intended number of patrons with reference to their
height and weight.
(v) Overall packed dimensions and weight.
requirements for the air supply and pressure.
(vii) The type, extent and
placement of impact absorbing material to be used.
A report indicating the
device’s status with respect to conformity with this Standard shall also
be provided.”
McDonald, with whom Professor Eager agreed, concluded that none of the three
manuals met the minimum information requirements of
is titled Minimum requirements for installation, maintenance and operating
manuals. It is in the following terms:
13.2.1 Installation information
The supplier or manufacturer shall provide the following
installation information:
(a) A list of equipment.
(b) The method of anchorage, number
of anchorage points and test method.
(c) The maximum safe wind speed in and
out of service (deflated).
(d) Siting, height and operational space
requirement.
(e) The maximum allowable slope of the site.
control measures.
(g) The air performance requirement of the
(h) That a residual current device needs to be sued in the
electricity supply.
(i) Lightning requirements, both operational and
13.2.2 Inspection and maintenance information
The supplier or manufacturer shall provide information on the
inspection and maintenance of the equipment covering, as a minimum,
listed in Clauses 15 and 16.
13.2.3 Operating Information
The manufacturer or supplier shall provide all necessary
operating information and requirements, including but not limited to the
(a) Staffing-minimum number of operators and attendants
(b) Supervision-where to locate staff to ensure constant
observation of all parts of the playing area and all activity on the inflatable,
admission of patrons to the inflatable in a controlled and safe manner, keeping
the entrance free from obstruction at all times and
use of a whistle or other
loud signal to attract the attention of the patrons.
limits-restriction of the maximum number of patrons at one time to the design
number, restriction of the maximum height
of the patrons to the design
(d) Environmental conditions affecting the set up of the device and
patrons on the device, e.g. site suitability, heat, moisture,
treatments for
surfaces, e.g. slide mats.
(e) Patron dress code-suitable attire, including
footwear, eyewear and removal of hard, sharp, loose or dangerous
(f) Activity controls-separation of larger or more boisterous users
from smaller or more timid ones, prevention of patrons from climbing
on the containing walls, prevention of inappropriate activities (e.g.
somersaults and rough play), restrictions on the
consumption of food, drink and
gum and the enforcement of correct riding position on slides.
procedures to be followed in the event of an emergency or
(h) Refuelling procedures-evacuation of the inflatable prior to
refuelling of a blower powered by an internal combustion engine.
McDonald, with whom Professor Eager agreed, concluded that none of the three
manuals in evidence met the minimum information requirements
McDonald provided a very detailed analysis of East Inflatables non compliance
of the Standard in separate tables in his report as follows:
general product
information;
b) s13.2.1:
installation
information;
c) s13.2.2:
inspection and maintenance
information;
d) s13.2.3: operating
information.
those tables he considers in detail each sub paragraph of those sections as they
relate to the 1 page E2-030 manual, the two page
manual which Ms Gamble printed
from the East Inflatables website and the 13 page operating manual. While
Mr McDonald concluded that
none of those documents complied with the
requirements of
as they relate to the provision of information, and on the
assumption Ms Gamble was not provided with the 1 page E2-030 manual and
page operating manual, it follows that:
a) Ms Gamble was provided with no information, other than an
assurance by East Inflatables, the jumping castle complied with Australian
b) the information that Ms Gamble was able to obtain, by
downloading and printing the 2-page manual from the East Inflatables website,
was grossly inadequate when assessed against the Australian Standards, and in
of AS 3533.4.1:2005; and
c) Ms Gamble’s alleged failures
to comply with the Standards are directly correlated with the failures by East
Inflatables to
comply with its mandatory obligations as a manufacturer and
supplier, with respect to
of AS 3533.4.1:2005.
“Andy” Chen’s evidence
Chen confirmed that
a sales member, responded on 24
to a letter from
WorkSafe regarding the jumping
Mr Chen said
wrote the response and he went through it with
Mr Chen then said he
reviewed the content of the response she had prepared and it was
roughly the same as what our situation
and he made
minor amendments to the response before it was
was not called to give evidence. Her response to
WorkSafe, approved by Mr Chen, included a false
Under cross
examination Mr Chen eventually accepted the invoice provided by Ms Gamble
true tax invoice.
a) the one page
page manual
are the same, or roughly the
same as the manuals available in November
When asked whether the manuals
were provided with the jumping castle, Mr Chen said “So, mmm, yes uh in
general we will provide
the manual. So, sometimes we could send elec- - uh
electrician
[sic] versions to the
customers.”
Inflatables provided a copy of the floor plan depicted at pp 202 - 203 of Case
Book Volume 3 with the E2-030 jumping castle
“if the customer
When asked what process or person was in place at East Inflatables to ensure
both manuals were included with the purchase of E2-030,
he responded, “I I
don’t know, I’m not so sure about this... So so its nearly like 10
years, it’s been for
c) in November 2015,
with respect to packing personnel “So so we have few people involved in
the packing because this is a very
huge item, so we have two or three people
involved in
Mr Chen indicated everyone knows what to pack and there is no form to tick what
has been packed in each package before it is sent
out. This was “roughly
the same in 2015.”
Chen said the photograph of the jumping castle and
accessories
included in East
Inflatables
response depicted the same accessories provided with the E2-030
jumping castle.
He clarified
that the E2-030 jumping castle came with an average four (4) to eight (8)
in general,
we provide four to eight pegs, uh it depends, uh it varies between customers.
Some customers would like to purchase some
when four pegs would be provided instead of eight, Mr Chen confirmed that
usually if it’s below 20 square ah metres, it will be four, and
over will be
specifically how many pegs would be provided with the E2-030 model, to which the
interpreter clarified “
So – so, do you mean like how many pegs
were anchored?.
Before a response was provided, Mr Chen said “
I think it would be
eight, should be
Chen said the dimensions of the pegs supplied are “
roughly the
” as those shown in the
photographs
provided with
East Inflatables’
When asked if at
November 2015, East Inflatables supplied 300 millimetre by 10 millimetre
J-shaped pegs, Mr Chen said “
because it’s been 10 years, a while,
but now we use the seven – 47 centimetre
However East
Inflatables’
response to WorkSafe represented eight 47 cm pegs were
supplied with the purchase of a E2-030 Jumping Castle from which the inference
is drawn that these pegs were supplied to Ms
Chen confirmed the quality assurance examination (QA) on the jumping
was performed by a
production manager by the name of
He accepted in cross examination that the date of the QA document was 15
November 2015 and that was the order
Mr Chen said that the
QA included checks for sewing and reinforcement to ensure the product is
strong enough and can endure
Inflatables
response provided test results with respect to European
Mr Chen also
gave evidence that East Inflatables “
produce our product in Australian
accept this evidence given the evidence of Mr McDonald and Professor Eager that
Ms Gamble’s jumping castle did not
comply with the Australian Standards.
Mr Chen was cross-examined about whether a screen shot shown to him demonstrated
the homepage
for East Inflatables as at 19 September
to which he responded,
it seems like the one because that’s the internet order IT
Department, but for me, it seems like the
whether sales representative
of East Inflatables was
authorised to represent that the E2-030 jumping castle model complied with
Australian Standards, Mr Chen
reiterated that “
we produce the product
according to Australian
Mr Chen eventually conceded that East Inflatables did not perform or arrange for
their products to be tested or assessed to confirm
they comply with Australian
from East Inflatables was using her private
email to correspond with Ms Gamble when
amend the tax invoice to enable Ms Gamble to avoid paying tax in
Mr Chen later
confirmed in answer to a proposition that
negotiating with Ms Gamble regarding the dry slide sold by East Inflatables that
So, ah generally we just – we will say if they can get order and
then we will produce the product
”. This is in stark contrast to
email representations to Ms
“Coco” email
D5 details an email exchange between
beancoco23@gmail.com
sales-03@east-inflatables.com
which is as follows:
on 25 January
“Good morning. I am interested in x2 of your jumping
castles. pick up Sydney warehouse.
Could I please get
some information on size as well as what is included in the package. Such as
blower. Cords .pegs etc. And a how
many are supplied .
Thankyou so much for
and “Candy’s” response to
“Coco” on 25 January 2024:
“Hello Coco,
Thank you for your kind
In the attachment, please check our Sydney warehouse stock
We have E102038, but no E102036.
Each castle come with a blower, 4
pegs and some repair materials.
Dear “Coco”, please kindly advise
your final order.
Your early reply will be highly appreciated.
Candy (Sales Manager)
East Inflatables Manufacturing Co.,
Chen confirmed that jumping castle E102038 is the crayon jumping castle referred
This I find, after
comparing Exhibit P81 (Court Book Volume 3 page 75 fifth product down the page
on the left hand side), Exhibit
P84 (Court Book Volume 3 pages 202, 206 and 228)
and Exhibit D6 page 2 (third product down the page on the left hand side), to be
the same jumping castle as that purchased by Ms Gamble in November 2015. Mr Chen
also confirmed
was their sales manager and she also
responded to WorkSafe on behalf of East Inflatables and she was the same person
who wrote the
email set out above on 25 January
Mr Chen further
confirmed that
was of similar seniority to him at
East Inflatables, although maybe she was slightly junior to
email exchange supports, by inference, a finding that given the E102038 jumping
castle is the same as the E2-030 jumping castle
then only four pegs were
supplied to Ms Gamble when she purchased the jumping castle in November 2015.
This is notwithstanding Mr
Chen asserting that the email of
inviting Ms Gamble to commit customs fraud were
personal emails using her personal email address and by inference they were
without the manufacturer’s authorisation. In my view the entire
email exchange between “Fiona” and Ms Gamble makes
was communicating with Ms Gamble for the purpose of
selling a product on behalf of East Inflatables. As to
email – the email address used (
sales-03@east-inflatables.com
is clearly, on its face, an authorised email address of East Inflatables and,
further, was clearly from a sales person sent to
response to an enquiry about purchasing jumping castles from East
Inflatables.
many pegs were supplied to Ms Gamble?
addition to the evidence canvassed above about the number of pegs supplied to Ms
Gamble at the time of purchase further evidence
is as follows:
(i) In Ms Gamble’
response to WorkSafe she
“When the jumping castle arrived, it was supplied with 4
pegs from the manufacturer. A manual was not provided. Ms Gamble had
to obtain a
copy of the manual from the manufacturer’s
(ii) Mr Monte said in his interview with WorkSafe:
“And what does it say about setting up the jumping
Ah, put four pegs in on an angle. That’s all it was, um,
shipped with it. Pretty hard to put a peg in on a 45 degree
Monte gave evidence in chief as follows:
“Okay and when you said um something about four pegs, was
that something that was in relation to the other jumping castles?
That’s what – that’s what come out of the
castle. That’s what we received, is – is the four
cross examination Mr Monte said:
“Now, when the um jumping castle arrived, ah you were
there when – when it was unpacked, contained the four 300 millimetre
you’ve referred to, it contained a ground sheet, correct?
“If we can go to CB 3 229? That’s it. Mr Monte, was
the jumping castle delivered with eight pegs of the – of the
-depicted – of the length depicted in that photo?
No, not at all, only
spite of East Inflatables claim that it
eight pegs, with this model of inflatable device, it produced no record or proof
that in fact occurred. The absence of that
evidence, the evidence I have
highlighted above together with issues associated with East Inflatables
credibility, including the
inference to be drawn from the
“Coco”/”Candy”
email, result in a finding that
only four non-compliant pegs were delivered to Ms Gamble with the jumping
manual supplied to Ms Gamble?
response to WorkSafe
Ms Gamble said the following regarding East Inflatables’ failure to supply
the jumping castle with an operating manual, or
any operating instructions at
“Details of any instructions provided by you to the
operators as it relates to setting up of the inflatable amusement
A manual was not provided with the jumping castle when
purchased by Taz-Zorb. On her own initiative Ms Gamble downloaded a manual
the manufacturer’s website (copy attached
Details of the purchase of the inflatable amusement
When the jumping castle arrived, it was supplied with 4 pegs
from the manufacturer. A manual was not provided. Ms Gamble had to obtain
of the manual from the manufacturer’s
Monte also gave evidence regarding the manual:
“Were you working with um Ms Gamble when she obtained the
jumping castle?
Yeah, I was there the day she opened
Okay and um, did you receive an operations manual in relation
to the jumping castle?
No. I think Rosemary had to download it, actually. Um, I think
it – we received a um – just a brochure of different types
jumping castles they had on
his taped Record of Interview with WorkSafe on 22 March
Mr Monte said:
“Are you aware of any operators manual for the jumping
It come on a – ah, what was it, a, um, oh, a booklet. It was
on a back of a booklet. And that’s what they send you.
A catalogue
basically. And it’s on the back of
in his evidence Mr Monte said:
“I was mistaken there. I thought I’d seen it, but
what it was, was the – I think it had on the back of it “four
pegs,” and then ah Rosemary had to download it, then I read the
Is the – is the booklet that came with it, a catalogue?
Are you describing a catalogue?
Yes, it was a catalogue. It was a catalogue of different other
jumping castles that you could
Monte also gave evidence with respect to how Ms Gamble obtained the two page
“...you indicated um that Rosemary Gamble had downloaded
something from the website, which you had read?
Yes, that is true. That is
But as far as the instructions that were contained on the
document that Rosemary downloaded, do you recall if the instructions were
specific to that model of jumping castle, the crayon jumping castle or
No, I don't think
So once you received the um jumping castle, and ah did you and
Rosemary go online again together to see if you could find a
Um, Rosemary did ... and then she showed it to me later
Does that appear to be ah the manual which Rosemary showed to
you, which she sourced
Yes, yes, that
Heikkilae’s findings, summarised at paragraph 180 are relevant to this
Accordingly
I find no manual was supplied with the jumping castle by East Inflatables and in
(i) Ms Gamble went online and downloaded/printed the two page manual, most
likely on 3 December 2015;
(ii) the 13 page manual was not available on the East Inflatables website in
late November/early December 2015, and did not become
available on its website
until 24 March 2022, after East Inflatables received the
Notice from
WorkSafe; and
(iii) the one page manual upon which the prosecution was largely based was not
available for downloading on the East Inflatables
website at any time.
Ms Gamble and
Mr Monte’s interpretation of the manual
Monte gave evidence regarding his interpretation of the two page manual
downloaded by Ms Gamble, both in evidence and in his interview
with WorkSafe on
22 March 2022.
evidence he said:
“...what instructions were given about um installing the
Well, they had to be on an angle, um
that’s um – so, we tried to put them on an angle the best we can
– or we could.
And was that all that the instructions said about the installation of the
pegs?......
Yes, it said 45 degrees. I remember
Did you do any research in relation to the pegs that should be used, or
the number of pegs?
No. Like, I said, I was always – always under the
impression with – impression that um that was the bare minimum, is what
...what instructions did that document give you about operating
in the wind?
The – the one that Rosemary downloaded, um I think it
– ah, not to be running in winds over – I’m not sure
in miles an hour or kilometres an hour. Um, it – it basically went through
how to unroll the castle, ah put it up,
deconstruct it, what we’ve just
...the sentence “Extend the strap drive – extend
the strap, drive the provided stakes through the ring at the end of the
strap.” What did you interpret that to mean in terms of the number of
stakes that you had to install...?
his Record of Interview Mr Monte said:
“And what does it say about setting up the jumping
Ah, put four pegs in on an angle. That’s all it was, um,
shipped with it. Pretty hard to put a peg in on a 45 degree
Does it talk about the wind?
No, not that I think, no. I’m sure it doesn’t.
I’m not quite sure to be
Do you know how many retention pegs must be used for the device
to achieve its maximum operating wind speed?
Ah, four is as far as I’m aware. From – from the
accepted that such an
interpretation was open to a lay person if only four pegs were supplied.
Informed by what the Standard required,
each agreed that such an interpretation
was erroneous but by inference an innocent and understandable error on both Ms
Mr Monte’s part.
history of Ms Gamble’s business
Gamble started her business, known as Taz-Zorb, in
after she received a
$5,000.00 loan from her
Mr Monte and Ms
Gamble travelled to Zoodoo near Hobart and saw water balls in use. After seeing
children using water balls, Ms
Gamble and Mr Monte discussed how that would be a
good business idea.
undertook research and decided on purchasing land based zorb balls for safety
reasons. They settled on purchasing three zorb
balls to start Ms Gamble’s
business. They initially operated zorb balls at the Esk
” after which Ms Gamble gradually expanded the business to
councils, fairs and birthday
initially utilised a steel barrier which went all the way around the zorb balls
at the Esk Market.
Taz-Zorb started operating at different locations, Ms Gamble designed and
arranged for the manufacture of the zorb ball
Gamble operated the jumping castle for five months of the year keeping it in
storage for the remainder of the year. Typically,
the jumping castle was hired
for use on weekends.
Gamble put the revenue from the hire of the amusement devices back into the
business in order to grow the business, and to replace
the zorb balls every 9 to
Gamble’s use of the jumping castle
Monte’s evidence included the following:
(a) use of the jumping castle was seasonal; from spring to
were occasions where the Zorb balls or the jumping castle would be used
separately “depending on who – who wanted
number of times he had erected the jumping castle at events between its purchase
and December 2021 would be “in the
hundreds somewhere... I wouldn’t
, but probably 100 times, around there
somewhere.”
his record of interview with WorkSafe Mr Monte said he had set up of the zorb
of times in the
response to WorkSafe Ms Gamble explained the background to the purchase
of the jumping castle as
“Details of the history of use of the inflatable devices
The jumping castle was purchased in November 2015. The jumping castle is used
for approximately 5 months of the year and is in storage
for the rest of the
year due to weather. Typically, the jumping castle is hired for used (sic) on
Gamble was also asked by WorkSafe to provide,
“Details of any prior
incidents or injuries associated with the use of the inflatable amusement
, to which she responded:
“One incident occurred 4 years ago when a 10-year-old boy suffered a
bleeding nose while he was in the zorb ball on a hot day.
No accident or
incident as such
Gamble was asked by WorkSafe to provide details of the experience of the
operators of the inflatable amusement devices. In her
Ms Gamble: 9 years zorbs; 5 years jumping castle
Mr Monte: 9 years zorbs; 5 years jumping castle
Mr Barrett: 1 year Zorbs; approximately 1 month jumping
was Ms Gamble’s system with respect to operating the jumping castle prior
to 16 December 2021 and was it effective?
n) a. in the Complaint alleges a failure with respect to the
“...provision and maintenance of safe systems of work...”
, with the alleged failure the subject of seven Particulars. Where the
Crown alleges a failure to maintain a safe system of work,
the Court must
examine the whole system. In
Director of Public Prosecutions v JCS
Fabrications Pty Ltd and JMAL Group Pty Ltd
[2019] VSCA 50
Victorian Court of Appeal said:
“41. Subject to the further observations below, in the
instant case, the prosecution alleges that the respondents failed to
system with respect to the unloading of the plant by failing to ensure that a
forklift supported the plant before the
restraint strapping was released during
the task of unloading the plant. Putting the case in that fashion invites
scrutiny of the
whole system — including the experience, skill, knowledge
and training of those employees who were part of the system —
determine whether JMAL failed to ensure so far as is reasonably practicable that
non-employees were not exposed to risks
to their health and safety in the
conduct of JMAL’s undertaking.”
Gamble’s system will be assessed in light of the following
(a) East Inflatables’ recommendation that the jumping
castle could be operated to a wind speed of 25
says she understood 25 kmph to be the wind speed, in excess of which, use of the
jumping castle was prohibited but she
cannot recall the source of that
(b) Ms Gamble and Mr
Monte’s acceptance of representations by East Inflatables that the jumping
castle complied with Australian
(c) Only four pegs and no manual
was supplied;
(d) Ms Gamble downloaded a two page East Inflatables manual in
December 2015, which she and Mr Monte interpreted to mean – insert
minimum of four pegs;
(e) Ms Gamble did not obtain any external advice, but
she and Mr Monte developed a system of work via research online, including the
downloaded manual, material from Safe Work Australia, watching YouTube videos,
observing the activities of other amusement device
industry operators at local
shows and carnivals, and by Ms Gamble undertaking a NEIS course (New Business
Assistance and New Enterprise
(f) Ms Gamble and Mr Monte successfully and without incident operating
the jumping castle over 100 times over 5 years without
relevant elements of Ms Gamble’s system of work for the operation of the
jumping castle included:
(a) training and instruction;
(b) supervision;
assessment;
(d) inspection and maintenance;
(e) site selection and set
(f) weather monitoring;
(g) risk tolerance;
(i) planning and flexibility of set up;
(j) tethering and
cancellation;
(k) monitoring child welfare;
(l) pulling the jumping castle
(m) use of star pickets.
accordance with
Director of Public Prosecutions v JCS Fabrications Pty Ltd
and JMAL Group Pty Ltd
(supra) each element will be considered in
Ms Gamble’s system regarding training and
instruction
Monte and Mr Barrett were volunteers
however by virtue of
s7(1)(h) of the Act, both were deemed to be
Gamble’s s155 response to
confirmed the
The training undertaken/provided by
“Ms Gamble and Mr Monte are self-trained. To the best of
their knowledge, there was no training course available on for (sic)
the use and
operating of jumping castles when they purchased the device in November 2015. Ms
Gamble and Mr Monte visited YouTube
websites to learn how jumping castles were
set up, and specifically observed others setting up jumping castles at
of instructions provided by Ms Gamble to operators for setting up the amusement
“Ms Gamble and Mr Monte by practice and observation
learnt how to erect and secure the device, and had successfully set it up,
without incident, dozens of times over many years.
Ms Gamble and Mr Monte
subsequently instructed Mr Barrett on the safe setting up of the inflatable
amusement devices in a manner consistent
with the manufacturer’s manual
and the best practice they had observed and implemented. Mr Barrett was not
responsible for
setting up the inflatable devices alone. He was always
supervised by either Ms Gamble or Mr
Monte gave evidence regarding the training of Ms Gamble and himself in the
operation of the jumping castle:
“...you said that it was all self-taught. How did you
teach yourself to um anchor the jumping castle?
Well, we did – we did a lot of ah YouTube searching, ah
watching other people, Showmen’s Guild, that sort of thing. They
castles, how they rolled them up, how they unrolled them, and um, yes, we were
sort of all self-taught,
self-taught aspect was looking at a lot of YouTube and going to Showmen’s
Guild, and seeing how other operators
– ...... Yeah, a – a lot of
places, yes. A lot of places,
um, was that something that you did together, or did Rosemary Gamble instruct
you in how to setup the jumping castle?......
It’s something that we did
“...can you confirm that the extent of um your on the job
training extended to watching YouTube videos and going to Showman's
order to...
Yes. Yes. Yes. And on-the-job training, as well. As in we had
ourselves.”
“...what did you learn or observe in relation to the
pegging of jumping castles?
Well, to peg down all points, um yeah, and – and on an
angle. Um, I didn't know if it was exactly a 45 degree angle, but I knew
...And through the D-rings.
...And the tie down
Monte also gave evidence that Ms Gamble had learned about completing risk
assessments in her NEIS
Monte gave evidence regarding training in his Record of Interview with WorkSafe
on 22 March 2022 as follows:
(a) He and Ms Gamble learnt by
had watched YouTube videos to see how amusement devices were set up and pulled
down. There was no course they could complete
(b) They learnt over time,
through operating the
setting the devices up around one hundred
Barrett gave evidence he had not seen an operating manual for the jumping
castle, other than the label on the
but confirmed that he
had received
“on the job
Barrett confirmed in his Record of Interview with WorkSafe on 23 March 2022 that
“I was trained to do it all, just by them, not, you know – yeah,
I was trained to do
system regarding training and instruction is consistent with the relevant
requirements of ss17 and 18 of AS 3533.4.1:2005
and s3.2 of AS
3533.2:2009.
Ms Gamble’s system regarding supervision
Barrett gave evidence regarding his supervision on the morning of the Wind
“And what was the extent of any supervision that was
given to you by Rosemary Gamble?
Um the extent of it, she just basically showed me what to do
and told me, you know, what I needed to do. Um I didn't really do anything
without being told to
system of supervision is consistent with the relevant requirements of s17 of AS
3533.4.1:2005.
Ms Gamble’s system regarding risk assessments
Gamble’s s155 response to
responded to a
request for
“Copies of any risk assessments conducted for each of the
inflatable amusement devices”
as follows:
“Taz-Zorb independently developed and documented a risk
assessment for both the jumping castle and zorb balls (copies
relation to both activities, Taz-Zorb identified high winds as a potential
hazard and, under the heading ‘Actions to be
Taken’ mitigated the
potential hazard presented by wind by prohibiting use of either amusement when
winds reach 25kmph. This
threshold is a lesser threshold than currently mandated
by Safe Work Australia, which suggests operation of land-borne inflatable
devices should cease when wind gusts exceed
also developed and documented its own Emergency Management Plan (copy
which it deployed at events at which inflatable amusements were
Gamble also took it upon herself to download an ‘Amusement Device Operator
Checklist’ from the Safe Work Australia
website. Copies of recent
checklists completed by Taz-Zorb are
Monte said the risk assessment checklist for the jumping
was prepared by Ms
Gamble. She learnt to prepare risk assessments and she learnt other aspects of
her business through the NEIS course
Mr Monte was
familiar with the risk assessments with respect to each inflatable
and had, on
occasions, completed the risk assessments which were conducted on each occasion
the inflatable devices were
Monte gave evidence regarding his role in conducting risk assessments. He said
that while on the morning of the Wind Event, there
was no opportunity to
formally complete risk assessment documentation, a risk assessment would have
The following
exchange took place between Mrs Wilson SC and Mr Monte:
“Was that something that you routinely did yourself? No,
I actually started it with Rosemary, and um we did a lot of it from
memory, and
then we’d sit down at night and – or when we could, um write out the
assessment....We’d done it repeatedly,
over and over again, so it -it was
second nature to
Monte was familiar with Taz-Zorb’s Emergency Management
and Risk Assessment
was to be completed on the occasion of every time you ah did a job?...... Yes,
Monte said he had completed risk assessments on occasions, but from those in
evidence it appears Ms Gamble completed most of the
assessments.
In his Record of
Interview with WorkSafe on 22 March 2022, the following exchange took
“And who is responsible for checking the condition of the
jumping castle each time it’s erected
Rosemary and
Barrett gave evidence, consistent with the hierarchy of
responsibility:
“Jesse, do you know what a risk assessment
that something you were ever asked to do?
I was never asked to do it, no. ...
It was always someone above me that had to do
Barrett said the following in response to questions in his Record of Interview
with WorkSafe on 21 February 2022:
“Did you do a check of the – a visual check of the
jumping castle while you were putting it up?
Yes. So when you’re just
putting it up, you look at it and see if anything needs to be done, but,
you aware if a risk assessment had been conducted prior to setting up the
jumping castle at the Hillcrest Primary School
on 16 December 2021?
not sure. Maybe. Don’t
system regarding risk assessments is not inconsistent with the relevant aspects
of s18 of AS 3533.4.1:2005 and s3.2
of AS 3533.2:2009.
Ms Gamble’s system regarding inspection and
maintenance
Ms Gamble’s s155 response to
“The jumping castle is carefully inspected before use to
ensure that there are no tears/holes or other defects. Otherwise, cleaning
inspection after every use occurs. Taz-Zorb has never identified any damage or
defect in the jumping
jumping castle was in excellent condition and at the time only required
inspection and cleaning. No structural maintenance
has been required to either
the jumping castle or the zorb ball arena. Zorb balls are replaced approximately
every 9-12 months, (see
Monte says in his Record of Interview:
“At what intervals do you undertake the maintenance and
inspection of the jumping castle?
...when it’s being cleaned before and after
And who is responsible for checking the condition of the
jumping castle each time it’s erected?
Rosemary and
Prior to the incident on the 16th of December, 2021 did you
observe any defects on the jumping castle?
No. As far as I concerned it was pretty good.
Have you completed an entry into the logbook for the erection,
storage or maintenance of the zorb ball arena?
No. But we do store – we did store, um, all this stuff in
a storage unit during the winter months. Or right through, actually.
Monte said the following in his evidence:
“...how would you describe the general condition of the
jumping castle on the day, prior to its use?
Well, when I seen it, I thought it was quite good,
Um, did you um check the condition of the equipment before it
was used?...... Meaning the D-rings? Oh, well any of it. Did you check
holes or damage?...... Yeah, I – I often did check – check the
D-rings um there was like a little bit of surface
rust, but that was about it.
Um, I - I’d have a look inside, see if it was clean, look up the slide,
see if that was all clean.
Um, if I saw anything, I – I would have –
I wouldn’t have used it at all, to be honest.
ever conducted any repairs on the jumping castle in the past?
No. I – I’ve never seen anything wrong with it.
– what checks are you aware of that were done prior to going to Hillcrest
Primary School on the 16th?...... You mean beforehand
or? Yeah, beforehand, in
the lead-up to this um booking?...... Well, beforehand, I mean if we did a job,
we’d check it when
we pulled it down anyway. Um, and then, we’d pack
everything up, we knew it was already checked as we pulled down. So, when
setup, we knew everything was going to be
you recall whether or not you checked the condition of the D-rings on the day
for the jumping castle before setting it up?
Yes, I – I did. I always
did. Um, there seemed to be a little bit of surface rust, nothing to really
worry about, but um, yes,
always did.
Barrett told WorkSafe in his record of interview:
“did you do a check of the – a visual check of the
jumping castle while you were putting it up?
Yes. So when you’re just putting it up, you look at it
and see if anything needs to be done, but,
the level of documentation required by the Australian Standards is absent, it is
clear, given the evidence which confirms the
jumping castle was in
Ms Gamble was
strongly focussed on inspection and maintenance. This adds weight to Professor
Eager’s opinion there was compliance
of the relevant Standards regarding maintenance and
inspection. My conclusion, having conducted a view on 4 November 2024, is the
jumping castle was in good
system regarding inspection and maintenance is consistent with the relevant
requirements of ss 15 and 16 of AS 3533.4.1:2005
and s3.2 of AS
3533.2:2009.
Ms Gamble’s system regarding site selection and set
her s155 response to WorkSafe, Ms Gamble said:
“...It was agreed between Hillcrest and Ms Gamble that
the devices would be on the oval as the devices needed to be set up on
surface due to safety requirements and at least 3-4 metres away from the hill on
the oval. There was an entire cleared football
field where the devices were set
up, with no nearby
Details of who determined the set up location of the
inflatable amusement devices.
Ms Gamble and a teacher from Hillcrest, Jamie-Lee
the selection of the site, Mr Barrett said in his Record of Interview with
“So when we got there and we were deciding where to
put it, Rosemary and Bobby sort of discussed where they should put it. I
they said something to each other like, “Where did we put it in previous
years?”, but, yeah, that was my first
time at Hillcrest, so
Monte’s evidence regarding the set up for the day was as
“What were your duties on the day after you arrived at
the school?
Um, we rolled out the castle um ah put it up, positioned it,
pegged it down, then we moved on to the border, blew it up ah pegged
blew up the Zorb balls um and basically after that we were pretty ready to go,
And when you say “we rolled out the jumping
castle,” who was involved in doing that?
I think the whole three of us,
...who was involved in staking down the jumping castle and the
I was and Jesse
And how many pegs were used to anchor the jumping castle on the
16th of December 2021?
Two that I put down and two that Jesse put down, so
...who selected the pegs that were used?
Rosemary threw them out um and she always did that
you say she threw them out, what do you mean by that?..... Well, she she placed
them near the D-rings where we needed to peg
had a lot of trouble trying to get the pegs down actually. The ground was
And were all the pegs exactly the same, or were there some
difference between the pegs?
No, they were mixed. They were
Barrett gave evidence about setting up the jumping castle as follows:
“Okay and what about the jumping castle? Can you tell us
how you started to um erect that inflate that?
Yes. We put it into its rough position of where it's gonna be,
then we unfolded it and um pulled the corners you know like dragged
place and then started inflating
...the base is all stretched out and then um you started to
inflate it. What happened next?
yeah once it's pulled taut and inflated yeah hammering the pegs
...who hammered in the pegs on the castle on this day?
And is anything else done to secure the anchors?
Um no you just hammer them in and you pull it
Barrett confirmed he was instructed to ensure the pegs were hammered in until
they were flush to the
following exchange appears in Mr Monte’s Record of Interview with
“Robert, could you please tell us in your own words, what
you did on the 16th of December, 2021? From what you remember of that
...I went over to see Rosemary. There was two bent pegs, as
I’ve said before. There two bent pegs I took them over to the box,
them in the
his Record of Interview with WorkSafe Mr Barrett said:
“...we just set up the big blower that goes on the back
of it and we zip up all the outlets for air. And you have to wait for
castle to be inflated for a bit because you have to make sure the base of it is
nice and tight. And then when it was up
a bit, Bobby gave me two stakes to
hammer into the bouncy
This therefore suggests further inflation takes place after the pegs are
hammered in.
evidence is clear that, in accordance with best practice as cited by Dr
the stakes were
inserted near vertically and flush to the
Accordingly
Taz-Zorb’s system regarding site selection and set up correlates with the
relevant requirements of s18 of AS 3533.4.1:2005
and ss 3.1 and 3.2 of AS
3533.2:2009.
Ms Gamble’s system regarding weather monitoring
Gamble was not asked about weather monitoring in the s155 Notice she received
from WorkSafe.
Monte gave evidence that he and Ms Gamble monitored weather conditions in the
following manner:
“From apps on our phone. Ah, Rosemary had BOM, I had
Weatherzone. Um, hers was more about hour by hour update, mine was –
the radar was just a lot better on mine, so we could see any clouds, stuff like
that, coming
Barrett confirmed this in his evidence when he said:
“And um how did you check the wind before letting
everybody else on? How would you do that?
Ah weather, weather radar, weather apps on the
And was that you who – would you check a weather app or
did other people check the weather apps?
Ah no it was mostly – well pretty much all Rosemary and
Monte confirmed in his Record of Interview with WorkSafe that on 16 December
2021, the weather was monitored in the manner described
above when he
“...Robert who was monitoring the wind speed on site on
the 16th of December, 2021?
Both. Rosemary and I we – the night before we, um, we
looked at the weather. She has BOM. I weather zone. And in the morning
went down, um, and we looked on the news basically in the morning. And we keep
an eye out that
Taz-Zorb’s system regarding weather monitoring is consistent with the
relevant requirements of s18 of AS 3533.4.1:2005 and ss
3.1 and 3.2 of AS
3533.2:2009.
Ms Gamble’s system regarding risk
Duff, a teacher employed at the School who had arranged for Ms Gamble to supply
the amusement devices for the “Big
Day In”, says in her affidavit
dated 17 December 2021:
“[f]rom my observations of how
they operate and seeing how they were prepared to cancel the zorb balls knowing
that it would
be a great disappointment for the children I was more than happy
to use them again this year. I was very confident that they were
responsible
operators and safety conscious in their setup and equipment
It is clear Ms Duff’s opinion that Ms Gamble was safety conscious and a
responsible operator was based on her dealings with
Ms Gamble and her
observations of the operation of the amusement devices at the School the
previous year.
Gaye Kelly, a grade 5/6 teacher at the School, says in her affidavit of 16
December 2021:
“In 2020, the contractors responsible for setting up the
equipment determined that it was too windy for the zorb balls, so they
up the jumping castle. The event was successful, and everyone appeared to enjoy
themselves. There were no injuries or safety
identified.”
Gamble’s safety conscious approach to risk in the operation of the jumping
castle is demonstrated by the evidence with respect
to the following aspects of
the system of work.
system regarding risk is consistent with the relevant aspects of s18 of AS
3533.4.1:2005 and ss 3.1 and 3.2 of AS
3533.2:2009.
Ms Gamble’s system regarding wind tolerance
Gamble says in her s155 response:
“Ms Gamble is now unable to recall the source of what she
understood was a recommendation not to operate in wind conditions
exceeding 25
kmph however recalls that this policy was always adhered to at events where
Taz-Zorb was operating inflatable
amusements.”
Monte also gave evidence with respect to this issue:
“...and ah you mentioned that there was a, a limit that
was either in miles or kilometres. I don't recall whether or not you
that was?...... I think – Do you remember now?...... I think it was around
kilometres.”
the jumping castle came with a wind limit for its inflatable of 25 miles per
hour. Why did you and Rosemary decide on
a wind limit of 25 kilometres per
We just thought it was a lower speed, um a safer speed to
operate um jumping castles, zorb balls in. But zorb balls were um they were
unpredictable, so we tried to just run them in small winds and that sort of
“...But as far as the jumping castle was concerned ...
it’s limit was 25 kilometres an hour wind speed?
Yes, as far as we were concerned,
“Had had there been occasions when um the wind speed had
been – had exceeded 25 kilometres an hour and you've –
you've taken
action to deflate it and pull it down?
Of course, you you you wouldn’t run it in the wind, in
high winds. It it was just ludicrous. I could see the the potential danger
it. I mean, same with the zorb balls, you know, they’re like big
his Record of Interview with WorkSafe, Mr Monte said:
“Do you know what the maximum operating wind speed is for
the jumping castle?
Um, I’m not sure it – I’m pretty sure it was
25 kilometres and that was pull down time after
might be higher, I don’t know. But, um, when I operate the balls
I’ll be really honest with you, um, on the first one
you pull them down if
it gets windy. They’re just – they can be
... having set up the castle on numerous occasions are you
aware of the notice I’m referring
Yes, I am. We wouldn’t have set it up if it was windy
like that. The bottom
“You wouldn’t set it up ...
...do you know what the maximum operating wind speed is for the
zorb ball arena?
No. But I probably myself I, um, zorb balls are like a big
sail, all right. Um, I probably would’ve operated any – in
above say 10 or 15 kilometres an hour. Or if I felt it was, um, if it was
And who makes the decision to cease operation if it becomes too
Rosemary or
Monte’s evidence that the trigger to cease zorb ball activities at wind
speeds of 10-15 km/h suggests a risk averse and responsible
approach to risk.
This approach is corroborated by Mr Barrett whose evidence follows.
his Record of Interview with WorkSafe, Mr Barrett was questioned about wind
speed and he said:
“Jesse, who makes the decision to cease the operations
involving the jumping castle if it exceeds the wind rate that you mentioned
Rosemary or Bobby. They don’t usually go to 25
kilometres, though. Just a slight wind is enough to put them
Do you know what the maximum operating wind speed is for the
use of the zorb balls?
... No, I don’t know. I do know that if it is a slightly
– the slightest bit of wind, that Bobby will put the trailer
zorb ball border and he’ll hook up ropes – or Rosemary will do this
– and he’ll hook up ropes
just in case they have to tie the balls
down for a bit. They’ve done that at Deloraine Primary when I helped
Barrett gave the following evidence:
“Did you receive any instruction from Rosemary Gamble um
Yeah. Um if there was ever – I was told if there was ever
wind um get the kids off and you know, make sure it died down before
anyone else back on or make sure you check that it's not gonna come back before
letting anyone else go on
How risk averse or conscious of the wind and the effect of wind
were Rosemary and Bobby as a general rule?
Oh they were very aware of it yeah. They were always cautious
What what what amount of wind would put them off and call to a
halt the zorb balls or the jumping castle?
Um I don't know an exact number but it would’ve been
– it's a lot less than what was on the jumping
“So ah would a slight wind be enough for them to um take
an assessment of the ongoing use of the devices?
system regarding wind tolerance is consistent with the relevant aspects of s18
of AS 3533.4.1:2005 and ss 3.1 and
3.2 of AS 3533.2:2009.
Ms Gamble’s System regarding weather/forecasting and
responses to weather change
Monte and Ms Gamble had an operating wind limit of 25km/h for the jumping
Mr Monte confirmed
that the jumping castle would not be operated in high winds as he could see the
potential danger in it.
Before an event, Mr Monte checked apps and the news to keep an eye on the
occasions Taz-Zorb tied the jumping castle to the nearest tree or their car if
Mr Monte thought that the jumping castle could become
During high wind
gusts (by inference exceeding 25 km/h), Mr Monte would tether the jumping castle
and see how the weather went.
During this time, he and Ms Gamble would monitor
the weather on their phones.
Once the jumping castle was tethered and if there was no indication the weather
would improve the jumping castle would be
Barrett was aware of the maximum wind limit displayed on the front of the
jumping castle. Mr Barrett was informed that if the
wind increased, he was to
get the children off the jumping castle and make sure the wind decreased prior
to allowing anyone else
Mr Barrett said
that Ms Gamble and Mr Monte would check the weather on their phones before
anyone would be allowed back on the jumping
castle. Mr Barrett never made a
decision on issues relating to the wind or weather
conditions.
Mr Barrett gave
evidence that Ms Gamble and Mr Monte were “
of the wind and they were “
always cautious of
speed limit for Taz-Zorb was “
a lot less than what was on the jumping
“slight wind”
would cause Taz-Zorb to
make an assessment of the ongoing use of the amusement
system regarding weather forecasting and response to weather change correlates
with the relevant requirements of
s18 of AS 3533.4.1:2005 and ss 3.1 and 3.2 of
AS 3533.2:2009.
The Bureau of Meteorology (BoM) Weather Forecast for 16
December 2021
Monte gave evidence that before the Wind Event on 16 December 2021, he
considered the weather apps and the news in order to keep
an eye on the
BoM forecasts for Devonport for the afternoon of 15 December 2021 and 16
December 2021
Issued at 4:15 pm EDT on Wednesday 15 December
Forecast for Thursday 16 December
Sunny. Winds southwesterly 15 to 20
km/h becoming light in the morning then becoming north to northeasterly 15 to 20
km/h in the late
Precis: Sunny. Min 12 Max 21
Chance of any
Issued at 5:30 am EDT on Thursday 16 December
Forecast for the rest of Thursday 16 December
Sunny. Light winds
becoming north to northeasterly 15 to 20 km/h in the evening then turning
easterly in the late evening.
Precis: Sunny. Max 21
Chance of any rain:
(emphasis added)
Eager made the following observations regarding the BoM forecasts which appear
in Appendix J of his
“1. The forecast wind speed was 15 to 20 km/hr at
4:15 pm Wednesday 15 December 2021.
2. The forecast wind speed prior to this
forecast dropped from 25 to 20 km/hr.
3. The forecast and the observed wind
speeds at 10 am (time of Incident) were both 8km/hr.
4. After 10 am the
forecast wind speed dropped to 3 km/hr at 3 pm.
5. After 10 am the observed
wind speed increased steeply to more than 25 km/hr at 2
Beaufort Scale appears at Appendix C of the BoM
The relevant parts of
the scale are reproduced
Beaufort Scale No.
Descriptive Term
Units in km/h
Units in knots
Description on Land
Description at Sea
Smoke rises vertically
Sea like a mirror
Light winds
19 km/h or less
10 knots or less
Wind felt on face; leaves rustle; ordinary vanes moved by wind
Small wavelets, ripples formed but do not break: A glassy appearance
maintained.
Moderate winds
11-16 knots
Raises dust and loose paper; small branches are moved.
Small waves – becoming longer; fairly frequent white horses
Fresh winds
17-21 knots
Small trees in leaf begin to sway; crested wavelets form on inland
Moderate waves, taking a more pronounced long form; many white horses are
formed – a chance of some spray
Strong winds
Large branches in motion; whistling heard in telephone wires; umbrellas
used with difficulty.
Large waves begin to form; the white foam crests are more extensive with
probably some spray
Ms Gamble and Mr Monte’s self-imposed wind limit of 25 kmph suggests that
in accordance with the Beaufort Scale the
jumping castle could be operated
“Moderate Winds”
. Applying East Inflatables
recommended wind limit of 25 mph
implies the jumping castle, according to
the manufacturer, could be operated safely at the top of
or at the bottom of
“Strong Winds”
25mph is equivalent to 40.2335 kmph.
Beaufort Scale is included at Appendix A of AS 3533.4.1:2005 as an informative
wind limit imposed on operations by Ms Gamble and Mr Monte meant that they were
in essence applying, without knowing it, the Beaufort
Scale. In the opinion of
Professor Eager Ms Gamble:
“did what a reasonable operator
would do. She checked the weather with the BOM, who we respect, they're, you
know, an Australian
Federal Government organisation. She she checked with them
the night before. Not only did she do that, she checked in the morning
event, and she's most probably looking at the trees and the leaves and and using
a bit of common sense, and none of that's
changing to give her any any
indication that we've got to get the kids out, or strip it down, or you know,
let the air out. It just
ha- – the evidence is, it it it came from nowhere
and ended as quickly as it came. We’ve we’ve we've got that from
from several
eyewitnesses.”
the BoM forecast was for
“Light winds”
(i.e. 19 km/h or
less), what was observed on the 6 Lawrence Street CCTV
and the video of the
set up of the zorb balls
suggests that the conditions at around 10.00 am on 16 December 2021 were in fact
“Light Winds”
respectively.
These winds appear, from exhibits P3 and P71B and from the eyewitness accounts
as to the conditions prior to the Wind
Event, to be very light.
that the dust devil was unpredictable and, according to Dr Earl-Jones, incapable
of being forecast it was reasonable for Ms
Gamble to rely on the BoM forecast
for 16 December 2021.
her response to the WorkSafe s155 Notice, Ms Gamble
“Ms Gamble confirmed the weather report on 16
December 2021 prior to set up and at the site from the start of the day itself
the weather conditions were still and relatively calm. Winds were light and
variable until the unexpected and sudden circumstances
associated with the
tragedy occurred.”
“Watched the Channel 7 news the night before and on the morning of
16 December 2021 for the weather forecast for Devonport;
Checked the Bureau of Meteorology app on her phone both the evening before
and on the morning of 16 December 2021 for the weather
forecast for Devonport,
which provided hourly temperature, rain and wind forecasts, including maximum
gusts for the day.
Additionally, Mr Monte checked his Weatherzone app on the phone on the
morning of the incident for the Devonport forecasts for 16
Monte said in evidence:
“But just in relation to the weather, what checks were
made about the weather conditions for the 16th of December 2021 before
to Hillcrest Primary School?
Oh, I looked on – on the weather app at
night, I also checked the news, same with in the morning, um and I just kept an
on the weather through our apps, really. Um, that’s the only way you
could do it. There was nothing forecast at all, really,
ah not that I could see,
you kept an eye on that?
Yeah, I always did. I always did, whatever
steps did you take to assess the weather conditions before an event?
apps, the news – news, um that sort of thing, just keep an eye on the
Mr Monte’s Record of Interview with WorkSafe the following exchange took
“...Robert who was monitoring the wind speed on site on
the 16th of December, 2021?
Both. Rosemary and I we – the night before
we, um, we looked at the weather. She has BOM. I weatherzone. And in the morning
before we went down, um, and we looked on the news basically in the morning. And
we keep an eye out that way.
And how was it being monitored on site?
his Record of Interview with WorkSafe, Mr Barrett said:
“Jesse, was anyone monitoring the wind speed on the site
on the 16th of December 2021 at Hillcrest Primary School?
We had all checked
the weather and it said it would be fine. There was no wind before it
what – did you check the weather yourself?
And what did you
use to do that?
Just my phone.
And that was prior to the
Ms Gamble, Mr Monte and Mr Barrett were monitoring the weather suggests an
appreciation of the risks due to weather when operating
the inflatable
Eager gave evidence that the BoM was a trusted Australian Government Agency
whose weather forecasts are based on the best
available data and that it was
reasonable for a person to rely on its
forecasting.
McDonald said monitoring weather through weather apps was not sufficient. He
contended that “
they’re not locally accurate...they’re not
continuous...[and] don’t provide local
Eager conceded
“[w]eather at the very local level can vary from the
regional level and weather can be
unpredictable.”
Earl- Jones confirmed that it is “
a lot easier to give a general
weather forecast rather than um what the – a person is going to be
experiencing in a specific
addition, Mr McDonald said
“[t]here are numerous methods to monitor
wind including the Beaufort scale, there are wind socks, there are little
devices you
can buy...there are devices that are cheap and readily
available.”
his evidence Dr Earl-Jones confirmed that the dust devil was likely invisible to
the naked eye. He said a wind anemometer would
circumstances.
Professor Eager confirmed that the use of an anemometer would not have prevented
this tragedy.
By analogy,
familiarity with the Beaufort Scale, or utilising a wind sock, would have been
in the circumstances.
was required of Ms Gamble was vigilance with regard to available sources of
weather forecasting, particularly the BoM, constant
vigilance on the ground, and
a system ready to change or be locked down should climatic circumstances change.
I am satisfied such
a system was in place on 16 December 2021. This system would
however been enhanced if an anemometer was used.
Ms Gamble’s system regarding planning and flexibility in
evidence Mr Monte said:
“...was there any reason why eight pegs weren’t
used to anchor down each of the eight D-rings on that day?
Well, it was a
nice day, and I’ve always been under the impression that four was bare
And where did you get that impression from?
Um, from when
received the jumping castle.
...Had you ever used any more than four
Yes, in windier weather, yes, of course.
...Had you ever used
all eight pegs at all eight anchorage points?
Of course, yes.
wind the – the factor that distinguished how many pegs you would insert
into the jumping castle on any day?
Yes, of course,
his WorkSafe Record of Interview Mr Monte said:
“Why weren’t eight retention pegs installed on the
16th of December to the jumping castle?
Well we worked to the condition. So,
no wind so you should set up light. If it gets windier you pin it down even
harder. Same as the
On previous occasions when you’ve operated
the jumping castle, how many retention pegs would you have used to secure
Depending on the weather, four to eight.
Have you ever operated the
jumping with all eight D rings secured?
Do you know how many retention
pegs must be used for the device to achieve its maximum operating wind
Ah, four is as far as I’m aware. From – from the
his evidence Mr Barrett said:
“...had you ever seen the jumping castle used with more
than four pegs?
Yeah. Yeah.
Had you ever seen it used with eight
Ah I'm not sure. Well if it [indistinct word(s)] the full eight
but I've seen it used with more than
his WorkSafe Record of Interview Mr Barrett said:
“So there are eight D-rings on the jumping castle. Were
eight retention pegs installed into the D-rings prior to the incident
December 2021?
No, there was four. Depending on the weather, we would put
– yeah, we were just working to conditions...
On previous occasions,
have you observed the jumping castle being operated with less than eight
retention pegs to secure it?
When you’ve set up the jumping
castle previously, how many retention pegs would you have used?
system regarding planning and flexibility in set up is consistent with the
relevant aspects of s18 of AS 3533.4.1:2005
and ss 3.1 and 3.2 of AS
3533.2:2009.
Ms Gamble’s system regarding tethering and event
cancellation
referring to the Risk Assessment Checklist for 10 October
in explaining what the
meant, Mr Monte said:
“...what’s that word meant to convey about what
happened that day?
Tethered? Well, we would tether it with a rope ah through um
the two back D-rings um if we thought it was going to become unstable.
We’d tie it to ah say the nearest tree or bring up the car and we would do
...there were times when you actually went further than
tethering, and made the decision to actually deflate the jumping castle.
Yes, that’s very true, yes.
...how would you determine what the trigger was for you to go
to the next step, the final step of actually deflating? What would trigger
Just just high wind gusts. Um, yeah, it’s hard to
explain, to be actually honest with you. Um, we would just tether it and see
the weather went and keep an eye on our apps on our phones, ah stuff like that.
That’s the only way I can sort of explain
And so, do I take it from that that once it got to the point
where um the castle had been tethered, and there was really no hope that
weather was going to improve, was that the point – the trigger for you to
Oh, yes, yes, for sure. For sure,
respect to an example of a prior decision not to use the zorb balls due to wind,
which transpired to be at the Hillcrest Primary
School, Mr Monte said:
“...There was one year there I refused to set up the
balls it was too windy. They weren’t really
Kelly confirms in her affidavit that in 2020 it was too windy for the zorb balls
so only the jumping castle was set up. She says
that event was
successful.
his Record of Interview with WorkSafe Mr Barrett said:
“...Do you know what the maximum operating wind speed is
for the use of the zorb balls?
... No, I don’t know. I do know that if it is a slightly
– the slightest bit of wind, that Bobby will put the trailer
zorb ball border and he’ll hook up ropes – or Rosemary will do this
– and he’ll hook up ropes
just in case they have to tie the balls
down for a bit. They’ve done that at Deloraine Primary when I helped
system regarding tethering and event cancellation is consistent with the
relevant aspects of s18 of AS 3533.4.1:2005
and ss3.1 and 3.2 of AS
3533.2:2009.
Ms Gamble’s system regarding child welfare
the children at the School were clearly
meaning of s19(2) of the Act, Mr Monte said the following in evidence, when
asked about what occurred once the children
arrived on 16 December
“... they started um, ah getting in the balls and I um
– we cut down the time to three minutes because the balls get hot
and usually it’d go four minutes. I’m just trying to think. Yeah.
And – and just rotating the kids, we
get them to take their shoes off,
anything sharp, worn that’s going to get hot in there, so I’d keep a
a really good eye on the kids in the balls themselves, if
they’re overheating, you get the general
his Record of Interview with WorkSafe, Mr Monte said:
“I went over to Rosemary to se –talk to her about
how many – whether we could, um, cut the time down on the balls
was hot and the kids do get hot in there. So we cut it down from 5 minutes to
evidence is corroborated by Gaye Kelly in her affidavit of 16 December 2021
wherein she says
“the contractors informed me that the students could
only use them for three minutes (instead of the usual five) as the weather
evidence demonstrates an intention on the part of Taz-Zorb to maintain a working
environment that was safe and without risks
to the health and safety of the
children and in that regard its system regarding child welfare complies with the
relevant aspects
of s18 of AS 3533.4.1:2005 and ss3.1 and 3.2 of AS
3533.2:2009.
Ms Gamble’s system regarding pulling the base of the
jumping castle “taut”
Barrett’s evidence on this issue was as follows:
“...the base is all stretched out and then um you started
to inflate it. What happened next?
...yeah once it's pulled taut and inflated yeah hammering the
pegs on the
“...is anything else done to secure the
...no you just hammer them in and you pull it
his Record of Interview with WorkSafe Mr Barrett said:
“...we just set up the big blower that goes on the back
of it and we zip up all the outlets for air. And you have to wait for
castle to be inflated for a bit because you have to make sure the base of it is
nice and tight. And then when it was up
a bit, Bobby gave me two stakes to
hammer into the bouncy
Eager gave evidence with regard to the difficulties of pulling the base of the
jumping castle taut when using star pickets
which given this evidence and that
of Mr McDonald on this issue
is important:
“The the other thing – point I’d like to make
is it's really difficult to tension them. Like, you've you've you've
carabiner, and just by its very nature, it’s got – I mean
you’d you’d need something else inside
to take take up the slack.
You – like the carabiner, it's it’s a bit like when we went out to
the the site inspection
and the police had erected it, and it was flopping in
the breeze... Um, and and they used star pickets, and this is probably the
reason it was slack. Like, there was no tension... Whereas, with with the the
the stake, you can pull it out and and hammer it in
so you've got the tension on
it when you – when you you hammer it in. You don’t don't have that
same sort of control
with the the star picket.”
examination of the photographs of the star pickets with carabiners
confirms both how
much of the star pickets would be protruding from the ground which creates a
trip and/or injury hazard, and how
difficult it would be to pull the base of the
jumping castle taut.
Ms Gamble’s system/experience regarding the use of star
Monte gave evidence about this issue as follows:
“...Mr Monte, um these are what you thought were the 40
centimetre – about 40 centimetre star pickets that appear to have
carabiners inserted in them?
did did you trial the use of those for
the purpose of staking the jumping castle down at some point in time?
was it successful, and if it wasn’t, why?
wasn’t because um we found that they were a tripping hazard. Ah, we put
them, we put caps on them, but kids would take
the caps off, um and as you can
see from the top there, um when you hammer them down, it actually frays the
metal on the top. So,
caps coming off, kids around, it it’s just –
no, it was just not on.
It was a trip hazard. I’ve tripped over it, so
if I trip over it, I put myself in a position where if I’m going to trip
over it, other people are going to trip over it, so that’s why we stopped
using them.
...the star picket couldn't fit through the D-ring, so you
had to attach it to the –
You had to attach it to the
That's why we had the carabiners.
...if the star pickets had been
able to be put fully flush into the ground, how difficult would – would it
have been, or was
it to remove them from the ground?
difficult because if you were to put them in on say a 45 degree angle and flush
into the ground, how do you remove it?
you're saying you can’t think of
any way by which they could have been removed without great
difficulty?
Not off-hand,
Eager gave further evidence regarding the use of star pickets and the risks they
“...so, what observations would you make about the safety
and otherwise utility of using star pickets with carabiners attached
Um, well, I must confess I don't particularly like star pickets on
inflatables because they introduce other other hazards. Like, you've
got lots of
excited children running around with these exposed ends that after you've
hammered in a few times, get really sharp razor-bladey
um things on them if they
impale themselves, and I've seen photos of kids where they’ve impaled
their their calf muscle, like
the the the picket’s gone through there.
It's it’s horrible. It’s really – not as bad as death, I
Set-up on 16 December 2021
Monte gave evidence that on 16 December 2021, he picked up the trailer from Ms
Gamble’s home at 6:30am and drove to Devonport
arriving at approximately
7:45am. Mr Monte walked around the School to find someone to plug in power for
the Amusement Devices.
He unpacked equipment and put out the power leads when
Ms Gamble and Mr Barrett arrived at the
Mr Monte and Mr
Barrett pegged down the jumping castle and zorb ball
Mr Barrett and Ms
Gamble inflated the zorb balls, and Mr Monte inflated the zorb ball arena. Mr
Monte and Mr Barrett undid the
straps and unrolled the jumping castle, opening
the two halves up, did up the zippers and attached the blower. The jumping
was blown up, positioned, and let down again before being pulled taut and
pegged to the ground.
Monte hammered in two pegs to anchor the jumping castle and Mr Barrett hammered
in another two pegs.
Monte inserted the pegs on the left side of the jumping castle, as he faced it,
at points “C” and “E”
identified on Exhibit
and Mr Barrett hammered
the pegs on the right side.
Mr Monte inserted at least one j-shaped
at the front left side of
the jumping castle.
said he hammered in a peg similar to the one contained at photograph
which was described as a
folded down peg on the back left side of the jumping
Monte gave evidence that he ensured the ground was firm to support the weight of
the jumping castle,
were no drainage issues,
ground was suitable to hold the anchoring
there was adequate
clearance between the jumping castle and buildings, trees and
powerlines,
and there was
safe access for participants and emergency
pegs inserted to secure the jumping castle were described by Mr Monte as
” and approximately 300 mm in
He said the ground
surface of the School’s oval was “
said that because the ground was incredibly hard, it made it difficult to insert
the pegs at an angle.
pegs were therefore hammered into the ground near vertically and flush to the
zorb ball arena was secured with six pegs of a similar shape and size as the
pegs used on the jumping
Mr Barrett arrived at between 8.30am and 9.00am, he assisted Mr Monte unstrap
and remove the Amusement Devices from Mr Monte’s
trailer and the tray of
Mr Barrett and Mr
Monte unfolded and pulled the corners of the jumping castle, dragged it into
position and started to inflate it
Barrett said in evidence the jumping castle tethers were pulled
, and four pegs were hammered into place on four of the
eight tether points of the jumping castle by both Mr Barrett and Mr
Mr Barrett hammered
pegs at points marked “G” and “H” on First Class
Constable Wotherspoon’s plan
of the jumping castle (Exhibit
Mr Barrett said he
hammered a J-shaped peg and another “
sort of folded down style
peg through
the D-rings on the jumping
and hammered the pegs
into the ground using “
a big mallet
Barrett confirmed he pulled the anchorage ties of the jumping castle taut before
hammering the pegs in.
Barrett also assisted with unfolding, moving into position and inflating the
zorb balls and zorb ball arena, as well as setting
up and securing the
Mr Barrett confirmed
the pegs with “
folded down type ends
” were used to secure the
zorb ball arena and were the same length as the jumping castle
INTERPRETATION
AND APPLICATION OF THE AUSTRALIAN STANDARDS AND THE
CAUSE OF THE ANCHOR FAILURE
Introduction
will be discussed below there is little difference between the experts on what
level of downward force would have been required
to resist upward forces which
lifted the jumping castle and the patrons using it into the air. There are
however significant differences
in the opinions:
McDonald and Professor Eager with respect to interpretation and application of
the Australian Standards to Ms Gamble; and
McDonald and Professor Eager as to the application of wind force; that is
whether it was a horizontal or vertical wind
force which led to the failure of
the jumping castle’s anchorage
prosecution called Mr McDonald who is an expert in mechanical engineering and
inflatable amusement devices.
In addition to the evidence he gave in court his opinions are contained in his
McDonald reviewed the design and operation of the jumping castle against the
following standards:
(a) AS 3533.4.1-2005 – Amusement rides and devices
– Part 4.1: Specific requirements – Land-borne inflatable
3533.1-2009 – Amusement rides and devices – Part 1: Design and
Construction
3533.2-2009 – Amusement rides and devices – Part 2: Operation and
Maintenance
3533.4.1-2005 says it is intended to be used in conjunction with AS 3533.1-2009
and AS 3533.2-2009
“which provide requirements and recommendations on
matters common to all amusement rides and devices. Specific requirements
Standard take precedence over corresponding requirements in AS 3533.1 and AS
AS 3533.4.1-2005 the terms ‘normative’ and ‘informative’
have been used to describe the manner in which
a certain appendix applies.
“A 'normative' appendix is an integral part of a Standard, whereas an
'informative' appendix is only for information and
McDonald said these Standards provide the framework for a comprehensive
assessment based on the minimum requirements and specifications
safety, reliability and consistency in equipment and
McDonald examined the jumping castle, zorb ball arena and zorb balls over a
period of two and a half days and spent six months
writing his report. He had
regard to all the materials referred to in Attachment two to his
and all the documents
listed on pages 6-9 in the preparation of his report. These documents included
the Laboratories for Materials
Advanced Testing Services (LMATS) load test and
hardness reports
Geoton Pty Ltd report.
summary Mr McDonald concluded the jumping castle was not compliant with
Australian Standards or the manufacturer’s specifications
at the time of
the incident. The impact of these failures was to significantly reduce and
undermine the risk controls required for
the safe performance and operation of
the jumping castle on the day of the incident. He says there was:
“limited capability within the system due to the use of
only four under-capacity, non-compliant ground anchor pegs installed
anchorages)”
which resulted in the
“defeat in the anchorage system at relatively
low wind speeds.”
the outset Mr McDonald determined the jumping castle was an amusement device
under the relevant suite of Australian Standards.
He then assessed the jumping
castle against the specific Australian Standard AS3533.4.1-2005, and in
particular Section 6 of that
standard titled Anchorage. Section 6.1
“Sufficient anchorage points shall be provided
and located such as to enable stability and restraint to be maintained under
designers stated operating conditions.
The wind speed for which inflatable devices shall be designed shall be
not less than 11.1m/s (40km/h).
The number of anchorage points to address wind loads shall be calculated
in accordance with Appendix
McDonald then used Appendix B to calculate the number of anchorage points
required for this jumping castle. He says the number
and location of anchor
points on an individual jumping castle design is a function of windage area and
wind velocity; and must be
calculated and determined for each jumping castle
design. The minimum number of anchor points required is calculated on a force
from a specified wind velocity) applied to a jumping castle’s
face area/s. Having measured the two faces of the jumping castle
to be 4.5m and
5m, it was determined that each face of the jumping castle required a minimum of
two standard anchorages (appropriately
standard anchorage being an anchor point capable of withstanding 1600N
horizontally and for a very low angle position anchor
strap (0-30 degrees...),
such as an anchor point originating from the base of the jumping castle, the
vertical component of the design
force on each anchor is required to be not less
than 500N.”
Mr McDonald’s examination of the jumping castle revealed it was fitted
with two anchor points per side, located adjacent to
the main corners, so that
it had a total of eight anchor points. The design of the jumping castle was
therefore compliant with the
anchorage requirements of
AS3533.4.1-2005.
evidence of Mr Monte and Mr Barrett together with the evidence of First Class
Constable Wotherspoon, who inspected the scene after
the Wind Event, establishes
only four anchor points using pegs hammered into the ground through a D ring
attached to the jumping
castle were used to anchor the jumping castle to the
ground. The pegs used were two J shaped pegs which were 300mm long and had a
diameter of 11.9mm and two folded V shaped pegs which were 345mm long and which
had a diameter of 11.1mm.
They were inserted into the anchorage points at locations shown at C, E, G and H
addition AS3533.4.1-2005 required that
“each anchorage point on the
inflatable and its stake or stakes shall withstand a minimum horizontal force
one of the pegs
GeoTon, including three of the pegs used on the day to anchor the jumping
castle, were found to be able to withstand the
minimum horizontal force given
the manner in which they were hammered into the ground on the day; that is the
full length of each
peg was hammered into the ground at near 90 degrees to the
angle of the peg.
McDonald advised the pegs used on 16 December 2021 were not compliant with the
Standard because they were not 16mm in
and not compliant
with the manufacturer’s instructions because they were of a mixed
configuration (J and V pegs), nor was there
a consistent approach to the set-up,
that is Ms Gamble varied the pegs used from site to
However, he noted that
there were some star pickets with carabiners in the toolbox on the back of the
trailer, which was at the School,
that were compliant with the
Standard AS3533.4.1-2005 dealing with anchorages also specified
anchorage system shall be designed so that the anchor ropes or straps are
secured in a manner that prevents the device
lifting off the
McDonald said in his evidence there are a number of mechanisms associated with
preventing lift in a jumping castle. The key one
“putting in
anchorages”
at all; and the other is related to the process and
sequence of installation of the anchorages. As to this Mr McDonald specified
that by laying the inflatable out in a deflated form and stretching the
anchorages, inserting the pegs then (lastly) inflating the
jumping castle
creates tension within the bottom membrane of the castle and the anchorages.
This changes the mechanism as to how
the anchorages are loaded and helps to hold
the castle down.
evidence is that on 16 December 2021 two anchorage pegs were inserted before the
jumping castle was inflated to put it into position
and then two anchorage pegs
were hammered in after the jumping castle was
The effect of
anchoring the inflatable after it was inflated means that, according to Mr
“you wouldn’t have that tension within the straps, and
you’re at risk of bringing... your anchorages into a vertical
pattern. So, part of the key to how you prevent lift is actually the
installation or erection of the
McDonald has however proceeded on the basis of the Tasmania Police report
regarding the order of installation which was the jumping
castle was laid out,
it was inflated and then
This is at variance
with the evidence.
Mr McDonald said had all eight anchorages been used in the configuration
provided by the manufacturer, then if the castle
had been inflated correctly
(i.e. the tension in the straps) then that would have prevented lift considering
the wind loads within
Mr McDonald was of
the view the anchorage system in use on 16 December 2021 was not suitable
because the method of installation
did not provide the necessary tension and
that the failure to anchor each face by anchoring the two sides left the front
edge unrestrained
and that, consequently,
“the whole front of the
mattress... can lift. There’s nothing actually holding
McDonald’s evidence was that the configuration of the anchorage on the
jumping castle on the day, namely at C, E G and H
(Exhibit P78) meant that the
face that represents G and H would probably be reasonably secure, but the back,
left and front sides
would not be secure. The effect of his evidence on this
point was that the anchorage system used on the day meant three of the four
faces of the jumping castle were
6.2(i) of AS3533.4.1-2005
“[a]nchorage systems shall be consistent...”
McDonald said this means the same system was to be used each time. He said that
the instructions from the downloaded manual,
which is the 2 page manual Ms
Gamble downloaded from the East Inflatables website, to
“Locate all of
the tie down straps on the bottom of the unit...., Extend the strap drive the
provided stakes through the ring
at the end of the
with the requirement to be ‘consistent and reproducible’ and the
manufacturer’s instructions did not
allow for any deviation in the
application of the anchorage
He reviewed material
related to how the anchorage system was implemented by Ms Gamble and concluded
she did not comply with AS3533.4.1-2005
as there were inconsistencies in the
installation of the anchorage system, as installation depended on the weather
and the retention
pegs used were mixed up quite a bit. Different anchorage
systems were devised and used on different
6 of AS 3533.4.1 is very specific regarding the anchorage system. Mr McDonald
says the anchorage system:
“is complex and relies on a
critical and deliberate relationship between components to meet a specific
performance standard.
This necessitates a designer who is able to fully
understand the functionality, mechanisms and forces at work within the anchorage
system for the specific device. If an element or elements are subtracted,
altered or substituted, this changes the relationship between
components and
constitutes a new system.”
This and every new system he says must be assessed by a person who is able to
fully understand and account for the mechanisms and
forces at work within the
anchorage system for the specific device. This feature of design requires a
competent person with engineering
qualifications in accordance with the
definition of competent person in AS3533.1-2009 Appendix
addition Mr McDonald says part 18 of AS3533.4.1-2005 titled
‘Operation’
provides if the manufacturer’s anchorage
system is not suitable for use, for example the instructions are incomplete or
equipment is non-compliant, then the device is not to be used until
appropriate direction has been sought from the manufacturer or
a competent
person has assessed and advised on the
evidence of Ms Gamble contained in the response to the s155 notice and Mr
Monte’s evidence was to the effect that she did
not receive any manuals
and she only received four pegs when she received the jumping castle from East
Inflatables. The evidence
of East Inflatables was there was a one page manual
specific to the E2-030 jumping castle which indicated it had eight tie downs
“must be either staked to the ground with at least a 45cm long
, and that this manual was available at the time the jumping
castle was purchased by Ms Gamble and could be sent electronically. However,
this was not obtained by the defendant who only downloaded a two page manual
from the website.
Interestingly on this point the one page
which I have found Ms
Gamble did not receive talks about using 45cm stakes whereas the response of
East Inflatables to the s155 notice
says each stake or peg is
any event, Mr McDonald was of the view that the manufacturer’s
instructions (based on the two page downloaded manual) required
driven through all the tie down locations that had been identified, and that the
jumping castle had been designed, in
accordance with the Standard, to have two
anchorage points at each corner. However, Ms Gamble did not follow those
instructions as
she oversaw a system on the day where only four pegs were
inserted into the anchorage points at C, E G and H depicted in Exhibit
prosecution questioned the reasonableness of Ms Gamble’s interpretation
irrespective of her assertion she was only
provided with four pegs, given the
obvious eight anchor points on the jumping castle, and the fact that she did, on
other occasions,
peg all eight anchor points. This is to be contrasted with the
evidence at paragraphs 210 to 213 including that of Mr McDonald.
it is apparent those instructions were open to different interpretations, so in
the absence of clear instructions, Mr McDonald
says it was incumbent on Ms
Gamble to engage a competent person to advise her on the appropriate anchorage
system. This is discussed
in more detail below.
McDonald says the effect of the anchorage system in place on the day was that it
was inadequate to address the lateral load requirements
under the Standard and
it did not secure the leading edge on three of the four faces of the jumping
castle. This enabled air to infiltrate
the mattress and put the jumping castle
into vertical lift, which was the configuration which offered the least
retention capacity
for the pegs that were in use. Those pegs were themselves not
compliant with the Standards or the manufacturer’s instructions.
McDonald also considered the requirements Section 13 of AS 3533.4.1-2005 imposed
on the manufacturer and supplier in relation to
information they are to provide.
He compared the three manuals that were said to be in existence at the time,
namely the downloaded
manual (two pages), the E2-030 specific manual (one page)
and the generic manual (13
Each of the three
manuals contained instructions about the method of anchorage and the number of
anchorage points. In particular
he concluded that each of the manuals provided
that each of the tie down straps were to be staked – see Exhibit P112 (CB
The one page
specific manual contained instructions to use eight pegs and specified that the
pegs to be used were to be 45cm in
Further, Mr McDonald
said none of the three manuals provided for an alternative staking set
He concluded that all
three manuals were deficient in the provision of information in respect of
certain elements of Section
17 of AS 3533.4.1 provides:
“[a]n inflatable device shall,
while operating, be under the control and supervision of a competent
Competent Person is defined in paragraph 1.3.8 of
AS3533.1-2009 as
“[a] person who has acquired through training,
qualifications or experience... the knowledge and skills enabling that person
perform a specified task”.
While acknowledging that there was no known course for operating inflatables,
Mr McDonald noted that valuable training and experience
could come from being
instructed by an engineer in the Standards and operation of the
At pp 75-76 of
Exhibit P112 Mr McDonald says Ms Gamble and Mr Monte could not
the role of a competent person in relation to the Standard”
opinion which was based on their lack of familiarity or compliance with the
A3533 suite of Standards as demonstrated by multiple
instances of their failure
to comply with the Standards, not following the East Inflatables’ manual
which was demonstrated
by multiple deviations from the instructions contained
therein and a lack of concurrence with regulatory advisories and relevant
of practice. Further, the knowledge of Ms Gamble, Mr Monte and Mr Barrett of the
operating requirements of the E2-030 jumping
castle were inconsistent (eg. as to
the number of patrons permitted on the jumping castle, operating wind speed and
anchorage requirements).
‘Operation’
of AS3533.1-2005
The manufacturer’s and supplier’s
instructions and requirements shall be followed, particularly in relation to
installation,
operation, maintenance and inspection. In the absence of such
information, the inflatable device shall not be used until the information
been sought from the manufacturer or supplier or a competent person has provided
the necessary
information.”
Standard also requires the device to be set up in accordance with
manufacturer’s instructions with all device anchor points connected to
ground anchor stakes in the correct positions.
Where the manufacturer’s
instructions are not clear or cannot be complied with, the anchorage system
shall be designed by a
addition AS3533.1-2005 requires that ground stakes be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer’s instructions and they
are to withstand a
horizontal force of 1.6kN, that weather conditions are continuously monitored
and the use of an anemometer is
recommended.
McDonald advised the manufacturer’s instructions Ms Gamble downloaded from
the website contained the key information regarding
anchorage but it was not a
complete manual. He said that if there is a risk that the information was
ambiguous or incomplete then
the Standard required the operator to consult with
“competent person”
and he stressed the importance of using
someone who understands the requirements of the Standard (locally), within the
local environment
and with the people who are using the
McDonald indicated if there is reinterpretation, redesign or modification of an
engineering control system, such as what anchorages
should be used, a
“competent person”
needs to be someone of a similar
competence to a designer and in Australia that is seen as being a tertiary
qualified engineer. He
said there were 26,000 mechanical engineers alone in
Australia and he expected the cost of an engineer conducting an investigation
and providing the necessary advice to be in the vicinity of $1,000-$2,000 on
2020 rates.
McDonald also reviewed AS3533.2-2009 which covers operations and maintenance
with respect to amusement rides and
In relation to
organisational arrangements and planning Mr McDonald advised it was difficult to
discern any consistent policies and
procedures of Ms Gamble which were
invariably applied, adhered to and undertaken at each hire, set-up, operation,
dismantling and
storage of the jumping
He reviewed some of
the risk assessments Ms Gamble had undertaken and acknowledged she had
identified wind as a hazard and she had
imposed a limit of 25kph which was lower
than that required in Section 6 of
AS3533.1-2005.
However she
did not have a system for monitoring wind speeds and she did not use an
anemometer.
Further in one
assessment the defendant had identified the use of star pickets (there were
several located in the toolbox on the
trailer on the day of this incident) as a
control measure to address the hazard of wind. However, the lack of consistency
of practice
meant that the control measure was not adequately implemented and
therefore it cannot be said that the risks posed by wind had been
addition Mr McDonald was not satisfied Ms Gamble adequately addressed the
requirement in AS3533.2-2009 to train
In particular, he
found no evidence from the material supplied to him of training records or
procedures. This, combined with the
numerous examples of non-compliance with the
Standards, led Mr McDonald to conclude Ms Gamble was not competent to train the
as they were consistently inconsistent with everything:
“[t]here’s no consistency in anchorage, there’s no
consistency in knowing what the wind speed was, there’s
no consistency in
the number of patrons. There’s no evidence of things
...practising the emergency evacuation.”
His conclusion therefore was
there was insufficient training of
McDonald also noted from the evidence supplied to him that it was highly likely
that a copy of the instructions developed in accordance
with Section 3.1(a) and
(c) of AS3533.2-2009
available at all times to the workers. He also concluded that there was evidence
pegs had been previously damaged and replaced
and the replacement pegs did not
match the specifications of the manufacturer or the jumping castle’s
design, and that the
defendant was not competent to change the system in so far
as it related to the pegs
McDonald was asked a number of questions in the letter of instruction he
received from WorkSafe Tasmania which he addressed at
p168 onwards in his
In particular, he
examined the three versions of the manufacturer’s instructions and
concluded there had been critical non-compliance
by Ms Gamble in respect of the
jumping castle, in so far as it related to the pegs used in the anchorage system
and the number of
pegs utilised (specifically the failure to install eight pegs)
on the date of the
McDonald was also asked whether the jumping castle complied with the relevant
Australian Standards at a component level; that is
the fine detail of the pegs,
anchorage, the material it was made out of, corner stitching, the size of the
emergency exit and the
The main areas where there was non compliance on the day of this incident with
AS3533.1-2005, related to design and manufacture,
and were in respect of
anchorages; that is the supplied stakes did not comply with the Australian
Standard’s requirement that
they be of a diameter of 16mm, nor did the
anchorage system used by Ms Gamble on the day, comply with the requirement to
eight pegs in accordance with both the manufacturer’s instructions
and the Australian
were also a number of non-compliance issues related to the deficiencies in the
information to be provided by the manufacturer,
supplier or
McDonald said if information is missing then you go back to the manufacturer and
if you still fail to obtain the necessary information
you engage a competent
person. He said a competent person would also be required to advise on
information which was incorrect for
the Australian context and/or was
incomplete. This is to all occur before the jumping castle is used. Accordingly
in the absence
of receiving an operating manual, Ms Gamble should have made the
necessary enquiries to obtain complete, correct and appropriate
information
before using the jumping
In the case of
deficiencies, a competent person with engineering qualifications should have
been engaged to advise on remedies with
respect to the non-compliance
McDonald was asked to determine if Ms Gamble operated the jumping castle, on the
day of this incident, in accordance with the relevant
Australian Standards. He
set out his findings in Exhibit P112 at pages 190 to 193. In evidence Mr
McDonald described the deficiencies
in the defendant’s operation of the
jumping castle as
“systemic.”
He made observations of particular failures in respect of AS3533.1-2005
regarding anchorages and operations. Mr McDonald advised
that the jumping
castle, as set up on the day, was not compliant with the manufacturer’s
instructions, primarily due to the
failure to follow the manufacturer’s
specification (or the Australian Standard) as to the type and number of pegs
used to anchor
the jumping
follows as the set up did not comply with the manufacturer’s
specifications then Mr McDonald found the jumping castle was
not operated in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, namely to anchor using
eight pegs and to use the manufacturer’s
pegs. Nor had the defendant
engaged a competent person, to address the absence of fundamental components and
required information.
McDonald was then asked to determine the impact of these failures on maintaining
control over a hazard such as wind. In his evidence
Mr McDonald explained the
hierarchy of controls
identified wind as a hazard in the use of inflatable amusement
At pp 201-205 of his
Mr McDonald says the
effect of wind on the jumping castle is an ever-present risk when it is set up
outside. During his evidence
he acknowledged that in those circumstances wind as
a hazard cannot be eliminated, and therefore it is the operator’s duty
minimise the risks that are associated with the hazard. He identified that an
engineering control was required to restrain the
inflatable device.
AS3533.1-2005 requires the use of a formula that enables the calculation of wind
loads imposed on the jumping
castle in order to determine the minimum number of
anchorages to withstand a minimum wind speed of
In this case that was
calculated to be eight pegs. Further, the pegs were required to be 16mm in
diameter and fit for purpose. This
took into account the diameter, peg length,
length to achieve penetration into the soil and whether the pegs are
or “J”-style pegs or star
McDonald also noted that continuous accurate local wind monitoring was required
and that the use of an anemometer was recommended.
He also referenced
AS3533.1-2005 Section 18(b) and the requirement for the device to be
“set up in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions
(in this case eight pegs)
with all device anchor points connected to
ground anchor stakes in the correct positions. Where the manufacturer’s
instructions
are not clear or cannot be complied with, the anchorage system
shall be designed by a competent
McDonald noted the manufacturer’s instructions provided specified that all
anchor points (of which there were eight) were
to be used and he noted that the
documentation provided to him for his review (including Safe Work Australia
Amusement Device Operator
Checklists and the defendant’s completed risk
assessments which referenced wind and the use of star pickets), establish Ms
Gamble knew wind was a
McDonald said the installation of the anchorage system on the day of this
incident did not comply with the manufacturer’s
instructions or the
Standard and as such it provided significantly lower restraint to wind which he
says was effectively half the
capacity recommended by both the manufacturer and
the Standard. He noted that there was a sequence of failures, the first being
by virtue of the anchorage configuration, the defendant failed to prevent
horizontal wind from penetrating underneath the castle
which in turn changed the
desired loading behaviour of the pegs by changing the load from a horizontal
force to a vertical force
resulting in the pegs sequential
addition Mr McDonald says Ms Gamble was not competent to design the anchorage
system and by extension, was not competent to make
changes to the anchorage
system by installing a reduced number of
The effect being that
the change reduced the capacity of the engineering control; ie the anchorage
system. In addition the anchorage
system which she used on this day increased
the likelihood of its partial or full failure and as such it could not
adequately prevent
lift, which likely magnified the potential consequences
through reaction to wind gusts or events; namely the dust
capacity of the changed design of the anchorage system used by Ms Gamble on this
day was dependent on relatively calm wind or
weather for the duration of the
event at the School and/or sufficient warning of a change in wind conditions so
she could act if
wind increased. However, there was no evidence Ms Gamble
continuously and accurately monitored local wind speeds in order to adhere
the identified control to cease operations if the wind speed reached the
specified limit of 25kph.
This significantly increased the exposure of patrons to the adverse effects of
the reliance by Ms Gamble and Mr Monte on weather applications meant that the
information received was based on regional
forecasts that did not account for
localised terrain influences on
McDonald concluded by saying Ms Gamble’s decision to alter the anchorage
system was made without the competence, qualifications,
knowledge, training and
specific experience of or from a competent person, with the effect that the
hazards and risks associated
with wind were not properly
controlled.
He went on to
“[i]t is my opinion that the overarching impact of
the significant reduction in controls (from the non-compliance of the amusement
devices to Australian Standards and the erosions of controls in operations)
meant that when the system was tested at the occurrence
of the wind event, the
devices and the risk controls were significantly and overwhelmingly under the
required and expected capacities.
This affected the manner in which the devices
responded to the wind event. It is my opinion that the Taz-Zorb inflatable
devices present on the 16
December 2021 at Hillcrest
Primary School, as set up and operated by Taz-Zorb, had extremely limited
capacity to resist and no resilience
to potentially endure the event or reduce
the exposure to or magnitude of consequences through slowing
expanded on this in his oral evidence and explained that as the anchorage system
was already reduced (by virtue of only having
half the number of required pegs),
this had a bearing on the retention capacity of the existing pegs, which was
critical in light
of the likely exposure of the castle to the extreme weather
event of 1-2 seconds. In particular, if configured properly, there was
potential to minimise the consequences of the Wind Event passing over the
jumping castle by the pegs not completely coming out
and there not being a total
failure of the anchorage
McDonald prepared some calculations to determine the point at which the
retention of the pegs in the soil started to fail, in other
words, the ultimate
capacity of this jumping castle if properly
Mr McDonald
determined the ultimate capacity of the unladen jumping castle on its front and
back face, side faces and underside of
the mattress in lift. He determined that
at the time the Wind Event occurred the jumping castle was already in lift. In a
lift situation,
in addition to the forces from the retention pegs, the mass of
the inflatable device and the mass of the patrons on board would act
against the
vertical lift force. Upper and lower measurements were provided for each of
these factors to determine that the ultimate
theoretical capacity of the E2-030
jumping castle in lift was between 87.1- 100.4kph, noting that this was based on
an even loading
of all anchor points and pegs and therefore does not consider
the load distribution within the jumping castle at the time of the
which he said is unknown and cannot be accurately estimated. Furthermore he says
the structural stiffness of the jumping
castle is treated as being even in his
calculations. As structural stiffness varies and specifically changes between
the jumping
compartment and the climb/slide space – he says it is likely
that the jumping castle would not lift evenly or in a level manner.
influencing variables include wind direction, weakest capacity peg, load
distribution and structural mass
distribution.
McDonald also reviewed the evidence of a lack of peg shaft bending failure and
the absence of evidence of hole structural failure,
combined with witness
accounts of the event to determine that the failure of the anchorage system was
due to the defeat of three
fundamental serial controls brought about by a
significant reduction in the capacity and restraint of the anchorage system in
installation.
These were 1) the installation of only four pegs which facilitated
the infiltration of air pressure under the mattress and activated
the risk of
device lift, placing the jumping castle into a state of abnormal operation. 2)
As a result, preventing full lift was
reliant on the anchorage system in place
on the day. With only half the required pegs, the retentive capacity of the
anchorage system
was also halved. 3) Lastly, the pegs used did not have the
required capacity under the Standard owing to the pegs having a diameter
Further the
evidence supported a finding that the complete failure of the anchorage system
was while it was in vertical
combined force of the weight of the castle and its patrons and the retention
capacity of the four pegs installed on the day meant
that the total force acting
on the jumping castle to resist lift was between 5256N and 7849N. The minimum
pressure required to lift
those forces was between 218-333Pa. This translates to
a minimum wind speed of between 71-87kph to achieve static equilibrium between
lift and restraint.
McDonald advised both the Standard and the manufacturer’s instructions
specified that eight pegs be used to anchor the device.
He then compared, in
table 10.9.2 of his report, the retention capacity of the four mixed pegs used
on the day, with the retention
capacity of eight pegs of the same dimensions as
those Ms Gamble says she received, eight pegs which were compliant with
AS3533.4.1,
eight pegs matching the manufacturer’s
specifications
470mm shaft length, 10mm diameter) and eight star pickets (450mm length, 30mm
leg). Had any one of the final three configurations
been used on the day, then
he says any of those configurations would have had the capacity to resist lift
of the jumping castle.
10.9.3 on page 226 of Exhibit P112 illustrates that based on a comparison of
half of the same configurations as above (i.e.
four pegs only) that only four
star pickets with rated carabiners would have had the capacity to defeat the
loss of retention of
the pegs and lift of the jumping castle.
Importantly,
Mr McDonald noted that the above calculations were based on static equilibrium
and did not take into account the time
exposure of the wind event to the jumping
Based on witness
accounts (and the evidence of Dr Earl-Jones) it is likely that the wind event
passed over the jumping castle in
a matter of seconds. Had star pickets been
used then they would have had greater retention capacity than other
configurations which
means that it would take the application of a sustained
wind of sufficient force and duration to force a peg from the ground. In
circumstances where the exposure to the wind event was fleeting, the use of star
pickets potentially could have significantly affected
whether failure occurred
at all, or the behaviour of failure and the magnitude of potential consequences
the actual anchorage system in use on the day, which was significantly under the
required capacity, did not have the base
restraint strength nor the endurance
capability to sustain retention in a dynamic
summary Mr McDonald concluded that the jumping castle had not been anchored or
operated in accordance with the applicable Australian
Standards at the time of
the incident nor was the jumping castle or its operation compliant with the
manufacturer’s specifications.
In particular, the jumping castle had only
been anchored at four anchorage points using non-compliant pegs. Further the
configuration
of the anchorage system meant that the jumping castle did not meet
the horizontal wind load rating which facilitated pathways for
air pressure to
infiltrate and fill under the jumping castle’s mattress providing the
impetus for lift. Calculations of wind
speeds required in these circumstances
to defeat the anchorage system in place on the day showed the jumping castle was
likely exposed
to wind speeds of 71-87 kph. However had the jumping castle been
set up and operated in accordance with the Australian Standards
it would have
likely had the capacity to withstand speeds of 87.1-100.4kph. Further if star
pickets had been used (in fact, the only
peg/stake that met the Australian
Standard peg specification requirement), as foreshadowed in Ms Gamble’s
risk assessments,
the jumping castle would have likely had the capacity to
withstand 109.8-119kph. In his evidence Mr McDonald said he believed that
“if the full eight star pickets had been used, it would have endured
addition Mr McDonald concluded that the reductions in risk controls and the
substantial reduction in capacity of the jumping castle
anchorage system
contributed to this rapid failure and its catastrophic consequences. Further,
the anchorage system failure was not
instantaneous and had the anchorage system
been correctly installed it would have likely prevented complete anchorage
system defeat
or at least slowed failure of the anchorage system during the
short event. The slowing of the failure would have likely resulted
reduction in the magnitude of the consequences.
his evidence Mr McDonald said that the (force of the) dust devil was not the
“The failure [is] back at the-trying to prevent
lift and anchoring it down correctly, so it can at least withstand the basic
wind speeds. The dust devil is the consequence...When you actually look at the
sequence of the failure, the sequence of the installation,
the sequence and the
configurations used, it’s it’s much lower down that the failure
occurred...”
Professor Eager
Eager considered the reports of Dr Earl-Jones and GeoTon, eyewitness accounts,
the results of his inspection of the jumping
castle and the results of the
police investigation.
summary his opinion was as follows:
“[i]t is almost certain that the
mechanism of failure was an overloading of the jumping castle anchor
Eager’s summary of the sequence of events leading to the failure of the
jumping castle anchorage system is as
“The Wind Event was an intense circular wind 4m in
The Wind Event extended vertically from ground level around 15 to
16m above the ground.
The primary direction of the wind was circular, but it
also had an upward direction. This meant the air was moving around and around
and up, helically or in a spiral.
The Wind Event had a path which took it
over and above the jumping castle.
As the Wind Event passed over and above
the jumping castle it twisted and attempted to lift the jumping castle in a
clockwise direction
(when viewed from
base of the jumping castle was constrained to the ground by four stakes so the
Wind Event could only twist the upper region of
the jumping castle.
jumping castle stored this twisting as torsional strain energy.
The jumping
castle was akin to a coiled spring.
The Wind Event added more and more energy
into the twisted jumping castle.
The torsional strain energy built up within
the jumping castle until the pneumatic energy now stored within the jumping
castle overcame
the twisting and the jumping castle sprang back.
twisting and release repeated over and over in quick succession.
The jumping
castle is violently fluttering.
Each time the twisting occurs a moment is
applied to the four stakes. This moment violently and repeatedly laterally pulls
and releases
the stakes.
This violent pulling action jerks the stakes
sideways like an operator of an inflatable device hitting them with a
The stakes move laterally backward and forward each time the jumping
castle twists and releases.
Each time the stakes move sideways their
containment hole becomes slightly larger.
This action is similar to what an
operator of an inflatable device does when packing up the device at the end of
an event. The operator
will hit the side of the stake sideways several times
with a hammer to loosen it before attempting to pull it from the enlarged
The soil retaining the stakes is dry and hard and has little elastic
The oscillation continues until one of the stakes lets go.
more stakes let go in quick succession placing all the load on the remaining
The jumping castle is now held by a single anchor which removes the
torsional moment and with this the lateral movement of the remaining
The jumping castle [is] pulled upward while being held by this
remaining stake.
The pulling compresses the air within the jumping castle to
a pressure which exceeds its fabric strength.
This compression caused the
fabric of the ‘red’ crayon to rupture. Figures 20 and 21 are
photographs taken before and
after the ruptured jumping castle fabric was taped.
No evidence was sighted of a failure mode inspection before the taping occurred.
The taping may have destroyed vital evidence.
The remaining anchor had a
defective poorly welded and structurally inadequate D-ring which instantly and
catastrophically failed
under the intense vertical suction load.
Immediately
after the D-ring catastrophically failed the jumping castle became airborne and
was sucked rapidly high into the sky.”
Eager analysed Dr Earl-Jones’
as a result of which
he concluded:
“The Earl and Weeding Report [13] estimates Wind Event
speed to be at least 16.67 to 22.22m/s (60 to 80 km/hr) and a lifting
equivalent to 16kN based on a pressure drop of 1000Pa and an area of 16m2
magnitude is greater than a maximum 11.1 m/s specified within AS
3533.4.1:2005.
The Earl and Weeding Report does not advise the amplification
effect of localised turbulence. It also does not provide details of
the velocity
and acceleration gradients within the boundary layer between the still air and
the Wind Event.
The boundary layer would have contained turbulent eddies with
localised velocity and acceleration gradients which were considerably
than these figures.
The estimated localised velocity would have been 100 m/s
which is considerably greater than the maximum velocity specified within
3533.4.1:2005 (11.1 m/s) while being slower than a jet airplane which cruises at
between 150 to 250 m/s.”
evidence the following exchange took place about the velocity of the dust
“So so the velocity is somewhere between two-thirds
and 40% of the velocity that a jet airplane would travel at?.....That is
opinion, yes, based on my
experience...”
Professor Eager concluded that
the mechanism of failure
was an overloading of the jumping castle
explained there were three differentials at play, namely velocity, acceleration
CONSIDERATION
OF THE COMPETING OPINIONS
Eager’s opinion is that on the day of the incident the jumping castle and
its anchor pegs were subject to impulsive
jerk like forces as a result of the
dynamic and chaotic forces of the dust devil. As a result he said the mode of
failure caused
by the dust devil, twisting and rotating, coupled with the
elastic nature of the jumping castle allowed it to twist and let go. Professor
Eager explained this in his evidence in the following terms:
twisting it and
let’s go, and that letting go is...tapping the stake on the side, so it
lets go, and...that force gets transmitted
down to the stake, So its not just
that its sucking it
“...its all happening in a heartbeat...the sequence is is probably
less than a
“...its going circular... sucking... upwards...[w]e’ve got
four stakes, and they’re getting knocked one way or or
the other way...and
when we hit them on the side, on the head, which is what this thing is doing,
each time it goes...its making
the hole even if its just a millimetre...is all
you need to break that bond, to break that surface
McDonald’s horizontal wind hypothesis was disputed by Professor Eager on
the basis that the rapid, chaotic and oscillating
nature of the dust devil, as
described by Dr Earl-Jones, and its circular motion provided a situation where
the pegs were rapidly
and violently pushed and pulled sideways in all directions
by the oscillating movement of the dust devil, widening the holes in which
sat, allowing them to come out of the ground sequentially, albeit in rapid
succession one after the other with the exception
of the final peg, whose D ring
broke before the peg released.
Earl-Jones’ opinion in his supplemental report was that:
“The winds of the dust devil would not have been coming
from a single direction but very chaotic and variable in the vicinity,
pulls in the air around it. The dust devil would likely have pulled air
underneath the jumping
Accordingly
I accept the oscillating chaotic and variable wind at the base of the dust devil
was horizontal (albeit oscillating),
and it pulled air underneath the jumping
castle, while at the same time subjecting the jumping castle to violent vertical
Importantly,
Mr McDonald said the following during his evidence:
(a) He measured the footprint of the jumping castle at 22.5 m2;
was a downward force of between 5.256 kN and 7.849
comprising:
i. the jumping castle mass and patron mass of 3.904 kN –
ii. peg retention based on the GeoTon testing of 1.352
(c) Assuming eight Australian Standard compliant pegs, each
with 0.5 kN of vertical resistance, there would be a downward force of
7.904 kN and 10.497 kN, comprising:
i. the jumping castle mass and patron mass of 3.904 kN –
ii. the Australian Standard compliant peg retention of 4 kN (i.e. eight
compliant pegs x 0.5 kN
(d) There was an application of vertical
Notwithstanding
Mr McDonald’s hypothesis is based upon horizontal wind speed/force, if one
applies Dr Earl-Jones’ opinion
to Mr McDonald’s calculations,
assuming a 22.5 m
footprint of the jumping castle, then that equates
to 22.5 kN of upward lift. However Mr McDonald’s maximum calculated
force figure of 10.497 kN falls well short of the capacity of eight
compliant pegs to resist the vertical force applied to the jumping
castle. This
is demonstrated below.
McDonald also agreed that the application of a significant horizontal wind force
to the jumping castle would more likely result
in a roll over or
which he described as
the behaviour of all of the amusement devices in response to the forces of the
dust devil was not consistent with Mr McDonald’s
theoretical horizontal
wind speed of 87.1 – 100.4
being applied to them.
For example, the evidence relating to the zorb balls, which were lifted, is that
they went up vertically and
came down near to where they
rather than, as one
would expect if subject to a high horizontal wind speed, being pushed across the
oval. Similar descriptions were
given of the vertical or near to vertical lift
of the jumping castle and zorb ball arena and once in the air they travelled
including by
Mr Monte who said in evidence:
“...the castle was in the air, it went straight up, the
border bounced a few times, and it went straight up as
Eager explained that given the extreme nature of the wind event and the forces
the jumping castle was exposed to that:
[e]ight pegs
wouldn’t have done it, 12 pegs wouldn’t have done it, 16 pegs
wouldn’t have done it, 20 pegs wouldn’t
have done it...if we
multiple or divide this (force) by 0.5
(capacity of the pegs)
you’ve got 60 or 84 pegs is what you
number of propositions were put to Professor Eager about the wind event
(a) that anchoring pegs at points C, E, G and H (P78) left a
leading edge of the jumping castle exposed leaving it susceptible to
air penetrated under the jumping castle putting it into the lift and that
occurred before the force of the dust devil positioned
itself over the jumping
(c) the force of the dust devil amplified the magnitude of the event at the
point after which the anchorage system had already
(d) witness descriptions of the incident suggest the jumping castle was put
into vertical
Eager rejected all of the above propositions and maintained that the force of
the dust devil was what caused the anchorage
failure, which occurred in
milliseconds consistent with a rapid, chaotic, oscillating, impulsive force
which created the characteristics
of the dynamic jerk differential generating
greater force than a static or one directional horizontal wind.
McDonald’s horizontal wind hypothesis is generally inconsistent with
descriptions of the Wind Event by eye witnesses and
the evidence of
meteorological expert Dr Earl-Jones. Despite this, and his hypothesis of the
jumping castle leading edge being left
open by Ms Gamble’s anchorage
system leaving the jumping castle susceptible to wind, none of the available,
recommended or
required retention systems as outlined by the manufacturer or in
the Australian Standards would have prevented the incident from
occurring given
the calculations of Dr Peiris.
with the GeoTon report, Dr Peiris expressed the opinion that the undrained
adhesion strength of the soil at the School
the condition of the soil on the School’s oval had no impact on anchorage
on Dr Earl-Jones’ report, suggesting a probable uplift force of about 16
kN (assuming a floor area of the jumping castle
), Dr Peiris
provided an analysis of the forces which likely led to the failure of the
anchorage system,
illustrated on the white board during his
16 m2 (floor area)
16 kN (upward lift
137.2 kg (weight of the jumping castle)
390 kg (weight of the
527.2 kg -> 5.17 kN (total downward weight/force)
kN (net upward force)
8 x 0.5 = 4.0 kN (downward force of 8 compliant
6.83 (excess upward force in kN)
excess uplift force of the dust devil over and above the retention capacity of
eight pegs which complied with the Australian Standard
was 6.83 kN, with an
uplift force of 16 kN
Peiris noted in his report, to resist the net upward force of 10.83 kN, 22
compliant pegs with a vertical resistance force
of 0.5 kN each would have been
a floor area of the jumping castle of 22.5 m
, in accordance with Mr
McDonald’s actual measurements, Dr Peiris illustrated the following on the
whiteboard during his
22.5 m2 (floor area)
22.5 kN (upward lift
137.2 kg (weight of the jumping castle)
390 kg (weight of the
527.2 kg ->
kN (total downward weight/force)
NET 17.33 kN (net upward force)
= 4.0 kN (downward force of 8 compliant pegs)
13.33 kN (excess upward
the basis of the actual floor area of 22.5 m2, the excess upward lift force of
the dust devil, assuming eight compliant pegs, was
13.33 kN, or over 145%
greater than the downward force of 9.17 kN (i.e. 5.17 kN + 4 kN). Applying Dr
Peiris’ analysis the number
of compliant pegs required at 0.5 kN of
downward force to resist a net upward force of 17.33 kN is 35.
Peiris conducted the same analysis assuming eight star pickets with a downward
resistance of 1.128 kN each (per the GeoTon
calculations were conducted both for a jumping castle floor area of 16
, given that the actual floor area was
confirmed by Mr McDonald to be 22.5 m
, that is the figure which
should be used in the calculations. As illustrated by Dr Peiris on the
22.5 m2 (floor area)
22.5 kN (upward lift
137.2 kg (weight of the jumping castle)
390 kg (weight of the
527.2 kg -> 5.17 kN (total downward weight/force)
kN (net upward force)
8 x 1.128 = 9.024 kN (downward force of 8 star
(excess upward force)
Dr Peiris’ mathematical approach to the number of star pickets required to
resist the net upward force of the dust
devil, then at 1.128
of downward force per star
picket 16 star pickets would have been required to resist a net upward force of
Dr Peiris’ methodology to the data agreed to by Mr McDonald at page 224 of
Exhibit P112, gives rise to the following
by reference to the calculations for
eight star pickets:
22.5 m2 (floor area)
22.5 kN (upward lift
3.904-6.497
downward weight/force; ie jumping castle and patrons’ mass)
16.003-18.596 kN (net upward force)
8 x 1.128 = 9.024 kN (downward force of
8 star pickets)
6.979-9.572 kN (excess upward force)
the net upward force range of 16.003 – 18.596 kN to the downward force of
each star picket of 1.128 kN reveals, on
Mr McDonald’s data, that between
15 and 17 star pickets would have been required to resist the upward force of
the dust devil.
Not only was it possible that the dynamic force of the dust
devil exceeded the retention capacity of eight compliant pegs, a proposition
McDonald agreed with,
the retention capacity of eight compliant pegs is significantly less than eight
star pickets it is probable it did.
follows a minimum of 15 star pickets (16.003kN divided by 1.128) or 33 compliant
pegs (16.003 kN divided by 0.5) would have been
required to resist the upward
suction force of the dust devil. Of itself, leaving aside the issue of breach of
duty, this suggests
that no reasonable precautions were available that could
have eliminated or reduced the risk of the jumping castle being lifted from
ground by the dust devil. The only precaution which was identified in the
evidence was not holding the
Given that the
likelihood of occurrence at the School or in Tasmania of a dust devil of this
intensity was
“unprecedented”
“essentially impossible to have predicted the occurrence of
this event,”
precaution was not reasonable in the circumstances. The weather conditions were
benign prior to the arrival of the dust devil
and they were benign after it had
passed. Looked at prospectively, given the weather forecasting and the
conditions on the day,
it cannot be said the event should have been cancelled at
or before the time the jumping castle was erected.
calculations set out above assume the application of an even lift of the jumping
castle by a static force. However, according
to Professor Eager, what was
operating on the jumping castle was a dynamic and oscillating uplifting
explained by Professor Eager, the author of a number of journal articles on the
“The Wind Event was not measured so nobody knows for
certain the magnitude of the jerk to which the jumping castle was subjected.
The Wind Event was not a static force.
The acceleration was not
The Wind Event was a non-static or impulsive force.
An impulsive
force is a force that acts on a body for a shorter period of time and with a
greater peak value.
In lay terms, the shorter the time period over which the
force is applied the greater the impulsive
Eager’s opinion was the dynamic force of the dust devil was likely 5 to 7
times the static force required to snap
the broken D Ring which we know failed
at 6 kilonewtons:
“...when things fail catastrophically, they fail at about
5 to 7 times what they fail statically. So, you've got – we
know it failed
at 6 kilonewtons statically, so somewhere between 5 and 7 times 6, so you've got
6 kilonewtons times either four or
five, you've got 30 kilonewtons um minimum um
for the D-shackle that catastrophically broke...”
“Could be seven
42...kilonewtons”
McDonald accepted that the application of dynamic force can be as much as 5 to 7
times that of static
Eager said that considering the application of scientific principles relating to
dynamic force and jerk to the wind event
potentially produced an upward force of
30-42 kN; (5-7 times 6 kN), which, allowing for the weight of the jumping castle
and children
would require the installation of 60–84
which are compliant with
the Australian Standards.
this calculation Professor Eager has not taken into account the downward force
produced by the weight of the jumping castle or
of the patrons. If that is done
and using the methodology provided by Dr Peiris the calculations, using 8 pegs
which are compliant
with the Australian standards and 8 star pickets and a
dynamic/jerk force of 30 kN and 42 kN,
0.5 kN Pegs
1.128 kN Star Pickets
0.5 kN Pegs
1.128 kN Star Pickets
Dynamic/jerk force
downward force produced by the jumping castle and the patrons (per Dr
net upward force
Anchor downward force
Excess upward force
Anchors required (
net upward force
divided by kN per peg or star
picket; i.e. 0.5 or 1.128 respectively.
(emphasis added)
in order to defeat the dynamic force produced by the dust devil at a
dynamic/jerk force of 30kN, 50 pegs compliant with the Standards
pickets would have been required. At a force of 42kN, 74 pegs compliant with the
Standards or 33 star pickets would have
was submitted by the DPP that I should accept Mr McDonald’s opinion in
preference to Professor Eager’s opinion for
a number of reasons which in
summary included the following:
was apparent throughout his report and during the course of his evidence
Professor Eager was not impartial and he was really acting
as an advocate for Ms
opinion was based upon two things namely the weather event and the risk which in
fact materialised which is not the correct basis
upon which to assess the
evidence and necessarily invited him to engage in impermissible hindsight
opinion was not based on all the evidence provided to him for example he had not
reviewed the one-page specific manual and had
not accessed a number of
photographs;
explanation for the mechanism of the failure of the anchorage system was not
corroborated by witness accounts;
his involvement in the development of the relevant Australian Standards he was
not previously aware of the University of Illinois
tent study, despite it being
published in 2004 with a guidebook being available since 2017;
was clearly sympathetic to Ms Gamble and it was suggested this infected many of
his responses in cross examination. In addition
his answers were often
unresponsive whereby he repeatedly and earnestly justified her actions;
only spent two hours examining the jumping castle and three weeks working on his
report whereas Mr McDonald said he spent 2 ½
days inspecting the inflatable
devices and six months preparing his report;
was an academic with little or no practical experience in applying the
Australian standards to the inspection of inflatable amusement
McDonald was eminently qualified to give his opinion on the failure of the
anchorage system of the jumping castle given his many
academic qualifications
and memberships and relevant practical experience applying the Australian
standards to the inspection of
inflatable amusement devices; and
McDonald was an impressive witness who was measured and gave his evidence
impartially. His evidence was coherent and considered
and his opinion was based
on clear reasoning.
to the first, sixth, ninth and tenth reasons I take the view Professor Eager was
very passionate about the engineering aspects
of this case and he put his views
across forcefully. He clearly believed in his hypothesis and where he disagreed
with what was being
put to him he unequivocally and clearly said so. This is
demonstrated in his very thorough cross examination by Mrs Wilson SC whereby
sought his agreement with Mr McDonald’s hypothesis that all the
“significant Wind Event”
did was amplify what occurred after
the anchorage system had already
In my opinion this
does not mean Professor Eager lacked impartiality. In any event the methods used
by factfinders to resolve conflicts
in evidence given by lay witnesses such as
the manner in which a witness gives his or her evidence and demeanour do not
resolving conflicts between experts. In this case the opinions of the
experts are directed towards issues which assist in the determination
Gamble’s guilt. In such a case I am only permitted to accept Mr
McDonald’s opinion to the exclusion of Professor
Eager’s opinion if
I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Mr McDonald’s opinion is
correct. Authority for this proposition
is the decision of the Victorian Court
of Appeal in
R v Anderson
[2000] VSCA 16
where the Court said at
Even if, contrary to the view to which I have come,
the jury could properly have been asked to consider the opinions expressed by
Campbell and Castle, it was not enough to simply tell the jury that it was for
them to determine which of the expert witnesses they
preferred. This was a case
where there were conflicting opinions bearing upon a critical issue in the
trial, and yet little guidance
was given to the jury about how to approach such
evidence generally, let alone in the specific circumstances of this case. If the
jury were to accept the evidence of Campbell and Castle then it was, as I have
previously stated, inevitable that the only conclusion
to which they could come
was that the applicant had not acted in self-defence and had not been provoked,
and that, when he had told
the witnesses that he had been stabbed by the
deceased, he was lying. Although, of course, there will be many circumstances in
a jury will be entitled to act on the opinions expressed by some witnesses
in preference to the opinions expressed by others (cf.
Chamberlain v. The Queen
[1983] HCA 13
(1984) 153 C.L.R. 514
at 598 per Brennan, J.), where, as here, the opinions were
directed to an issue which would conclude the guilt of the accused, the
should have been told that they could only accept the opinions expressed by
Campbell and Castle, to the exclusion of those expressed
by Collins and Wells,
if they were satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the former opinions were
correct (R. v. Sodo
(1975) 61 Cr.App.R. 131
decision was recently followed in
R v AN; R v LM
[2022] NSWSC
which is a case which
concerned a conflict between experts as to the cause of death of the victim. In
“in exceptional cases, I may be incapable of resolving a
conflict between experts on matters of science. If the conflict relates
area where I cannot resolve that conflict in a manner which would eliminate
reasonable doubt, the accused must be acquitted
Velevski v R
(2002) 187 ALR 233
[2002] HCA 4
Ussher-Clarke v R
[2018] NSWCCA
as the second reason is concerned Professor Eager said that in determining the
cause of the failure of the anchorage system
he first looked at the hypothesis
that lateral forces lifted the jumping castle but he did not think that was the
cause. He thought
there must be some other way and that is when he looked at the
possibility of the dust devil lifting the jumping castle and he used
expertise in engineering to explain the mechanics of the failure by reference to
calculations relating to the force of the dust
devil and how that operated on
the anchorage system.
Hindsight reasoning which is the basis of the criticism of Professor Eager
appears to have been the same process which Mr McDonald
used to inform his
opinion as to the wind speed of 71 km/h – 87 km/h which led to the failure
of the anchorage system.
has started with the failure of the anchorage system, he has noted the
configuration of the pegs which were used, the forces resisting
lift namely the
mass of the jumping castle and the patrons using it, the retention strength of
the various pegs, relying on the
GeoTon report, and the pressure required to
lift the jumping castle, patrons and the pegs. He has then performed a
calculation to
determine the minimum wind speed, in the range of 71 km/h –
87 km/h, which he says would have led to the failure of the anchorage
my experience experts quite often start with the result and work backwards using
all the available evidence in order to
form an opinion as to the cause of the
event which is being examined. I do not criticise either expert for working in
this manner.
relation to the third reason there appears to be a reference to the one page
in Professor
Eager’s report.
referenced at page 147 and in appendix A at page 148 in the schedule of
documents attached to the second letter of instruction
dated 26 June 2024 at
document number six. He said in
though he had never
seen it and there were a number of photographs he did not think he had seen. If
one looks at appendix A to his
report and the schedule of documents contained in
the letter of instruction of 15 June 2022 and those in appendix A to the letter
of instruction of 26 June 2024 and those in appendix B to the letter of
instruction of 27 August 2024 then the following items refer
to photographs
provided to him: item 1 in the first letter, items 1, 31, 34, 52, 54, 125, 140,
142, and 144 which appear in appendix
A to the second letter and items 2, 3, 4,
5, and 6 which appear in appendix B to the third letter. On the assumption the
photos were
sent he has examined a large number of photos. It is not clear to me
what photographs he has not seen or if he has seen all the photographs
evidence. If Professor Eager has not seen the one page manual, and it is not
clear from the evidence whether that is the case,
then in my view this makes no
difference to his opinion. That opinion is essentially based upon the two page
manual which is the
only manual I have found Ms Gamble had access to. I cannot
make any assessment of the effect on Professor Eager’s opinion of
considering some photographs when it is not clear to me whether he considered
them all and if he did not which ones he did
not consider. I can say from
considering his report that it appears he has considered the photographs
relevant to his opinion. I
therefore conclude there is no substance to this
to the fourth reason Professor Eager said in evidence the effect of the dust
devil resulted in the repeated twisting and releasing
of the jumping castle like
it was a coiled spring and it would have been violently fluttering. He accepted
that there was no eyewitness
account which corroborated the movement of the
jumping castle in this way.
The evidence of Ms Shepherd was discussed with Professor Eager in relation to
this issue. She described the jumping castle as
“all crumpled and mixed
but it was put to Professor Eager this was not the jumping castle
because she described the inflatable device which she saw as blue
jumping castle was not blue. It was suggested what she saw was the zorb ball
arena because that was blue. Professor Eager
attempted to reconcile this
discrepancy by deducing Ms Shepherd either got the colour of the jumping castle
wrong or she did not
observe the jumping castle but instead what she observed
was the zorb ball arena. However if one considers her statement carefully
conclusion I have come to is that the device she observed in the air was the
jumping castle because she goes on to say she saw
a child fall out of the
jumping castle while it was in the air. The evidence is a boy fell from the
jumping castle and no child fell
from the zorb ball arena. I therefore conclude
the device which Ms Shepherd observed was the jumping castle although she was
describe the jumping castle as
and parts of it are in
Shepherd’s description of it being all crumpled and mixed up is not
inconsistent with the jumping castle repeatedly twisting
and violently
fluttering. There is also evidence from other witnesses as to the jumping castle
lifting straight up and spinning,
twirling and twisting while in the
This criticism does not
affect the veracity of Professor Eager’s opinion.
is no substance in the fifth criticism of Professor Eager’s opinion.
Professor Eager is specifically asked about that
study, which he refers to in
his report, during
cross-examination.
relation to the seventh criticism it does not follow, without more, that because
Professor Eager spent less time than Mr McDonald
in examining the jumping castle
and preparing his report that Professor Eager’s opinion is wrong or that
Mr McDonald’s
opinion ought to be preferred.
to the eighth reason while it is clear Professor Eager is indeed an academic the
evidence discloses he has vast practical experience
including experience in the
impact of wind in dynamic circumstances upon structures including amusement
This, given his
background of being on the committees responsible for numerous standards
including AS3533.4.1.2005,
would include the practical application of the relevant standards. Professor
Eager also has some patents
which implies the practical application of relevant standards.
so far as Mr McDonald’s opinion is concerned I note he said in evidence he
chose not to rely on the contents of Dr Earl –
Jones’ report because
he only had a preliminary version of that report when he produced his own
Dr Earl – Jones
was the only meteorological expert called to give evidence at the hearing of
this Complaint and his opinion
was not challenged. Unlike Dr Earl-Jones, Mr
McDonald is not a meteorological expert and therefore, given
Evidence Act
, he is not able to provide an admissible opinion with
respect to the direction, force, nature and characteristics of the dust devil.
He has no expertise in meteorology, specifically wind, which is outside his
field of specialised knowledge and training.
McDonald’s opinion as to the cause of the anchor
is provided in
response to the following question:
“Assess the evidence associated with the wind event
and determine the likely impact the event had on each device/component
modes of failure]. Specifically, what wind speed was likely/necessary
to result in the incident
summary, Mr McDonald’s opinion is that:
highly likely that the front face of the jumping castle did not have any pegs
anchoring it to the ground. This provided
over five metres of leading edge which
was unrestrained from lift... When the sudden and strong wind event arrived and
hit the leading
edge of the jumping castle mattress, the significant gap in
retention provided a pathway of least resistance for air
enter under the mattress... The building pressure underneath the mattress put
the jumping castle into lift which changed the load
orientation on the ground
pegs from horizontal pull to a vertical
McDonald said the calculations he performed in this section of his
and on which his
opinion was based, were
“...calculations represent the theoretical ultimate capacity and
configuration...
” based upon the requirements of AS 3533.4.1 and
“...even loading of all eight anchor points and
. He also said
“...the structural stiffness of the
jumping castle is treated as being even in the above calculation”
“...it is likely that the jumping castle would not lift evenly or
in a level manner”.
“other influencing variables
include wind direction, weakest capacity peg, load distribution and structural
mass distribution.”
Mr McDonald accepted that the wind event was a dust
he said, contrary to
the evidence of Dr Earl-Jones, that it was horizontal forces that put the
jumping castle into lift.
Further in his evidence Mr McDonald advised references to wind speed in his
were to horizontal
wind speed,
which, on his
analysis, caused the
by horizontal wind entering
underneath the leading edge of the jumping castle. The initial failure of the
anchorage system was caused
by the entry of horizontal wind under the mattress
which put the jumping castle into lift. This was prior to the vertical suction
forces of the dust devil acting upon the jumping
That is the anchorage
system had already failed before the dust devil was over the jumping
The difficulty with
this theory is that it does not appear anywhere in Mr McDonald’s very
thorough and lengthy report. It only
came to light during his evidence. It was
not suggested to be his evidence in the DPP’s opening however it became
his position
submissions.
It is difficult
to accept this theory bearing in mind it was Mr McDonald’s evidence that
it only took 1-2 seconds for the anchorage
system to fail and for the jumping
castle to become airborne.
His opinion ignores the likelihood of dynamic suction forces, as distinct from
static horizontal forces, having anything to do with
the loss of retention.
Having said all of that Mr McDonald went onto concede:
is possible that the dynamic force exceeded the retention capacity of eight
pegs, which otherwise would have complied with
the relative Australian Standard.
It’s possible? ..... It's possible.
DPP’s closing submissions at paragraphs 130-136 are as follows:
combined force of the weight of the castle and its patrons and the retention
capacity of
four pegs installed on the day meant
that the total force acting on the jumping castle to resist lift was between
5256N and 7849N.
The minimum pressure required to lift those forces was between
218-333Pa. This translates to a minimum wind speed of between 71-87kph
achieve static equilibrium between lift and
the Standard and the manufacturer’s instructions specified that eight pegs
be used to anchor the device.
Table 10.9.2 in P112, it can be seen that had eight pegs compliant with
AS3533.4.1; eight pegs matching the manufacturer’s
specifications (J
shape, 470mm shaft length, 10mm diameter) or eight star pickets (450mm length,
30mm leg), been used on the day,
then any of those configurations would have had
capacity to resist lift of the jumping castle. P112 p225. [Note the
configuration
of eight J pegs (300mm shaft length, 11.9mm diameter) was omitted
from this conclusion].
10.9.3 illustrates that based on a comparison of half of the same configurations
above (i.e. four pegs only) that only four
star pickets with rated carabiners
would have had capacity to defeat loss of
Importantly,
Mr McDonald noted that the above calculations were based on static equilibrium
and did not take into account the time
exposure of the wind event to the jumping
castle. Based on witness accounts (and the evidence of Dr Earl-Jones) it is
likely that
the wind event passed over the jumping castle in a matter of
seconds. Had star pickets been used then they would have had greater
capacity than other configurations which means that it would take the
application of a sustained wind of sufficient force
and duration to force a peg
from the ground. In circumstances where the exposure to the wind event was
fleeting, the use of star
pickets potentially could have significantly affected
whether failure occurred at all, or the behaviour of failure and the magnitude
of potential consequences and harm.
based on the actual anchorage system in use on the day, which was significantly
under required capacity, it did not have
the base restraint strength nor the
endurance capability to sustain retention in a dynamic
McDonald concluded that the jumping castle had not been anchored or operated in
accordance with the applicable Australian Standards
at the time of the incident
nor were the devices and their operation compliant to the manufacturer’s
specifications. In particular,
the jumping castle had only been anchored at
four anchorage points using non-compliant pegs. Further the configuration of the
system meant that the jumping castle did not meet the horizontal wind
load rating which facilitated pathways for air pressure to
infiltrate and fill
under the inflatable’s mattress, providing the impetus for lift.
Calculations of wind speeds required
in these circumstances to defeat the
anchorage system in place on the day showed the jumping castle was likely
exposed to wind speeds
of 71-87 kph, however had the jumping castle been set up
and operated in accordance with the Australian Standards it would have likely
had the capacity to withstand speeds of 87-100kph. Further if star pickets had
been used (in fact, the only peg/stake that met the
Australian Standard peg
specification requirement), as foreshadowed in the defendant’s risk
assessments, it would have likely
had the capacity to withstand 110-119kph. In
his evidence he stated that he believed that “if 8 star pickets had been
(then) it would have endured the
McDonald’s evidence about the jumping castle’s reaction to a
horizontal wind speed was as follows:
“And you were also
asked some questions about um horizontal wind and whether ah you would expect
the – um how you would
expect the castle to react to a horizontal wind at
71 to 87 kilometres or something like that. It was put to you that you’d
expect it to um, ah be pushed over. I think your response was that you would
expect it to um shear or slide? ..... Yes.
Um, the very clear evidence of Dr Nick Earl-Jones last Friday was that the
lateral speed, or the horizontal speed of the wind um that
brought the dust
devil laterally from the car park across to the oval was 10 to 20 kilometres per
hour. Then went onto say that internally
perhaps the force within the dust devil
was 60 to 80, but very clearly gave some evidence that the horizontal force of
the movement
of the wind event was 10 to 20 kilometres per hour, um would you
expect a wind speed such as that to push over the jumping castle,
for example?
..... Ah, trying to convert that to metres per second in my head, which is
roughly a third, or –
Well, the the – ..... To to shear and slide or roll a castle, no,
it’s nowhere near that. Your your weight of the castle
and the weight of
the patrons inside would – it’s – even with the retention
system that was fitted, it was still
– oof – can’t remember
off the top of my head, it might have been eight to – eight to nine
metres per second
if the – and keep in mind, the retention system’s
different from what I – what I calculated originally, so –
Yeah. Um, well the – .....
That that initial wind wouldn't be
enough to actually physically move a castle, assuming the retention system had
already failed at
10 to 20 kilometres per hour
. I’m doing maths in my
head here as well.
Um, well the the requirement of the standard to um withstand lateral
forces of 40 kilometres per hour is based on the 11.1 metres
per second, I
think, isn’t it? ..... Yes.
So, we're talking about half of that, or a quarter to half of that?
..... Oh, sorry, yeah, we’re in half of that with half retention.
you're likely to – likely to be failing the – the anchorage system
as used on the day at that point.
So, this is consistent with your evidence yesterday, that the initial
failure is due to horizontal wind coming and – .....
(emphasis added)
that passage there is a statement that horizontal wind speed of 10-20 km/h would
not be enough to move the castle, assuming the
anchorage system had failed, but
Mr McDonald goes on to say with half the retention; ie 4 pegs the anchorage
system is likely to
be failing at that point; ie at 10-20 km/h. I do not
understand this evidence in light of his calculations in table 10.9.3 of his
report that 4 mixed pegs, which he described as the likely configuration at the
time of the incident, were likely to withstand a
horizontal wind speed of 71-87
km/h before there is a loss of
How has the
retention system already failed at 10-20 km/h when that wind did not have the
capacity to shear, slide or roll a castle
and how does this statement fit with
his theory that the anchorage system in use on the day failed at between 71-87
km/h? His opinion
was predicated on horizontal wind speeds and not on any
internal force within the dust devil. He says the anchorage system had already
failed before the vertical suction forces of the dust devil operated on the
jumping castle. In fact he has ignored for the purposes
of his opinion Dr
Earl-Jones’ evidence which was as follows:
almost impossible to accurately measure the speed within a dust devil, using
meteorological instruments, or even state
of the art remote sensing techniques,
as dust devils are very small and the wind speed within varies greatly in time
and space, and
from one dust devil to the next. However, it is estimated that
winds can reach 100 km/h or faster (NOAA, 2022). I estimate that the
dust devil would have been at least 60-80 km/h based on similar events in the
USA (NOAA, 2022) and mainland Australia (Watson,
2003) along with the effect of
the wind on the inflatables and gazebo as described by the witnesses.
not the speed of the winds however which is what provided the lift, but the
pressure drop in the middle of the vortex, which
is up to 1000 Pa (10 millibars;
Balme and Hagermann, 2006) lower than the immediate surrounding atmospheric
pressure. This had the
effect of sucking the inflatables into its centre of the
dust devil and up off the ground in the associated updrafts
(this can be
seen in the footage of the Yuncheng County incident in the Appendix
according to Dr Earl-Jones it is not the speed of the winds but the pressure
drop in the middle of the dust devil which
sucked the jumping castle into its
centre and up off the ground.
McDonald's opinion also appears to be based upon the order of installation
reported by Tasmania police that being the castle was
laid out, it was inflated
and then anchored. He says if you do it the other way around by laying it out,
stretching it out, anchoring
it and then inflating it you tension the bottom
strap which pulls the pegs horizontally. The first method produces slackness in
strapping which enables air to infiltrate under the mattress which puts the
castle into lift and allows the straps to pull
vertically.
The evidence
however is that the straps were pulled taut before the pegs were hammered in and
therefore there was no slackness which
would enable air to infiltrate under the
mattress which puts the castle into
addition there was criticism by the DPP that
“significant aspects of Dr
Peiris’ evidence were not put to
Mr McDonald.”
The reason for this was, as explained by counsel for Ms Gamble in his
submissions in reply, because Dr Peiris’ evidence related
application of vertical wind force, relying on the opinion of Dr Earl-Jones,
which was a completely different mode of failure
to the opinion expressed by Mr
McDonald. Mr McDonald’s opinion was that horizontal wind caused the
anchorage system to fail
before the dust devil arrived, that is
the dust devil commenced its vertical suction on the jumping castle.”
DPP also submitted Dr Peiris’ calculations were simplistic and they do not
engage with Mr McDonald’s opinion that
the anchorage system failed before
the weather event.
because these calculations were characterised as simplistic does not mean,
without more, they were wrong. While the mathematical
calculation or process is
not difficult the calculation of the various components of the equation is not
simplistic. In any event
Dr Peiris was not challenged on his calculations and he
included an analysis of Mr McDonald’s upward and downward force figures
bearing in mind Mr McDonald’s position is the horizontal wind had already
caused the anchorage system failure. When applying
a dynamic force which was
agreed to be 5 to 7 times greater than a static force Dr Peiris’
calculations were not inconsistent
with Professor Eager’s view that 50 to
74 pegs would not have held the jumping castle down.
final point to mention is the anchorage system consisting of the pegs did not
entirely fail. One peg remained embedded in the
oval. It was the D ring which
was attached to that peg which catastrophically failed.
the reasons expressed in paragraphs 388 to 436 I am not satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that the anchorage system failed because
of the application of
a horizontal wind force prior to the dust devil commencing its vertical suction
on the jumping castle. The
evidence does not permit me to exclude, as a
reasonable hypothesis, the possibility that Professor Eager’s opinion is
DETERMINATION
Gamble has conceded she owed the health and safety duty in s32(a) of the Act. In
so far as a failure to comply or a breach of that
duty under s32(b) is concerned
she accepts it is an onerous
which was explained by
Gaudron J and Callinan J (in separate judgments) in
Slivak v Lurgi
(Australia) Pty Ltd
[2001] HCA 6
; (2001) 205 CLR
to vary significantly
from a general law duty of care.
High Court in
Baiada Poultry Pty Ltd v The Queen
“so far as is reasonably practicable”
attention to the extent or content of the duty:
“All elements of the statutory description of the duty
were important. The words "so far as is reasonably practicable" direct
attention to the extent of the duty. The words "reasonably practicable" indicate
that the duty does not require an employer to take
every possible step that
could be taken. The steps that are to be taken in performance of the duty are
those that are reasonably
practicable for the employer to take to achieve the
identified end of providing and maintaining a safe working environment. Bare
demonstration that a step could have been taken and that, if taken, it might
have had some effect on the safety of a working environment
does not, without
more, demonstrate that an employer has broken the duty imposed by s 21(1). The
question remains whether the employer
has so far as is reasonably practicable
provided and maintained a safe working environment.”
are a number cases which have discussed the nature of offences such as the
charge in this case which qualify the duty, as appears
in s19 of the Act, with
words such as
"so far as is reasonably practicable"
. Such cases include
National Foods Milk Ltd v Smith
[2006] TASSC 24
and Kent v Gunns
Limited (supra), from this jurisdiction,
Chugg v Pacific Dunlop
[1990] HCA 41
(1991) 170 CLR 249
Chugg v Pacific Dunlop Ltd (No 2)
[1993] 3 VR 934 at 940
R v Australian Char Pty Ltd
Lurgi (Australia) Pty
324 [58] and 322 [88] – 336 [98] and
Dinko Tuna Farmers v
[2007] SASC 166
(2007) 98 SASR 96
these authorities the following propositions with respect to the charge
the primary
element of the offence is the failure to ensure so far as is reasonably
practicable that each employee, or in this case
health and safety is not put at risk. The obligation
imposed on the defendant is not absolute;
there is no test
or general rule by which it can be determined whether the obligation has been
the onus is on
the prosecution to establish such a failure;
determination of whether there has been a failure involves a value
“reasonably
practicable" means something narrower than physically possible or feasible;
reasonably practicable is to be determined on the basis of what was known at the
relevant time;
reasonably practicable is a question of fact;
to determine
what is reasonably practicable, it is necessary to balance the likelihood of the
risk occurring, against the cost, time
and trouble necessary to avert that
while it may be
expected similar considerations to those which arise in the determination of a
breach of the common law duty, may
also arise when considering a breach of the
section, common law requirements should not be imported as elements of the
offence; and
foreseeability
of risk of injury is a likely consideration when reaching a determination as to
whether the element of ensuring safety
so far as was reasonably practicable has
been made out. However, such a consideration does not import common law
requirements into
the legislation as an element of the
Laing O’Rourke (
) in considering what was “reasonably
practicable” Murphy JA
“It follows from the definition of 'practicable' that
the obligation imposed on an employer by s19(1) is an obligation to provide
maintain a working environment in which its employees are not exposed to hazards
only so far as is reasonably practicable. The
words 'reasonably practicable' are
ordinary words, bearing their ordinary meaning and simply call for the making of
a value judgment
in light of all the facts: Slivak v Lurgi (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2001] HCA 6
(2001) 205 CLR 304
, 322 (Gaudron J). Hindsight may mislead. As
Harper J said in Holmes v RE Spence & Co Pty Ltd
(1992) 5 VIR 119
‑ 124, in relation to the equivalent provision in the Victorian
legislation:
‘The Act does not require employers to ensure that
accidents never happen. It requires them to take such steps as are practicable
to provide and maintain a safe working environment. The courts will best assist
the attainment of this end by looking at the facts
of each case as practical
people would look at them: not with the benefit of hindsight, nor with the
wisdom of Solomon, but nevertheless
remembering that one of the chief
responsibilities of all employers is the safety of those who work for
assessment of what was reasonably practicably able to be done to ensure health
and safety, in the context of the
, requires an assessment of
“the likelihood of
the hazard or the risk concerned occurring”
, s18(a). This introduces
consideration of the issue of foreseeability confirmed by the following
statements of the High Court in
Chugg v Pacific Dunlop Ltd
(supra), in
the West Australian Court of Appeal in
Laing O’Rourke
(supra) and
in the South Australian Court of Appeal in
Dinko Tuna Farmers Pty Ltd v
(supra) respectively:
“It is clear from the definition of "practicable" in
s.4 of the Act that the issue of practicability requires some consideration
the question of
foreseeability...”
word 'risk' appears in the definition of 'practicable' in pars (a) and (b)(ii)
and (iii). In s 3 of the Act 'risk' is defined
to mean the 'probability' of the
relevant injury or harm occurring, which means no more than the 'likelihood' of
the injury or harm
occurring: Hamersley Iron Pty Ltd v Robertson (18). This will
require some consideration of the question of foreseeability: Chugg
Dunlop Ltd (265); Hamersley Iron Pty Ltd v Robertson (18). That, in turn,
involves consideration of whether it is shown
that the employer knew, or that a
reasonable employer in the position of the employer would have appreciated or
foreseen the risk
of the injury or harm to health occurring: Wylie v South
Metropolitan College of TAFE [45]; Reilly v Devcon [60]; Silent Vector Pty
Shepherd [11] ‑
the ordinary case it can be expected that foreseeability of risk of injury is
likely to be a subject matter for consideration
by a court when reaching a
determination as to whether the element of ensuring safety so far as was
reasonably practicable, has been
made out. However, such a consideration does
not import common law requirements into section 19(1) as an element of the
Mason J made clear in
Wyong Shire Council v Shirt
[1980] HCA 12; 146 CLR
a risk which is not
far-fetched or fanciful is real and therefore foreseeable. The threshold for
foreseeability is therefore low.
In addition, Mason J said the following in so
far as the common law is concerned although this is essentially codified in the
“In deciding whether there has been a breach of the duty
of care the tribunal of fact must first ask itself whether a reasonable
the defendant's position would have foreseen that his conduct involved a risk of
injury to the plaintiff or to a class of
persons including the plaintiff. If the
answer be in the affirmative, it is then for the tribunal of fact to determine
what a reasonable
man would do by way of response to the risk. The perception of
the reasonable man's response calls for a consideration of the magnitude
risk and the degree of the probability of its occurrence, along with the
expense, difficulty and inconvenience of taking alleviating
action and any other
conflicting responsibilities which the defendant may have. It is only when these
matters are balanced out that
the tribunal of fact can confidently assert what
is the standard of response to be ascribed to the reasonable man placed in the
defendant's
is only when the risk is determined to be foreseeable that the balancing
calculus of s18 is undertaken. That is, if the likelihood
is zero (or
negligible) the factors in s18 need not be considered.
considering foreseeability and the broader issue of practicability, the dangers
of the use of hindsight must be kept in mind.
At common law, Gummow J
Roads and Traffic Authority (NSW) v Dederer
[2007] HCA 42
(2007) 234 CLR 330
reasonable care was exercised in the particular case is a question of fact going
to the breach of any duty owed, not to the
existence of that duty. In each case,
the question of whether reasonable care was exercised is to be adjudged
prospectively, and
not by retrospectively asking whether the defendant's actions
could have prevented the plaintiff's
warning applies in relation to workplace safety prosecutions:
Australian Char Pty Ltd
(supra) at 846,
Lurgi (Australia) Pty Limited
(supra) per Gaudron J at
addition it is clear an allowance must be made for the fact that inattention or
misjudgement are common features of everyday work,
and the chance of haste,
carelessness, inadvertence, inattention and even unreasonable or disobedient
conduct, must be recognised;
R v Australian Char Pty
(supra) at 846 and
Tenix Defence Pty Ltd v
[2002] WASCA 165
per Heenan J at [45].
discussed in paragraphs 8 and 9, in order to prove the charge, the prosecution
must establish beyond reasonable
(a) Ms Gamble had a health and safety duty: s32(a) of the
(b) She failed to comply with that duty on 16 December 2021: s32(b) of
the Act, which requires proof, by reference to s 19, that;
(i) she was conducting a business or undertaking at the
relevant time;
(ii) there was a risk to health and safety arising from the
conduct of that business or undertaking;
(iii) she failed to take the steps
particularised in the Complaint at paragraph (n) a, b and c contrary to
s19(3)(c), (d) and (f)
of the Act; and
(iv) it was reasonably practicable for
her to have taken those steps as pleaded in paragraph (o) of the Complaint;
(c) Ms Gamble’s alleged failure exposed individuals to a
risk of death or serious injury or illness as pleaded in paragraph
Complaint: s32(c) of the Act.
Gamble’s position with respect to paragraph 449 is she:
(a) admits she had a health and safety duty to those present:
s32(a) of the Act;
(b) denies she failed to comply with that duty, asserting
that she took all reasonable steps to discharge that duty: s32(b) and s
in doing so she:
(i) admits she was conducting a business or undertaking at the
(ii) admits that there was a risk to health and safety arising from the
conduct of that undertaking, but says that the extent or content
of her duty
required her to guard against normal, unusual or unexpected natural phenomena,
which fall within the range of ordinary
human experience, as opposed to the
extraordinary, overwhelming, unpredictable and unprecedented operation of
natural forces, which
fall outside the range of ordinary human experience, and
in particular, in this case, the dust devil;
(iii) says that there were no
reasonable or practicable measures which she could have taken which would have
eliminated or reduced
the hazard giving rise to the
discussed in paragraphs 11 to 20 the hazard giving rise to the risk, in this
case, was the failure of the anchorage system to anchor
the inflatable device to
the ground due to wind. Whereas, in paragraph 21, the risk arising out of the
hazard was the risk of death
or serious injury associated with a fall from
height and/or being struck by the inflatable device or any part attached
thereto, due
to the inflatable device becoming dislodged from the anchorage
points and becoming airborne.
issues left for determination are therefore:
(a) whether Ms Gamble was in breach of her duty to eliminate or
reduce the risk; and/or
(b) whether there were reasonably practicable precautions
which Ms Gamble could have taken which would have eliminated or reduced
hazard or risk.
duty to eliminate or reduce risk
Gamble’s duty in s19(2) required her to
far as was reasonably practicable, that the health and safety of persons was not
put at risk from the conduct of her business.
If it was not reasonably
practicable to eliminate the risk, her obligation, under s17, was to reduce that
risk so far as was reasonably
practicable.
Court must not consider Ms Gamble’s alleged acts or omissions with the
benefit of hindsight.
Act requires her to adopt a proactive and flexible approach to the potential
dangers of her business or undertaking, while recognising
that human frailty is
an ever-present
Defining the risk to health and safety
in this case is as articulated in paragraph
Proof of the existence of the defined risk provides the
factual framework against which the elements in paragraph 449(b)(iii) and
are assessed, namely:
(a) whether Ms Gamble failed to take the measures identified in
the Complaint to reduce or eliminate the risk; and
(b) whether it was
reasonably practicable for her to have taken those measures.
The particulars contained in the Complaint
law is a defendant is
“entitled to be apprised not only of the legal
nature of the offence with which he is charged but also of the particular act,
matter or thing alleged as the foundation of the
function of particulars is to inform a defendant of the case he or she will face
or is required to meet. Particulars are required
to inform a defendant how it is
he or she is alleged to have committed the
first thing to note about the particulars is none of them allege a failure by Ms
Gamble to comply with the Australian Standards.
particulars in the Complaint allege a breach of the duty in s19(2) of the Act by
reference to s19(3)(c), (d) and (f). Those parts
of s19(3) are as follows:
“Without limiting
subsections (1)
a person conducting a business or undertaking must ensure, so far as is
reasonably practicable –
(a) ...; and
(b) ...; and
(c) the provision and maintenance of safe systems of work; and
(d) the safe use, handling and storage of plant, structures and
substances; and
(e) ...; and....
(f) the provision of any information, training, instruction or
supervision that is necessary to protect all persons from risks to
their health
and safety arising from work carried out as part of the conduct of the business
or undertaking; and
The relevant paragraphs of the charge allege:
“n) The defendant failed, so far as was reasonably practicable to
ensure the health and safety of other persons was not put
at risk from work
carried out as part of the conduct of the business or undertaking, in that it
a. Ensure the provision and maintenance of safe systems of work, in that
the defendant failed to ensure that the anchorage system
was sufficient to
prevent lift of the inflatable device, in that the defendant failed to do one or
more of the following:”
(after which the Complaint lists particulars
(i) to (ix); (iv) and (vii) were abandoned by the DPP in opening the case).
“b. Ensure the safe use, handling and storage of plant, structures
and substances, in that the defendant failed to do one or
more of the
following:”
(after which the Complaint lists the same particulars as
are listed under a. namely (i) to (ix); (iv) and (vii) were abandoned by
DPP in opening the case).
“c. Ensure the provision of any information, training, instruction
or supervision that is necessary to protect all persons
from risks to their
health and safety arising from work carried out as part of the conduct of the
business or undertaking in that
the defendant failed to do one or more of the
following:”
(after which the Complaint lists particulars (i) to
Particulars (i)-(ix) under paragraphs a. and b. are as follows:
(i) Failed to ensure a peg was installed at each of the anchorage points on the
inflatable jumping castle, in accordance with the
manufacturer’s
instructions; and/or
(ii) Failed to ensure that each face of the inflatable jumping castle was
secured by installing pegs at each anchorage point; and/or
(iii) Failed to use the pegs recommended by the manufacturer for use on the
inflatable jumping castle or a suitable alternative
as recommended by a
competent person; and/or
(v) Having departed from the manufacturer’s recommendation to install
pegs at each of the anchorage points, did not engage
a competent person to
recommend a suitable alternate anchorage system and implement that
recommendation; and/or
(vi) Having departed from the manufacturer’s recommendation to install
the manufacturer’s pegs, did not engage a competent
person to recommend a
suitable alternate anchorage system and implement that recommendation and/or
(viii) Failed to use a continuous win monitoring anemometer; and/or
(ix) Failed to apply the controls that had been identified in previous
risk assessments, namely the use of star
Particulars (i)-(iv) under paragraph c. are as follows:
(i) Failed to provide the workers with information including the
manufacturer’s operating manual for the inflatable jumping
(ii) Failed to provide the workers with training and instruction in accordance
with the manufacturer’s operating manual for
the inflatable jumping
castle, including the requirement to use each of the anchorage points; and/or
(iii) Failed to provide the workers with training and instruction in accordance
with the manufacturer’s operating manual for
the inflatable jumping
castle, including the requirement to use the manufacturer’s pegs;
(iv) Failed to provide workers with adequate supervision during the set-up of
the inflatable jumping castle.
submission by Ms Gamble with respect to paragraphs n) a. (i), (iii), (v) and
(vi), n) b. (i), (iii), (v) and (vi); and n) c. (i),
(ii) and (iii) is that, if
the Court does not accept that Ms Gamble was provided with
“manufacturer’s instructions”
by East Inflatables or
was able to access material from East Inflatables which provided the
instructions alleged, namely requiring
her to install a peg at each anchorage
point of the jumping castle, she cannot be held to have breached s32 in the
manner particularised.
have found that no instruction manual was supplied to Ms Gamble by East
Inflatables and she only received four pegs. I accept the
interpretation placed
on clause seven by Ms Gamble and Mr Monte contained in the two page manual
downloaded by Ms Gamble. I have
also found only two pegs supplied by East
Inflatables and two other V shaped pegs were used on the day. I do not think
the defendant’s submission ought to be accepted although
strictly speaking on the evidence it is correct. This is because it
clear on the evidence that on occasions eight pegs had been used by Ms Gamble to
anchor the jumping castle due to the prevailing
weather conditions. So without
knowing it Ms Gamble had complied in the past with what the DPP says were the
manufacturer’s
instructions. She had applied common sense to the operation
of the jumping castle. It is also plainly common sense to use eight pegs
there are eight anchorage points. If you bought a tent with eight anchorage
points which was supplied with four pegs and no manual
would you only use four
pegs? I suggest not. The prudent person would source four more similar pegs and
use eight pegs.
Accordingly
was the use of eight pegs on 16 December 2021 at the School reasonably able to
be done in relation to ensuring health
and safety given the hazard and risk? The
hazard being the failure of the anchorage system, due to the application of wind
jumping castle, to anchor the jumping castle to the ground and the risk
being the risk of death or serious injury associated with
a fall from height
and/or being struck by the inflatable device or any part attached thereto, due
to the inflatable device becoming
dislodged from the anchorage points and
becoming airborne. Turning to the s18 factors:
a) The likelihood of the hazard or the risk concerned occurring;
Dr Earl-Jones, Mr McDonald and Professor Eager agreed jumping
castles were particularly susceptible to the ever-present hazard of
risk to health and safety due to wind was not one which could be eliminated so
it was a risk that had to be mitigated or
and it follows the
likelihood of a failure of the anchorage system to anchor the jumping castle to
the ground due to wind, thereby
giving rise to a risk to health and safety, was
a continual and ongoing risk when the jumping castle was operated outside where
could be impacted by wind. It follows the risk of death or at least serious
injury was likely if the hazard eventuated.
b) The degree of harm that might result from the hazard or the risk;
Ms Gamble accepts in her written submissions that the degree of harm that
might result from the hazard or risk was
significant.
As a matter of common knowledge, falls from height of any degree are
associated with the risk of serious injury or death. The higher
the fall, the
greater the risk.
The degree of harm that could be sustained by being struck by a heavy piece
of the jumping castle, for example, the blower could be
significant and result
in serious injury or death.
the person concerned knows, or ought reasonably to know, about –
hazard or the risk;
of eliminating or minimising the risk; and
evidence which establishes the defendant was aware of the hazard and risk
associated with a failure of the anchorage system.
A prior risk assessment dated
1 August 2016 identified measures such as a self-imposed wind speed limit and
the use of star pickets.
Gamble also had regard to Safe Work Australia’s
“Information
Sheet for Inflatable
specifically identified the hazard of the jumping castle becoming airborne due
to wind. The evidence was Ms Gamble had previously
operated the jumping castle
with eight pegs; that is using one peg at each anchor point which suggests she
was aware of this measure
to mitigate the risk.
d) The availability and suitability of ways to eliminate or minimise the
The defendant had a sufficient number of pegs available to her on 16 December
2021 to use at each of the anchorage points. The DPP
also says a suitable
alternative, namely the use of star pickets, were also on site on the day and
could have been used. Although
the evidence of Mr McDonald was to the effect
that mats could be used to minimise the risk of patrons injuring themselves on
pickets and the defendant herself says this risk could be minimised through
the use of safety caps or sandbags I do not think star
pickets were a viable
alternative. The evidence is they created a trip hazard and in order to reduce
this risk they had to be hammered
right into the ground which made their
removal very difficult. In addition to these issues both Mr Monte and Professor
after being hammered in the metal on the top of the star picket
becomes frayed and sharp and there is a risk a patron will be injured.
Eager indicated he had seen photographs where childrens’ calf muscles had
been impaled.
e) ... costs associated with available ways of eliminating or minimising the
There was no additional cost to the defendant to anchor all eight anchor
points. There were plenty of pegs on site on the day of this
these particulars refer to a competent person, namely n) a. (iii), (v), (vi) and
n) b. (iii), (v) and (vi) they are not applicable.
This is because I am of the
view that changes made to the anchoring system are more likely to be operational
rather than design issues;
that is I am not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
the definition ascribed to this term by Mr McDonald ought be favoured over that
used by Professor Eager. Being an operational issue it is clear on the evidence,
having considered in detail her system of work at
paragraphs 223 to 324, Ms
Gamble was a competent person.
to s32 Ms Gamble accepts she had a health and safety duty under subsection (a)
and I have found she has failed to comply
with that duty under subsection (b) by
not using eight pegs. However I am not satisfied this failure exposed the
students to a risk
of death or serious injury under subsection (c). This is
because the weather forecast, the eyewitness evidence of the weather conditions
before the Wind Event, and the exhibit which shows those weather conditions
prior to the Wind Event, all establish the weather conditions
were benign. If
those conditions had continued it is likely this tragedy would have been
avoided. In addition, I am not satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt, for the
reasons discussed in paragraphs 388 to 436, the anchorage system failed in the
manner proposed by
Mr McDonald. It is more likely the anchorage system failed
due to the significant upward force of the dust devil acting upon the
castle. In those circumstances the evidence is that eight pegs would not have
prevented the failure of the anchorage system
and therefore the failure to
comply with the duty was not a substantial or significant cause of the children
being exposed to the
risk of serious injury or
Application
of the s18 factors to particulars n) a. (viii) and n) b. (viii) namely a failure
to use a continuous monitoring anemometer
is the same as previously stated for
s18(a), (b) and (c), as set out in paragraph 462. As to s18(d) an anemometer has
advantage over using weather apps on phones because the forecasts
provided on weather apps are general over a region and do not take
into account
localised terrain and land features which affect wind. Accordingly weather apps
do not enable the user to accurately
monitor local wind speeds and accordingly
Ms Gamble would not know when a wind speed of 25 km/h had been reached which was
would cease operations. It appears Mr Monte previously used such a
device but had difficulty converting the reading he received from
from miles per hour to kilometres per hour. He was however, at the time of this
incident, in the process of trying to
source a new device. Such devices, for the
purposes of s18(e) were commercially available and affordable. So again s32(a)
are satisfied. The Wind Event was described by eyewitnesses as coming on
“all of a sudden”
and Dr Earl Jones said it was likely
invisible to the naked eye. He and Professor Eager said such a device was
useless in the circumstances.
Accordingly, the failure to comply with the duty
and use an anemometer was not a substantial or significant cause of the children
being exposed to the risk of serious injury or
Section 32(c) has not
been made out.
Application
of the s18 factors to particulars n) a. (ix) and n) b. (ix) namely a failure to
apply the controls identified in previous
risk assessments, namely the use of
star pickets, is the same as previously stated for s18(a), (b) and (c), as set
out in paragraph
462. As to s18(e) there was no additional cost to the defendant
in using star pickets as there were in excess of eight star pickets
for use on site on the day of the incident. Contrary to Ms Gamble’s
submissions
there is evidence
that a risk assessment had identified the control of using star
however as to s18(d)
while available, I do not consider the use of star pickets was a suitable method
by which to eliminate or minimise
the risk because of the reasons set out in
paragraph 462(d). In addition on the DPP’s case, based on Mr
McDonald’s report,
it was not suggested the Australian Standards advised
or required the use of star pickets. I am therefore satisfied s32(a) has been
made out but not s32(b). There is also evidence that the failure to use of eight
star pickets was not a substantial or significant
cause of the children being
exposed to the risk of serious injury or
Therefore s32(c) has
also not been made out.
remaining particulars are n) a. (ii), n) b. (ii) and n) c. (iv) which provide in
summary Ms Gamble failed to ensure safe systems
of work and the safe use,
handling and storage of plant and structures by failing to ensure that each face
of the inflatable jumping
castle was secured by installing pegs at each
anchorage point and by failing to ensure the provision of any information,
instruction or supervision that is necessary to protect all persons
from risks to their health and safety by ensuring the provision
of adequate
supervision during the set up of the jumping castle.
first two particulars can be dealt with together. Application of the s18 factors
to these particulars is as previously stated
for s18(a), (b) and (c), as set out
in paragraph 462. As to s18(d) there were pegs available to secure each face
and Ms Gamble had
previously secured each face when operating the jumping
castle. I find Ms Gamble knew or ought reasonably to have known about the
or the risk and that this was a method which was reasonably able to be
implemented and which at least minimised the risk.
As to s18(e) there was no
additional cost to the defendant in installing pegs at each anchorage point as
there were in excess of
eight pegs available for use on site on the day of this
incident. I am therefore satisfied s32(a) has been made, as has s32(b). However
s32(c) has not been made out because I am not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
that had each face been secured by installing eight
pegs that measure would have
made any difference to the tragic outcome; that is the breach was not a
substantial or significant cause
of the children being exposed to the risk of
serious injury or death.
final particular to consider is n) c. (iv) which alleges a failure to adequately
supervise during the set up of the jumping castle.
In my view the evidence
discussed at paragraphs 223 to
establishes Ms Gamble
did adequately supervise Mr Monte and Mr Barrett. If I am wrong about that then
the inadequacy had no, or
no material, effect on the elimination or reduction of
the risk, for the reasons stated in paragraph 439 from
Baiada Poultry Pty Ltd
v The Queen
(supra). In addition any breach in this regard was not a
substantial or significant cause of the children being exposed to the risk
serious injury or death.
I need to consider the
“reasonably practicable”
particularised under subparagraph o) of the Complaint which are as
a) The measures referred to above were reasonably practicable
(i) The manufacturer's instructions were available to be downloaded
and clearly stated that all anchorage points were to be used;
The evidence
does not support this particular. The evidence supports the proposition that the
manufacturer’s instructions
were not available to be downloaded at any
time before 24 March 2022 when the 13 page “Operating Manual”,
became available
on line. Even then that manual was considered by the experts to
be grossly deficient.
(ii) The manufacturer's instructions were available and
clearly stated the requirements of the retention pegs;
The evidence does not
support this particular for the reasons stated above. Further, the
manufacturer’s instructions did not
clearly state the requirements of the
retention pegs, nor was Mr Chen able to provide any cogent or compelling
evidence in that regard.
(iii) The manufacturer supplied retention pegs that
accorded with their own manufacturer's requirements;
The evidence does not
support this particular due to evidence that the manufacturer only provided four
pegs which were not compliant
with Australian Standards, nor was Mr Chen able to
provide any cogent or compelling evidence in that regard.
(iv) The defendant
had a sufficient number of pegs available to her to use at each of the anchorage
While Ms Gamble did have other pegs available, the evidence is that
the use of additional pegs would not have made any difference
(v) A suitable alternative to the retention pegs, in the form of
star pickets were available on site for use;
For the reasons previously
stated star pickets were not a suitable alternative and their use would not have
made any difference. Nor
did the content of Ms Gamble’s duty require her
to use star pickets, which are not referred to in the Australian
(vi) Weather monitoring devices or anemometers had been used in
the past and were available commercially;
For the reasons stated a weather
monitoring device or anemometer would not have made any difference to the
ultimate outcome.
(vii) A competent person could be engaged to provide advice
For the reasons stated the
evidence does not support this particular. Ms Gamble was a “competent
person” to operate the
jumping castle within the meaning of the specific
amusement devices standard AS 3533.4.1:2005.
Mr McDonald conceded there was
no “trigger” in the manual Ms Gamble downloaded for her to engage a
“competent person”
in the context of the design of the jumping
castle, such as an engineer.
In addition the installation of the number of
pegs was an operational issue and not a design issue.
Finally there is no
evidence a “competent person” would have provided any advice about
an alternative anchorage system
that would have made any
difference.
(viii) The manual contained illustrations of how the pegs should
be inserted into the ground.
The evidence does not support the proposition
that Ms Gamble was ever supplied with a manual which contained illustrations of
pegs should be inserted into the ground. Further the 13 page operating
manual which did contain some illustrations, albeit not illustrations
showed how the pegs were to be installed, was not available to be downloaded
prior to 16 December 2021. None of the manufacturer’s
instructions,
including the one page manual, the two page manual or the 13 page operating
manual, stated the requirements of the
retention pegs, nor was Mr Chen able to
provide any cogent or compelling evidence in that regard. There is no evidence
that a different
peg installation would have made any difference. In any event
the evidence with respect to the four pegs which were installed is
installed correctly; i.e. at closer to 90o rather than
tragic incident occurred, on the evidence, due to an unprecedented weather
system, namely a dust devil. The dust devil was impossible
to predict. As the
DPP properly conceded
dust devil was unforeseen and unforeseeable. I am satisfied Ms Gamble had a
health and safety duty under s32(a) of the Act and
in some respects she failed
to comply with that duty under s32(b). However I am not satisfied, pursuant to
s32(c), those failures
were a substantial or significant cause of the children
being exposed to the risk of serious injury or death. This is because I am
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt the failure of the anchorage system occurred
in the manner suggested by Mr McDonald. The evidence
does not permit me to
exclude, as a reasonable hypothesis, the possibility that Professor
Eager’s opinion is correct. I am
therefore required to find a reasonable
doubt as to the guilt of Ms
likely the failure of the anchorage system occurred in the manner suggested by
Professor Eager. In those circumstances
the failures to comply with the duty,
which I have identified, would not have prevented the failure of the anchorage
system. Ms Gamble
could have done more or taken further steps however given the
effects of the unforeseen and unforeseeable dust devil, had she done
would sadly have made no difference to the ultimate outcome.
Accordingly,
I am not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of Ms Gamble’s guilt to the
charge in the Complaint which has been filed
against her. In those
circumstances I find the charge is not proved. It is therefore
DPP v ROSEMARY ANNE GAMBLE T/A Taz-Zorb (Complaint No:
_____________________________________________
Exhibit List
Description of Exhibit
Exhibit No.
Agreed Facts P1
Aerial (photoshopped) photograph of jumping castle position before
Video of set up on morning of Incident Date
Aerial plan showing approx. positions of children
Forensic Pathology Report
Peter Anthony Dodt
Forensic Pathology Report
Jalailah Jayne-Maree Jones
Forensic Pathology Report
Zane Timothy John Mellor
Forensic Pathology Report
Jye Max Sheehan
Forensic Pathology Report
Chace Craig Harrison
Forensic Pathology Report
Addison Tabitha May Stewart
Statutory Declaration
Jerome Pape 16/12/21
Supplemental Proof
Jerome Pape – 17/10/24
Jamie-Lee Ackerley (nee Duff) 17/12/21
Lisa Maree Willett 16/12/21
Lisa Anne Shepherd 16/12/21
Gaye Maree Kelly 16/12/21
Declan Cameron Kelly 16/12/21
Stephen James Fenn 16/12/21
Jeff George McCormack 16/12/21
Zoe Kaye Hingston 21/12/21
Nigel Benjamin Williams 21/12/21
David William Shepherdson 22/12/21
Andrew Phillip Turner 20/12/21
Dean Clifton Bramich 20/12/21
Janelle Margaret Hays 20/12/21
Robert Douglas Boutcher 17/12/21
Transcript of Recording
Amy Louise Dettmer 10/05/22
Darren Robert Purton 20/12/21
Kylie Heather Brown 17/12/21
Steven Wayne Brownrigg 25/03/22
Melissa Sue Keygan 12/05/22
Colin Thomas Wilcox 11/01/22
Melissa Jane Ellen Bonney (undated)
Bianca Pearce 22/12/21
Jason Adrian Leary 21/12/21
Alison Tania Jeffrey 20/12/21
Miriam Beswick (undated)
Antoinette Maree Belbin (undated)
Transcript of Recording
LW recorded 21/12/22
Transcript of Recording
BB recorded 20/12/21
Transcript of Recording
VB recorded 21/12/21
Transcript of Recording
AB recorded 20/12/21
Transcript of Recording
AB recorded 20/12/21
Transcript of Recording
MB recorded 22/12/21
Transcript of Recording
JC recorded 21/12/21
Transcript of Recording
LD recorded 21/12/21
Transcript of Recording
CD recorded 22/12/21
Transcript of Recording
MG recorded 21/12/21
Transcript of Recording
IH recorded 20/12/21
Transcript of Recording
KJ recorded 22/12/21
Transcript of Recording
NJ recorded 20/12/21
Transcript of Recording
CL recorded 21/12/21
Transcript of Recording
JL recorded 21/12/21
Transcript of Recording
TM recorded 22/12/21
Transcript of Recording
LM recorded 21/12/21
Transcript of Recording
MP recorded 20/12/21
Transcript of Recording
MP recorded 22/12/21
Transcript of Recording
AP recorded 20/12/21
Transcript of Recording
MP recorded 20/12/21
Transcript of Recording
TS recorded 22/12/21
Transcript of Recording
WS recorded 21/12/21
Transcript of Recording
BT recorded 20/12/21
Transcript of Recording
MW recorded on 20/12/21
Transcript of Recording
JW recorded on 21/12/21
Transcript of Recording
KW recorded on 20/12/21
Transcript of Recording
BM recorded 18/12/21
Transcript of Recording
BM recorded 16/03/22
Transcript of Recording
AP recorded 22/12/21
Photograph of position Ms Shepherd was standing during
observation
Agreed Fact
Videos and Locations
Map of Devonport Area
Lawrence Drive (front)
Lawrence Drive (rear)
CCTV of Airport
Court Book 2
Photographs
3D model: scene at Hillcrest Primary School
Constable Wotherspoon’s Spreadsheet
Connor Evidence
Report of Doctor Connor dated 6/07/2022
Plan prepared by First Class Constable dean Wotherspoon
First Class Constable Wotherspoons plan of jumping castle
Court Book 3
Agreed Fact – S 155 response from Defendant
Court Book 3
Letter of Bradley Parker pages 2-5
Court Book 3
Response – pages 6-193
Agreed fact S.155 Material from East Inflatables
Court Book 3
Notice to give information pages 194-196
Court Book 3
Response from Candy pages 197-231
Response from Candy
Court Book 3
Attachment to James Day further correspondence with East Inflatables pages
Business Record
Business Record dated 19/09/2015
Business Record dated 9/12/2021
Business Record dated 24/03/2022
Business Records – emails between Coco and Candy dated 25 January
East Inflatable product list
First Class Dean Wotherspoon 3D model prepared as a result of inspection
Guide for amusement devices published by Safe Work Australia page 1 dated
Court Book 4
Agreed Fact - FSST
Court Book 4
Annexure BOM data pages 3-35
Court Book 4
Dr Earl-Jones and Mr Weeding report dated 15/12/2022
Supplemental Proof
Court Book 4
Dr Earl-Jones CV
Court Book 4
De Earl-Jones google scholar
Pages 41-42
Article by John Knox and others entitled wind-related Bounce House
Incidents in meteorological, Regulatory and outreach contexts
Document tilted: Dust Devils a life cycle
Youtube Clip
( will need to download to re view)
Dust Devil Video from 23/24
(Dust devil caught on camera carrying away bouncey house – youtube
video ) on mute 30 secs
Court Book 4
Agreed Fact – Forensic Science Services Tasmania
Court Book 4
Agreed Fact – Spectrometry Analysis
Court Book 4
Agreed Fact – Australian Standards
Court Book 4
Australian Standard – Amusement rides and devices
Standalone court book
Australian Standards – Amusement rides and devices Part 2: Operation
and maintenance
Court Book 4
Australian Standard – Amusement rides and devices specific
requirements Land-Borne inflatable devices
Court Book 4
Australian Standard – Amusement rides and devices Part 4.1 specific
requirements – land-borne inflatable devices pages
Court Book 4
Agreed Fact – Continuity of D ring and metal object
Court Book 4
Scope of work pages 311-313
Court Book 4
Load Test Reports (photographs and Graphs) pages 314-345
Court Book 4
Hardness Reports dated 7.10.2022 and accompanying photos pages 346-349 +
Bundle of 3 photographs taken by Inspector Day
Inspector Day’s 2 videos taken 30/12/22
Court Book 4
Mr Shahandeh CV pages 354+355
Court Book 4
Mr Shahandeh Report dated 19/12/2022 pages 356-410
Mr Shahandeh - 2 Page Pocket guide
Court Book 5
Report of Mr McDonald dated 10/01/2023
Court Book 4
Agreed fact – continuity of pegs and anchors
Pages 352-353
Annexed to Court Book 5
Record of interview – Jesse Dean Barrett pages 1-57
Annexed to Court Book 5
Record of interview – Robert Monte pages 58-103
Plan of jumping castle showing area of leading edge of Mr McDonald
Mr McDonalds second plan of position of Blower
Photograph of Diagram of Mr McDonald
Diagram of Mr McDonald
Horizontal load diagram of Mr McDonald
Court Book 7
Redacted report of Professor David Eager
Mass X Gravity diagram of Professor Eager
Second diagram of Professor Eager
Willy Willy diagram of Professor Eager
Me Heikkilae Report dated 14/10/2024
Supplementary Report of Mr Heikkilae of 5/11/2024
Snapshot of 5/11/2017
Snapshot of 23/03/2022
Snapshot of 24/03/2022
Dr Peiris report dated 10/10/2024
Dr Peiris calculations of Dr Earl-Jones
Dr Peiris setting out of Mr McDonalds calculations
Dr Peiris calculations of Dr Earl-Jones and using star pickets
Dr Peiris calculations setting out Mr McDonalds figures and using star
Snapshot of 9/12/2021
Snapshot of 1/11/2022
19. Primary duty of care
(1) A person conducting a business or
undertaking must ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, the health and
safety of –
(a) workers engaged, or caused to be engaged
by the person; and
(b) workers whose activities in carrying out
work are influenced or directed by the person –
while the workers are at work in the business or undertaking.
(2) A person conducting a business or
undertaking must ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the health
and safety of
other persons is not put at risk from work carried out as part of
the conduct of the business or undertaking.
(3) Without limiting
subsections (1)
a person conducting a business or undertaking must ensure, so far as is
reasonably practicable –
(a) the provision and maintenance of a work
environment without risks to health and safety; and
(b) the provision and maintenance of safe
plant and structures; and
(c) the provision and maintenance of safe
systems of work; and
(d) the safe use, handling and storage of
plant, structures and substances; and
(e) the provision of adequate facilities for
the welfare at work of workers in carrying out work for the business or
undertaking,
including ensuring access to those facilities; and
(f) the provision of any information,
training, instruction or supervision that is necessary to protect all persons
from risks to
their health and safety arising from work carried out as part of
the conduct of the business or undertaking; and
(g) that the health of workers and the
conditions at the workplace are monitored for the purpose of preventing illness
or injury of
workers arising from the conduct of the business or
undertaking.
Particulars (a) to (k) in paragraph 7 are either agreed or established by the
Emphasis added. The
meaning of hazard is considered in paragraphs
Emphasis added. The
meaning of risk is considered in paragraph 21.
Particulars (iv) and (vii)
were omitted by consent on 5 November 2024. See Transcript (T) page 9 line 24 to
page 10 line 12.
Particulars
(iv) and (vii) were omitted by consent on 5 November 2024. See T9 line 24 to T10
No breach of duty
and therefore no charge has been laid with respect to the zorb balls despite DB,
JW and AP sustaining injuries
which arose out of their
M Wilson SC; opening
address T19 line 29 to T20 line 40.
See paragraphs 24 to
Ms Gamble’s
submissions dated 31 January 2025 at
Ms Gamble’s
submissions dated 31 January 2025 at
Prosecution
submissions dated 10 February 2025 at
Ms Gamble’s
submissions in reply dated 14 February 2025 at
T933 line 39 to T934
T933 lines 21-23.
[2018] NSWLEC 143
235 LGERA 5.
See paragraphs
[2000] NSWCCA 410
[2016] NSWCCA 185
[2016] NSWCCA 185
Chugg v Pacific
[1990] HCA 41
170 CLR 249
The facts which follow
are contained in Exhibit P1.
This cannot be correct. The evidence at paragraph 320 is due to the hardness of
the ground the pegs could only be hammered in at
a slight angle; i.e. near
straight. Therefore, this paragraph should probably read at a 80-degree angle.
At a 10-degree angle the
pegs would have been hammered in close to the
horizontal not vertical axis.
Exhibit P5-affidavit of the
forensic pathologist Dr Andrew Reid.
Exhibit P6- affidavit of
the forensic pathologist Dr Andrew
Exhibit P7- affidavit
of the forensic pathologist Dr Andrew
Exhibit P8- affidavit
of the forensic pathologist Dr Andrew
Exhibit P9- affidavit
of the forensic pathologist Dr Andrew
Exhibit P10- affidavit
of the forensic pathologist Dr Andrew
Exhibit P11 Court
Book Volume (CBV) 1 pages (pp)
Exhibit P18 CB V1 pp
Exhibit P16 CB V1
pp 103-105.
Exhibit P16 CB
Exhibit P17 CB V1
pp 106-110.
Exhibit P14 CB
V1 pp 94-97.
Exhibit P15 CB
V1 pp 98-100.
Exhibit P26 CB
V1 pp 130-131.
Exhibit P42
CB V1 pp 211-238 at page
Exhibit P67 CB V1 pp
765-801 at p 770 and pp 777-778.
Exhibit P27 CB V1 pp
132-139 at pp 133, 134 and
Exhibit P65 CB V1 pp
721-737 at pp 726 and 735.
Exhibit P69 CB V1 pp 811-828 at pp 814, 817, 818 and
Exhibit P25 CB V1 pp
Exhibit P43 CB V1
pp 239-259 at pp 248 and
Exhibit P44 CB V1 pp
260-304 at p 273.
P45 CB V1 pp 305-331 at p
Exhibit P50 CB V1 pp
423-441 at pp 428 and 433.
Exhibit P52 CB V1 pp 466-477 at pp 467-469 and
Exhibit P55 CB V1 pp
535-552 at pp 537 and 542.
Exhibit P57 CB V1 pp 566-587 at pp 571-571 and
Exhibit P58 CB V1
pp 588-608 at p 606.
P62 CB V1 pp 661-683 at p
Exhibit P63 CB V1 pp
684-700 at pp 690-691.
Exhibit P64 CB V1 pp 701-720 at pp 703 and
Exhibit P30 CB V1 pp
Exhibit P33 CB V1
pp 156-158.
First Class
Constable Willcox was tasked to attend the School at approximately 10:05am on 16
December 2021 and he made his way to
the School immediately. He was there until
after 1:45pm.
Exhibit P112B
p 7 line 29.
Exhibit P112B p
8 lines 1-2.
Exhibit P112A p 11
lines 472-477.
Exhibit P112A
p 10 lines 455-460.
P112A p 11 lines 495-497.
Exhibit P112A p 35 lines
Exhibit P112A p
36 lines 1813-1819.
P112A p 37 lines 1837-1839.
T269 line 3 to T270 line 3.
T270 lines 6-19.
T270 lines 38 to T271
Exhibit P40 CB V1 pp
176-193 at pp184-186.
Exhibit P41 CB V1 pp194-210 at pp 198 and
Exhibit P47 CB V1 pp
361-381 at pp 366-367, 372 and
Exhibit P48 CB V1 pp
382-401 at pp 385 and 392.
Exhibit P56 CB V1 pp 553-565 at pp 557, 560 and
Exhibit P61 CB V1 pp
647-660 at pp 649-651.
Exhibit P19 CB V1 pp 115-116.
Exhibit P72 CB V2
pp32-33, 39-43.
T81 lines 21-29,
Exhibit P72 CB V2 pp
See exhibits P92
and P93 which are his CV and Google Scholar
respectively.
Exhibit P90
CB V4 pp 43-72.
Dr Earl-Jones also
had regard to a video of the set up (Exhibit P3), a video of a dust devil at the
Devonport airport (Exhibit P71B),
photographs (Exhibit P72), and materials
provided by the Bureau of Meteorology (Exhibit P89). See T322 to
See the first clip
on Exhibit P71B particularly after
Exhibit P90 CB
Exhibit P90 CB V4
Exhibit P90 CB V4
Exhibit P90 CB
Exhibit P90 CB
Exhibit P90 CB
Exhibit P90 CB
Exhibit P90 CB
Exhibit P90 CB
Exhibit P90 CB
Exhibit P90 CB
Exhibit P90 CB
Exhibit P90 CB
Exhibit P90 CB
Exhibit P90 CB
Exhibit P90 CB
Exhibit P90 CB
Exhibit P91 at
T325 line 42 to
T326 line 4.
See Exhibit P90 CB
V4 p 70 (Exhibit P94 refers to the website of incidents:
All Incidents - Weather
40 to T335 line 4.
lines 17-24.
T324 line 31
to T325 line 1.
T328 lines 4-7.
Exhibit P102 CB V4
pp 205-256.
Exhibit P100
CB V4 pp 77-204.
P101-standalone court
Exhibit P102 CB V4
p 210, T553 lines 5-6, T647 lines
Exhibit P102 CB V4
Exhibit P112 CB V5
Exhibit P112 CB
V5 pp 72-74.
Exhibit P112
CB V5 pp 74-79.
P112 CB V5 pp 79-82.
Exhibit P112 CB V5 pp
Exhibit P112 CB V5
Exhibit P112 CB
V5 pp 92-103.
P112 CB V5 pp 103-106.
Exhibit P112 CB V5 pp
T530 line 27 to
T541 line 26.
T529 line 5 and T
530 lines 27-30.
line 7 to T537 line 24.
T537 line 26 to T540 line
T551 line 6 to T553
It is however
defined in clause 4 of AS 3533.4.1:2018 however this standard does not apply as
the jumping castle was manufactured
before this Standard commenced
T666 line 38
to T667 line 6.
24 to T668 line 21.
lines 11-22.
Exhibit D8 CB V7 p
Exhibit D8 CB V7 p
T741 line 4 to T744
submissions dated 10 February 2025 at [32] and Mrs Gamble’s submissions
dated 31 January 2025 at
At [69]-[70]
per Pullin JA.
These Regulations
were in force at the time of the Wind Event. They have been replaced by the 2022
Regulations.
lines 18-19.
Exhibit P111
CB V4 pp 356-411.
lines 6-30.
Exhibit P111 CB V4 p
Exhibit P81 CB V3
p 13 and p 70.
25 to T239 line 9.
Exhibit P81 CB V3 pp
Exhibit P81 CB
Exhibit P112B p
14 lines 12-18.
Exhibit P81 CB
Exhibit P81 CB
V3 p 13 and p 70.
P81 CB V3 p 115.
T226 lines 24-27,
T240 line 9.
T240 line 40 to T241
line 2. See also CB V3 p 13 and p 197.
T226 lines 1-4.
Exhibit P84 CB V3 p 206
and T240 lines 11-21.
Exhibit P84 CB 3 pp 207-219 and T240 lines
Exhibit P81 CB V3
T241 line 41 to T242
Exhibit P81 CB V3 p
13 in answer to request for information (rfi) number 12 and page
Exhibit P81 CB V3 p
Exhibits D14, D15,
D16, D22 and D23.
Exhibit P112 CB V5 p
Exhibit P81 CB V3 pp
Exhibit P81 CB
Exhibit P81 CB
Exhibit P81 CB
V3 pp 116-122.
P81 CB V3 p 117.
P81 CB V3 p 115.
P81 CB V3 p 114.
P81 CB V3 p 110.
P84 CB V3 p 226.
subsequent discussion.
Exhibit P81 CB V3 p 117.
Exhibit P81 CB V3 pp
Exhibit P81 CB
Exhibit P84 CB
Exhibit P84 CB
Exhibit P81 CB
Exhibit D12 CB
V6 pp 1-40.
He explained
what a snapshot was at T802 lines
Exhibit D14 and CB
V4 pp 23-24.
Exhibit P84 CB V3 pp
207-219 and p 197.
Exhibit D8 CB V7 p 16 lines 376 to
Exhibit D8 CB V7 p
16 line 385 to p19 line
T239 lines 29
– 40, Exhibit P81 CB V3 p
Exhibit D8 CB V7 p 19
line 429 to 430.
D8 CB V7 p 20 lines 436 to
Exhibit D8 CB V7 p
16 lines 376 to 381.
T419 line 6 to T420 line 14, T653 lines
Exhibit D8 CB V7 p
Exhibit P112 CB V5
pp 180-184, Exhibit D8 CB V7 pp 20-21, Exhibit D17 CB V6 p 47.
Exhibit P112 CB V5 pp
180-184, Exhibit D8 CB V7 p
Exhibit P112 CB V5 pp
180-184, Exhibit D8 CB V7 p 28-30, Exhibit D17 CB V6 p
Exhibit P112 CB V5 pp
180-184, Exhibit D8 CB V7 p 30-31.
Exhibit P102 CB V4 pp
Exhibit P102 CB
V4 pp 227-228.
P102 CB V4 p 228.
P102 CB V4 p 228.
P102 CB V4 p 228.
P112 CB V5 p 50.
P112 CB V5 pp 46-51.
Exhibit P112 CB V5 p 55.
Exhibit P112 CB V5 p 59.
Exhibit P112 CB V5 p 65.
Exhibit P112 CB V5 pp
Exhibit P112 CB V5
Exhibit P112 CB
V5 pp 55-59.
Exhibit P112
CB V5 pp 59-65.
P84 CB V3 pp 197-231, T156 lines
Exhibit P83 CB V3
pp194-196, T156 lines
Exhibit P84 CB V3 p
Exhibit P81 CB V3 p
T176 lines 5-23. See
the exchange from T173.
Exhibit P84 CB V3 p 206.
Exhibit P84 CB V3 pp
T158 line 33 to
T159 line 5.
interpret to mean
electronic.
T161 lines 30
Exhibit P84 CB V3 p
Exhibit P84 CB V3 pp
It is unfortunate
the s155 notice from WorkSafe asks for information about E2-030 jumping castles
generally. The questions are not
specifically directed towards the jumping
castle purchased by Ms Gamble.
Exhibit P84 CB V3 pp 226
T161 line 38
to T162 line 16.
lines 12-23.
Exhibit P84 pp 233
– 285 and T162 lines
T172 lines 18-22.
T172 line 31 to T173
For example Exhibit
P81 CB V3 p147.
T189 lines 37-40,
T190 line 11.
Exhibit P81
CB V3 p 13.
Exhibit P112B
p 15 lines 33-36.
lines 29-32.
T240 line 40 to T241
Exhibit P81 CB V3
P81 CB V3 pp 26-27.
Exhibit P81, CB V3 p 11.
Exhibit P81 CB V3 p 13.
T225 lines 39-41.
Exhibit P112B p 15
lines 14-15 and 21-23.
T226 lines 17-19.
lines 24-26.
Referring to the
two page manual at CB V3 pp 26-27, T241 lines 32-34.
T226 line 38 to
T227 line 2.
Exhibit P112B p 15
lines 33-36.
P112B p 17 lines 20-23.
Exhibit P112B p 23 lines
T522 lines 6-7 and
Exhibit D17 CB V6 p
57 at [151].
T237 lines 1-6.
T236 lines 34-39.
T239 lines 21-26.
Exhibit P81 CB V3 p 13
in answer to rfi number13.
T237 lines 14-19 and
Exhibit P81 CB V3 p 14 in answer to rfi number
Exhibit P112B p 30
lines 22-30.
Exhibit P81
CB V3 pp 10-193.
P81 CB V3 p 13.
P81 CB V3 p 14.
P81 CB V3 pp 10-193.
Exhibit P81 CB V3 p 11.
Exhibit P84 CB V3 p 211 although the photograph of the jumping castle at P72 CB
V2 at pages 250 and 252 depicts advice from East
Inflatables advising that the
jumping castle not be operated in winds in excess of 20 mph.
So on this point
there is conflicting advice from East inflatables.
Exhibit P81 CB V3
page 12 in answer to rfi number
Exhibit P81 CB V3 page
11 in answer to rfi number 6 and 7, Exhibit P81 CB V3 page 12 in answer to rfi
number 8, T243 lines
Exhibit P81 CB V3
page 13 in answer to rfi number 13 and page 14 in answer to rfi number
Exhibit P81 CB V3
page 11 in answer to rfi number
Exhibit P81 CB V3 pp
Exhibit P81 CB V3
p 11 in answer to rfi number
Exhibit P81 CB V3 p 11
in answer to rfi number
Exhibit P112B p 8
line 30 and p 30 line 35.
Exhibit P112B p 5 lines 42-44 and p 6 lines
Exhibit P112B p 14
lines 36-37, p 8 line 30.
T242 lines 34-39.
lines 15-18.
Exhibit P112A p 6
lines 235-236.
Exhibit P81 CB V3
Exhibit P81 CB
V3 pp 32-35.
Exhibit P81
CB V3 p 12.
Exhibit P81
CB V3 p 29.
Exhibit P81
CB V3 p 12 and pp 39-68.
Exhibit P81 CB V3 p 12 and pp
Exhibit P81 CB V3
T243 line 33 to
T244 line 35-39,
Exhibit P81 CB V3 pp 48, 53-56,
Exhibit P81 CB V3
Exhibit P112B p
17 lines 39-42.
P112A p 13 lines 615-617 and T273 lines
Exhibit P112A p 13
lines 600-604.
P112A p 14 lines 625-629.
Exhibit P81 CB V3 pp
Exhibit P81 CB V3
p 14 in response to rfi number
Exhibit P81 CB V3 p
14 in response to rfi number
Exhibit P112B p 11
lines 18-21.
P112B p 17 lines 39-42.
Exhibit P112B p 19 lines
Exhibit P112B p 31
lines 10-14.
Exhibit P112A p 13
lines 600-604.
11-14, T668 line 42.
Evidence Act
Exhibit P81 CB V3 p
14 in response to rfi number
Exhibit P81 CB V3 p
16 in response to rfi number
Exhibit P112A p 14
lines 634-637.
T217 lines 41-
Exhibit P112B p 6
lines 42-43 and p 7 lines 18-19.
Exhibit P112A p 12 lines
Exhibit D17 CB
V6 p 49 [42].
P112B p 22 lines 2-14, T276 lines
Exhibit P80 CB V3 pp
Exhibit P112B p 13
lines 11-17.
Exhibit P13
CB V1 p 92.
Exhibit P16
CB V1 p 103.
Exhibit P81
CB V3 p 12 in response to rfi number
T242 line 41 to
T243 line 4.
Exhibit P112B p 19
lines 25-29.
P112B p 19 lines 33-36.
That is the notice which appears on the jumping castle. See CB V2 p 250 and p
252 which warns against operating the jumping castle
in winds in excess of 20
Exhibit P112B p 20
lines 17-21.
P112B p 20 lines 23-25.
Exhibit P112B p 33 lines
Exhibit P112B p 33
lines 38-41.
P112A p 15 lines 701-705.
Exhibit P112A p 33 lines 1636-1637 and lines
T242 line 41 to
T243 line 8.
T245 lines 19-23
and T246 lines 23-34.
T246 lines 18-29.
lines 31-34.
T273 line 37
to T274 line 9.
lines 11-19.
Exhibit P89 CB V4
Exhibit D8 CB
V7 p 524ff.
Exhibit D8 CB
Exhibit P89 CB
V4 pp 33-34.
Exhibit P102
CB V4 p 233.
Exhibit P81 CB V3 p
15 in response to rfi number
Exhibit P81 CB V3 p
15 in response to rfi number
Exhibit P112B p 13
lines 11-21.
P112A p 12 line 517 to p 13 line
Exhibit D8 CB V7 p
111 lines 2356-2367.
lines 38-41.
CB V7 p 111 lines 2361-2362.
T469 lines 7-13;
here Mr McDonald was referring to wind meters or anemometers.
Exhibit P112B p 22
line 40 to p 23 line 15.
T268 lines 23-28.
Exhibit P112A p 16 lines
Exhibit P81 CB
Exhibit P112B p 16
lines 32-34.
Exhibit P16
CB V1 p 103.
P112A p 33 lines
Exhibit P112B p 7
lines 21-24.
Exhibit P13
CB V1 p 104.
Exhibit P112A p 12
Exhibit P72 CB V2
pages 243-244 (photographs numbered
T247 line 27 to
T248 line 32.
34 to T705 line 2.
line 32 to T217 line 30.
T217 lines 35-39.
line 14 to T218 line 14.
T217 lines 16-18.
line 13 to T220 line 2.
T219 lines 16-17.
426 (photograph no. 528).
T220 lines 21-31.
T220 line 33 to T221
T263 lines 5-8 and
T264 lines 1-3.
lines 14-27.
T265 lines 10 to
T410-411 and Exhibit
P112 CB V5 p 254-257.
Exhibit P112 CB V5 pp
Exhibit P102 CB V4
pp 205-256.
Exhibit P100
CB V4 pp 77-204.
Exhibit P102 CB V4
Exhibit P102 CB V4
Exhibit P112 p
Which included
photographs, video recordings, documents and interviews-See Exhibit P112 CB V4 p
Exhibits P106
and P107 CB V4 pp 314-345 and pp
Exhibit P111 CB
V4 pp 356-410.
P112 CB V5 p 4.
33 to T418 lines 1-2.
Exhibit P102 CB V4 pp 214-215 and Exhibit P112 CB V5 p
Exhibit P112 CB V5 p
Exhibit P112 CB V5 pp
24-25 and T422 line 30 to T427 line
Exhibit P111 CB V4 p
Exhibit P102 CB V4 p
215 at clause 6.2 (b) and at T427. A kilonewton (kN) is a unit of force
equal to 1,000 newtons.
Peg 6 of 7; see Exhibit P111 CB V4 pp 366-372.
Exhibit P102 CB V4 p 215
clause 6.2(e).
Exhibit P102 CB V4
p 215 clause 6.2(h) and Exhibit P112 CB V5 p 29.
Exhibit P1 at
T432 line 40 to
T443 line 3, T574 lines
T433 lines 6-9 and
T574 lines 23-25.
T434 line 24 to
T435 line 7.
Exhibit P102
CB V4 p 215 clause
Exhibit P81 CB V3
T435 line 39 to
T436 line 20.
29 to T437 line 13.
Exhibit P100 CB V4 p 87 and p 174, Exhibit P112 CB V5 pp
Exhibit P102 CB V4
p 232 and T441 line 27 to T443 line
Exhibit P81 CB V3 pp
26-27, Exhibit P84 CB V3 pp 197-200, T158 line 33 to T160 line
Exhibit P84 CB V3 p
Exhibit P84 CB V3 p
Exhibit P112 at pp
46-65, T456 to T458.
CB V5 pp 51-52, T457 lines 21-24, T458 lines
Exhibit P84 p 206,
T457 lines 26-32.
lines 1-14.
Exhibit P112
CB V5 pp 55-59.
lines 15-33.
T462 line 6
to T463 line 13, Exhibit P112 CB V5 pp 76-79.
Exhibit P102 CB V4 p
Exhibit P102 CB V4 p
232 at paragraph 18(b).
Exhibit P102 CB V4 p 232 at paragraphs 18(c) and (f) and T463 lines 15 to
T465 lines 8-38
and T466 to T467 line 5.
Exhibit P101.
P112, CB V5 p 92.
P102 CB V4 p 214. The wind speed is 11.1 m/s or 40
T467 line 19 to
T469 line 13.
30 to T469 line 17, Exhibit P112 CB 5 p
Exhibit P101
T470 line 21 to
T471 line 33. See also
An amusement ride or device shall only be operated when
the following planning has been carried out:
(a) Policies relating to an amusement device and procedures for its
operation have been prepared and communicated to all staff and
are adhered to at
(c) In addition to the relevant specific requirements outlined in
, all manufacturer's instructions relating to the safe operation of an
amusement device and any rider restrictions specified by the
manufacturer, or
determined by a competent person in the absence of any instructions from the
manufacturer, are
line 36 to T472 line 29.
Exhibit P112 CB V5. The letter of instruction is at pp
Exhibit P112, CB
V5 pp 168-178, T473 line 1 to T474 line
Exhibit P112 CB V5 pp
180-186, T474 line 18 to T475 line 15. Where the jumping castle was not
“it was manageable in a compliant
33 to T476 line 9.
lines 11-29, Exhibit P112 CB V5 p
T477 lines 1-12,
Exhibit P112 CB V5 p
T 477 lines 13-16,
Exhibit P112 CB V5 p 184.
T477 to T479.
P112 p 196, T479 to T481.
Exhibit P112 pp 197 to 200 and T482 lines
An order of how
things are controlled by methodology; see T484 line 36 to T484 line 41.
Exhibit P112 p 201
and T486 line 22 to T487 line
Exhibit P112 p 202 and
T487 lines 16-42.
P102 CB V4 p 232.
P81 CB V3 for example at pp 33, 37, and 39-68.
Exhibit P112 pp 202 to
203, T488 line 17 to T489 line 33, Exhibit P112 p
Exhibit P112 p 203
as to competency.
P112 p 203, T490 lines 1-5 and lines
Exhibit P112 p
204, T490 lines 12 to 41.
Exhibit P112 p 204.
Exhibit P112 p 218, T492 line 38 to T493 line
Exhibit P112 p 219.
T493 line 22 to T494
Exhibit P112 pp
220 to 230 and at T496 to
See Exhibit P112 pp
220 to 222.
Exhibit P112 pp
224 to 225.
Exhibit P84
CB V3 pp 197 and 201.
Exhibit P112 p 225.
the discussion at T493 line 22 to T494 line
Exhibit P112 p
Exhibit P112 p 229.
T511 lines 7-10
and lines 16-19.
D8 CB V7 pp 65-83.
Exhibit D8 CB V7 p 87 lines
Exhibit D8, CB
V7 pp 88-90.
admissibility of these 2 lines was objected to by the DPP and conceded by
defence counsel. They were therefore excluded by me
on 14 November 2024 and are
ignored for the purposes of this decision.
Exhibit P90 CB V4 pp
Exhibit D8 CB V7 p
94 lines 2115-2126.
lines 12-14.
CB V7 p 87 lines
T689 line 38
to T690 line 22.
lines 34-37.
T698 line 41
to T699 line 1. See also Exhibit D8 CB V7 p 89 lines
T700 line 37
to T701 line 9.
P91 at [4].
T559 line 41 to
T560 lines 1-4.
lines 37-41.
Exhibit P112 CB V5
Exhibit P27 CB V1
p 138 lines 8-14, Exhibit P51 CB V1 p 450 line 11, Exhibit P66 CB V1 pp
Mr Barrett at
T269 line 27 to T270 line
T760 lines 19-25
and T768 lines 6-20.
T768 lines 22-26.
lines 30-32 and T771 lines
T769 line 4 to T770
Exhibit D17 CB
V6 pp 52-53 at [80]-[87].
Exhibit D17 CB V6 p 52 at
Which we know is
incorrect because the floor are of the jumping castle was 22.5m
which provides an upward lift force of 22.5
Exhibit D17 CB V6 p
52 at [77].
This appears to be
an error. The figure should be 5.17, but it does not change the effect of the
calculation as the figure for net
upward force is
Exhibit P111 CB V4 p
These calculations
were not performed by Dr Peiris in evidence but have been done using the same
methodology he used.
is the range of figures which appear on p 224 of Exhibit P112.
T707 line 30 to
T708 line 17, Exhibit D8 CB V7 p 112 lines
Exhibit P90 CB
Exhibit P90 CB
T590 line 10 to
T591 line 22, Exhibit D8 CB V7 p 570 lines 3847-3852 and p 571 lines 3853-3855
and 3875-3878.
CB V7 p 78 lines
14-19, Exhibit P106 CB V4 p 314. The D ring tested by LMATS failed at a maximum
load of 5.948kN.
line 37 to T693 line 8.
T563 lines 13-15.
30 kN divided by 0.5 kN and 42 kN divided by 0.5 kN.
T693 line 41 to T694
Exhibit P106 shows the D
ring actually failed at 5.948 kN. Using this figure instead of 6 kN in the
calculations for pegs and star
pickets at 5 and 7 times 5.948kN produces the
following figures respectively 49.14, 21.78, 72.93 and 32.33; that is at 30kN,
50 compliant
pegs or 22 star pickets and at 42 kN, 73 compliant pegs or 33 star
pickets would have been required to defeat the force of the dust
submissions dated 10 February 2025 [187]-[196].
See T775 line 6 to T778
R v AN; R v LM
[2022] NSWSC 776
T775 lines 6-26.
Exhibit P112 CB V5 p
Exhibit P84 CB
Exhibit P26 CB V1
pp 130-131, Exhibit P30 CB V1 pp146-147.
Exhibit P72 CB V2 pp
278-279 (photos 300 and 301).
See the affidavits of
Ms Shepherd, Ms Kelly’s son, Mr Boutcher, Ms Hays and the records of
interview of students VB, NT, MP,
BT and LW reproduced at pp 21-27 above.
Exhibit D8 CB V7 p 104,
T761 line 38 to T762 line
See T584 to T585 and
T586 lines 22-41.
D8 CB V7 pp 594-601.
Exhibit D8 CB V7 pp
See Exhibit P112 CB
V5 pp 220-236.
P112 CB V5 p 240.
P112 CB V5 p 224.
P112 CB V5 pp 220-236.
Exhibit P112 CB V5 p 222.
See for example T564 lines 15-20, T564 line 41 to T565, T571 lines
Exhibit P112 CB V5
pp 220, 221, 222, 225, 226 and
T557 line 40 to
T489 lines 19-22,
T572 lines 39-40, T573 lines 14-15 and T579 lines
T490 lines 27-29.
See [153] and [280] of
the DPP’s closing submissions dated 10 February 2025.
T 493 line 15, T559
lines 1-4 and T563 lines
Exhibit P112 pp
Exhibit P112 p
Exhibit P112 pp
T571 line 41 to T572
Exhibit P112 p
Exhibit P90 CB V4 pp
See paragraphs
255, 258, 312 and 313.
DPP’s submissions 10 February 2025
submissions 10 February 2025
Ms Gamble’s
submissions dated 31 January 2025 at
Gaudron J at
[51]-[52] (in dissent) and Callinan J at
See Porter J, as he
then was, in
Kent v Gunns Ltd
[2009] TASSC 30
(2009) 18 Tas R
At [32] per Dawson,
Toohey and Gaudron JJ; with whom Brennan and Deane JJ agreed. By its terms
"Practicable"
“practicable having regard
(a) the severity of the hazard or risk in
(b) the state of knowledge about that hazard or risk and any
ways of removing or mitigating that hazard or risk;
availability and suitability of ways to remove or mitigate that hazard or risk;
(d) the cost of removing or mitigating that hazard or
per Murphy JA.
per Gray J.
See paragraphs 24
Ms Gamble’s
submissions dated 31 January 2025 at
Holmes v RE
Spence & Co Pty Ltd
(1992) 5 VIR 119
WorkCover Authority of New
South Wales (Inspector Egan) v Atco Controls Pty Ltd
[1998] NSWIRComm 200
(1998) 82 IR 80
Commercial Industrial Construction Group
[2006] VSCA 181
(2006) 14 VR 321
R v Australian
Char Pty Ltd
[1999] 3 VR 834
Director of Public Prosecutions v Packaging
Australia Pty Ltd
[2005] VSCA 219
(2005) 11 VR
[1937] HCA 77
(1937) 59 CLR 467
per Dixon J at p
[1937] HCA 77
(1937) 59 CLR 467
Veysey v the Queen
[2011] VSCA 309
(2011) 33 VR 277
Kirk v Industrial Relations Commission of NSW
Particulars (iv) and
(vii) were omitted by consent on 5 November 2024. See T9 line 24 to T10 line
Pursuant to s17 of
See paragraph
25.8.1(b) of Ms Gamble’s submissions dated 31 January
Exhibit P81 CB V3 p
Exhibit P81 CB V3 p
Applying the cases
cited in paragraph 23.
Applying the cases cited in paragraph
See paragraph 25.4.7
of Ms Gamble’s submissions dated 31 January
Exhibit P81 CB V3 p
See paragraphs 404 to
407 and 413 to 414 and applying the cases cited in paragraph
Applying the
cases cited in paragraph
At paragraphs 228 to
237, 252 to 260, 269 to 275, 276 to 279, 303 to 307 and 312 to 315 in
particular.
Applying the
cases cited in paragraph
See paragraph 259.
DPP’s written
submissions dated 10 February 2025 at paragraph 76.
(2002) 187 ALR 233
[2002] HCA 4
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.65 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter