URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCAT/2025/189.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BI v St Giles Society Limited [2025] TASCAT 189 (25 September 2025)
BI v St Giles Society Limited
[2025] TASCAT 189
Personal Compensation
BI (Worker)
St Giles Society Limited (Employer)
Hearing Date:
23 September 2025
Hearing Location:
Date of Orders:
25 September 2025
Date Reasons Issued:
25 September 2025
RM Grueber – Deputy President
Orders Made:
1. The worker is to submit to an independent medical review by Dr Katie
Daniels by way of review of the medical imaging scans and
reports referred to in
Dr Daniels’ report dated 8 July 2025 and is to be taken to have given
consent to Dr Daniels accessing
the medical imaging scans and reports.
2. The employer has leave to file and serve a report by Dr Daniels provided
that it substantially accords with Dr Daniels’
report dated 8 July 2025
and to adduce evidence from Dr Daniels at the hearing of the worker’s
section 42 referral.
3. Subject to (4) the employer has leave to adduce
evidence from Dr Peter Gan and Dr Sandra Gongora at the hearing of the
section 42 referral including medical records served prior to
these orders other than reference to and comment on Dr Daniels’
4. On the filing and service of Dr Daniels’ report in accordance
with (2) the employer has leave to adduce evidence from Dr
Gan and Dr Gongora
referring to and commenting on Dr Daniels’ report as proofed in Dr
Gan’s report of 14 August 2025
and Dr Gongora’s report of 3
September 2025 as if Dr Daniels’ report dated 8 July 2025 is the report
filed and served
in accordance with (2).
5. The worker has leave to file
and serve expert reports responding to the reports of Dr Daniels, Dr Gan and Dr
Gongora and has leave
to adduce evidence from the makers of those reports at the
hearing of the worker’s section 42 referral.
6. Any right to
object to the admissibility of evidence adduced in accordance with these orders
on grounds other than grounds arising
under section 42G and section 49(1A) is
7. The worker’s s 60A referral is dismissed.
Within 14 days the parties are to file a consent memorandum for proposed agreed
orders in respect to the costs arising in connection
with the referrals and
application determined by these orders.
9. If the parties are unable to
agree proposed orders for the purposes of (8) then within 21 days the parties
are to file and serve
submissions in respect to costs.
worker’s section 42 referral is referred for a conciliation conference to
be conducted by the Deputy Registrar or his
delegate pursuant to Division 2 of
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
on a date to be
determined by the Deputy Registrar or his delegate.
worker’s section 42 referral is to be listed for hearing in Launceston on
10-14 November inclusive.
12. The worker is to file a statement of facts
issues and contentions by 10 October 2025.
13. The employer is to file
and serve an answering statement of facts issues and contentions by 17 October
14. By 24 October 2025 each party is to:
(a) File and serve
statements of any lay witnesses that the party intends to call at the
(b) File and serve an indexed bundle of documents to be tendered at
the hearing other than expert reports and proofs and statements
of witnesses.
15. The worker is to file and serve any additional expert report or
proof within 3 business days of receipt and not later than 3
16. The worker is to file and serve an indexed and paginated
hearing book containing the referral, statements of facts issues and
contentions, expert reports, statements of evidence and all other documents to
be tendered at the hearing by 3 November 2025 and
is to file one hard copy of
the hearing book by 6 November 2025.
17. Filing and service in
accordance with these directions is to be in electronic form except where
otherwise provided.
18. The worker has liberty to apply to adjourn the
hearing and any such application is to be filed together with written
submissions.
19. The parties have liberty to apply in respect to the
Catchwords:
Workers compensation – Application pursuant to
for leave to
adduce medical evidence not served during the conciliation process –
Referral pursuant to
for worker to be medically reviewed – Review by
consideration of radiology – Referral pursuant to
for interim
Legislation Cited:
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2020
Cases Cited:
V v Caterpillar Underground Mining Pty Ltd (Ref No 843/2015)
Taxi Apps Pty Ltd v Uber Technologies Inc & Ors
Sales & Anor v Transport for NSW
[2020] NSWLEC
Kumar v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
Body Corporate Strata Plan No. 57963 v Gunn
[2025] TASCAT
B. v The State of Tasmania
(Department of Education)
Representation:
Worker: N Willing/Hall Payne
Employer: CN Dockray SC/Abetz Curtis
W/2025/160, W/2025/1200, W/2025/704
Publication Restriction:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication.
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Referrals and application
parties have filed the following referrals and application:
A referral by
the employer pursuant to s 90C of the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
(the Act) to require the worker’s consent to review of the
worker’s radiology by Dr Katie Daniels.
An application
by the employer pursuant to s 49(1A) for leave to adduce evidence from Dr
Daniels, Dr Peter Gan and Dr Sandra Gongora
at the hearing.
A referral by
the worker pursuant to s 60A seeking an interim order for weekly payments and
costs thrown away.
relevant facts are largely not contentious. The worker claims to have suffered a
low back injury on 4 March 2024 while working
for the employer. On 4 April 2024
she made a workers compensation claim. The claim was disputed, and on 9 July
2025 consent orders
were made pursuant to s 81A of the Act that the employer not
pay compensation.
4 February 2025 the worker filed a referral pursuant to s 42 of the Act seeking
a determination that the employer is liable to
pay workers compensation.
referral proceeded to a conciliation conference on 25 June 2025, but did not
settle. The conciliation process ended and the referral
was referred by the
conciliator for hearing.
that point the employer’s case was that the incident alleged by the worker
to have caused her injury did not occur. The employer
proposed to rely only on
lay witnesses, despite having had the worker assessed for independent medical
reviews by Dr Gan, a neurosurgeon,
and Dr Gongora, an occupational physician. Dr
Gan had provided reports dated 17 April 2025 and 17 June 2025, and Dr Gongora a
dated 4 June 2024. Those reports were not served during the conciliation
27 June 2025 the employer’s solicitors briefed counsel, Mr Dockray SC. On
2 July 2025 Mr Dockray provided a memorandum of
advice. As a result of Mr
Dockray’s advice the employer began to investigate a further ground of
defence, being that if an
injury did occur as alleged it fell within the
extended definition of injury in the Act and that the relevant test of causation
not satisfied.
4 July 2025 the employer’s practitioner sought a report from Dr Daniels,
who is a radiologist. Dr Daniels provided a report
to the employer’s
practitioners on 7 July 2025. Dr Daniels did not examine the worker. Her
opinion was based on radiological
reports properly obtained by the employer
through legal process, and the scans for those reports which she accessed from
online imaging
prior to the initial directions hearing the parties provided agreed proposed
directions for a timetable. The appointment for
the directions hearing was
vacated and the agreed directions were made on 21 July 2025. They included a
direction that the s 42 referral
be listed for hearing on dates to be determined
by the Registry in consultation with the parties.
dates, firstly in September and then in November, were proposed, but the
referral was not formally listed before events overtook
this process.
Daniels’ report was filed and served on 31 July 2025.
4 August 2025 the employer sought supplementary reports from Dr Gan and Dr
Gongora to address the proposed defence identified by
Mr Dockray, and for
comment on Dr Daniels’ report.
the employer’s request a directions hearing was held on 6 August 2025. At
the directions hearing Mr Dockray explained that
the employer’s case was
not in fact ready for hearing, that the employer would seek to rely on Dr
Daniels’ report and
that supplementary reports had been sought from Dr
Gongora and Dr Gan. Counsel for the worker observed that the employer would
leave pursuant to s 42G and s 49(1A) to rely on the medical reports it
had obtained, and that leave would be opposed. I vacated the
previously made and did not list the s 42 referral for hearing, but advised the
parties that the Registry would reserve
the dates from 10-14 November in
Launceston for a hearing. The directions hearing was adjourned until 22 August
in anticipation of
the referrals and application that were subsequently
12 August 2025 the worker emailed Dr Daniels directly advising that she had not
provided her consent to Dr Daniels reviewing her
medical imaging files. In this
respect, in the medical authority at Part 4 of the workers compensation claim
the worker had indicated
that she did not consent to her medical information
being released. On 18 August 2025 Dr Daniels withdraw her report on the basis
that she did not have the worker’s authority to view the radiology on
which she had based the report.
Gan provided a report to the employer dated 14 August 2025, and Dr Gongora
provided a report dated 3 September 2025. On 25 August
the employer served the
reports of Dr Gan and Dr Gongora, other than Dr Gongora’s report of 3
September 2025 which was served
on a date prior to 11 September 2025.
19 August 2025 the worker, through her practitioners, refused to consent to the
review of her radiological records by Dr Daniels.
employer then undertook the necessary preliminary requirements set out in s
90A(3) for the worker to be required to submit to
an independent medical review,
taking the view that the requirements in s 90A of the Act concerning submission
by a worker to independent
medical review included a review of diagnostic test
results and medical records.
history culminated in the hearing together of the s 90C and s 60A referrals and
the application for leave.
Section 90C referral
90A sets out the obligations and threshold requirements for a worker to submit
to an independent medical review. The provisions
relevant to this matter are s
90A(1)-(4), which provide:
90A. Workers may be required to submit to independent medical
(1) For the purposes of this Act, an
independent medical review of a worker is a review, conducted by a single
medical practitioner
(other than a medical practitioner chosen by the worker)
who has expertise in a field, or a part of a field, relevant to the worker's
injury, and may include –
(a) one or more examinations of the worker;
(b) a review of any diagnostic test results, or
other medical records, in respect of the worker.
(2) If a worker claims compensation or is
receiving weekly payments, the worker's employer, or the employer's insurer, may
the worker to submit to an independent medical review of the worker by a
medical practitioner.
(3) A worker may only be required
subsection (2)
submit to an independent medical review if the employer or the employer's
(a) has discussed with the worker's primary
treating medical practitioner the reasons why it is intended to have the review
(b) has informed the worker, in writing, of the
reasons why it is intended to have the review conducted.
(4) A worker who is required under
subsection (2)
submit to an independent medical review by a medical
practitioner –
(a) is to –
(i) submit, at a reasonable time, and at a
reasonable place, of which the worker has been given reasonable notice in
writing, to the
review, including any examination conducted by the medical
practitioner as part of the review; and
(ii) be taken to have given consent to the
provision, to a medical practitioner nominated by the worker's employer, of any
reports or records that relate to the injury to which the worker's claim
for compensation relates; or
(b) is to, within 30 days, refer the matter
section 90C(2)
the Tribunal.
parties have approached this case on the basis that s 90A(1)(b) applies to the
circumstances of Dr Daniels’ report. I will
accepted that as being so
without interrogating that issue further.
90A(3) sets out two threshold requirements to a worker’s obligation to
submit to an independent medical review, being
a requirement that the employer
or the employer’s insurer discuss the reasons for the medical review with
the worker’s
primary treating medical practitioner and that they inform
the worker of the reason for the review. Those steps were not taken prior
the preparation of Dr Daniels’ report. They have been taken subsequently.
The employer’s expectation is that Dr Daniels
would provide a second
report essentially in identical terms to the initial report, but in compliance
with s 90A.
worker has refused to provide her consent to Dr Daniels’ use of her
radiology. Disagreements concerning medical assessments
are dealt with by s
90C, which provides:
90C. Disagreements, &c., about reviews
Subsections (2)
in relation to a worker if the worker –
(a) refuses without reasonable excuse to submit
to an independent medical review or examination when required under
section 90A
(b) in any way obstructs such a review or
examination; or
(c) refuses to submit to, or undertake, any
treatment required in accordance with
section 90A(7)
(2) If this subsection applies to a worker, the
worker, the worker's employer or the employer's insurer may refer the matter of
worker's refusal or obstruction to the Tribunal.
(3) If this subsection applies to a worker, the
worker's right to compensation and to take any proceedings under this Act in
to compensation is, except if the treatment to which the worker has
refused to submit is surgical treatment, suspended until the
matter has been
determined by the Tribunal.
(a) a copy of a report is served under this
Division on a worker's primary treating medical practitioner, the worker's
employer, or
the employer's insurer; and
(b) the worker, employer or employer's insurer
are unable to agree as to –
(i) whether, or to what extent, the worker's
incapacity is due to the injury in respect of which the worker is claiming or
compensation; or
(ii) the worker's condition or fitness for
employment –
the worker, the employer or the employer's insurer may refer the matter to the
(5) In determining whether an independent
medical review, or an examination of a worker, ought to be conducted, the
Tribunal must
have regard to the following matters:
(a) whether the reviewer has the appropriate
expertise to properly assess the worker's injury;
(b) whether, in the circumstances, an excessive
number of reviews or examinations have been conducted in respect of the
(c) whether the worker has previously made a
complaint, on reasonable grounds, to the worker's employer or the employer's
conduct the review;
(d) the location and timing of the
and may have regard to any other matter that the Tribunal thinks fit.
(6) In determining any matter referred to it
subsection (2)
the Tribunal may, if the payment of compensation has been suspended
subsection (3)
(a) whether compensation may be paid to the
worker in respect of that period of suspension; and
(b) the period of that suspension in respect of
which the worker is entitled to be paid compensation.
employer contends that the worker has refused without reasonable excuse to
permit Dr Daniels to prepare a report based on her
radiological records. The
worker contends that it is unreasonable for her to do so given the late timing
of the review, which has
been sought after the completion of the conciliation
issue overlaps with the s 49(1A) application.
Section 49(1A)
application
employer’s application is for leave to adduce evidence from Dr Daniels, Dr
Gongora and Dr Gan. Leave is required because
the reports were not provided to
the worker during the conciliation process.
2 of Pt V of the Act requires the parties to undertake a conciliation process.
Section 42G(1) and (2) provide:
42G. Evidence during conciliation process
(1) During a conciliation process, a party to
the process must provide the other parties to the process with any report or
of evidence from a medical practitioner or other expert witness on whom
the party intends to rely should the claim proceed to an
arbitrated hearing
before the Tribunal.
(2) If a party fails to provide the report or
proof of evidence referred to in
subsection (1)
the conciliation process, the party may not adduce evidence from the medical
practitioner or other expert witness at an arbitrated
hearing before the
Tribunal, unless the Tribunal otherwise allows.
is clear that the Act requires each party to put their cards on the table in
terms of medical evidence during the conciliation
process, to maximise the
possibility of settlement and to avoid parties subsequently being taken by
the reports were not served during the conciliation process, under s 90B of the
Act they would have been provided to the
worker’s primary treating medical
practitioner within seven days, who in turn would have provided copies to the
worker. The
worker did not assert otherwise. The reports retained privilege,
which was not waived by compliance with s 90B:
V v Caterpillar Underground
Mining Pty Ltd (Ref No 843/2015)
[2015] TASWRCT 44.
The worker would have
been aware of their contents, but not aware that the employer would seek to rely
on them in the Tribunal, and
presumably prepared her case and engaged in the
conciliation conference accordingly.
49(1A) provides:
(1A) A party may
not adduce expert evidence at a hearing to which this Act relates, other than a
hearing under section 81A, unless
(a) the evidence has been disclosed to the other
parties to the hearing during the conciliation process in accordance with
(b) the Tribunal otherwise allows.
conciliation process concluded with the unsuccessful conciliation conference and
the referral for hearing. The employer therefore
needs leave under s 49(1A)(b)
to be able to adduce evidence from the doctors.
discretion to grant leave in s 49(1A) is unfettered, except insofar as it should
be exercised judicially having regard to relevant
matters and not arbitrarily or
capriciously. The Act provides no direction in respect to the exercise of the
discretion, except the
apparent purpose served by s 42G.
principal consideration in exercise of the discretion to admit evidence where
leave is required is the interests of justice:
Taxi Apps Pty Ltd v Uber
Technologies Inc & Ors
[2024] VSC 63
[29]. In considering an application
to admit late expert evidence in that case Nichols J found some guidance from
considerations
relating to the amendment of pleadings in
Aon Risk Services
Australia v Australian National University
[2009] HCA 27
, observing at
29 As the Court of Appeal observed in
Northern Health v Robert
[2015] VSCA 172
, the well‑understood principles
in Aon, as summarised in
Ultra Thoroughbred Racing Pty Ltd v Those
Certain Underwriters at Lloyds, London & Ors
[2011] VSC 370
applicable in a general sense to the late service of an expert report. While the
primary question on the service of a late report
remains what do the
interests of justice dictate, those principles are often expressed in the
following questions:
(a) whether there will be a substantial delay caused by
the amendments;
(b) what is the extent of any wasted costs;
(c) is there any irreparable element of unfair
prejudice caused by the amendments?
(d) what are the concerns of case management arising
from the stage in the proceeding at which the amendment is sought; will the
of leave lessen public confidence in the administration of justice? And
(e) has a satisfactory explanation been given for
seeking the amendment at the stage at which it is sought?
30 Furthermore, interests wider than those of the
moving party — the expenditure of time, costs and limited judicial
— are relevant considerations in the determination of whether to
allow interlocutory processes.
Sales & Anor v Transport for NSW
[2020] NSWLEC 145
J considered an application to rely on an expert report produced on the first
day of the hearing. His Honour observed that
the rules of evidence did not apply
to the particular type of proceeding before him, but that matters of fairness
and justice and
principles of case management must be considered. In particular
His Honour had regard to whether there was an explanation for the
late provision
of the report and the likely consequence that the evidence if admitted would
result in extending the time of the hearing
and result in additional evidence
those matters I would add consideration of whether the evidence is on its face
relevant, probative and admissible, as there is
little point in granting leave
otherwise, although Robson J noted that relevance and admissibility are not
sufficient alone. These
identified considerations are not
exhaustive.
Consideration
employer contended that by reason of the radiological reports having been
disclosed by the worker in discovery, and the reports
including links to the
radiological films, the worker thereby gave consent to consideration by the
employer of those materials, extending
to Dr Daniels’ assessment, and that
Dr Daniels’ conclusion that consent was not provided was misconceived. It
peculiar that an employer would be required to follow the 90A
procedure in order to obtain expert opinion on material properly disclosed
during litigation. The further step taken by Dr Daniels to access the
radiological scans may be the trigger. However, I do
not need to determine that
issue as I am satisfied that orders pursuant to s 90C should be made. I am also
satisfied that and leave
should be granted.
90(5) sets out four matters that I must have regard to in determining whether an
independent medical review ought be conducted.
In the context of the section
requiring a worker to undergo the intrusive circumstance of a medical
examination, those matters must
be taken into account and given weight as
central considerations in making the decision:
Kumar v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2020] FCAFC 16
[82]. I do not see the
list of matters to be had regard to as exhaustive of the relevant
consideration.
issue arises under s 90C(5)(a), (b) or (c). Dr Daniels’ expertise was not
in issue. The worker has not been the subject of
excessive reviews or
examinations, having seen Dr Gongora once, on 28 My 2024, and Dr Gan once, on 7
April 2025. She will not be
required to be examined by Dr Daniels. Doctors
Daniels, Gan and Gongora each have a different area of medical specialty.
the worker asserted that Dr Daniels did not have her consent to prepare
a report she raised no complaint about her conduct.
respect to the location and timing of the review for the purposes of par (d),
location is not relevant as the worker will not be
examined. As to timing, again
no appointment for examination is required. However, the review will be
undertaken when s 42G and s
49(1A) would operate to require leave for the
employer to rely on the report in the hearing of a referral. Leaving aside the
that a review might be undertaken for a reason other than litigation, given
that the review in this case is clearly for the purposes
of the proceedings in
the Tribunal, the question of timing turns on the same considerations as the
application for leave, which I
have considered below.
considerations are that the radiological reports have been discovered, that the
reports and scans would be held by medical
practitioners or practices and would
be liable for production under summons, and that the purpose for the review by
Dr Daniels is
directly relevant to the issue of liability. The purpose of s 90C
is to protect a worker from the imposition of unreasonable examination.
apparently extends to the intrusion of disclosure of medical records for
consideration. Neither circumstance applies in this
situation. No examination is
required and the records have been disclosed, albeit that Dr Daniels was
required to take a further
step to view the scans that were reported on.
worker submitted that Dr Daniels’ withdrawal of her report supported the
conclusion that she resiled from the opinions expressed
in the report. I do not
consider that any such inference may reasonably be drawn. Clearly the exchange
of correspondence between
Dr Daniels and the worker and between Dr Daniels and
the employer’s practitioner shows that Dr Daniels’ expression of
withdrawal of her report related to the issue of the absence of the
worker’s consent, not a change in her opinion.
am satisfied that the review ought to be conducted.
to s 49(1A), for the reasons set out below I will grant leave for the employer
to adduce evidence from Dr Gan, Dr Gongora
and, given my conclusion concerning s
90C, from Dr Daniels.
main objectives of the Tribunal, as set out in
Tasmanian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2020
, include to ensure that referrals are
processed and resolved as quickly as possible while achieving a just outcome, to
act with as
little formality and technicality as possible and to be to be
flexible in the way in which the Tribunal conducts its business. There
pleadings in the Tribunal to define the justiciable issues raised, although as a
matter of procedural fairness they may be
restricted to matters identified in
referrals, statements of facts issues and contentions and witness statements,
where expanding
the issues would unfairly prejudice the other party by taking
them by surprise or where circumstances would prevent or make unreasonably
onerous that party advancing contradicting material. The purpose of s 42G is
consistent with that approach.
employer has explained the reason for the application for leave and the steps
taken to address the failure to perceive the issue
identified by Mr Dockray. The
employer may properly be criticised for not having identified the issue before
the conclusion of the
conciliation process. As I have noted below, it should
have been apparent from the material filed with the referral. It would also
been apparent from the reports obtained by the employer before the conciliation
conference. However, the material before me
does not indicate that the employer
made a forensic decision not to pursue the issue, rather it appears that it took
a somewhat blinkered
approach to its contention that an injury simply did not
occur as alleged by the worker. It was not in fact aware of the issue until
after the conciliation process finished. Insofar as the employer erred in this
regard, for the reasons set out below it is an error
capable of remedy, and the
employer has pursued remediation appropriately and with proper expedition.
worker carries the onus of proving her entitlement to compensation:
will inevitably include causation, a question in issue even on the
employer’s initial formulation of its case. The initial
compensation certificate describes the injury as a recurrence. A medical report
by Dr Ananthababu Sadasivan filed with the
referral refers to the injury as an
aggravation of a pre-existing degenerative condition. Dr Sadasivan expresses the
view that the
worker’s employment is the major or most significant
contributing factor to the aggravation. These matters bring the injury
the extended definition in s 3 of the Act, and are the basis of the causation
issue identified by Mr Dockray. The reports
sought to be relied on by the
employer address that issue. The reports are relevant and, adopting the meaning
described in
Evidence Act 2001
are probative in the sense that
the evidence could rationally affect the assessment of the probability of the
existence of the facts
of injury and causation. Tribunal will be assisted by
that evidence in reaching the correct decision.
worker pointed to matters of opinion expressed in the reports of Dr Gan and Dr
Gongora that respond to questions and assumptions
raised by their letters of
instruction that might be said to stray outside their areas of professional
expertise and go to ultimate
conclusions that are matters for the Tribunal.
Those elements of the reports may be the subject of particular objection if the
are tendered, or submissions as to weight, but those are considerations
best left to the Tribunal at the hearing.
is not immediately apparent that granting leave would result in substantial
delay. The employer is ready to proceed on the reserved
dates. Granting leave
may result in the reserved dates being lost if the worker requires greater time
to obtain responding opinion,
if she chooses to seek that opinion, and it cannot
be obtained from her existing experts. If a substantial delay ensues that may
addressed by future applications.
interests of justice include consideration of the public interest in the
efficient use of the publicly funded resources of the
Tribunal and
inefficiencies in the application of those resources:
Body Corporate Strata
Plan No. 57963 v Gunn
[2025] TASCAT 15
[6]. Hearing dates have been
reserved, if not formally directed, however they are over six weeks hence and if
the worker is unable
to be properly and fairly prepared to respond to the
additional evidence those dates may, with sufficient notice, become available
for allocation to other matters.
worker is aware of the contents of the reports and has been for some time. She
has been aware that the employer proposes to rely
on them at the hearing for
being served, this is not
a situation where she is taken by surprise at the last
moment. There is sufficient time for her to prepare her case in response,
subject to any delay in obtaining further expert opinion. Any prejudice may be
reasonably addressed by the opportunity to obtain
further opinion and possibly
by costs orders. There is no irreparable element of unfair prejudice that will
be caused by granting
am satisfied, for these reasons, that the interests of justice favour granting
Section 60A referral
60A establishes a power to make interim determinations. It provides (with ss
(2A), which is not relevant to this case, omitted):
60A. Power of Tribunal to make interim determinations,
(1) The Tribunal may make an interim
determination, ruling or direction in respect of a claim for compensation
referred to it, whether
or not liability for the claim has been accepted or
(1A) The Tribunal may make an interim
determination, ruling or direction in the following circumstances:
(a) where a delay by one side of the proceedings
substantially prejudices the other side;
(b) where a party fails to comply with a
direction of the Tribunal or a conciliator;
(c) where the Tribunal is otherwise satisfied
that the interests of justice require it.
(2) Where the Tribunal makes an interim
determination, ruling or direction it must make an order which gives effect to
that interim
determination, ruling or direction.
(2B) It is not a requirement for the
making of an interim order that the applicant might otherwise suffer serious or
irreparable
(2C) In determining a rate of weekly
payments for the purposes of an order under this section, the Tribunal may have
regard to the
basic salary if a rate cannot be reasonably determined by
reference to
(3) An order made under
is to specify the period for which the interim determination,
ruling or direction applies.
worker relies on s 60A(1A)(a), alleging delay by the employer.
worker did not identify any particular prejudice beyond an asserted delay in
determination of the worker’s claim, observing
that she is not in receipt
of workers compensation. The worker did not provide any evidence of her
circumstances or matters beyond
the history of the proceedings and the material
filed by the employer, but did tender certificates establishing her ongoing
incapacity.
respect to its referral and application the employer made observations
concerning the expedition with which the worker had conducted
her case, pointing
to the period that had lapsed between the making of s 81A orders and the filing
referral, being some seven months, and in taking over eleven weeks
to make discovery of documents, and delay arising from her refusal
to consent to
Dr Daniels preparing a report. I do not see that those matters have particular
relevance for the employer’s referral
and application, but they are
relevant to the s 60A referral. I am not critical of the worker in respect of
those periods, as there
may be valid reasons for the delay in instituting
proceedings and in making discovery, but in the absence of any explanation they
do not indicate any particular urgency by the worker in resolving her claim.
There is no suggestion of delay by the employer during
the conciliation process.
Any relevant delay has arisen following the conciliation conference.
employer has acted expeditiously to pursue the second defence since Mr Dockray
identified it. It is possible that earlier dates
for hearing may have been
available if the estimated hearing time were shorter based on the
employer’s original defence. However,
there has been no adjournment or
vacation of hearing dates.
is not unusual for parties to retain counsel after conciliation has been
unsuccessful. No doubt, if Mr Dockray had been instructed
prior to the
conciliation conference the second defence would have been identified before the
conference, and the only difference
in process subsequently would have been that
leave would not have been required for the additional evidence.
B. v The State of Tasmania (Department of Education)
[2019] TASWRCT 28
Chief Commissioner Webster dealt with an application for interim orders The
Chief Commission was considering and application under
s 60A(1)(c) rather than
(a), but made comments at [60] relevant to this case:
60. The making
of interim awards under s60A is designed to apply to those circumstances which
fall outside the ordinary nature of
a contested claim before the Tribunal.
Although finding the worker has established, in this case, there is a serious
issue to be
tried, this is not an unusual situation in a contested claim for
compensation which the Tribunal deals with on a daily basis. In
this case it
appears all the medical evidence that needs to be obtained has been obtained and
all that is left for the employer to
do is to clarify its instructions by
speaking to the worker’s former Principal and to finalise its views on the
construction
The issue of prejudice to the worker in this case is not significant given her
financial resources. The possible prejudice, however,
to the employer may not be
capable of being addressed if the worker was successful on this application but
unsuccessful on her s42and/or
I say this because I know of no mechanism by which the employer could recover
any interim compensation paid in circumstances
where the worker is ultimately
found not to have an ongoing entitlement to weekly payments.
am not satisfied that there has been any, or sufficient, relevant delay by the
employer following conclusion of the conciliation
process to take this matter
outside the ordinary nature of a contested claim before the Tribunal and to
warrant an interim order.
s 60A application also seeks costs. I will provide for that
Determination
am satisfied that the employer should succeed on the s 90C referral and the
application for leave, and that the s 60A referral should
be dismissed insofar
as it seeks an interim order in respect to weekly payments.
respect to costs, the employer has been successful, but has been so in the
context of seeking an indulgence. I indicated that I
would give the parties the
opportunity to deal with the matter of costs following my determination of the
substantive issues on the
referrals and application.
that the timetable to prepare for hearing was vacated I will make further
directions for a timetable. The timetable will permit
the worker to obtain
further medical opinion in response to that delivered by the employer if she so
choses, and provide liberty
to the worker to apply to adjourn the hearing if she
is unable to obtain such evidence in time to maintain the reserved dates of
10-14 November.
addition, the parties agreed that if the employer’s referral and
application were successful a further conciliation conference
referral should be convened.
Accordingly
I make the following orders and directions:
worker is to submit to an independent medical review by Dr Katie Daniels by way
of review of the medical imaging scans and reports
referred to in Dr
Daniels’ report dated 8 July 2025 and is to be taken to have given consent
to Dr Daniels accessing the medical
imaging scans and reports.
employer has leave to file and serve a report by Dr Daniels provided that it
substantially accords with Dr Daniels’ report
dated 8 July 2025 and to
adduce evidence from Dr Daniels at the hearing of the worker’s section 42
to (4) the employer has leave to adduce evidence from Dr Peter Gan and Dr Sandra
Gongora at the hearing of the worker’s
section 42 referral including
medical records served prior to these orders other than reference to and comment
on Dr Daniels’
the filing and service of Dr Daniels’ report in accordance with (2) the
employer has leave to adduce evidence from Dr Gan
and Dr Gongora referring to
and commenting on Dr Daniels’ report as proofed in Dr Gan’s report
of 14 August 2025 and
Dr Gongora’s report of 3 September 2025 as if Dr
Daniels’ report dated 8 July 2025 is the report filed and served in
accordance with (2).
worker has leave to file and serve expert reports responding to the reports of
Dr Daniels, Dr Gan and Dr Gongora and has leave
to adduce evidence from the
makers of those reports at the hearing of the worker’s section 42
right to object to the admissibility of evidence adduced in accordance with
these orders on grounds other than grounds arising
under section 42G and
is reserved.
worker’s s 60A referral is dismissed.
14 days the parties are to file a consent memorandum for proposed agreed orders
in respect to the costs arising in connection
with the referrals and application
determined by these orders.
the parties are unable to agree proposed orders for the purposes of (8) then
within 21 days the parties are to file and serve submissions
in respect to
worker’s section 42 referral is referred for a conciliation conference to
be conducted
by the Deputy Registrar or his delegate pursuant to Division
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
on a date to
be determined by the Deputy Registrar or his delegate.
worker’s section 42 referral is to be listed for hearing in Launceston on
10-14 November inclusive.
worker is to file a statement of facts issues and contentions by 10 October
employer is to file and serve an answering statement of facts issues and
contentions by 17 October 2025.
24 October 2025 each party is to:
(a) File and serve statements of any lay witnesses that the party intends to
call at the hearing.
(b) File and serve an indexed bundle of documents to be tendered at the hearing
other than expert reports and proofs and statements
of witnesses.
worker is to file and serve any additional expert report or proof within 3
business days of receipt and not later than 3 November
worker is to file and serve an indexed and paginated hearing book containing the
referral, statements of facts issues and contentions,
expert reports, statements
of evidence and all other documents to be tendered at the hearing by 3 November
2025 and is to file one
hard copy of the hearing book by 6 November 2025.
and service in accordance with these directions is to be in electronic form
except where otherwise provided.
worker has liberty to apply to adjourn the hearing and any such application is
to be filed together with written submissions.
parties have liberty to apply in respect to the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.87 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter