URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASPComm/2025/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:19:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tasmanian Planning Scheme - Central Coast amendment PSA2024001 [2025] TASPComm 5 (17 March 2025)
Tasmanian Planning Scheme - Central Coast
PSA2024001 - rezone 1685 Castra Road, Sprent from
Agriculture to Rural and apply the priority vegetation area overlay
Planning authority
Central Coast Council
Cindy and Jade Wootton
Date of decision
17 March 2025
The draft amendment is modified under
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
as set out in
Annexure A and is approved under
section 40Q.
Dan Ford Claire Hynes
Delegate (Chair)
REASONS FOR DECISION
draft amendment proposes to rezone 1685 Castra Road, Sprent from Agriculture to
Rural and apply the priority vegetation area overlay.
Site information
The site is located at
1685 Castra Road, Sprent (folios of the Register 247683/2, 242543/1, 247683/3,
242543/2 and 247683/4) and has
frontage to Castra
The site is comprised of 5 titles ranging in size from 0.5ha to 4.4ha (14ha
in total) and contains a dwelling and several outbuildings.
Apart from an area
of approximately 1.5ha of remnant vegetation, the site is generally cleared
grazing land containing 2 dams.
The site is zoned Agriculture and subject to the Bushfire-Prone Areas Code
and Landslip Hazard Code.
Surrounding land is zoned Agriculture to the north and Rural to the east,
south and west. The site is surrounded by plantation forestry
to the east, south
No services are provided to the site.
Issues raised in representations
No representations were received during the
exhibition period.
The planning authority did not refer the draft amendment to TasWater under
section 56S
Water and Sewerage Industry Act 2008
Section 56S
Water and Sewerage Industry Act 2008
56S. Referral to regulated entities of draft amendments to planning
(1) A planning authority
[emphasis added] refer to the relevant
regulated entity –
(b) a draft amendment of an LPS, administered by the planning authority, that
the authority has prepared under
Land Use Planning and
Approvals Act 1993
as in force after the commencement of
Use Planning and Approvals Amendment (Tasmanian Planning Scheme) Act 2015
There are no qualifications applied for when a planning authority may not
refer the draft amendment.
The Commission referred the draft amendment to TasWater. In response,
TasWater made a submission stating it had no objection to the
draft amendment
and that TasWater did not wish to attend any hearing.
Planning authority’s response to the
representations
The planning authority
recommended no modifications to the draft amendment.
Consideration of the draft amendment
section 40M
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
the Commission is required to consider the draft amendment to the Local
Provisions Schedule (LPS), any representations
received, statements and
recommendations contained in the planning authority’s section 40K report
and any information obtained
at a hearing.
representations were received, and the Commission did not hold a hearing.
Commission must also consider whether the draft amendment meets the LPS criteria
as set out under
section 34(2)
of the Act:
(a) contains all the provisions that the SPPs specify must be contained in an
(b) is in accordance with
(c) furthers the objectives set out in Schedule 1; and
(d) is consistent with each State policy; and
(da) satisfies the relevant criteria in relation to the TPPs; and
(e) as far as practicable, is consistent with the regional land use strategy, if
any, for the regional area in which is situated
the land to which the relevant
planning instrument relates; and
(f) has regard to the strategic plan, prepared under
Local Government Act 1993
, that applies in relation to
the land to which the relevant planning instrument relates; and
(g) as far as practicable, is consistent with and co-ordinated with any LPSs
that apply to municipal areas that are adjacent to the
municipal area to which
the relevant planning instrument relates; and
(h) has regard to the safety requirements set out in the standards prescribed
Gas Safety Act 2019
Regional land use strategy
relevant regional land use strategy is the Cradle Coast Regional Land Use
Strategy 2010-2030 (regional strategy).
(planning consultancy) submitted a supporting planning report, dated June 2024
(planning report) for the applicant. The planning
report provided an assessment
against the relevant regional policy statements within the regional strategy and
submitted that the
draft amendment meets the policies for the following
Rezoning the
site to the Rural Zone would allow the Natural Assets Code of the State Planning
Provisions (SPPs) to apply to development
assessments. This is consistent with
regional policy BNV 1, which focuses on managing and maintaining the regions
biodiversity and
ecosystems.
The site is not
viable for commercial agricultural use. Therefore, rezoning the site from the
Agriculture Zone to the Rural Zone to
allow application of the priority
vegetation area overlay is warranted.
contains threatened fauna habitat and a vegetation community of local
importance.
policy BNV 1 and 2 of the regional strategy states:
BNV 1 Maintain and manage the region’s biodiversity and ecosystems and
their resilience to the impacts of climate change.
BNV 2 Protect threatened native vegetation communities, threatened flora and
fauna species, significant habitat for threatened fauna
species, and other
native vegetation identified as being of local importance and places important
for building resilience and adaptation
to climate change of these.
Natural Values Assessment dated November 2023, prepared by Natural State, was
submitted in support of the draft amendment.
natural values assessment identified that three native vegetation communities
were observed on the property:
ASF - Freshwater
aquatic sedgeland and rushland
NAD - Acacia
dealbata forest
WOB - Eucalyptus
obliqua wet forest with broadleaf shrubs
natural values assessment also identified one threatened native vegetation
community listed under the
Tasmanian Nature Conservation Act 2002
Act) was observed on the property:
Community #39
WETLANDS. ASF - Freshwater aquatic sedgeland and rushland
natural values assessment also identified one threatened flora species listed as
rare under the
Tasmanian Threatened Species Protection Act 1995
was observed onsite growing in a dam during the survey:
Vallisneria
- River Ribbons
natural values assessment concluded that:
Suitable hunting, foraging & nesting habitat exists for a number of
threatened fauna species which are likely to utilise the
waterway, native forest
and the surrounding natural areas. Whilst no nests, burrows or tree hollows
potentially used by threatened
fauna were located on the property during the
site survey, this does not mean that they are not present.
The waterway supports at least two separate patches of the threatened aquatic
plant species Vallisneria australis – River Ribbons.
The dam area is
classified as a threatened native vegetation community ‘ASF –
Freshwater aquatic sedgeland and rushland’.
Agricultural Assessment Report (agricultural report) dated July 2024, prepared
by Lisa Abblitt, noted that the site has been included
in the Land Potentially
Suitable for Agriculture Zone map through the Agricultural Land Mapping Project,
which has been used as a
guide for the spatial application of the Agriculture
Zone through the Local Provisions Schedules.
agricultural report relied on a range of data sets and information sources to
establish property characteristics including soils,
climate, and
infrastructure.
agricultural report identified that the site is constrained for agricultural use
due to its natural values, soil classification,
the property size and the
inability to adjoin other agricultural land.
agricultural report concluded that:
Whilst it is agreed that the protection of Agricultural land is of vital
importance, the evidence overwhelmingly demonstrates that
this property has
little value for agricultural use and is highly compatible with the Rural Zone
purpose. The subject property lacks
the physical attributes required for
agricultural development, and an investment in irrigation infrastructure to
improve a property
of this size will likely never be repaid. This property also
lacks scale, and it needs to be recognised that this report focusses
combined 14ha property. However, the property contains five titles for which
there is a future possibility of multiple ownership
which results in smaller
individual property sizes. In this event the constraints will be substantially
magnified. But although small
property size can be a constraint to agricultural
enterprises, this is not the case for all rural developments.
The Rural Zone purpose is to provide for ‘a range of use or
development’ in rural locations. There are many opportunities
property under rural zoning both as a whole or in smaller lots. Some suggestions
include rural support infrastructure such
as farm worker accommodation, packing
sheds or processing facilities. This property has a value for development under
rural zoning,
which far outweighs its value under agricultural zoning.
Importantly a change to rural zoning will not reduce the agricultural ability
this property as the use remains compatible with the zoning.
planning report considered that regional policies C.2 Wise Use of Resources -
Respect for What is Values, C.3 Support for Economic
Activity - A Diverse and
Robust Economy and C.4 Places for People - Liveable and Sustainable Communities
were relevant to the draft
planning report submitted that the rezone will allow for a greater variety of
development opportunities on the land, providing
increased control of land
clearance under the Natural Assets Code, and will provide for compatible
additional development opportunities
while protecting the waterway through
applicable land use controls resulting in a more effective utilisation of the
planning authority supported the applicant's assessment and submitted that:
The Strategy identifies that “land is to be used in the manner best
matched to its highest capability to support social, cultural
and economic
endeavour while always protecting the health of the environment”. The
submissions made with the application include
the statements that
“rezoning will allow additional uses compatible with agriculture while
also allowing agricultural operations
in various forms. The proposal will allow
a better utilisation of the land for uses compatible with the surrounding
area” (p.24,
Veris report).
Commission consideration
Commission notes the proposal represents an extension of the existing Rural Zone
and agrees with the justification from the applicant
that the draft amendment
would further the regional strategy. The Commission is persuaded that the
proposal is consistent with BNV
1 of the regional strategy as it will allow
future development assessments to recognise and consider the significance of the
vegetation at the site under the Natural Assets Code.
Commission finds that the draft amendment is, as far as practicable, consistent
with the regional strategy.
Local strategy
planning authority submitted that the draft amendment supported theme 3 and 5 of
the Central Coast Council’s Strategic Plan
2024 -2034.
Theme 3 - Environmental Focus
3.3 Households, businesses, and new developments are encouraged and supported to
minimise their impact on environment.
Theme 5 - Growing Sustainably
5.1 The decisions we make about where people can live, work and play, what those
spaces look like and how they function will be informed
by community engagement,
empirical data and long-term thinking.
Commission consideration
Commission considers that the draft amendment has had regard to a strategic plan
prepared under
Local Government Act 1993
Planning scheme
planning report submitted that the subject land adjoins mostly Rural zoned land
comprising forestry operations and is part of
an agricultural cluster of smaller
planning report provided an assessment on whether the zone is appropriate for
the site against
Guideline No. 1 - Local Provisions Schedule (LPS):
zone and code application (the guidelines).
planning report considered that the site is inappropriate for the Agriculture
Zone as the physical attributes and property sizes
do not warrant the
application of the Agricultural Zone.
agricultural report included a detailed assessment of AZ 6 of the guidelines and
submitted that the site is inappropriate for
the application of the Agriculture
Zone due to the limited potential for agricultural use, lack of irrigation
capability, soil type
and is supported by the land capability assessment which
shows that the land is class 5 and 6 with low potential for agricultural
agricultural report also submitted that the enterprise suitability mapping shows
that cropping on the site is high risk and the
property is only suitable for
agricultural report considered that:
Through a combination of Land Capability, land suitability and constraints
analysis it is believed that this property is not compatible
with inclusion in
the Agriculture Zone. Assessment against criteria for the Rural Zone follows.
planning report also considered the appropriateness of applying the Rural Zone
to the subject site. It considered that the Rural
Zone would be more appropriate
as it would provide for a wider variety of development opportunities suitable
for a rural area and
particularly on smaller lots constrained for agricultural
operations.
planning report also submitted that the Rural Zone would provide protection of
the natural values at the site.
planning authority’s supporting report considered the changes in the
allowable uses under the Agriculture and the Rural
zones, submitting that:
An increased number of permitted uses [under the Rural Zone] would be provided
for, albeit with qualifications in many cases. These
qualifications have been
designed to protect existing agricultural use of the land through minimising
conversion of land as well
as requiring said use to be associated with Resource
Development or Resource Processing. A detailed comparison of use classes for
existing and proposed land zoning is provided in Attachments 4 & 5.
An increased number of discretionary land uses would also be able to be
considered. In these circumstances, protections remain in
place for the
protection of existing agricultural uses and agricultural potential in the forms
of the Zone Purpose, use qualifications
and Clause 20.3.1. Clause 20.4.2
provides specific protection for adjoining land within the Agriculture Zone.
Subdivision provisions would also be eased, although the only likely interaction
with the subject land is through a boundary adjustment
rather than subdivision.
planning authority supported the application of the Rural Zone as the site is
not prime agricultural land, is not regionally or
locally significant, and fits
the criteria for consideration for a zone other than the Agriculture Zone. The
planning authority submitted
that the rezone aligns with the
guidelines.
Commission consideration
Commission agrees with the justification provided from the applicant and
planning authority.
Commission further notes that the largest of the titles to be rezoned is 4.4ha
and as the Rural Zone has a minimum area for subdivision
of 40ha as an
acceptable solution, any future subdivision of the site would require assessment
by the planning authority under the
performance criteria and is unlikely to
result in any significant increase in the number of lots (if any).
Commission accepts the planning authority’s assessment of the use classes
and notes that many use classes allowable in the
Rural Zone are also provided
for in the Agriculture Zone with qualification, no new use classes are allowed,
and any future use or
development would need to be assessed against the relevant
provisions of the planning scheme, including the Natural Assets Code.
Commission finds that the Rural Zone is appropriate for the site.
Natural Assets Code - priority vegetation overlay
natural values assessment identified that three native vegetation communities
were observed on the property:
ASF - Freshwater
aquatic sedgeland and rushland
NAD - Acacia
dealbata forest
WOB - Eucalyptus
obliqua wet forest with broadleaf shrubs
natural values assessment also identified one threatened native vegetation
community listed under the NC Act was observed on the
Community #39
WETLANDS. ASF - Freshwater aquatic sedgeland and rushland
natural values assessment also identified one threatened flora species listed as
rare under the TSP Act was observed onsite growing
in a dam during the
Vallisneria
- River Ribbons
applicant’s planning report submitted that the priority vegetation overlay
of the Natural Asset Code does not apply to the
Agricultural Zone and that the
natural values report has identified threatened species on the property.
planning report submitted that the application of the priority vegetation
overlay will ensure the adequate protection of these
planning report noted that as the Natural Assets Code may be applied to the
Rural Zone, the rezone would ensure the application
of the Code and the
protection of the assets when developed in the future.
planning authority’s supporting report submitted that sections of the site
have been identified as containing priority vegetation
by independent review
accompanying the application. The planning authority supported the application
of the priority vegetation overlay
as vegetation values on the property have
been identified that would be able to be protected under the proposed
planning authority advised that proposed overlay reflects TASVEG 4.0 on the
Commission consideration
Commission agrees with the justification provided from the applicant and
planning authority.
rezone of the site to the Rural Zone will allow the application of the priority
vegetation area overlay, which will provide protection
of the vegetation
communities at the site.
Commission agrees that the priority vegetation overlay should be applied to the
site as proposed.
State Policies and Resource Management and Planning System
State Policy on the Protection of Agricultural Land
applicant’s planning report considered that the draft amendment is
consistent with the
State Policy on the Protection of Agricultural Land
(PAL Policy) for the following reasons:
the agricultural
report identified that the Land Potentially Suitable for Agriculture Zone layer
is inaccurate, and therefore the
Agriculture Zone is not appropriate for this
the site does
not meet the criteria for ‘prime agricultural land classification’,
as the soil classification is Class
the agricultural
report concludes that the property has little value for agricultural purposes
and is highly compatible with the Rural
Zone purpose;
the site lacks
access to large quantities of water; and
the property
contains five small titles, totalling 14ha, which lack scale for agricultural
Commission consideration
Commission is persuaded that the planning report and supporting reports were
informed by from suitably qualified persons and demonstrate
that the site is not
prime agricultural land, is constrained and that the application of the Rural
Zone is consistent with the PAL
Commission considers that rezoning the site to the Rural Zone would not
unreasonably confine or restrain agricultural use in the
area, as most of the
surrounding land is also in the Rural Zone.
Commission finds that the draft amendment is consistent with the PAL Policy.
State Coastal Policy 1996
applicant and planning authority submitted that the subject site is not within
1km of a high-water mark and therefore the
State Coastal Policy 1996
not applicable.
State Policy on Water Quality Management 1997
applicant submitted that the site has no access to reticulated water, sewer and
stormwater services and the provisions of the
planning scheme will ensure that
any existing or future use or development on the site is consistent with the
State Policy of Water Quality Management 1997
(Water Quality
Commission consideration
Commission agrees with the applicant that the draft amendment is consistent with
the Water Quality Policy.
Resource Management and Planning System Objectives
planning report considered the draft amendment aligned with the Objectives of
the Act as:
the Rural Zone
will provide use and development opportunities for currently underutilised
application of
the priority vegetation area overlay will ensure that future use and development
proceeds with consideration of the
existing ecological values of the site;
the site is not
considered suitable for agricultural uses;
the rezoning is
consistent with the purpose statement and application guidelines for the Rural
directly adjoins existing residential use and land in the Rural
Commission consideration
Commission agrees with the justification from the applicant and finds that the
draft amendment furthers the Objectives set out
in Schedule 1 of the Act.
Modifications required to draft amendment
section 40M of the Act the Commission must consider whether modifications to a
draft amendment of an LPS ought to be made.
Commission notes that several minor editorial changes are required to the draft
amendment as follows:
the certified
draft amendment references Castra Road ‘Spent’ instead of
the application
of the priority vegetation overlay on the certified draft amendment is shown in
red. This should be modified to reflect
the requirements of Guideline No. 1
Local Provisions Schedule (LPS): zone and code application which shows the
priority vegetation
areas overlay as green diagonal hatching; and
the application
of the priority vegetation overlay should be limited to the site and not extend
to the surrounding land as shown on
the certified draft
Decision on draft amendment
to the modifications described above, the Commission is satisfied that the draft
amendment meets the LPS criteria and gives
its approval.
Attachments
Annexure A - Modified amendment
Modified amendment PSA2024001
1685 Castra Road, Sprent (folios of the Register 247683/2, 242543/1, 247683/3,
242543/2 and 247683/4) from Agriculture to Rural
the priority vegetation area overlay of the Natural Assets Code to
1685 Castra Road, Sprent (folios of the Register 247683/2,
247683/3, 242543/2 and 247683/4) as shown below.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (28.6 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter