URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASPComm/2025/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:19:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tasmanian Planning Scheme - King Island amendment 02-2025 [2025] TASPComm 20 (22 September 2025)
Tasmanian Planning Scheme - King Island
02-2025 - Apply the Landscape Conservation Zone
to properties at Lymwood
Planning authority
King Island Council
Date of decision
22 September 2025
The draft amendment is
modified under
section 40N(1)(b)
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act
as set out in Annexure A and is approved under
section 40Q.
Robin Nolan Anthony Ferrier
Delegate (Chair) Delegate
REASONS FOR DECISION
On 18 October 2024, the
Commission decided to modify the draft King Island Local Provisions Schedule
(draft LPS). The King Island
LPS (as modified) became effective on 18 December
As part of its 18 October 2024 decision, the Commission found that the draft
LPS required substantial modification and accordingly,
section 35KB
Act, the Commission directed the planning authority to prepare a draft amendment
to the King Island LPS and to submit the
draft amendment to the Commission after
the LPS came into effect.
Draft amendment AMD 02/2025 is one of five draft amendments to the King
Island LPS prepared in response to the Commission’s
direction. The King
Island planning authority has publicly exhibited the draft amendment in
accordance with
section 40G
and provided the Commission with its
section 40K
AMD 02/2025 is to apply the Landscape Conservation
Zone (LCZ) in lieu of the Particular Purpose Zone King Island Rural Area
(PPZ-KIRA),
the KIC-S1.0 Fences in the King Island Rural Area Specific Area Plan
(SAP) and the Local Area Objectives overlay for clause KIC-P4.2.1
as applied in
the certified draft LPS to the following properties:
a) 294 Red Hut Road, Lymwood folio of the Register 149017/2
b) Red Hut Road, Lymwood folios of the Register 157134/1, 157134/2,157134/3 and
157134/4; and
c) adjoining road reserves to the road centrelines.
Site information
The site comprises 5 adjoining titles with a combined
area of approximately 922ha. Except for folio of the Register 149017/2, the
remaining 4 titles are owned by one entity. The site is located southwest of
Grassy on the southern coast of King Island. The site
is substantially vegetated
and included in conservation covenants.
Land to the west of the site is Crown land, known as the Colliers Swamp
Conservation Area, proclaimed under the
Nature Conservation
. The conservation area is zoned Environmental Management. Otherwise,
land surrounding the site is zoned the PPZ-KIRA.
Issues raised in representations
One representation was received from the Department
of State Growth. The representation advised that all land parcels are within an
exploration licence and partially mapped as areas of high prospectivity in the
MRT LISTMap layer. The representation objected to
the LCZ because the use class
Extractive Industry is prohibited in that zone which would effectively prevent
the future development
of any mineral resource on the land. The representation
referred to and supported the Council’s submissions to the LPS hearings
opposing the application of the LCZ that stated:
purpose of the PPZ King Island Rural Area is to balance the agricultural use of
the rural area with features of natural
and landscape value which require
protection.
Some of the
properties containing conservation covenants are also used for farming, which is
not an appropriate use under the Landscape
Conservation Zone.
draft amendment was referred to TasWater under
section 56S
Sewerage Industry Act 2008
. In response TasWater made a representation
stating no objection to the draft amendment and that it did not wish to attend
any hearing.
Planning authority’s response to the
representations
The planning authority’s section 40K report of
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
(the Act) considered the
representation and advised that extractive industry could be of higher priority
than protecting landscape
values. The report contended the provisions of
PPZ-KIRA and application of the Natural Assets Code overlays can protect
values. The report recommended reinstatement of the PPZ-KIRA and
KIC-S1.0 Fences in the King Island Rural Area Specific Area Plan.
Date and place of hearing
The hearing was held at the Commission’s office
on Level 3, 144 Macquarie Street, Hobart on 8 September 2025.
Appearances at the hearing
Planning authority: Heidi Goess, Plan Place for King
Island Council
Charlotte Almond, Development Services Manager (Observing)
Representors:
Claire Armstrong, Senior Strategic Planner, Department
of State Growth (DSG)
Ben Waining, Director of Mining Policy, Mineral Resources Tasmania
Department of State Growth
Bec Guard, Mineral Resources Tasmania Department of State Growth
(Observing)
Interested parties:
Anna Povey, Land for Wildlife Coordinator,
Tasmanian Land Conservancy
John Thompson, Conservation Landholders Tasmania
Richard Cuskelly, Planning Policy Officer, Department of Natural Resources
and Environment Tasmania (NRE)
Ann Hamilton, Private Land Conservation Program Team Leader, NRE.
Consideration of the draft amendment
section 40M of the Act, the Commission is required to consider the draft
amendment to the Local Provisions Schedule (LPS) and
the representations,
statements and recommendations contained in the planning authority’s
section 40K report and any information
obtained at a hearing.
hearing was convened to assist the Commission to consider the issues in the
representation.
Commission must also consider whether the draft amendment meets the LPS
criteria as set out under section 34(2) of the Act:
(a) contains all the provisions that the SPPs specify must be contained in an
(b) is in accordance with section 32; and
(c) furthers the objectives set out in Schedule 1; and
(d) is consistent with each State policy; and
(da) satisfies the relevant criteria in relation to the TPPs; and
(e) as far as practicable, is consistent with the regional land use strategy, if
any, for the regional area in which is situated
the land to which the relevant
planning instrument relates; and
(f) has regard to the strategic plan, prepared under
Government Act 1993
, that applies in relation to the land to which the
relevant planning instrument relates; and
(g) as far as practicable, is consistent with and co-ordinated with any LPSs
that apply to municipal areas that are adjacent to the
municipal area to which
the relevant planning instrument relates; and
(h) has regard to the safety requirements set out in the standards prescribed
Gas Safety Act 2019
Pre-hearing submissions
submissions were received prior to the hearing from parties that attended the
earlier LPS hearings. The submissions from these
parties contended the LCZ
should apply to the land with conservation covenants.
Tasmanian Land Conservancy (31 July 2025) submitted that the LCZ for Lymwood was
the most appropriate zone for conservation covenanted
land. Almost the whole
covenanted area supports various threatened vegetation communities and species
listed as endangered under
national legislation and that Tasmanian Vegetation
communities than previously mapped.
area supports significant threatened fauna with some listed nationally as
Critically Endangered with two of the three Australian
birds most at risk of
going extinct in the next 20 years. The covenanted land is a very large area of
native vegetation, especially
significant in the context of King Island which
has been extensively cleared.
covenanted properties also connect to Colliers Swamp Conservation Area, which is
zoned Environmental Management, thus forming
an even larger area that would be
compatibly zoned.
Conservation
Landholders Tasmania (4 August 2025) submitted:
excised from
exploration licences, however 89 of those titles covered by active exploration
licences have been rezoned to LCZ during
the 27 completed Draft LPS
97.4 % of the
potential resources identified as ‘high prospectivity for metallic
minerals’ in the Lymwood/Grassy area
are actually outside of the five
covenanted titles.
LCZ will not
prevent future exploitation of the small areas of potential metallic mineral
resources as there are provisions under
LUPAA to consider a future case on its
merits if there are not any less destructive alternatives.
Tasmania’s Resource Management and Planning System there is no priority of
one Considered on a state-wide basis the majority
of covenanted titles are land
use over another.
Guideline No. 1 and the 22 April 2021 Planners Portal advice indicate that LCZ
is the most appropriate zone for the large
cluster of covenanted
submission from NRE (25 August 2025) advised:
The application
of the LCZ to the Lymwood properties is supported as they collectively hold very
significant natural values unique
to King Island.
Live’ is the most appropriate LIST dataset to gauge the presence of these
threatened communities on King Island.
The layer is sourced from the recent NRE
Tas King Island Vegetation Mapping Revision Project 2023. It is significantly
more accurate
than the ‘Threatened Native Vegetation Communities 2020
(TNVC 2020)’ LIST dataset (which is based on ‘TASVEG
The threatened
vegetation communities are listed under Schedule 3A of the
Conservation Act 2002
. The nationally protected native vegetation
communities provide vital habitat for fauna endemic to King Island that includes
endangered at the State level and critically endangered at the National
Swamp-Seal Bay is listed in the Tasmanian Geoconservation Database as having
District-level significance for geomorphology
with the wetland significance
stated as possibly the least modified by artificial drainage either directly or
in the catchment.
submission included a map showing both State and National-Listed threatened
native vegetation communities.
Suitability of the Zone
the hearing Ms Goess reiterated the recommendation in the Planning
Authority’s s.40K report for the LPS provisions applying
to the site.
This should be Particular Purpose Zone King Island Rural Area (PPZ-KIRA), the
KIC-S1.0 Fences in the King Island Rural
Area Specific Area Plan (SAP) and the
Local Area Objectives overlay for clause KIC-P4.2.1.
support of these provisions Ms Goess contended the application of PPZ-KIRA to
the site was consistent with the comprehensive application
of the Particular
Purpose Zone (PPZ) to the rural area of King Island and that the PPZ allowed for
the protection of natural values
and landscape values through the operation of
development standards - such as clauses KIC-P4.6.1 Building Height, KIC-P4.6.2
and KIC-P4.6.3 Landscape values. These standards protect landscape
values in any assessment of use and development on these lots.
C7.0 Natural
Assets Code provides further protection as the lots are within the Priority
Vegetation Area overlay. Ms Goess confirmed
that the site did not display any
farming practices.
Goess advised that extractive industry was a permitted use in the PPZ-KIRA
unless a permit application was for a Level 2 activity
where the application
would be discretionary.
Commission Consideration
the planning scheme provisions as detailed in the planning authority’s
section 40K report, the preferred zoning applying
to the site is the PPZ-KIRA,
together with KIC-S1.0 Fences in the King Island Rural Area SAP and the Local
Area Objectives overlay
for clause KIC-P4.2.1.
section 40K report contended that PPZ-KIRA along with the standards KIC-P4.6.1
Building Height, KIC-P4.6.2 Setbacks, KIC-P4.6.3
Landscape values and C7.0
Natural Assets Code would protect the natural values of the site.
zone purpose for PPZ-KIRA is primarily aimed at an agriculture use, yet zone
purpose KICP4.1.4 states:
‘To provide for compatible use and
development that minimises the impact on the natural and cultural, scenic and
landscape values
of King Island.’
related local area objectives for PPZ-KIRA focus on agricultural land and uses
and extractive industry with no reference to natural
values except for
KICP4.2.1(c)(iii) which states:
‘development, other than for
extractive industry or agricultural use, is sited to minimise its visual impact
on the coastal
and rural landscapes when viewed from public areas such as roads
or coastal foreshores;’
comparison the LCZ purpose states:
22.1.1 To provide for the
protection, conservation and management of landscape values.
22.1.2 To provide for compatible use or development that does not adversely
impact on the protection, conservation and management
of the landscape
to PPZ-KIRA, the LCZ purpose statements focus is on conservation values, whereas
PPZ-KIRA focus is on agriculture, but does
reference development that is
compatible and that minimises impacts on natural values. The Commission finds,
in consideration of
zone purpose and the natural values of the site, the LCZ is
Height in the zone allows for a permitted maximum building height of 12m for
resource development under clause KIC-P4.6.1
of PPZ-KIRA is compared to a
maximum 6m height for all development in the LCZ. The performance criteria for
both zones have broadly
similar intent including an assessment of landscape
values. However, the building height performance criteria for PPZ-KIRA is does
‘not unreasonably impact on the coastal or rural landscapes’,
whereas for the LCZ it is ‘compatible with landscape
building height standard for PPZ-KIRA has a focus on landscape values as a
visual assessment whereas under the LCZ the focus is
on natural landscape
values. The Commission finds, in consideration of the assessment criteria for
the building height standard,
the LCZ is capable of being more respective of the
natural values of the site.
consideration of the landscape values, PPZ-KIRA includes the standard P4.6.3
Landscape values that has the objective:
‘That development is
compatible with the coastal and rural landscapes when viewed from roads and
public places adjoining the
The corresponding Acceptable Solutions and Performance Criteria concern only
‘residential and visitor accommodation’.
equivalent standard in the LCZ is 22.4.4 Landscape protection. This standard
concerns all building and works (another standard
concerns visitor
accommodation) The objective for the standard is:
landscape values of the site and surrounding area protected and managed to
minimise adverse impacts’
the LCZ, landscape values are not confined to the protection of visual values of
the landscape. The Commission finds, in relation
to standards that protect
landscape values, clause 22.4.4 Landscape protection of the LCZ is
Priority Vegetation Area overlay of the Natural Assets Code has application
under both PPZ -KIRA and the LCZ. The application
of the code is not a
determinant on the zoning of site.
evidence for Department of State Growth (DSG) suggested the Environmental
Management Zone (EMZ) is preferred to the LCZ as the
use classification
extractive industry is discretionary in the EMZ. While the zone purpose for the
EMZ has a good fit for the natural
values of the site and the site adjoins the
Colliers Swamp Conservation Area areas zoned EMZ, the zone is not before the
for assessment.
Extractive Industries and Conservation Values
the hearing, DSG in support of their representation and the recommendation of
the planning authority in their section 40K report,
Ms Armstrong referred to
strategies 1 and 5 of clause 4.3.3 Extractive Industry of the draft Tasmanian
Planning Policies that concern
the protection of strategic resources and support
for future mineral extraction.
Armstrong contended that zoning the land as Landscape Conservation may fetter
future extractive industry and that the Environmental
Management Zone
(consistent with the adjoining land) would be preferred for the site rather than
Landscape Conservation.
Waining for Mineral Resources Tasmania (MRT) described the operation of the
Mineral Resources Development Act 1995
concerning the rights and
obligations for mining exploration licences and the issue of mining licences. An
exploration licence has
been in place over the site for 25 years. The current
exploration licence applying to the site expires in 2026 but can be renewed.
mapping of high prospectivity for metallic minerals over part of the site was
based on a model that was derived at a regional
scale rather than being informed
by the specific geology of the site.
exploration licence grants exclusive right to apply for a mining lease. Mr
Waining acknowledged that activities conducted under
an exploration licence were
exempt from the provisions of a planning scheme through section 11(3) of the
Act. He said that the fact
that extractive industry is a prohibited use class in
the LCZ amounted to an impediment that would discourage future exploration
Waining gave weight to the fact that all minerals, except category 3 minerals,
are owned by the Crown and mining is at the discretion
of the Minister. Mr
Waining contended that the planning scheme should not add to the difficulty of
gaining permits for accessing
important mineral resources through the use class
of extractive industry being classified as prohibited in the LCZ.
Waining stated that the existence of a conservation covenant had no weight under
Mineral Resources Development Act 1995
He also stated that the
future demand for minerals is not known and that limits should not be imposed on
the future potential for
mining to occur on this land. If mining did occur, he
said that it would only affect a relatively small footprint, and the balance
the land could still be protected by the covenant.
Cuskelly and Ms Hamilton for the Department of Natural Resources and Environment
Tasmania (NRE) described the State and National
significance of the site and
protections applying under the
Nature Conservation Act 2002
Commonwealth
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act
. It was submitted that:
NRE mapping
showed the site to be in good condition supporting species that were critically
endangered.
The area of the
conservation covenants represented a band of largely undisturbed protected
vegetation adjoining the adjacent reserved
land that included Colliers Swamp
Conservation Area.
Some of the
vegetation meets Commonwealth listing as critically endangered.
If a mining
permit was to be granted permits would be required under the Nature Conservation
Act 2022 and referral for assessment
under Commonwealth legislation.
NRE supported
the site being included in the Landscape Conservation Zone and the PPZ-KIRA
focus on agriculture was not acceptable
for the protection of the significant
natural values on the site.
Thompson for Conservation Landholders Tasmania stated the conservation covenants
applying to the site were held in perpetuity and
the values recognised under the
international Convention on Biological Diversity. Mr Thompson contended that the
conservation covenants
recognised the Government commitment to protecting the
area in perpetuity. He also identified that there are provisions in the Act
there was the sufficient case to amend the planning scheme provisions.
Conservation Landholders Tasmania supported the zoning
of the site as Landscape
Conservation.
Povey advised that the Tasmanian Land Conservancy was formed to protect nature
on private land. She submitted that the conservation
value of this land should
be considered relative to King Island as a whole (which has so little native
vegetation) and that the zoning
should be consistent with the conservation
covenants. The Tasmanian Land Conservancy supported the zoning of the site as
Conservation.
Commission Consideration
site is subject to an exploration license and is partly included in the high
prospectivity mapped area. The land under exploration
licence is considerably
larger than the site and the prospectivity mapped area covers some 2.6% of the
site as estimated in the evidence
for Conservation Landholders Tasmania. The
mineral resources of the site are unknown.
conservation covenants applying to the site have been made under the
Conservation Act 2002
. The covenants are:
Covenant C810217
(2008) applies to CT14917/2.
Covenant C934284
(2010) Applies to all the titles comprising the site except
purpose of the covenants is to protect natural values. In respect to mining, the
landowner covenants to not undertake the ‘removal
or disturbance of soil,
rock or other mineral resources ...’ and turning to C934284, the
objectives are stated to:
in perpetuity:
the natural
values of the land; and
(comprehensive, adequate and representative) values and establish and maintain
the land as part of the CAR Reserve System...’
site comprises one of the few remaining large areas of intact natural vegetation
on King Island that also is in private ownership.
The Commission finds the
existence of conservation covenants confirms the natural values of the site and
provides a compelling case
for the LCZ.
evidence from NRE and Tasmanian Land Conservancy went to the high natural values
of the site supporting threatened vegetation
communities and threatened fauna,
including that which is endangered and critically endangered and includes
habitat for fauna endemic
to King Island. The natural values of the site are
protected under State and Commonwealth legislation. The evidence on the natural
values was not contested. The Commission accordingly finds the site has
significant natural values worthy of protection.
LPS Criteria
the hearing in relation to the LPS criteria (section 34(2) of the Act), Ms Goess
referred to the PPZ-KIRA and section 32(4) significant
economic benefit and
policies in the Cradle Coast Regional Land Use Strategy for the importance of
mining to the region as meeting
the section 34(2) LPS
Commission consideration
relevant parts of section 34(2) LPS Criteria of the Act are considered
State Policies
State Coastal Policy 1996
significant part of the site is in the coastal zone as defined in the State
Coastal Policy (Coastal Policy). The evidence on the
protection of natural
values of the site is consistent with the outcome of the Coastal Policy for the
Protection of natural and cultural values of the coastal
’ and related outcomes concerning ‘
natural resources and
ecosystems’
. The Coastal Policy also provides for mining under the
Sustainable development of coastal areas and
’. Unlike the natural values, the mining resources are
unknown and any future approval processes will be assessed against the
draft amendment is consistent with the Coastal Policy.
Policy on Water Quality Management 1997
State Policy on Water Quality Management 1997
(Water Quality Policy) has
application to the site. There is no evidence that the LCZ is not consistent
with the Water Quality Policy.
State Policy on the Protection of
Agriculture Land 2009
evidence was that the site is not agriculture land as defined in the
Policy on the Protection of Agriculture Land 2009
(PAL Policy)
PAL Policy does not apply to the site.
Regional Land Use
Cradle Coast Regional Land Use Strategy 2010-2030
Cradle Coast Regional Land Use Strategy 2010-2030 (regional strategy)
acknowledges the mineralised significance of the region
including King Island
and states ‘Land use planning can assist the mining sector by ensuring
access to known resources... is
not constrained by encroachment of sensitive
uses.’ (P46). The regional strategy contends because of unique
circumstances a
‘nuanced approach’ to matters relating to King
regional strategy also states ‘areas outside formal reserves which
complement, link or enhance areas of conservation status,
regional identity or
local character are managed to retain natural values and function’.
consideration of the regional strategy and a nuanced approach where the natural
values are significant and known the LCZ is preferred.
The Commission finds the
draft amendment is consistent with the regional land use
Draft Tasmanian Planning Policies (TPPs)
evidence for DSG drew upon strategies 1 and 5 of clause 4.3.3 Extractive
Industry of the draft Tasmanian Planning Policies that
concern the protection of
strategic resources and support for future mineral extraction.
Correspondingly
the draft TPPs at clause 2.1 seeks the protection and conservation of
Tasmania’s biodiversity.
on the application of the TPPs includes ‘Where the Act requires a planning
instrument to be consistent with the TPPs,
the TPPs must be considered in their
entirety to determine those strategies that are relevant to the particular
the TPPs have not been made, the Commission does not make a finding that the
draft amendment ‘satisfies the relevant criteria
in relation to the
Schedule 1 Objectives
Commission finds the LCZ furthers the Schedule 1 objective Part 1 1(a)
‘to promote the sustainable development of natural and physical resources
and the maintenance of ecological processes and genetic
diversity’.
Modifications required to draft amendment
Commission notes the instrument map exhibited by the planning authority was not
consistent with the instrument map included in
the decision under section 35KB
dated 18 October 2024.
exhibited map excluded a small area of land at 294 Red Hut Road, Lymwood folio
of the Register 149017/2.
Commission considers this to be in error minor in nature and modifies the draft
amendment to be consistent with the direction
from the section 35KB decision and
the title boundaries.
Decision on draft amendment
Commission’s decision on the King Island LPS established that it accepted
the evidence in support of the application of
the LCZ to the site and it
considered application of the zone is consistent with Guideline No.1 that
assists with the uniform application
of the State Planning Provisions. However,
the decision on the draft LPS zoning of the site was deferred in accordance with
the substantial
modification provisions of the Act as there may be a public
Commission considers that exhibition of the draft amendment and subsequent
hearing of the representation has given sufficient
opportunity for any matters
of public interest to be raised.
site has significant conservation values that are recognised through State and
Commonwealth legislation and confirmed through
conservation covenants. The LCZ
is a better fit for the site’s natural values than the PPZ-KIRA. PPZ-KIRA
purpose prioritises
agriculture and conservation values are not the primary
focus. While the site has an exploration license and is partly included in
high prospectivity mapped area, the resource for mining is unknown. If a mining
licence was to be considered for any part of
the site, the approval process can
include amendments to the King Island LPS specific to requirements rather than
the prospect of
a discretionary approval process as would be the case under
Commission is satisfied that the draft amendment as modified meets the LPS
criteria and gives its approval.
Attachments
Annexure A - Modified amendment
Modified amendment AMD 02/2025 to the Tasmanian
Planning Scheme - King Island
Apply the Landscape Conservation Zone to the following properties as shown in
Figure below and remove the KIC-S1.0 Fences in the King
Island Rural Area
Specific Area Plan and the Local Area Objectives overlay for clause
KIC-P4.2.1:
a. 294 Red Hut Road, Lymwood folio of the Register 149017/2;
Hut Road, Lymwood folios of the Register 157134/1, 157134/2, 157134/3 and
157134/4; and
c. adjoining road reserves to the road centreline.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (9.61 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter