URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCAT/2025/191.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Skyplan Australia Pty Ltd v NM (No. 2) [2025] TASCAT 191 (8 October 2025)
Skyplan Australia Pty Ltd v NM (No. 2)
[2025] TASCAT 191
Personal Compensation
Skyplan Australia Pty Ltd (Employer)
NM (Worker)
Hearing Date:
On the papers.
Employer’s submissions – 6 August
Worker’s submissions – 26 August 2025.
reply submissions – 4 September 2025.
Hearing Location:
Date of Orders:
8 October 2025
Date Reasons Issued:
8 October 2025
R O Winter, Senior Member
Orders Made:
The worker is to pay the employer’s costs of and incidental to the
employer’s s 81A referral from and including the date
of the hearing on 18
June 2025, and for the review of the worker’s post-hearing written
submissions, and the employer’s
preparation of post-hearing
submissions.
Catchwords:
Workers compensation – Entitlement to compensation – Claim
disputed – Reasonably arguable case – Costs –
fruitless resistance.
Legislation Cited:
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
Cases Cited:
Skyplan Australia Pty Ltd v NM
[2025] TASCAT 132
Bruce Osmond
Farrow v State of Tasmania (Metropolitan Transport Trust)
[1997] TASSC 62
(1997) 7 TAS R 127
State of Tasmanian v Muir-Wilson
[2000] TASSC
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
Young Women’s Service Inc v W
[2023] TASCAT 36
Oysters Pty Ltd v Coatsworth
[2007] TASSC 90
Calvary Healthcare
Tasmania v S
[2014] TASWRCT 55
Cheryle Williams t/as Battery Point
Bed & Breakfast v A
[2017] TASWRCT 3
State of Tasmania
(Department of Health) v M
[2020] TASWRCT 20
Patchwork Management
Services Pty Ltd (T/A Compass Recruitment) v P
[2004] TASWRCT
Macquarie Southern Cross Media v R
[2008] TASWRCT 18
Patrick Stevedores (Asciano Limited)
[2011] TASWRCT 32
Kean v Workers
Rehabilitation and Compensation Corporation
[1998] 71 SASR 42;
Allianz Australia Services Pty Ltd (No. 2)
[2019] TASWRCT 35.
Representation:
Worker: T Zacharek – PAT Legal
Employer: J Brown – Abetz
Curtis Lawyers
Publication Restriction:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication.
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
referral hearing on 18 June 2025 and the receipt of written
submissions from the parties by 25 June 2025, by a written decision dated
2025, I found that the employer had discharged its onus of proof to establish a
reasonably arguable case that the employer
was not liable to make payments to
the worker pursuant to s 81A of the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
(the WRC Act). Because of this finding, I made orders pursuant to s
81A(3)(c) and (d) of the WRC Act.
23 July 2025, counsel for the employer made an application seeking that the
worker pay the employer’s costs with respect
to the s 81A referral.
25 July 2025, I gave chamber directions setting a timetable for the provision of
written submissions in relation to the employer’s
costs application.
last of those submissions were received by 4 September 2025. On 5 September
2025, both counsel for the employer and the worker
indicated that they were
content for me to determine the employer’s costs application on the
is my decision relating to the employer’s application for
background to the employer’s s 81A reference dated 15 May 2025 is set out
in my decision of
Skyplan Australia Pty Ltd v NM
[2025] TASCAT
The issue for determination
s 59(1) of the WRC Act, the Tribunal may make such order as to costs as it
considers appropriate. The proper exercise of the discretion
ordinarily requires that costs “follow the event” – see
Bruce Osmond Farrow v State of Tasmania
[1997] TASSC 62
; 7 TAS R 125.
State of Tasmania v Muir-Wilson
[2000] TASSC 25
, Cox CJ provided some
guidance as to the approach which is to be taken concerning a costs application
in a s 81A referral. At [9]
his Honour stated:
The present case differs from the ones I have cited in that they were all cases
where the question was what order for costs ought
to be made after the final
determination of the claim for compensation. Here the determination of the
Tribunal is very much an interim
one. All that has so far been determined is
that there is a genuine dispute as to the giving of notice and the fact that it
justifies relieving the employer of the present obligation to pay
weekly compensation and he is not taken to have accepted liability
in respect of
If the worker wishes to pursue the
claim, she may still do so at a hearing where all issues in contention will be
in that decision at [12], his Honour went on to state (referencing
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534):
Where there is a Reference under s81A, it is not the case that the worker
“has caused the other party to incur the costs of
litigation.” They are expenses which the employer necessarily incurs in
obtaining the relief he seeks. They may be increased
on the worker's part and this may justify an order that he pay at
least the costs occasioned by that resistance... (emphasis added)
an employer is required only to demonstrate that a reasonably arguable case
exists to dispute the claim under s 81A, success
by an employer in a s 81A
referral does not necessarily inform the question where the ultimate burden of
costs ought to lie in the
event that the claim is brought back to the Tribunal
by the worker and ultimately progresses to a fully arbitrated hearing.
employer by necessity incurs costs while referring the claim to the Tribunal
where it wishes to dispute liability under s 81A.
It is not those costs which
ought to be borne by the worker in circumstances where the s 81A referral
The employer’s costs submissions
its written application for costs on 23 July 2025, the employer’s counsel
indicated that they were instructed to apply for
an order that the worker pay
the employer’s costs that amount to the worker’s fruitless
resistance of the s 81A referral.
These costs would be for the time spent by the
employer in preparing for and attending the hearing on 18 June 2025 and the
of the written submissions filed by the worker and the preparation of
the employer’s written submissions.
that application, the employer’s counsel advised that on 8 July 2025 he
had invited the worker to consent to the orders sought,
but on 22 July was
advised that such a costs order would not be agreed to.
employer’s costs submissions referenced the cases which confirm the
Tribunal has an unfettered discretion to order costs
pursuant to s 59(1) of the
employer’s counsel also referenced the section of Cox CJ’s decision
State of Tasmania v Muir-Wilson
(supra) indicating different
considerations may apply in a costs application relating to a s 81A referral.
The specific reference
was made to his Honour’s comments in [12] above.
for the employer also referred to Senior Member Jack’s decision in
Karinya Young Women’s Service Inc v W
[2023] TASCAT 36
... resistance that does not, ultimately, ‘bear fruit’ in the sense
of not achieving a desired outcome. It does not necessarily
resistance that was completely hopeless, or lacking in substance from the
That is a right of every worker where the employer disputes liability to pay
compensation in relation to a claim that has been made.
However, in doing so,
the worker runs the risk of a costs order where the employer’s costs,
necessarily incurred as part of
that referral, are increased by the
worker’s unsuccessful, or ‘fruitless’ resistance.
employer’s counsel summarised these authorities by stating that:
It is clear that if a worker seeks to resist a s 81A referred filed by the
employer, particularly in circumstances where legal advice
had been obtained
first, and orders are then made in favour of the employer, there is a high
probability that the worker’s
resistance of the employer’s 81A
referral will amount to fruitless resistance and a costs order will follow.
to the grounds of the dispute and referencing the evidence upon which the
employer relied, the employer’s counsel further
submitted that the
worker’s resistance to the s 81A was fruitless resistance.
evidence included three witness statements of witnesses employed in senior roles
with the employer, including its Chief Executive.
The employer’s counsel
asserted that these statements made it clear that the worker’s version of
events relevant to each
of the grounds of the dispute was put to the witnesses
for the employer, with each witness disputing different aspects of what the
worker had said and done.
Referencing
the test as to whether a reasonably arguable case exists as enunciated by Evans
St Helens Oysters Pty Ltd v Coatsworth
[2007] TASSC 90
employer’s counsel submitted that it was clear that there were a number of
fundamental factual disputes between the parties,
all of which were going to
result in the orders that were eventually made.
employer’s counsel next asserted that this ought to have been apparent to
the worker’s counsel and the s 81A referral
should have been concluded
prior to the hearing on 18 June 2025. However, the worker instructed his counsel
to proceed, and in doing
so, ran the risk of a costs order by not conceding the
s 81A referral prior to that date. He also gained the benefit of continuing
be paid weekly payments during that period.
employer’s counsel submitted that it cannot be argued by the
worker’s counsel that the worker did not have ample time
appropriate advice or properly consider the documents filed in support of the s
81A referral because he was served with
them on 15 May 2025. The worker had also
had the benefit of an adjournment from 2 June (the first scheduled hearing
date) to 18 June
2025 and was paid weekly payments through to 4 July 2025 when
he might otherwise have received orders ceasing his payments as early
employer’s counsel concluded his written submissions by stating:
“the point being that the worker has benefited from
the way in which his
solicitor has managed his s 81A referral from filing through to the orders made,
even if a costs order is made
for his ‘fruitless
resistance’”.
The worker’s submissions
response to the employer’s costs application, the worker stated its
position as:
(a) The employer’s application for costs should be dismissed; or in the
alternative
(b) The decision in relation to the employer’s application for costs
should be reserved until the final determination of the
proceedings between the
The Worker’s submissions to dismiss the employer’s application
support of its submissions that the employer’s application for costs
should be dismissed, the worker also referenced the
decision of Cox CJ in
State of Tasmania v Muir-Wilson
worker’s counsel contended that the worker’s consideration of
whether there was a reasonably arguable case was made
more difficult by the way
in which the s 81A referral and supporting documentation was prepared:
“There were numerous unnecessary
duplications of documents. Further, there
were various contradictions and inconsistencies contained within the
documentation”.
worker’s counsel noted that “whilst the worker’s claim was
complex and multifaceted, it could have been easily
defended if the employer had
presented a more cogent s 81A referral. If this had been done, it is likely that
the worker would have
consented”.
worker’s counsel stated that the worker’s resistance of the s 81A
referral was not without substance and merit. Whilst
the Tribunal found that
there was a reasonably arguable case in relation to the employer’s
liability, that finding was not
‘inevitable’”.
worker’s counsel submitted that the exercise of the Tribunal’s
discretion to award costs against a worker on a s 81A
referral should be
exercised with caution. It was stated:
It would set a poor precedent if costs were liberally awarded against workers
who do not concede s 81A referrals. In our respectful
submission, it would be
contrary to the purposes of the Act (and particularly s 81A) if workers felt
pressured to consent to a s
81A referral due to the risks of costs that will be
awarded against them, particularly where the onus is on the employer to
that there is a reasonably arguable case, and not the other way
responding to the term ‘fruitless resistance’, the worker’s
counsel embarked upon a consideration of the number
of costs applications in s
81A referrals which have been awarded against workers. It was asserted that
since the commencement of
the WRC Act in 1988 only 17 costs application in s 81A
referrals have been successful and that in the majority of those cases where
Tribunal has awarded costs, it has done so in circumstances where it was
‘inevitable’ or that there was ‘a
inevitability’ that there would be a reasonably arguable case
determination.
this context, the worker’s counsel relied on
Calvary Healthcare
Tasmania v S
[2014] TASWRCT 55
Cheryle Williams t/as Battery Point Bed
& Breakfast v A
[2017] TASWRCT 3
State of Tasmania (Department of
Health) v M
[2020] TASWRCT 20
Patchwork Management Services Pty Ltd
(T/A Compass Recruitment) v P
[2004] TASWRCT 46.
final aspect of the worker’s counsel’s submissions with regard to
this aspect was its assertion that in many of the
17 cases in which an employer
has been awarded costs over the past 25 years (in s 81A referrals), the employer
had put the worker
on notice that an application for costs may be based on
‘fruitless resistance’ prior to the s 81A hearing. The
counsel indicated that in this case the employer did not put the
worker on notice as to costs. If the employer had put the worker
on notice as to
costs, the worker may have elected to consent to the s 81A referral.
The reserving of the application for costs
worker has asserted that as an alternative to the dismissal of the
employer’s application for costs, this application should
be reserved
until either the final determination of any s 42 referral filed by the worker,
or until after a reasonable amount of
time has elapsed without such a referral
being filed. In support of this suggestion, the worker’s counsel cited the
State of Tasmania v Muir-Wilson
Macquarie Southern Cross Media v
[2008] TASWRCT 18
G. v Patrick Stevedores (Asciano Limited)
[2011] TASWRCT 32.
worker’s counsel asserts that in any s 42 referral, the numerous issues
that the worker outlined in his oral and written
submission of 18 and 25 June
2025 in relation to the s 81A referral would be live. There would be significant
questions about the
veracity and reliability of the employer’s witnesses,
and medical evidence would be adduced for determination.
summary, with regard to this submission, the worker’s counsel asserted
“to use the terminology of his Honour Cox J
State of Tasmania v
Muir-Wilson
, we say that for the various reasons outlined above, it is not
possible in this case to see on which side of justice the decision
bear costs should fall until the final determination of any s 42
The employer’s reply submissions
its reply submissions of 4 September 2025, the “only additional
point” which the employer’s counsel sought to
raise related to the
worker’s counsel’s submission concerning the reserving of the
decision in relation to costs.
employer’s counsel asserted that the authorities are clear that there are
two distinct categories; costs for fruitless resistance,
which is what the
employer’s application seeks, and costs in the traditional sense, which is
when a litigation is at an end.
“This is not what the employer’s
counsel has been instructed to apply for”.
employer’s counsel submitted that the order being sought is for the costs
of fruitless resistance and it should be made
based on the submissions filed by
the employer.
Consideration
The dismissal of the employer’s application for costs
is no doubt that a s 81A referral by an employer seeking a finding of a
reasonably arguable case in relation to its liability
to pay a worker’s
claim is a preliminary determination. As Evans J in
St Helens Oysters Pty Ltd
v Coatsworth
(supra) at [10] stated:
It is a preliminary determination that results in interim orders. The very
notion of a reasonably arguable case like the very notion
prima facie
precludes a final determination of a disputed question of fact.
my decision with regard to the s 81A referral,
Skyplan Australia Pty Ltd v NM
(supra) at [50] when dealing with ground 2 of the employer’s s 81A
referral, I found that the worker’s counsel’s
assertions relating to
the perception in the mind of a worker and its contribution in a material degree
to an aggravation (or occurrence)
of the employee’s ailment was
misconceived. I found so as the fundamental aspect of the referenced decisions
was the finding
of facts. The cases referenced this as “if conduct which
actually occurred in the workplace” and “if the incident
or state of
affairs actually occurred”.
found that, taking the employer’s case at its highest, there were numerous
factual disputes as between the worker’s
claim form indications and the
evidence provided by the employer and that “there are thus many contested
series of incidents
and states of affair”.
agree with the employer’s counsel’s submissions that these were
plainly apparent on the evidence filed with the employer’s
do not accept the worker’s counsel’s submissions that the way the
employer presented its s 81A referral where “there
were numerous
unnecessary duplications of documents, and further, there were various
contradictions and inconsistencies contained
within the documentation”,
are a relevant considerations in supporting the worker’s counsel’s
submission that this
costs application should be dismissed.
extent and breadth of the factual disputes as between the worker’s claim
form and the employer’s referral evidence
were plainly apparent and known
to the worker’s counsel before the hearing on 18 June 2025.
[55] of my decision in the s 81A referral dealing with grounds 4 and 5 of the
employer’s referral, I found following the
reasoning of Belby J in
v Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Corporation
[1998] 71 SASR 42 at p
63 where his Honour stated:
... whether administrative action is reasonable or is taken in a reasonable
manner depends first on the finding of the primary facts
as to what occurred in
the taking of the administrative action, namely what decision was made, who made
it, and why it was made,
what was done, what was omitted to be done, and the
factual background against which the decision was made or implemented. It is
finding of fact as to whether the action was taken in a reasonable manner, that
fact depends in part on inferences to be drawn
from the primary facts, or the
weight to be given to particular primary facts and the fact finder’s
assessment of what is reasonable
in all of those circumstances.
passage was cited with approval by Chief Commissioner Webster (as he then was)
M v Allianz Australia Services Pty Ltd (No. 2)
[2019] TASWRCT 35.
Considering
these authorities, I found that taking the employer’s case at its highest,
there were significant factual disputes
with the worker’s evidence
relating to the meeting of 20 March and it was not appropriate for me to
reconcile those factual
disputes in a s 81A hearing.
doing so, I was guided by the authorities’ indications that a s 81A
referral is not the time for the finding disputed facts
such findings to be made
in a contested s 42 hearing, if such an application is filed.
of these matters, and considering the comments of Senior Member Jack in
Karinya Young Women’s Service Inc v W
(supra) at [43], I find the
worker’s resistance to the employer’s s 81A referral was fruitless
resistance.
turning to the other basis of the worker’s counsel’s submissions, I
pause to comment on two further matters.
although the worker’s counsel has undertaken some research into the number
of costs orders made by the Workers Compensation
Tribunal and TASCAT in s 81A
referrals, and has asserted that this was done so in circumstances where it was
“inevitable”
or that there was “a degree of
inevitability” that there would be a reasonably arguable case
determination, I do not
consider this case analysis to have relevance to this
matter, as each case turns on its own facts. Further, noting SM Jack’s
definition of ‘fruitless resistance’ in
Karinya Young
Women’s Service Inc v W
, the worker’s resistance does not need
to be completely hopeless or lacking in substance from the outset.
second matter relates to the worker’s counsel’s submissions
regarding the employer’s counsel’s failure
to put the worker on
notice as to costs and that had the employer’s counsel done so, the worker
may have elected to consent
to the s 81A referral. This submission also lacks
the time of the hearing on 18 June 2025 the worker had retained counsel who,
advising the worker properly, should have advised
him of at least the potential
vulnerability for an order for costs if the desired challenge to the s 81A
referral on the basis advised
to him ultimately failed. It was for the
worker’s counsel, properly advising her client, to provide that advice. It
the responsibility of the employer’s counsel to do
The reserving of the application for costs
worker’s counsel’s submissions in support of the reserving of the
question of costs until either the final determination
of a s 42 referral filed
by the worker, or until a reasonable amount of time has elapsed without such a
referral being filed, in
my opinion is not sustainable.
the employer’s counsel has indicated in his reply submissions, the
authorities are clear that there are two distinct categories
for costs orders;
costs for fruitless resistance which is what the employer’s application
seeks, and costs in a traditional
sense which is when litigation is at an
situation is akin to an order for “costs of and incidental to the
application”, being the general order made when
a specific application in
litigation is concluded, such as an application for an extension of time.
would be prejudicial to the employer to be at the whim of the worker as to
whether or not it filed a s 42 application subsequent
to a reasonably arguable
case finding in the s 81A, given there is no time limit for the filing of such
an application.
Determination
all of these reasons, I am satisfied that the employer has made out its case
that in defending the s 81A referral, the worker’s
case amounted to
fruitless resistance and it is appropriate in these circumstances to make the
order for costs the employer seeks,
though this will not include the preparation
of the s 81 referral, nor preparation for the s 81A referral hearing, as these
the employer would incur in the filing of a s 81A referral in any
worker is to pay the employer’s costs of and incidental to the
employer’s s 81A referral from and including the date
of the hearing on 18
June 2025, and for the review of the worker’s post-hearing written
submissions, and the employer’s
preparation of post-hearing
submissions.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.86 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter