URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASSupC/1843/47.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:23:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R. v. Walker [1843] TASSupC 47 (7 December 1843)
R. v. Walker [1843]
child, criminal defendant, prisoners' counsel, right to
Supreme Court of Van Diemen's Land
Pedder C.J., 7 December 1843
Hobart Town Advertiser
, 12 December 1843
, a girl who was said to be nearly 14 years of age, but who did not appear to be more than 12, was charged in a long information,
with having feloniously thrust pins, needles, a thimble, and various other articles down the throat of Hamilton Irvine, the infant
child of Dr. and Mrs. Irvine of Liverpool-street, (whom the prisoner had been engaged to nurse), with intent to choke and suffocate
the said Hamilton Irvine. There was a second count in the information, charging the prisoner with a common assault.
The prisoner had been placed in the dock on the previous day, when the Chief Justice, observing upon the serious nature
of the offence, and the tender years of the prisoner, humanely suggested to the Attorney General, that it would be more satisfactory
if she was defended by counsel.
The Attorney General remarked that the information not being for the capital offence, it was not a case in which counsel
could be assigned.
The Chief Justice asked if the parents or guardian of the prisoner was in court; when a man of the name of Walker was
called into the box. He said he was the child's guardian, and would endeavour to procure counsel. Afterwards he appeared in court,
and stated that he could not afford to pay the necessary fee.
The Attorney General suggested, if the trial was postponed, no doubt some gentleman at the bar would undertake the prisoner's
Under these circumstances the trial came on this morning, Mr. Montagu appearing for the prisoner, and taking notes. Mr.
Macdowell, during the examination of Mrs. Irvine came in, and undertook the defence, which he conducted with his usual ability.
Mrs. Irvine was the first witness called. - She was under examination by the Attorney General, for three hours. She stated
that the prisoner, Ann Walker, had been in her service as nurse to her infant daughter for some time. The witness said, for several
months I did not suspect the prisoner of any thing wrong; at last I frequently found pins in the child's mouth; she continued
to void pins for about a week; sometimes every two or three minutes, but on one occasion, twenty minutes elapsed; that was after
I felt a fine needle in the throat, before she could throw it out of her mouth. The child vomited principally crooked pins, straight
pins, and needles, and I think one or two nails; from the first to the last the child vomited, at different times, nearly a thousand
pins of different descriptions; I can swear to four or five hundred having been taken from the child's mouth by myself; besides
different other things. These things, besides pins, consisted of a few nails, pieces of tobacco pipes, buttons - one large enough
for a gentleman's coat; I also took from the child's mouth hooks and eyes, pieces of stick, bunches of rushes, pieces of
cane, a thimble for a grown up person, and a quantity of corn. About five or six weeks ago, I removed a quantity of corn from the
bed-room; about the same time, during the night I saw several rats running about the room; I sent the girl into the bed-room to get
a clean net cap for the baby, which was hung upon a nail; it was torn, as was also the baby's pinafore, a flannel petticoat,
three bonnets; one of the bonnets had something like a hole from the bite of the teeth; it had been hung on a nail, and the other
things were very much torn; I discovered that all the articles left in the bed-room were very much damaged; the destruction of property
went on gradually on the Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday; there was a small window in the bed-room which looked into the kitchen;
there were three nails on the back of the bed-room door, on one of which I placed a small flannel petticoat; I afterwards sent the
prisoner for it; and when she brought it, I said to Dr. Irvine you see how this is now torn; I also placed a laced cap, slightly
torn, on a nail, and a flannel petticoat; there was also a bag containing clothes; I sent the girl into the bed-room to fetch the
cap and petticoat; I looked through the window before the prisoner entered the bed-room, to see if the cap and petticoat were exactly
as I placed them, which they were. I did not watch her lifting the things off the door. She brought me the petticoat, after remaining
some time in the passage where I could not see her, much more torn. I asked her for the laced cap, she said it was not there. I watched
her through the window; the cap was off the nail; but the prisoner took it out of a clothes bag, and brought it me much more torn.
Up to this time, I had not suspected the prisoner of more than carelessness, in regard to the pins, needles, and other articles,
voided by the child and taken from her mouth. - I first charged her with the destruction of property. She hesitated and said, I did
tear the trowsers. After that I charged her with thrusting pins and needles down the child's throat. Afterwards I placed Dr.
Irvine's coat, surtout and trowsers in a tin box, in the bed-room and placed six bricks on the lid to prevent the rats getting
in. I also hung up two parasols and placed a white cashmere waistcoat very high on a nail. All these things, when I sent her for
them, were brought to me torn. I questioned her; she hesitated for a little while; then acknowledged she had committed all the destruction
of property in the house. I was then certain she had tried to destroy the child. That day, I put one needle, with a little black
thread twisted round it, and two or three pins. I afterwards found them in the child's mouth. The prisoner, on my questioning
her, afterwards confessed that she had put the pins down the child's throat, head-fore-most; she said she forced them down, I
asked her if the child made no resistance; did she not kick or cry. The prisoner said yes; but she held her with one hand, while
she thrust the other things down her throat. On further questioning.
The prisoner said, a large thimble she put down with the large end first; a large button, the size of a gentleman's
coat button, she put down straight up. She put the large nails down head foremost. I asked her how she bent the pins in such a complicated
manner; many of them were bent in the most complicated way. She took a pin, and bent it in a moment in the precise manner of one
of the worst taken from the child's mouth. She said she put the thimble the large end down for she meant to kill it. She said
pins put down the child's mouth, remained, according to the prisoners' own account fully six weeks. She said she had witnessed
the death of two or three children, from pins administered to them, and she had heard of the death of a fourth from a similar cause,
before she came to witness's service.
Mr. Macdowell cross-examined the witness. - After the conversation with the prisoner, when she acknowledged her crimes,
witness did not turn her away, but locked her up for 24 hours. Mr. McKann, the landlord, nailed the windows inside and the door outside.
The prisoner was retained in witness's service several days after that; she kept her because the child did not seem to like the
strange servant. The girl had an extraordinary facility in taking pins and needles from the child's mouth. Several other witnesses
were called - amongst the rest, Dr. Officer, who deposed that he had been called in to see the child. It did not appear to have suffered
injury. [The child was in court.]
Mr. Macdowell addressed the jury; the learned Chief Justice ably summed up, and the jury returned a verdict of Acquittal.
Hobart Town Courier
, 15 December 1843
GENERAL GOAL DELIVERY.
Before His Honor the Chief Justice, and a Jury of Twelve
An information was exhibited against
, charging her, in the first count, with putting and thrusting down the throat of an infant child, Hamilton Irvine, pins and needles
with intent to suffocate. The second count charged her with a common assault. The prisoner was a very small girl, of the age of 14
(so it was said,) but apparently not more than 11. She sat down during the whole of the trial, and appeared quite unconcerned in
Mrs. Irvine, the mother of the child, was first called, and underwent a very long examination; in the course of which
were elicited the following facts:- That the prisoner was in her service acting as a nurse; that there was no one else residing in
the house except herself, husband, and her little girl of about 7 or 8 years of age; that she had frequently been surprised at the
infant crying, and the prisoner thereupon putting her finger in her mouth and taking out pins and needles. The articles were exhibited
on the table, and there appeared to be about 300 pins, several needles, a large thimble, and a long piece of stick, which Mr. Macdowell
termed a stick of
. This witness further deposed that the prisoner, upon the final disclosure, and upon being taxed with the crime, and asked her reasons
for it, replied that she had killed other children, and had been instructed by two girls in the country; that she had killed two
herself by these means, and assisted in destroying a third; and that she had put these pins and needles in the child's mouth
for the purpose of killing him.
Mr. Montagu had kindly volunteered the day before the trial, at the suggestion of the Court, to defend the prisoner, but
in the morning requested the assistance of Mr. Macdowell, who came in during the examination of the witness and briefly cross-examined
her, eliciting, chiefly, the fact of her having kept the prisoner in her service, and sometimes attending to the child even after
she had been discovered and charged with this offence.
The Attorney-General next called Dr. Irvine, who corroborated the testimony of the first witness in some particulars,
and swore to the fact of one of the pins having passed through the child.
Mr. Macdowell cross-examined this witness as to his having gone to the Police-office and complained, in the first place,
not of the injury committed by the prisoner to his child, but of some injury as to his clothes, which the witness illustrated by
calling the attention of the jury to the garments he had on; he also stated, the reason of himself and Mrs. Irvine for the sending
the prisoner away instantly and getting another servant was that all servants were bad alike.
Dr. Officer was called, and we give his evidence more fully, as being important. - He stated that he visited Mrs. Irvine,
having been requested by Dr. Irvine, three weeks ago last Sunday; that he saw the child, and observed no injury upon it; saw a great
number of the articles that were now upon the table; there was nothing to indicate that they had been in the stomach of the child;
one or two of the pins were slightly corroded, but that might have been done otherwise than in the stomach; he did not think that
any of the larger articles, such as the nails or thimble, could have been voided from the stomach, if they had reached it; if the
larger articles had been forced down the throat there would have been danger of suffocation; he asked the girl if she intended, by
putting these things down the throat, to kill the child; she said "yes" in a stupid way, as if hardly knowing what she
said; he had no opportunity of judging whether the girl was weak in intellect or not.
Cross-examined by Mr. Macdowell - He examined the infant to see whether it had received any injury, and it appeared to
be in good health; he did not know that he examined the mouth particularly.
By the Chief Justice. - The child appeared to be about 12 months old; it would require a great deal of surgical knowledge
to pass the larger things into the stomach; if those buttons or that thimble were in the throat, he thought it would suffocate in
a few minutes; the larger nails would produce suffocation indirectly; inflammation would ensue; don't think that the stick would
produce instant suffocation; if the pins were to remain in the substance of the throat inflammation would be produced.
Mr. Simmons, District Constable, was called, who stated that the girl had voluntarily confessed to him that she had put
these things into the infant's mouth.
Mrs. Maria Carpenter called, but was asked no question.
James McCann called by the Attorney-General, who asked him no questions.
Cross-examined by Mr. Macdowell. - Saw on one occasion Mrs. Irvine's little daughter, and not the prisoner, take a
needle out of the child's mouth; Mrs. Irvine was present in the room at the time and the prisoner also.
Mr. Macdowell said that he was now to address the jury upon one of the most extraordinary accusations ever brought before
a court of justice, amounting, upon the information itself, nearly to murder; that he trusted the very enormity of the crime would
induce the jury to withhold their belief on the testimony brought to sustain it, in proportion as the charge was outrageous, and
as it was repudiated by the common feelings of humanity, until the frightful fact could be made clear upon the most satisfactory
evidence. And now what is the evidence? What single individual ever saw the prisoner attempting to commit any portion of the charge?
The jury had only her own statement to Mrs. Irvine and the district constable. If they believed her, then they must also believe
that the child expelled these articles; for, upon the discovery of one article after another, she goes to Mrs. Irvine and says, "Here,
ma'am, the baby has just vomited this nail." The jury could not take one portion of the statement and reject the other;
such a course would neither be right nor just. If the charge had been against the prisoner that she had uttered a great quantity
of abominable falsehoods, and that her science should be appreciated with the dexterity of an Indian juggler, persuaded Mrs. Irvine
that her child had passed up this nail or that thimble, then, indeed, might she be found guilty. And all this the first witness swallowed,
as the girl came exhibiting trophy after trophy of her triumphs, and which facts she detailed here to-day in a very precise - not
- manner. Again, then, the professional gentleman, Dr. Irvine, how does he act? Does he act as though he believed it? Would he have
complained of his
being damaged? And his mind, if the jury to-day observed him, seemed to luxuriate in the praises of his friend Mr. Myers, whose name
I do not recollect to have heard before, but the Doctor was kind enough to introduce him to us, and to laud him to the jury to-day
for his skilfulness in repairing that valuable garment. Aided by his spectacles, the Doctor endeavoured to find the tear and point
it out to the jury; but his friend had been
skilful, and the jury could not see precisely where it had been or, if they did, they could not fail to admire the ingenuity of Mr.
Myers. The Doctor also exhibited his beaver hat, and endeavoured to point out some dents that had been made on "the
of the crown," as the Doctor expressed it!! The learned counsel said that he would offer evidence to shew that, six days before
Simmons took the child into custody, the Doctor had been at the Police-office and complained of the damage done to the wearing apparel,
and said nothing about the infant. Dr. Irvine, to do him justice, established a proper mixture of caution and care as to his wardrobe,
and states that he said to the child, "Well, the mischief is all over now, you had better confess all you did." Would not
the jury believe that, if such words were used, they would have the very tendency to cause the girl at the bar to think that, by
telling a number of strange falsehoods, she would get out of the scrape? Abstractedly, from the confession of the child herself,
there was not a particle of evidence to bring home guilt to the prisoner. He thought that it was to be regretted that, when the mother
discovered that the child had been swallowing these pins and needles, buttons, and sticks - a collection that resembled the tenders
put out in the Government Gazette - she did not get rid at once of that "
girl" - but should have continued her in her service, with an intimation to be more careful. Was that the way a mother should
act? Or would not the jury think such conduct inconsistent and irreconcilable with the feelings of a mother? And yet her only excuse
was that "she did not discharge her because she was not likely to find a better one." All he could say, that never was
there a greater libel on the numerous applicants at Mrs. Rex's office. Then he would call the attention of the jury to the testimony
of McCann, whom they would believe, from having no paternal feeling in the matter; and he told them that he saw Mrs. Irvine's
own girl take a pin out of the child's mouth, although she swore that day no one but the prisoner did, or could well, extract
these substances. He would now leave the case in the hands of the jury, who would give into it that considerations which its importance
demanded, and they would consider whether she was guilty upon this information, or of a system of absurd falsehoods. The jury would
not fail to recollect the testimony of Dr. Officer, who told them the stupid and indifferent manner in which the girl said, "yes"
to the question he put to her. The jury would not, he trusted, receive one portion of the testimony and reject the other, and, therefore,
he would require no better evidence in the favour of the prisoner than that the jury should be called upon to believe that the infant
child should have swallowed that
piece of timber
exhibited by the Attorney-General. He felt satisfied that the jury would give to the whole case their most deliberate consideration,
and that justice would be done to the prisoner in that matter.
Mr. Price was called by Mr. Macdowell, who said that the first time Dr. Irvine came to the Police-office he complained
only of the prisoner tearing his clothes, and not of an injury to the child.
The Attorney-General replied, rebutting some portions of the learned counsel's defence, but we have not room to give
any further report.
The Chief Justice summed up at length, and most carefully.
Verdict - Not Guilty.
According to AOTSC 41/5, Walker used 300 pins and 8 needles.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter