URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFPT/2009/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:14:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hazelwood Pty Ltd v Forest Practices Authority [2009] TASFPT 4 (4 June 2009)
File No: 01/09 F D4/2009
Hazelwood Pty Ltd Appellant
Forest Practices Authority Respondent
This was the hearing of an appeal against the refusal of Forest Practices
Plan PEL0450.
The appeal was heard at Hobart on the 29
G Wilkinson appeared on behalf of the Forest Practices
W Downie appeared on behalf of the
Application
was made by the Appellant to the Forest Practices Authority for approval of
Forest Practices Plan PEL0450.
application was in respect of a net operational area of 25 hectares, at
Copping. The forest in the area consisted of 7 hectares
of Eucalypt forest; 4
hectares of
Eucalyptus amygdalina
forest on sandstone; 2 hectares of
Eucalyptus amygdalina
forest on dolerite; and 12 hectares of
Eucalyptus ovata
forest. The cleared area would be used for agricultural
purposes, with no reforestation.
Forest Practices Authority recommended refusal of the Forest Practices Plan.
The reason given was:
“The reason for the refusal is because the current proposal involves
clearance and conversion of approx 16 ha of two threatened
forest communities
E. amygdalina
forest on sandstone – 4 ha;
forest – 12 ha) which are listed on Schedule 3A of Tasmania’s Nature
Conservation Act. Under current legislation, the
Authority could only approve
clearance and conversion of threatened communities if it accepts a case for
exceptional circumstances,
as presented by the proponent. Such a case has not
been presented to the Authority.
The area of
Eucalyptus ovata
forest, and adjacent
E. pulchella
– E. vinminalis – E. globulus
forest containing hollows (1 ha),
also contains potential habitat for the swift parrot (
Lathamus discolor)
which is listed as an Endangered species under Tasmanian threatened species
legislation (
Tasmanian Threatened Species Protection Act)
Commonwealth legislation
Environment Protection Biodiversity Conservation
The advice from FPA’s Biodiversity Program also recommends
retention of these areas as native forest for maintenance of swift
appeal raised the issues considered in the following
paragraphs.
was contended the Forest Practices Authority had failed to respond to the
application within 28 days, as required by Section 19(2)
Practices Act 1985
, which reads:
“19. Authority to certify or refuse to
certify forest practices plan
Except where the Authority has
requested further particulars in relation to an application for the
certification of a forest practices
plan, the Authority shall take such action
as is referred to in
subsection (1)
within 28 days of receipt of the application.
was common ground and the Tribunal finds that the Authority did not respond
until well after the required time had elapsed.
was contended for the Appellant that he was therefore entitled to have the
application determined in his favour.
above Act is silent as to the consequences of a failure by the Forest Practices
Authority to determine an application within time.
There is nothing from which
one could derive that a purpose of the Act is that in the circumstances of a
failure to determine within
time there would be an automatic approval of an
application. It is therefore not appropriate to infer such a provision. This
was also contended for the Appellant that the power of the Authority to refuse
to certify the Forest Practices Plan did not arise,
because of the provisions of
Section 19(1AA). That section provides:
“19. Authority to certify or refuse to certify forest
practices plan
Where an application for the
certification of a forest practices plan is made in accordance with
, the Authority may –
certify the plan; or
refuse to certify the plan; or
amend the plan in such manner as it
considers necessary and certify the plan as so amended.
However, the Authority is not to certify a forest practices
plan involving the clearance and conversion of a threatened native
community unless the Authority is satisfied of one or more of the following:
the clearance and conversion is justified by exceptional
circumstances;
the activities authorised by the forest practices plan are likely
to have an overall environmental benefit;
the clearance and conversion is unlikely to detract substantially
from the conservation of the threatened native vegetation community;
the clearance and conversion is unlikely to detract substantially
from the conservation values in the vicinity of the threatened
native vegetation
Without limiting the Authority's
power under
subsection (1)(c)
, it may amend the plan by doing one or
more of the following:
inserting conditions and
restrictions to be complied with in the harvesting of timber, the clearing of
trees or the carrying out
of other forest practices covered by the plan;
inserting new specifications in
the plan or amending or omitting specifications contained in the plan as
identifying, for the purposes of
section 25A(1)
, the discrete operational phases of the
Except where the Authority has requested further particulars in
relation to an application for the certification of a forest practices
Authority shall take such action as is referred to in
subsection (1)
within 28 days of receipt of the application.
Where the Authority certifies a forest
practices plan, refuses to certify a forest practices plan or certifies a plan
in accordance with
subsection (1)
, it shall, by notice in writing served on the person who
applied under
for certification of the plan and the owner of the
land referred to in the plan or, as the case may be, the holder of the forestry
right conferred in respect of the land, inform them of its decision.
If the Authority itself certifies a
forest practices plan it must immediately affix its seal to the plan and endorse
it with the
date of certification.
If a person to whom the Authority has
delegated the power to certify forest practices plans certifies such a plan, the
person must
immediately sign the plan and endorse it with the date of
certification. “
was no evidence before the Tribunal which would satisfy it that the clearance
and conversion of the existing forest, was justified
by exceptional
circumstances, within the meaning of Section 19(1AA)(a).
was not contended, and the Tribunal does not find, that Section 19(1AA)(b) was
applicable.
was contended for the Appellant that the clearance and conversion was unlikely
to detract substantially from the conservation of
the threatened vegetation
community, within the meaning of Section 19(1AA)(c). In that respect the
Appellant called evidence from
Mr P Lockwood, the Forest Practices Officer of
many years experience who prepared the Forest Practices Plan the subject of the
application.
Mr Lockwood’s evidence was that while it was accepted
that 12 hectares of E
ucalyptus ovata
was to be cleared, that was unlikely
to detract substantially from conservation of the threatened native vegetation
community. His
evidence was that the species was imprecisely mapped and that it
was much more prevalent than shown on the existing RFA maps; and
that it was
common to find unmapped areas of
In his opinion the RFA mapping
was not accurate enough to say that the clearing of the 12 hectares was
likely to detract substantially
from the relevant conservation values, under
subsection (c) above. He identified several patches of
the Applicant’s property, which had not already been mapped. He also
identified a number of areas which had been mapped,
but were conserved under
previous forest practices plans. In his opinion sufficient of the
Eucalyptus amygdalina
was reserved on the Applicant’s
property, to mean removal of the extent proposed would not detract substantially
from the relevant
conservation values.
was given for the Forest Practices Authority by Mr F Duncan. The substance of
that evidence was that while it was conceded
that mapping was inaccurate, that
inaccuracy was not just to the extent of omitting existing areas of the relevant
communities.
In addition, the mapping was inaccurate because areas which were
mapped as existing, no longer existed because they had been cleared.
opinion when one balanced out the existence of unmapped communities with the non
existence of mapped communities, the overall
effect was that proportions shown
in the map were reasonably accurate. The Tribunal is unable to make a precise
finding in this
respect, but is satisfied that in substance Mr Duncan’s
proposition was correct, and that the mapping was and is sufficiently
to form the basis of this decision.
was not accepted by the Appellant that the area of
“substantial” when compared to the total area in the whole of the
State, for that specific vegetation community.
On the other hand, Mr Duncan
gave evidence that the current extent of this community in Tasmania is less than
5 per cent of its
preEuropean extent. The community occurs in
relatively arable lowland environments which were (and still are) favoured for
agricultural
development. Within the bio region that covers southeast Tasmania,
the estimated extent of
forest is about 700 hectares. In
his opinion patches of
adjacent to existing native forest, as is
the case with the patch of
forest in PEL0450, are potentially
more valuable from a conservation perspective than those patches which are
adjacent to the plantations,
as is commonly the case in south-east
dictionary definition of "substantial" is (appositely in the present context) -
"not inconsiderable or merely nominal" . On the
evidence the
vegetation on this site would be "substantial" . Taking into
account all of the evidence, the Tribunal is satisfied that clearing
12 hectares of
Eucalyptus ovata
which it is proposed to remove, is
capable of detracting substantially from the conservation of the threatened
native vegetation
community, within the meaning of Section 19(1AA)(c) of the
evidence was also that there are 4 ha of
Eucalyptus Amygdalina
sandstone in the plan area for harvesting. The uncontested evidence was that
this forest is a threatened community which
is listed as a vulnerable vegetation
community under the
Nature Conservation Act 2002
. Whilst the patch of
E amygdalina
is only 4 ha compared to 12 ha of
forest, the Tribunal considers it can be still considered
substantial and is worthy of protection. The Tribunal is therefore also
satisfied that clearing the 12 hectares of
Eucalyptus amygdalina forest
which it is proposed to remove, is capable of detracting substantially from
the conservation of the threatened native vegetation community,
meaning of Section 19(1AA)(c) of the Act.
Tribunal is therefore not satisfied, within the meaning of Section 19(1AA), of
any of the criteria set out in subsections (a),
(b), (c) or (d) of that
is the Tribunal satisfied, on the evidence, that it is appropriate to amend the
plan to provide for reservation of 1.5 ha as submitted
for the appellant, as
that or any amendment of apparent significance to the Appellant, would involve
loss of a significant part if
not all, of the 12 hectares of the
community and/or the 4 ha of the
Eucalyptus amygdalina
Tribunal is also obliged to have regard to the financial effect of its decision,
upon the Appellant. The Tribunal considers,
although it was not specifically
the subject of evidence, that there will be some adverse effect upon the
Appellant through being
unable to harvest the timber designated, and through
being unable to use the cleared land for agriculture. On the other hand, in
event of refusal of the Forest Practices Plan the Appellant is entitled to apply
for compensation pursuant to the provisions
Nature Conservation Act
Forest Practices Authority also relied upon the existence of habitat for the
swift parrot (
Lathamus discolor)
, in the vegetation to be removed. As
the Tribunal is required, for the foregoing reasons, to decline to certify the
Forest Practices
Plan either in its original or suggested amended form, it is
unnecessary to consider this further ground of refusal.
decision of the Tribunal is that the refusal of the Forest Practices Authority
to certify Forest Practices Plan PEL0450 is upheld.
Tribunal will entertain any application for an order for costs in this appeal,
if made to the Tribunal in writing with supporting
submissions within the next
14 days. If requested the Tribunal will reconvene to hear any evidence in
respect of any matter bearing
on an order for costs.
the absence of any such application for an order for costs the order of the
Tribunal is that each party bears its own costs.
Dated this 4
day of June 2009
KAM Pitt QC
Chief Chairman
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (231 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter