URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASADT/2020/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:11:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Alhossain Khalafallah v Tasmanian Health Service and Anor [2020] TASADT 3 (5 May 2020)
[2020] TASADT 3
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
Alhossain Khalafallah v Tasmanian Health Service and Anor
[2020] TASADT 3
KHALAFALLAH, Alhossain
TASMANIAN HEALTH SERVICE
GOUDEN, Stan
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
23 September 2019
DELIVERED ON:
REFERRING SECTION(S):
71(1)(a), 71(3), 72(1), 72(3) 97
DECISION OF:
Tribunal Member Robert Winter
CATCHWORDS:
Review of Dismissal – Practice and Procedure -
nature of evidence, application for production of documents
Anti-Discrimination Act
The State of Tasmania v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal & Ors
Praksash v Bobb Borg Enterprises
[1999] NSWADT 83
[1981] 2 NSWLR 104.
DETERMINATION:
1. The Tribunal makes no order in respect of the
Respondent’s Application for the Tribunal to issue a Notice to the
Complainant
to Produce Documents pursuant to
of the Act.
2. The Complainant’s application objecting to the
Respondent’s indicated intention to put into evidence the investigation
report of the Verity Group (“The Verity Report”) for the
Tribunal’s consideration in the Complainant’s application
of the dismissal of his complaint is upheld.
3. The Complainant’s application objecting to the Respondent’s
indicated intention to put into evidence the statements
of the five witnesses
contained within the Verity Report and make each available for cross-examination
by the Complainant for the
Tribunal’s consideration in the
Complainant’s application for review of the dismissal of his complaint is
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant:
Respondents:
Solicitors:
Complainant:
Bishops Barristers &
Respondents:
Office of the Solicitor-General
[2020] TASADT 3
Tribunal Member Winter
REASONS FOR DECISION
Application
1. This interlocutory determination concerns:
(a) An application by the Respondents pursuant to
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
(The Act), requesting that the Tribunal issue
written notices requiring the Complainant to attend a directions conference and
and produce specified information and documents.
This application
requests that a notice issues to the Complainant requesting he attend a
directions conference on a date to be fixed
and provide and produce the
following specified documents:
• All documents in the Applicant’s
(Complainant)’s possession, custody or power relating to his contention
Dr Fayez Hanna was a clinical PhD candidate at University of Tasmania, and
• All documents in the applicant’s possession, custody or power
relating to his contention that he held the role of University
of Tasmania PhD
Supervisor for Dr Fayez Hanna.
(b) An application by the Complainant objecting to the
Respondent’s indicated intention to put into evidence the investigation
report of the Verity Group (“The Verity Report”) for the
Tribunal’s consideration in the Complainant’s application
of the dismissal of his complaint
(c) An application by the Complainant
objecting to the Respondent’s indicated intention to put into evidence the
of the five witnesses contained within the Verity Report, and make
each available for cross-examination by the Complainant for
the Tribunal’s
consideration in the Complainant’s application for review of the dismissal
of his complaint.
2. It is necessary for the Tribunal to set out the background
to these applications in arriving at its determination.
3. On 13 June 2018, the Complainant lodged a written complaint
with the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner (“ADC”) alleging
discrimination and/or prohibited conduct by the Respondents.
Complainant alleged:
(a) Direct Discrimination on the basis of race and religious
belief/affiliation - refer s14 and s16(a) and (o) of the Anti-Discrimination
1998 (“the Act”).
(b) Inciting hatred towards, serious contempt
for, or severe ridicule of, the Applicant on the basis of race or religious
refer s16(a) and (o) and s19 of the Act.
(c) Victimisation on the
basis that the Applicant had previously made a complaint to the ADC- refer
s18(1)(c) of the Act.
5. The Respondents’ alleged conduct towards the
Complainant was said to have occurred in connection with employment- refer s22
(1)(a) of the Act.
6. On 25 January 2019, the ADC dismissed the
Complainant’s complaint against all Respondents.
7. On 20 February
2019, the Complainant made application to the Anti-Discrimination Tribunal
(“the Tribunal”) pursuant
to s71(3), of the Act for the review of
the dismissal of his complaint.
8. On 18 March 2019, at an initial directions
conference in the Tribunal, the Complainant was directed to make file and serve
written argument, and any additional evidence it sought to rely upon on in
relation to its application to review the dismissal of
his complaint.
11 April 2019, the Tribunal received from the Complainant’s solicitors a
consent memorandum executed by both the Complainant’s
solicitors and the
Respondents’ solicitors agreeing to extend the time for compliance with
the directions issued on 18 March
2019 to the close of business on 27 May 2019,
on the basis of the change of solicitors for the Complainant, and the need for
solicitors to have further time to comply with the previously made
directions.
10. On 27 May 2019, the Tribunal received from the
Complainant’s solicitors the following documentation:
(a) Statutory Declaration of Dr Fayez Hanna dated 24 May
(b) Statutory Declaration of Dr Alhossain Khalafallah dated 24 May
(c) Written submissions on behalf of the Complaint dated 27 May
11. Copies of these documents were served upon all Respondents.
Subsequent to the Tribunal’s receipt of this documentation,
teleconference was scheduled for 9:30am on Thursday 27 June 2019.
12. Upon an
application from the Respondents’ solicitors for an extension of time to
provide written responses to the Complainant’s
submissions of 27 May 2019,
the Respondents’ solicitors applied to adjourn the teleconference for a
further period of 14 days.
13. This was acceded to, with the conference being
scheduled for 10:30am on Thursday 11 July 2019.
14. Via email on 8 July 2019,
the Respondent’s solicitors filed with the Tribunal and served upon the
Complainant’s solicitors
an outline of submissions on behalf of the
Respondents and additional documents to be relied upon by the Respondent at
hearing comprising:
(a) Investigation Report of the Verity Group with
attachments (The Verity Report).
(b) Further response of the Second
Respondent, Dr Stan Gouden.
15. On 6 August 2019 at 1.01pm, the Tribunal received an email
from the Respondents’ solicitors which stated:
I have been advised by the practitioner for Dr Khalafallah that he will be
taking issue with the Verity investigation report that
was commissioned by the
THS to investigate the Applicant’s allegations of unlawful
discrimination.
In those circumstances, the Respondents now intend to call each of the
witnesses interviewed by the maker of that report, and those
statements are
annexed to it.
A copy of the report was provided to the Tribunal and Mr Maguire by post on
or about 9 July 2019.
These witnesses are:
Dr Stanislaw
Gouden, Director Northern Cancer Service THS
Dr Alistair
McDonald, Director Department of Medicine LGH
Smith, Director Integrated Operations Centre THS (formerly Manager and Chief
Radiation Therapist Northern Cancer Service)
Ms Courtney
Latin, Team Leader Administration WP Holman Clinic-LGH
Ms Roseanne
Summers, Administration Assistant WP Holman Clinic-LGH
When the matter proceeds to hearing, I will put the
statements contained in the Verity report to each of the witnesses and then make
them available for cross-examination.
In light of the above, it would appear that the estimated hearing time will
need to be significantly increased. I estimate the hearing
will now take at
least two days and possibly three.
Dr Gouden instructs that he will be overseas on 10/9 to 9/10. I would be
grateful if this could be taken into account when allocating
16. Subsequent to the receipt of this email, the Tribunal
listed the matter for a directions conference which was scheduled to occur
September 2019.
17. On 28 August 2019, the Complainant’s solicitors via
email, provided a letter to both the Tribunal and the Respondents’
solicitors, responding to the previously referred to email from the
Respondents’ solicitors of 1.01pm 6 August 2019.
18. On 30 August 2019
via email, the Tribunal and the Complainant received from the Respondent’s
solicitors, an application
pursuant to s97 for the production of
19. Via email on Friday 20 September 2019, the Tribunal received
correspondence from the Complainant’s solicitors to the Respondents’
solicitors dated 19 September 2019.
20. The covering email with the
Complainant’s solicitor’s letter of 19 September 2019
BY GEOFF McGUIRE
Please see attached correspondence forwarded to the Respondents’ legal
representative yesterday with respect to the telephone
directions hearing listed
on 23 September 2019.
It is intended to refer to this at the aforementioned directions
Please note that Mr McGuire will be unavailable, instead Mr Stephen Bishop
will appear on behalf of the Complainant.
Kind regards.....”
The Directions Conference of 23 September 2019
21. The directions conference occurred before the Tribunal on
the morning of 23 September as scheduled. The Complainant’s solicitor,
Steven Bishop appeared by telephone as did the Respondents’ solicitor Ms
Gretel Chen.
22. The Tribunal then heard from both the Complainant’s
solicitors and the Respondents’ solicitors in relation to the
of the material the Tribunal was to take into account in its consideration of
the Complainant’s application for
a review of the dismissal of his
23. The Complainant’s solicitors submitted that they had
significant issues with the content of The Verity Report which it had
from the Respondents’ solicitors subsequent to the Complainant’s
solicitors’ provision of its written
submissions and further evidence in
support of his application to review the dismissal of the Complainant’s
24. As a preliminary matter, the Respondents’ solicitors
were directed to issue to the Complainant a written application pursuant
of the Act for the production of documents to the Tribunal as foreshadowed in
the Respondents’ solicitors’ correspondence
of 27 August if they
intended to proceed with such an application, after the Complainants had
provided documents of the type requested,
which they indicated to the Tribunal
they would do within 7 days.
25. Mr Bishop submitted that in essence, that
the Tribunal should not take into evidence the Verity Report on the basis that
set out the evidence gathered during that investigation, but more
critically, and of concern to the Complainant, was its statement
of evidentiary
findings and opinions by the author thereof, which were ultimately to be
determined by the Tribunal.
26. It was further submitted that as, in a
review of this nature, the complainants evidence is to be taken at its highest,
the Tribunal
should not accede to the Respondents Solicitors suggestion of
making the witnesses , whose statement were attached to the Verity
available for cross examination, as to do so would be contrary to the nature of
the review process, would make the review
process akin to a hearing of the
substantive issues, as would occur in an Inquiry, and would thus be oppressive,
prejudicial, and
costly to the complainant.
27. In response, Ms Chen
submitted that The Verity Report should come before the Tribunal for its use in
its determinations of the
Complainant’s application for review of the
dismissal of his complaint as a consequence of this having been the prior
of the Tribunal, and also reflecting the Respondents’ right to
be accorded procedural fairness in its defence of the Complainants
application
for review of the dismissal of his complaint, in light of the
Complainant’s indications of not accepting the contents
of the Verity
28. Ms Chen confirmed her indicated intention ( as referred to in her
email of 1.01pm 6 August 2019),to seek to tender the Verity
report, and then
make each of the 5 witnesses, who had made statements, available for cross
examination by the Complainants.
29. After further submissions in response
were heard from the Complainant’s solicitors, the Tribunal reserved its
Determination
Section 97 Application
30. By correspondence from the Complainant’s Solicitors
to the Respondents’ solicitors and the Tribunal on 27 September
Complainant’s Solicitors provided documents of the kind referred to in the
Respondents’ application for the
issuing of a notice to the Complainant
pursuant to s97 as set out in its correspondence of 30 August.
consequence of this, there is no need for the Tribunal to consider, or make any
orders with regard to the Respondents’
application pursuant to s97, noting
that the Respondent does not appear to have indicated any objection to the
documentary material
provided by the Complainant’s solicitors on 27
September, 2019.
The exclusion of the Verity Report and the calling of the
Respondents’ five witnesses
32. The question for the Tribunal in the context of an
application for review per s72(1) is whether or not the Tribunal is satisfied
that the ADC made a correct decision in dismissing the Complainant’s
33. If the Tribunal is so satisfied the complaint lapses. If the
Tribunal is not so satisfied, the Tribunal is to deal with the complaint
it were an Inquiry under Division 4.
34. The Tribunal’s determination
of these issues involves an analysis of the basis of the Complainant’s
complaint to the
ADC, the ADC’s reasoning for its decision to dismiss the
Complainant’s complaint, and the material upon which the ADC
35. In the State of Tasmania v The Anti-Discrimination Tribunal and
[2009] TASSC 48
, Porter J however expressed a concluded view on the
nature of this type of review application pursuant to s72 of the Act. See that
judgement at paragraph 27-49 inclusive.
36. At paragraphs 39-42 inclusive,
Porter J stated the following:
- For the reasons which follow, I conclude that the review carried out by the
Tribunal under s72 is a comprehensive merit
review. It is not confined to the
material which was before the Commission. I think that the proper meaning of
the scheme is that
in carrying out a review, the Tribunal may take into account
such material as it thinks fit.”
37. At paragraph 47, His Honour stated clearly the role of the
Tribunal in the review process.
“47. Thus, when S
72 speaks of the Tribunal being satisfied or not that the Commissioner
“made the correct decision”,
it means that the question is whether
the decision was the correct one
on the material before the
The extent of such material is to be governed by relevance.
That is the interpretation which accords with the remedial nature of
legislation, and which better promotes its
38. There is thus a discretion in the Tribunal as to what
material it should have before it in determining the Complainant’s
application for review of the dismissal of his complaint. (The existence of such
discretion is also made clear in para 4.9 of the
ADT Practice Direction
39. It is also clear that in accordance with the Tribunal’s
procedural fairness requirements the Tribunal’s discretion
to allow the
adducing of additional relevant evidence as part of its Review of Dismissal
processes, does not relate only to the Complainant,
but also to the Respondents.
40. The basis of the Complainant’s complaint is detailed previously in
this decision – refer paragraph 4.
41. The ADC’s decision of 20
January 2019 dismissed the Complainant’s complaint against all
Respondents on the basis
of s71 (1)(a), on the ground referred to in s64(1)(a),
that being that the complainants complaint was misconceived or was lacking
42. The meaning of the words “misconceived, or lacking in
substance”, in a slightly different, but analogous context,
was considered
by Hunt J in Langley v Niland
[1981] 2 NSWLR 104.
43. At 107 Hunt J
relevantly stated that these words relate to “the insufficiency or absence
of merit of the factual basis for
the allegations made in the complaint, rather
than whether the complaint is one within the provisions of the act at
44. This interpretation is consistent with the scheme of the Act,
as evidenced by the existence of s64(1)(b).
45. There is thus a need to
analyse the nature of the evidence sought to be introduced by both the
Complaints and the Respondents
in the review contact of a dismissal to determine
its relevance.
46. It is clear that the Complaint wishes the Tribunal to have
addition material for its consideration of the review of dismissal
complainants complaint - as evidenced by the material provided by them on 27
May 2019, and also that provided by them to
the Respondents on 27 September
47. The Complainant submits however, that the nature of the review
process to be undertaken by the Tribunal pursuant to s72 involves
consideration of the Complainant’s evidence at its highest, and that the
Tribunal should not therefore conduct essentially
a full hearing of the
complaint, and take in the additional evidence proposed by the Respondents in
the discharge of its review functions,
48. They submit that such action
would be beyond what is required to determine the review process. They rely on
Praksash v Bobb Borg
Enterprises
[1999] NSWADT 83
, amongst others decisions, in
support of this submission.
49. The complainant submitted that the Verity
Report, should not be admitted into evidence, as being authored by an non
expert, and
also expressing views and opinions and that the Tribunal should also
not allow the Respondents to call the five witnesses who made
attached to the Verity Report, and make them available for cross examination on
their statements.
50. In the Tribunal’s opinion, the
Complainant’s solicitors’ arguments have partial merit. The Verity
Report itself
deals with factual findings and other matters ultimately for
determination by the Tribunal in the Review of Dismissal process. The
and opinions expressed therein by its Author, go directly to the matters the
Tribunal is to consider and rule upon.
51. The Tribunal does not consider
those factual findings, opinions and the like in the Verity report to be of
relevance to the review
process before the Tribunal.
Respondents’ submissions that the receipt of such a report in a review of
dismissal application is normal Tribunal practice,
is not accepted, as it is for
the Tribunal in each case to determine what relevant material it will received
into evidence for its
consideration.
53. The same however does not apply in
the context of the review of a dismissal proceeding, to evidence set out or
contained within
that report, which the Respondent submits is relevant to its
case within this Review of Dismissal process.
54. In his submissions and
other correspondence, the Complainant appears to have agreed, at least initially
55. The Tribunal considers this evidence to be relevant to its
determination of its satisfaction as to whether or not, on the material
the Tribunal, the ADC’s decision to dismiss the complainant’s
complaint was correct.
56. Such evidence goes directly to the basis of the
ADC’s dismissal of the complainant’s complaint, being of direct
in this review process, as it came into existence in the Respondents
investigative response to the complainant’s lodgement
57. Having considered the Complainant’s submissions and the
Respondents’ submissions with regard to this aspect, the Tribunal
to the conclusion that the Respondents’ solicitor’s suggestion, in
her email to the Tribunal and the Complainant’s
solicitors dated 6 August
2019 at 1:01pm that she intends, at the hearing of the Review of Dismissal to
put the witness statement
of each of the following witnesses into evidence, and
then make each of the following witnesses available for cross-examination by
Complainant’s solicitors is a sensible and pragmatic approach. These
witnesses are:
• Dr Stanislaw Gouden, Director Northern Cancer Services
• Dr Alistair McDonald, Director Department of Medicine
• Mr Grant Smith, Director Integrated Operations Centre THS
(formerly Manager and Chief Radiation Therapist Northern Cancer
• Ms Courtney Latin, Team Leader Administration WP Holman
Clinic-LGH.
• Ms Roseanne Summers, Administration Assistant WP Holman
Clinic-LGH.
58. In the Tribunal’s view, such an approach does not
prejudice the Complainant as has been asserted by the Complainant’s
solicitors, as they are already in possession of these witness statements, and
can make their own decision as to whether or not they
wish to cross-examination
any or all of these witnesses, and if so, the nature and extent of any such
cross-examination, before
the statements are admitted into evidence for the
Tribunals consideration.
59. The Tribunal makes the following orders:
1. The Tribunal
makes no order in relation to the Respondent’s Application for the
Tribunal to issue a Notice to the Complainant
to Produce Documents pursuant to
s97 of the Act.
2. The Complainant’s application objecting to the
Respondent’s indicated intention to put into evidence the investigation
report of the Verity Group (“The Verity Report”) for the
Tribunal’s consideration in the Complainant’s application
of the dismissal of his complaint is upheld.
3. The Complainant’s
application objecting to the Respondent’s indicated intention to put into
evidence the statements
of the five witnesses contained within the Verity Report
and make each available for cross-examination by the Complainant for the
Tribunal’s consideration of the Complainant’s application for review
of the dismissal of his complaint is dismissed.
4. That within fourteen (14)
days of the date of this decision, the Complainant’s solicitors are to
advise the Respondents’
solicitors and the Tribunal, whether it wishes to
cross-examine any or all of the witnesses indicated below at the hearing of the
application to review the dismissal of the Complainants complaint, these
• Dr Stanislaw Gouden, Director Northern Cancer Services
• Dr Alistair McDonald, Director Department of Medicine
• Mr Grant Smith, Director Integrated Operations Centre THS
(formerly Manager and Chief Radiation Therapist Northern Cancer
• Ms Courtney Latin, Team Leader Administration WP Holman
• Ms Roseanne Summers, Administration Assistant WP Holman
60. Upon receipt of this written advice from the
Complainant’s solicitors, the Tribunal will liaise with the parties to
a hearing of the final evidence and submissions to enable the
Tribunal to determine the Complainant’s application for the
review of the
dismissal of his complaint.
R. O. WINTER
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.56 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter