URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCCA/2024/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Director of Public Prosecutions v King [2024] TASCCA 8 (15 August 2024)
[2024] TASCCA 8
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (COURT OF CRIMINAL
Director of Public Prosecutions v King
[2024] TASCCA 8
: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
PROSECUTIONS
KING, Emily Kate
DELIVERED ON:
15 August 2024
HEARING DATE:
4 July 2024
Estcourt J, Pearce J, Porter AJ
Criminal Law – Appeal and new trial – Appeal against sentence
– Grounds for interference – Sentence manifestly
excessive or
inadequate – Crown appeal – Respondent instigated and abetted
setting fires to property at two different
properties on successive nights
– Residential and business and properties involved – Properties
owned by same people
against whom respondent held a grudge – Damage to the
extent of about $588,000 and victims concerned for their safety –
respondent with diagnosed mental illnesses – Where illnesses had causative
connection to offending and affected considerations
of imprisonment –
Where other mitigating personal circumstances and factors – Sentence of
and order requiring completion of 50 hours of
community service manifestly inadequate.
Aust Dig Criminal Law
REPRESENTATION
Mason SC, E Burrows-Cheng
Solicitors:
Director of Public
Prosecutions
Respondent:
Tasmania Legal Aid
[2024] TASCCA 8
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 8/2024
File No CCA 1132/2024
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS v EMILY KATE
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
of the Court:
appeal is allowed and the sentence of Blow CJ imposed on 22 April 2024 is set
count 1 on complaint 371/2022 the respondent is made the subject of a home
detention order for 16 months to commence on 23 April
2024, on the same
conditions as applied to the order of Blow CJ of 22 April 2024.
counts 2 and 3 on that complaint, the respondent is sentenced to 20 months'
imprisonment the execution of the whole of which is
suspended on condition that
she not commit any offence punishable by imprisonment for a period of three
years and that she perform
210 hours of community service within that period,
less the number of hours determined by Community Corrections to have been
pursuant to the order of 22 April 2024.
respondent is to report to a probation officer at 75 Liverpool Street, Hobart
within one clear working day of today.
Serial No 8/2024
File No CCA 1132/2024
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS V EMILY KATE
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
15 August 2024
is a Crown appeal against a sentence imposed by Blow CJ on 22 April 2024. The
respondent pleaded guilty to two counts of unlawfully
setting fire to property,
one count of burglary and one count of stealing. The respondent was convicted
and made subject to a home
detention order with an operational period of 16
months. The learned sentencing judge also made a community correction order to
for 12 months from the day following sentence with a special condition
requiring the respondent to perform 50 hours of community
sole ground of appeal is that the sentence was manifestly
inadequate.
The circumstances of the crimes
early 2021 the respondent commenced a relationship with Jarrod Minehan. At that
time Mr Minehan and his then wife, together with
Christopher and Rebecca Kline,
owned and operated a concrete business. Mr Minehan was Mrs Kline's brother.
During the course of that
year Mr and Mrs Minehan's marriage ended, following
which the relationship between Mr Minehan and Mr and Mrs Kline badly
deteriorated
and became acrimonious. Mr Minehan was removed from the
respondent felt very strongly about how her partner had been treated by Mr and
Mrs Kline and decided to seek revenge. She sent
numerous messages to others
asking whether they knew anyone who could "light a car on fire." A few days
before 14 December 2021 she
return for money, to damage property on her behalf. She approached Mr Booth
she knew of him and knew he needed money. The respondent told Mr Booth
that she would need the "jobs" to be done whilst she and Mr
Minehan were out of
14 December 2021 the respondent, when in Queensland, sent Mr Booth a message on
a social media application giving the address
of Mr and Mrs Kline's home in Snug
in southern Tasmania. The message was accompanied by a photograph of the house.
She told Mr Booth
that it was an "insurance job". The respondent asked Mr Booth
to "cause as much havoc as possible" and to burn the caravan and the
Hilux he would find there. She said to him "If you do a good job of the [Snug]
one I have another one for you." At about 2.30
am the following morning Mr Booth
went to the home with a can of petrol. He was accompanied by his close friend
Kirsten Donoghue.
Mr Booth decided to not burn the caravan because it was too
close to the house. However, he broke the window of the Hilux with a
emptied the petrol into the vehicle and set fire to it. The vehicle and tools
contained in it were totally destroyed.
The value of the loss was $84,726. That
is the subject of the first count of unlawfully setting fire to property.
respondent waited up to hear from Mr Booth. When he notified the respondent that
the "job had been done" she required proof,
and he sent her a photograph. That
must have been very soon after the fire was lit because, by 2.43 am, the
respondent had paid him
$500 by electronic transfer. The respondent looked at
the Tasmanian Fire Service website to check that there had been a report of
pleased about what had happened so far, the respondent then asked Mr Booth to
"do another job", this time to damage the
business premises of Concrete Tas Pty
Ltd in Stanton Place at Cambridge. That company, of which Mr and Mrs Kline were
principals,
operated the concrete business in which Mr Minehan had been
involved. The respondent sent Mr Booth a photograph of a map she had
showing the location of the premises. She said to him: "Steal whatever you want
to steal. Do whatever you want to do. Trash
it, cause carnage". Mr Booth went to
the Stanton Place premises at about 2.30 am on 16 December 2021, again with Ms
Donoghue. Mr
Booth smashed a glass door and he and Ms Donoghue entered. They
removed and stole a diesel heater, a welder and a radio. Mr Booth
then smashed
the window of an Isuzu truck which was parked outside. He emptied a can of
petrol into it and set it on fire. The truck
was destroyed. The fire spread to
the business premises. The cost of the damage to the Stanton Place premises and
the truck was assessed
in the total sum of $503,848.69. This conduct gives rise
to the remaining three counts
after the crimes at Cambridge were committed Mr Booth again reported back to the
respondent. A series of messages were exchanged
which made clear that Mr Booth
and Ms Donoghue had acted in accordance with the respondent's instructions and
that she was pleased
with the result. She paid him another $500.
identity of those involved was quickly established by the police. The respondent
was arrested and interviewed on 16 December
2021. She made detailed admissions
including that she had never met Mr and Mrs Kline. She admitted that she asked
for the car to
be burnt and the business to be "done". She did not, she said,
ask for the business to be burnt but admitted she told Mr Booth to,
do as much damage as he could. She wanted Mr and Mrs Kline to suffer a hurtful
consequence because she thought what they
had done to her partner was "fucking
horrible" and she responded in the only way in which she said she generally
reacted, that is
with "violence or anger".
Before going further, it is desirable to attempt to bring some clarity to
concepts that were mentioned in the submissions and the
subject of some debate.
Various references were made to the respondent's "criminal responsibility",
"culpability", "criminality"
and "moral culpability". As Wilson J said in
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
(1988) 164 CLR 465 at [486] (in dissent), there
is an "... ease with which obscurity of meaning can infect this area of
discourse."
Criminal responsibility relates to criminal liability; it attaches to a person
whose conduct and state of mind is such as to make
out the offence.
"Culpability" is a broad concept which generally encompasses the notion of
blameworthiness. It is a word often used
when discussing the role or level of
responsibility of joint offenders:
[2010] NSWCCA 49
[2011] NSWCCA 140
. It will be used in that sense in these
The next step is to distinguish between the concept of the objective
seriousness of the offence, described by the appellant as "criminality",
that of the moral culpability of an offender. This distinction follows on from
statements of the High Court in
Muldrock v The Queen
[2011] HCA 39
Bugmy v The Queen
[2013] HCA 37
, 249 CLR 51 at
Munda v Western Australia
[2013] HCA 382
249 CLR 600
culpability is more concerned with circumstances or characteristics of the
offender which may have an impact on blameworthiness.
Despite the distinction,
it is accepted that the line between the two is not always clear and that some
factors that are personal
to an offender, such as mental health impairment, may
in some circumstances affect both the assessment of the objective seriousness
the offence and the moral culpability of the offender: see the helpful
discussion of the general issue in
DS v The Queen
[2022] NSWCCA 156
, [90]-[96].
noted by the Court in
at [91], the proposition that personal
circumstances of the offender may diminish or reduce moral culpability raises
the question
as to from what moral culpability is reduced. Their Honours said,
"The short answer is from a moral culpability that corresponds
or substantially
correspondences with the objective seriousness (or gravity) of the offence."
Additionally, at [92] the Court observed
that the discussion of objective
seriousness and moral culpability was not meant to burden sentencing judges but
to assist by inviting,
and to an extent requiring, them to determine the
seriousness of the offence and how much moral blame the offender bears, but only
as part of the consideration of the weight to be attached to the various
sentencing factors for the purpose of undertaking the process
of instinctive
Criminal responsibility and culpability
respondent pleaded guilty on the agreed basis that she abetted and instigated Mr
Booth and Ms Donoghue to commit the crimes:
Criminal Code
, s 3(1)(c) and
(d). However, in terms of criminal responsibility for instigating the crime of
unlawfully setting fire to property
on the second night, s 5 of the Criminal
Code may have had a role to play.
relative culpability of co-offenders is not necessarily defined by their
physical role in the crime. Although the respondent did
not do the acts which
constituted the crimes, the criminal culpability of her conduct was at a high
level. The respondent caused
the crimes to have been committed by Mr Booth and
gave him detailed instructions and information to assist him. She used what she
understood to be Mr Booth's need for money to induce him to do her bidding and
lied to him about the reason she wanted the damage
done. In those circumstances,
the appellant's submission that the respondent is to be regarded as more
blameworthy than both Mr Booth
and Ms Donoghue, even though charged as an
instigator and abettor, should be accepted:
Director of Public Prosecutions v
[2002] VSCA 131
GAS v The Queen
[2004] HCA 22
[2009] NSWCCA 3.
Seriousness of
the offending
the crimes were committed against property, the respondent's aim was to harm Mr
and Mrs Kline. Beyond the financial harm
they suffered, as the sentencing judge
pointed out, they were subjected to very upsetting experiences in the middle of
on two consecutive nights. Although the second fire was in the
vicinity of unoccupied business premises, that was not the case with
fire. Mr and Mrs Kline were at home when they were woken at 2.37 am by
notifications on their phones from cameras monitoring
the premises. They saw the
Hilux fully alight. There was an obvious personal risk to them which would have
been even greater had
Mr Booth decided to carry out the respondent's instruction
to burn the caravan.
victim impact statement given to the sentencing judge indicated that they were
immediately concerned for the safety of their 13
year old son, and screamed at
him to get out of the house with his pets. He suffered a lasting psychological
impact. All serious
fires of this nature impose some risk on officers of the
Tasmania Fire Service who are responsible for attending them.
sentencing judge recognised the seriousness of the offending and
"I have to sentence Ms King for instigating and
encouraging the commission of crimes that resulted in over $580,000 worth of
No penalties other than imprisonment or home detention would be
appropriate."
The objective circumstances of the respondent's crimes were such as to require
a sentencing response which sufficiently reflected
the obvious need for general
deterrence, punishment, denunciation and protection of the
The respondent's personal circumstances
appellant contends that the learned sentencing judge, by deciding on home
detention for 16 months supplemented by 50 hours of
community service, imposed a
sentence which was manifestly inadequate. The factors which persuaded the
sentencing judge to not impose
a sentence of imprisonment arose from her
personal circumstances. The respondent was 26 when the crimes were committed.
When sentenced
she was 28. She had no prior convictions of relevance. She has
three children. Two children aged 12 and 7 were not in her care; the
from an early age; the younger from more recently due to the respondent's mental
health. She and Mr Minehan had a child.
The child was born while the respondent
was awaiting disposition of the criminal proceedings and, at the time of
sentence, was 7
months old. That child has health issues. The respondent helped
with the care of Mr Minehan's four young children when they were
with him on
alternate weeks. Mr Minehan was self-employed in a trucking business he
apparently established after his involvement
with the concrete business came to
sentencing judge was informed that the respondent had an extremely dysfunctional
and traumatic childhood. She had no relationship
with her biological father. She
was the victim of physical, sexual and emotional abuse perpetrated by two adult
males from which
her mother did not protect her. She was eventually removed by
child protection authorities into foster care. She disengaged from
with limited literacy and numeracy after year eight. When she was 14 she
commenced a relationship with an older male and
she became pregnant about a year
later. Her first child was born when she was 16.
respondent made full admissions in her video interview with police and accepted
responsibility for the instigation of the fires.
She pleaded guilty at an early
stage and was committed to the Supreme Court for sentence. She expressed regret
and a desire to apologise
to the complainants during the sentencing
sentencing judge was informed that, if the respondent was imprisoned, Mr Minehan
would be responsible for the care of their child
and in those circumstances he
would be unable to operate the trucking business he had commenced.
respondent's mental health was a significant matter in sentencing. She had a
long history of poor mental health which was the
subject of submissions by her
counsel. The sentencing judge was given a report prepared by a clinical
psychologist, Damien Minehan
dated 24 January 2024 and a report prepared by a
probation officer of the respondent's suitability for a home detention
Minehan interviewed and assessed the respondent and considered her medical
history. He diagnosed complex post-traumatic stress
disorder, borderline
personality disorder and anti-social personality traits. According to Mr
Minehan, complex PTSD is characterised
by chronic and ongoing exposure to trauma
over an extended period. Mr Minehan listed the diagnostic criteria for
borderline personality
disorder and expressed the view that there was evidence
for all of them being present in the respondent. They relevantly included
pattern of unstable and intense interpersonal relationships characterised by
alternating between extremes of idealisation and devaluation,
impulsivity, and
inappropriate, intense anger or difficulty controlling anger.
Minehan reported that the respondent had taken intentional overdoses in 2013 and
in 2021. The latter resulted in an intensive
care admission and discharge into
the care of her foster parents with follow up by the community mental health
team. Her referral
was with the background of "a two months deterioration in her
mental health state with symptoms including emotional lability, impulsivity,
emptiness, feelings of abandonment, severe identity disturbance, hypervigilance,
dissociation and chronic suicidal ideation." It
was noted however that her
engagement with community mental health service has been sporadic.
Minehan was asked to consider whether, and if so how, the principles discussed
by the Victorian Court of Appeal in
R v Verdins
, 16 VR 269 may apply to the respondent. At [38] of his report Mr
Minehan correctly noted the effect of
to be that a court may take
a person's mental condition into account in mitigation concerning moral
culpability, the kind of sentence
imposed and its conditions, general and
specific deterrence, whether a sentence will weigh more heavily than it would on
of normal health and whether imprisonment is likely to have a serious
effect on mental health. At [39] of his report he said this:
psychological symptoms associated with these conditions are likely to have
affected the mental functioning of Ms King at the
time of the offending in the
following ways:
dysregulation affective instability, intense anger and impulsivity – these
symptoms are more like to have a relationship
with impulsive offences that have
occurred within interpersonal conflict. ... .
Interpersonal/relationship
difficulties – in addition to the symptoms described above, Ms King's
psychological issues within
her interpersonal relationships resulting from
complex PTSD and BPD are likely to have affected her mental functioning during
time in which the unlawfully setting fire and associated offences took
place. These offences are less impulsive in nature and involve
prior planning,
Ms King's tendency to be involved in intense interpersonal relationships
involving idealisation and periods of intense
anger has likely resulted in her
being driven to act against those she felt had wronged Mr Minehan. Ms King had
demonstrated propensity
to act in an angry and emotionally dis-regulated way
when she perceives that she, or someone she cares about, has been wronged in
some way. "
report continued that, "Additionally, a custodial sentence is likely to be
particularly onerous for Ms King and will result in
a deterioration in her
mental health. Ms King is likely to experience depressive symptoms, emotional
instability and significant
suicidal ideation within a prison setting.
Separation from her infant child as well as the prison environment itself will
negative impact on her mental health."
sentencing judge accepted and acted on Mr Minehan's opinion and took into
account suggested mitigating factors. His Honour said:
"Ms King had
a terrible childhood. In particular, she was physically, sexually and
emotionally abused by a number of people. She
has mental health problems,
apparently contributed to by the childhood abuse. She has been diagnosed as
suffering from complex post-traumatic
stress disorder and borderline personality
Amongst other things, the symptoms of those conditions include problems with
emotional regulation, strong attachments to individuals,
and periods of intense
anger. She instigated and encouraged the offending against Mr and Mrs Kline
because of feelings of intense
anger related to her perception of how they had
treated Mr [J] Minehan. She was still angry when she was interviewed by the
and now regrets things that she said in anger.
It appears that her mental health has improved following changes to her
medication a few months ago. She is now receiving professional
assistance from a
private psychologist weekly and from a psychiatrist every three weeks, as well
as taking a depot injection once
If I were to send Ms King to prison, that would result in a prison experience
that would be more difficult for her than for most prisoners,
for a number of
reasons. Her treatment by the psychologist and the psychiatrist would be
interrupted. Her mental health would no
doubt get much worse. She would be
very anxious about the impact of her absence on her baby and Mr [J] Minehan. He
now operates
a trucking business. I expect he would be unable to both operate
his business and look after the baby if she was in prison.
... I think it is clear from the psychological report ... that her mental
health problems contributed to her commission of the offence
and therefore lower
her culpability.
The relationship between Ms King's mental health problems and her offending
means that she is not as blameworthy as someone with no
mental health problems.
There are other significant mitigating factors including her cooperation with
the police, her early please
of guilty, her remorse, and her desire to
apologise."
The submissions
the appellant submits that the objective circumstances of the crimes committed
by the respondent and the level of her
criminality and the impact on the victim
or victims, lead to the conclusion that general deterrence, denunciation,
punishment, and
public safety, were all predominant factors in the exercise of
the sentencing discretion. The appellant says the suggested reduction
culpability must be minimal given the nature of the respondent's actions in
bringing about the crimes.
the appellant concedes there were many factors the sentencing judge had to
consider, some of them significant mitigating factors
such as the early plea of
guilty, the mental health of the respondent and the impact on her family, it is
submitted the sentencing
judge erred as he placed too much weight on those
personal considerations and tailored a sentence to ameliorate perceived
This had the effect of diminishing to a significant degree the impact
or the punitive aspect of the sentence, and therefore, the
deterrent aspect. In
short, the argument is that the approach taken by the sentencing judge failed to
sufficiently reflect the predominant
factors, and erroneously gave too much
weight to factors personal to the respondent.
For the respondent, counsel sought to put a number of factual matters in
context. Counsel pointed out that the sentencing judge
was told the respondent's
plan was not thought out at length, and the plan was not one of any great level
of detail nor were there
detailed specific instructions. It was said to be
"generally a spontaneous plan, influenced by her overwhelming anger." Then
for the State did not take any issue with those submissions. Counsel
then appearing for the respondent told the sentencing judge
that the respondent
formed very strong attachments to people she was close to, and that in the
context of losing contact with her
son, Mr J Minehan had become a sole focus;
the fallout with his family had become all-encompassing for her. It was
submitted she
goes to significant and sometimes disproportionate lengths to
defend those to whom she is close when they are aggrieved.
Honour was also told that the respondent's response to the situation was so
intense that Mr Minehan specifically organised to
travel to Queensland to get
away from everything, and that the respondent could not specifically recall many
of the details of the
week or so when the offending occurred. Counsel submits
the factor of revenge has to be put in that broader context and her background,
notably the role her mental illnesses played.
accepting a high level of objective seriousness, heavy reliance is placed on the
established fact of the respondent's impaired
mental health, its connection with
the offending and its significance in terms of actual imprisonment. In
particular, it is argued
that the unchallenged causal connection between her
psychiatric conditions and the offending, and Mr Damien Minehan's unchallenged
opinion as to the effect of imprisonment on her must be given considerable
weight, with several limbs of the
"principles" being enlivened.
was put there is a number of other factors present which warrant a lenient
sentence. Those factors include, but are not limited
to, early pleas of guilty,
remorse, reduced moral culpability, lack of criminal history, prospects of
rehabilitation and the personal
circumstances including background of
deprivation and dysfunctional upbringing. As to the relevance and effect of such
Bugmy v The Queen
[2013] HCA 37
, 249 CLR 571;
[2024] TASCCA 1.
In short, counsel argues that the sentencing
judge's approach was properly nuanced and individualised given all of the
circumstances,
and the sentencing exercise did not miscarry.
should be made of the co-offenders who were charged with the same crimes. Mr
Booth is yet to be dealt with. Ms Donoghue
was sentenced on 20 February 2023,
also by Blow CJ, to three years' imprisonment with a non-parole period of 18
months. She was 28
years old at the time of the crimes. She had a number of
minor prior convictions, mostly for driving offences, with a long history
alcohol and drug use. She began using crystal methamphetamine very heavily about
a year before the crimes, she had a reasonable
employment history until her drug
use reached the point where she stopped work. She had been promised $1,000 for
the commission of
the crimes but received nothing; her involvement was to obtain
money for drugs.
psychological report showed that Ms Donohue had symptoms consistent with aspects
of complex post-traumatic stress disorder, as
well as border line traits,
although no formal diagnosis had been made. She was also exposed to domestic
violence and sexual abuse
when she was about nine years old and there were
multiple incidents of violence in her relationships as an adult. However, the
psychologist
considered that the symptoms did not causally contribute to her
offending behaviour. On 12 October 2023 the Court of Criminal Appeal
unanimously
dismissed her appeal against the sentence on the ground that it was manifestly
excessive. Of course, parity cannot be
an issue in considering whether the
respondent's sentence was manifestly inadequate, but it would arise in relation
to a re-sentencing
Director of Public Prosecutions v Swan
[2016] TASSC 9
Disposition of the
primary purpose of Crown appeals against sentence is to lay down principles for
the governance and guidance of courts having
the duty of sentencing offenders.
They also serve to maintain confidence in the administration of justice by an
intervention of an
appellate court in the case of a manifestly inadequate
Green v The Queen
[2011] HCA 49
244 CLR 462
Everett v The Queen
[1994] HCA 49
(1994) 181 CLR 295
Director of Public
Prosecutions v Swan
(above) at [30].
appellant needs both to persuade this Court of error in the exercise of the
discretion, and to negate any reason the residual
discretion of this Court not
to interfere should be exercised:
CMB v The Attorney-General (NSW)
256 CLR 346
In our view, the appeal should be allowed. In all of the circumstances, the
sentence imposed was such that it bespeaks error. The
aggravating features of
the respondent's conduct and the high level of objective seriousness have
already been discussed. We accept
that the factors of general deterrence,
specific deterrence, denunciation and punishment were predominant factors. The
respondent's
conduct amounted to revenge by proxy in exchange for actual payment
and was persisted in over a period of less than 48 hours. She
used a man to do
her bidding whom she knew to be financially vulnerable, or "malleable", as the
appellant's counsel put it. The respondent's
conduct resulted in very
substantial damage and risk of injury or worse. Absent the respondent's actions,
the crimes would not have
been committed.
It is also true that there were grounds for leniency. These have also been
detailed. There were relatively early pleas of guilty,
to the complaints as
distinct from an indictment, and evidence of remorse. In particular, the
respondent's background and her impaired
mental functioning relevant to her
conduct and the effect of a sentence of imprisonment weighed heavily in the
balancing exercise.
On the basis of Mr D Minehan's opinion it must be accepted,
as the sentencing judge did, that the respondent's moral culpability
appreciably diminished because of the operative effects of her mental illnesses.
In addition, his opinion established that any
sentence of imprisonment would
weigh more heavily on her and have a significant adverse effect on her mental
at [32], limbs 1, 5 and 6.
All of that said however, the objective seriousness of the offending –
with the consequent need for denunciation, deterrence
and punishment – is
such that it is not properly reflected in the sentence imposed, even accepting
all of the matters that
operated in the respondent's favour.
We are satisfied that the residual discretion not to allow this appeal should
not be exercised. The manifest error effectively amounts
to one of principle.
The factors that might lead to the exercise the discretion include delay, the
imminent or past release from
prison parole or unconditionally, and the effect
of any resentencing on progress towards rehabilitation:
Green v The Queen
(above) at [43]. Delay was a factor in this case but was not mentioned as an
issue before the sentencing judge. The respondent pleaded
guilty on 9 March
2023, and was committed to this Court for sentence, first appearing on 1 May
2023. The sentencing proceedings commenced
on 9 November 2023. There were two
subsequent short hearings when the matter was adjourned on each occasion because
of the unavailability
of Mr Minehan's report, with the plea in mitigation being
made on 1 February 2024. The sentence was handed down on 22 April 2024
cannot reasonably be said that in those circumstances, delay would trigger the
exercise of the residual discretion. There are
no other circumstances, either
alone, or in combination with others, that would produce an injustice if the
appeal were allowed.
the appeal has been allowed does not mean that the mitigating factors and the
respondent's personal circumstances cease to have
any effect or weight; proper
regard must still be had to those matters. Nor does it necessarily follow that
the respondent should
be sentenced to an immediate term of imprisonment. Scope
for individualisation remains.
The respondent's case presented, and does present, a difficult sentencing
exercise. We propose to take a course that calls for some
discussion. Section 7
Sentencing Act
1997 (the Act) sets out the types of orders, as
alternatives, that a Court may make if a person is found guilty of "an offence".
The combined effect of s 7, s 8(1), s 8(2) and s 42AC(1)(b) is that a court
imposing a sentence, for one offence, cannot impose both
a term of imprisonment,
immediate or suspended, and make a home detention order. However, s 11(1)(b) of
the Act enables a Court to
impose on an offender who has been convicted of more
than one offence specified in one or more complaints or indictments, a separate
sentence for each of those offences.
appropriateness of imposing a suspended term of imprisonment and making a home
detention order in respect of closely related
offences committed by an offender,
Director of Public Prosecutions v King
Director of Public
Prosecutions v
[2020] TASCCA 32
, Tas R 156. It was Mr Webb's
case that involved the point. He had pleaded guilty to charges of aggravated
burglary, wounding and
assault. All charges arose from a "home invasion" type
incident. On the charge of aggravated burglary, he was sentenced to 15 months
imprisonment the execution of which was wholly suspended for three years, while
on the other two charges he was made the subject
of a home detention order for
18 months. A Crown appeal against manifest inadequacy was unanimously dismissed.
In his reasons at [30], Blow CJ observed that the course taken by the
sentencing judge was a one that was permitted by s 11(1)
referred to above.
However, his Honour said:
"[T]hat was a course that should not
normally be taken by a sentence in relation to a single escapade because
it is clear from
that home detention is meant to be an alternative to a
sentence of imprisonment, suspended or otherwise, rather than as a form of
penalty that might be combined with a suspended sentence."
At [71], Wood J, after noting that a home detention was intended to be an
alternative to an immediate or wholly or partly suspended
term of imprisonment,
said that she wanted to make it clear she did not suggest that a home detention
order combined with a suspended
sentence should not have been imposed across
multiple counts. It was "an exceptional case and called for an exceptional
order", being
fashioned to be as punitive as it could be without imposing
imprisonment. Her Honour continued:
"I can think of other examples
where a court may impose two sentencing orders, which present a similar tension
in their purpose, but
which, in a particular case, may achieve a just outcome.
Ultimately, the wider the range of sentencing orders and the more
flexibility in fashioning sentencing orders to achieve the objectives
sentencing, the greater the scope for producing a just sentence in an individual
." [Emphasis added].
The other member of the Court, Estcourt J, did not, in that context, express a
view about the combination of sentences imposed by
the sentencing judge.
It might be possible to describe the respondent's course of conduct as an
"escapade", but there are some factual differences to
the case of Mr Webb. Here,
there was a gap in time, albeit short, between the instigation and completion of
the first count of unlawfully
setting fire to property, and the instigation of
the remaining crimes. In any event, the observations of Wood J which have been
highlighted
in the passage quoted are, with respect, rightly made, and should be
In this case, the Court's view is that a sentence can be fashioned which takes
into account all of the competing objectives of the
sentencing process and which
properly reflects the objective seriousness of the offending and the consequent
dominant factors, along
with the matters which operate in the respondent's
favour. That sentence will involve a not dissimilar approach to that taken in
the case of
but will involve a greater punitive element.
In relation to a wholly suspended term of imprisonment, there is the debate
sentences. The issue was
discussed at some length in
Director of Public Prosecutions v Vincent
[2020] TASCCA 16
where Martin AJ (with whom Blow CJ and Pearce
J agreed) concluded: "It is true that a wholly suspended sentence is a severe
and a more severe sentence than many members of the public might
Honour went on to note that the legislation concerning suspended sentences had
become stricter in the last decade and referred
to the following. Section 24(1)
of the Act makes a suspended sentence subject to a condition that the offender
does not commit another
offence punishable by imprisonment during the period the
order is in force. Applications for an offender who has breached a condition
a suspended sentence may now be made orally: s 27(4). If a court is satisfied
that an offender has been found guilty of a new
offence, the court must activate
the suspended sentence unless it is of the opinion that that would be unjust: s
27(4B) and (4C).
be added to those observations, is the fact that s 24(2) of the Act enables a
court to suspend the whole or part of a sentence
of imprisonment on a number of
conditions, one of which is that the offender perform community service for the
number of hours specified
in the order, and any other condition as the court
considers necessary or expedient. Those conditions, of course, are in addition
to the statutory condition in s 24(1), that the offender does not commit another
offence punishable by imprisonment during the period
the order is in force.
Those conditions, in particular that relating to community service, enables a
court to impose a suspended
term of imprisonment "which adds a sting" to what
otherwise might be thought as a lenient sentence:
[1970] 1 WLR
at 1017. At the same time, they provide additional potential for the
sentence to be served.
The imposition of a sentence of imprisonment is a grave step to take whether or
not the offender's liberty is immediately removed
or curtailed:
[2011] NSWCCA 151
Zaky v The Queen
[2015] NSWCCA 161
Hamill J (with whom Johnson and Davies JJ agreed) said that the New South Wales
Court of Criminal Appeal "had made it clear that
while there is an element of
leniency in the suspension of a sentence, it remains a gaol sentence and an
appropriate and available
sentencing option", adding that "[I]t is unfortunate
that this needs to be stated yet again....". His Honour referred to
[2002] NSWCCA 17
R v Nahlous
[2013] NSWCCA 90
It follows from that discussion that this Court must proceed on the basis that
a suspended sentence, as a term of imprisonment,
is a heavy sanction. It is
useful as a sentencing option: see
at [34]-[35]. One of the main
purposes in suspending a term of imprisonment is to encourage reform of the
offender with a central
consideration thus being the prospects of
rehabilitation. The Act allows suspension on conditions which involve an
immediate punitive
The Court makes the following orders:
(a) The appeal is allowed and the sentence of Blow CJ imposed on 22 April 2024
is set aside.
(b) On count 1 on complaint 371/2022 the respondent is made the subject of a
April 2024, on the same
conditions as applied to the order of Blow CJ of 22 April 2024.
(c) On counts 2 and 3 on that complaint, the respondent is sentenced to 20
months' imprisonment the execution of the whole of which
is suspended on
condition that she not commit any offence punishable by imprisonment for a
period of three years and that she perform
210 hours of community service within
that period, less the number of hours determined by Community Corrections to
have been performed
pursuant to the order of 22 April 2024.
of ss 24(4) and 28(b) of the Act, the Court is required to order the respondent
to report to a probation officer. The order
is that she report to a probation
officer at 75 Liverpool Street, Hobart within one clear working day of today.
In case of instigators, mode of execution
Where a person instigates another to commit a crime, and a crime is actually
committed after such instigation by the person instigated,
it is immaterial
whether the crime actually committed is the same as that instigated or not, or
whether the crime is committed in
the manner suggested or not; provided in
either case that the facts constituting the crime actually committed are a
probable consequence
of carrying out the instigation. In any such case the
instigator is deemed to have himself committed the crime actually committed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (239 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter