URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASRPDComm/2009/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:20:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Launceston Planning Scheme 1996 Amendment 154 [2009] TASRPDComm 22 (18 May 2009)
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Planning and Approvals Act 1993
Resource Planning and Development
Commission Act 1997
Decision and Reasons for Decision
LAUNCESTON PLANNING SCHEME 1996
Amendment 154
The amendment was to:
(a) Rezone several parcels of land located between Abels Hill Road and Benvenue
Road, St. Leonards, to LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL, and
(b) Insert SCHEDULE 15- Hillary Street Outline Development Plan
Date and Place of Hearing
11 March 2009 at Town Hall, Civic Square,
At its meeting on 2 February 2009 and pursuant to Section 8 of the Resource
Planning and Development Commission Act 1997, the Commission
delegated to Mr. C.
Pryor and Mr. J. Vandenberg jointly and severally:
powers and functions under
sections 40
(2), of the
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
in relation to draft amendment 154 to
the Launceston Planning Scheme 1996 and
connection with the exercise of those powers in performance of those functions,
its powers under Part 3 of the Resource Planning
and Development Commission Act
Representors
Campbell Smith Phelps Pedley Surveyors
(CSPP), obo Mt. Leslie Estates Pty. Ltd.
Mr. V. Tunevitsch
Appearances
Launceston City Council Ms Maria Chledowska - Policy Projects/ Planner
Mr. Harry Galea - Manager Transportation and Development
CSPP Mr John Dent
Issues raised in Representations
In support of the amendment CSPP
The overall road
layout and connectivity of roads
The provision,
location and amount of public open space
A residential
zone for the area (not necessarily Low density Residential)
The provision
for a stormwater contribution to be made by developers to solve the stormwater
drainage problem
In opposition to the amendment Mr Tunevitsch requested that the Rural
Residential use of his property for the rearing of animals
for domestic purposes
be maintained. He also objected to the potential increase in Council rates as a
consequence of enhancing neighbouring
infrastructure.
CSPP requested that one parcel of their client’s land be rezoned CLOSED
RESIDENTIAL rather than LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL as
proposed by the
concern regarding the amount of the required stormwater drainage contribution,
and the lack of detail as to how the amount
was determined.
Submitted that
the proposed stormwater drain would not adequately service one parcel of their
client’s land.
Submitted that
the planning strategy of the amendment failed to demonstrate that low density
use and development adequately addressed
the objectives of the Planning Scheme,
the Council’s Corporate Plan 2005- 2010, and the Resource Management and
Planning System.
Council’s Report
At a meeting held on 19 January
2009, Council considered a report by the Policy/Projects Planner setting out the
representations and
the officers’ responses to them.
Pursuant to Section 39 of the
the Council advised the Commission that
Council partially supported the representations, and recommended:
‘that the draft amendment 154 be approved as certified with the following
change: a “drainage easement” over CT
139952/1 marked on the Hillary
Street Area, St. Leonards Outline Development Plan (Road and Drainage Layout)
Commission’s consideration of the draft amendment
Council’s evidence- the site
The draft amendment proposed to:
properties between Abels Hill Road and Benvenue Road, St. Leonards from FUTURE
URBAN and RESERVED RESIDENTIAL to LOW DENSITY
RESIDENTIAL and CLOSED
RESIDENTIAL.
‘Schedule 15- Hillary Street Area, St. Leonards Outline Development Plan
(Road Layout and Drainage) (ODP) in the Planning
provisions relating to land shown in Schedule 15- Hillary Street Area, St.
Leonards Outline Development Plan (Road, and Drainage
Layout) (ODP) in the
Planning Scheme.
The subject land includes the following:
Land currently zoned Future Urban
29 Hillary Street Vol. 138165 Folio 2 1.056 ha
58A Abels Hill Road Vol.
138165 Folio 3 2.678 ha
80A Abels Hill Road Vol. 112660 Folio 1 2.213
47 Benvenue Road Vol. 126939 Folio 2 3.255 ha
71 Benvenue Road Vol.
152471 Folio 1 8364 sq. m
71A Benvenue Road Vol. 152471 Folio 2 3.585
30 Hillary Street Vol. 139952 Folio 1 4583 sq. m
Ashfield Court Vol.
149270 Folio 1- 13 1.43 ha
Part of 313 St. Leonards Road Vol. 152310 Folio
1 3 000 sq. m
Part of 23 Hillary Street Vol. 138165 Folio 7 300 sq.
Road Vol. 138165 Folio 6 2700 sq. m
Land currently zoned Reserved Residential
14 Abels Hill Road Vol.
15797 Folio 1 1.214 ha
30 Abels Hill Road Vol. 30075 Folio 2 9159 sq. m
Abels Hill Road Vol. 30075 Folio 1 9159 sq. m
285A St. Leonards Road Vol.
138165 Folio 1 2.061 ha
Part of 29 Hillary Street Vol. 138165 Folio 2 1.165
Part of 13 Hillary Street Vol. 136084 Folio 5 500 sq. m
The total area of land to be rezoned is 22.43 hectares.
The subject area is semi- rural in character, with ribbon development along
St. Leonards Road, Hillary Street, Abels Hill Road and
Benvenue Road. Some of
the listed parcels are developed with houses and associated buildings.
density of the residential development decreases at the eastern end of Abels
Hill Road and Benvenue Road.
Behind the development along the existing roads, the land has a more rural
character, being mostly cleared with scattered mature trees,
except for a group
of small young trees at 80A Abels Hill Road, and a row of mature pine trees in
the centre of the area. The risk
of bushfire is low.
TASVEG mapping classifies the land along Abels Hill Road, Hillary Street and
Benvenue Road as Agricultural, Urban and Exotic Vegetation,
Urban/Built up areas and Agricultural areas.
There are no rare or threatened fauna or flora within 500m, and no
scientific, aesthetic, architectural, historical and cultural values
ecosystems present on the land.
In regard to Land Capability, the majority of the subject land is within an
urban area and unclassified. No. 80A and part of 58Abels
Hill Road are
classified as Class 5, that is land with slight to moderate limitations to
pastoral use and unsuitable for cropping.
In regard to land stability, the land is generally Class II and Class III on
the western side and Class III on the eastern side, with
relatively small areas
of Class IV and Class V along the eastern, upper boundary of the land.
The land can be accessed from a number of points on the
surrounding roads.
There are two access points from Abels Hill Road to the
north, two access points from Benvenue Road to the south, and Hillary Street
provides access from the west. One property has an access off St. Leonards
Water and sewer.
There are no restrictions on the availability of
water, or sewage disposal from the subject area.
Stormwater drainage
There is a small creek running northwest across
the subject land, draining a large rural catchment. The creek has a history of
flooding, and some overland sheet flows from the rural land into the back
of residential properties during heavy rain storms. It
is poorly defined with
rural style diversions and culverts along it in a number of places.
Public Open Space
Most of the public open space in the area is
located along the North Esk River, west of St. Leonards. The public open space
eastern side of St. Leonards Road is limited to the Village Green. It has
no potential for a proper playground.
Community services
Community facilities and services are located in
the neighbourhood, including a church, a hotel, an antiques/ gallery,
newsagency,
Police Station, aged care facility, grocery shop, a primary school
and a missionary college.
The Metro bus service runs along St. Leonards Road.
The subject land is currently zoned partly FUTURE URBAN and
partly RESERVED RESIDENTIAL. It is surrounded by CLOSED RESIDENTIAL zoned
along Abels Hill Road, Benvenue Road and Hillary Street, and RURAL zoning to the
Council’s evidence- the proposal
Council’s s.35 report
stated that a number of landowners in the area had expressed interest in
developing their land, and subdivision
applications had been received for the
majority of the land in the FUTURE URBAN zone. The applications were separate
for each title
and did not take into account any of the surrounding
Council’s view that a coordinated approach for the whole area was
required was the genesis of the proposed amendment.
The purpose of the amendment was to provide a long term subdivision
opportunity for the subject area, and to address the issues specific
area. The issues included the multiplicity of separate owners, the existence of
a public watercourse running through some
properties, the need for appropriate
road connections for vehicle and pedestrian traffic, and the need for public
open space.
This was to be done by rezoning the land, adopting an Outline
Development Plan, and adding textual provisions to apply to development
land included in the ODP, especially in relation to the funding of stormwater
A number of other properties, which were not included in the ODP, were to be
similarly rezoned to correct anomalies such as double
zoning, which resulted
from previous subdivision development.
The ODP is intended to provide a ‘blueprint’ for subdivision and
infill development of the subject land. One of the
key elements was the
location of roads and how they would connect various land parcels and existing
surrounding residential development.
This was to provide alternative safe means
of access, and allow for some distribution of Abels Hill Road traffic, without
existing road capacity.
The Plan also identifies the area to be designated as Public Open Space, as a
consolidated contribution from landowners rather than
requiring a separate 5%
contribution (or cash in lieu) from individual owners.
The ODP indicates a notional lot layout, totalling 87 lots, with a minimum
lot size of 1500 sq. m. (the minimum specified in the planning
scheme for the
LOW DENSITY zone). The Plan was not to be read as a commitment to exact lot
numbers, size or configuration. However,
the proposed density of development for
an individual title, as determined by the number of notional lots shown on the
be a factor in determining whether a proposed subdivision would be a
Permitted or a Discretionary development.
A key component of the Plan was the provision for the construction and
funding of underground works to address the issue of stormwater
drainage, since
a failure to address this issue would render the land substantially incapable of
being subdivided.
Because of the long time frame envisaged for the full development of the
subject land, possibly 20+ years, it was not considered to
be economic or
equitable for Council to construct a total underground drainage installation as
a prelude to any development. This
would necessitate either the Council bearing
the total cost –estimated at $470,000 (the cost of the works plus on-cost
½% for design and supervision) for an unknown length of time, or
alternatively seeking to recover it proportionately from benefiting
landowners,
some of whom may not intend to develop their land in the foreseeable future or
indeed not ever.
The amendment therefore proposed that a ‘Stormwater Developer
Contribution’ be charged in accordance with a Schedule which
formed part
of the textual amendment. The Schedule listed the proportion of the total cost
(including the 171/2% on-cost) applicable
to each parcel of land. The
contribution would be charged when a particular landowner sought a permit to
subdivide that land. If
an owner was not interested in subdividing, then no
charge would apply. To provide for any variation in the cost of the drainage
works over time, the developer contribution would be subject to adjustment in
accordance with movements in the Consumer Price Index
Conversely, in the instance of any parcel of land through which the
underground main was constructed, the Council would make a scheduled
contribution, again subject to CPI adjustment. The contribution would be the
estimated cost of the works through the relevant land,
with the 17 ½%
on-cost being retained by the Council as reimbursement for the cost of design,
documentation, contract administration
and supervision. However, it would be
open to a developer to undertake the design and supervision instead of the
Council, in which
instance the Council’s contribution would include the
Because of the configuration of the existing creek, the ODP provided an
alignment for the stormwater main which would enable it to
be constructed in
sections as individual parcels of land were developed. At any stage, the
‘missing links’ would be addressed
by forming a connection between
the open creek and the piped drain.
The eventual outcome, assuming that all
landowners did in fact subdivide their land, would be the total piping of the
creek, with
the cost being progressively contributed by the benefiting
landowners.
Several properties in St. Leonards Road and the Ashfield Court subdivision
were to be exempt from the developer contribution since
they had already
contributed as conditions of previous planning permits.
Representations
Mr. Tunevitsch’s representation stated
that the property at 30 Abel’s Hill Road had been used for the keeping of
poultry, sheep, goats and cows for domestic use over the period of 50 plus
years that it had been owned by the Tunevitsch family.
He asked that the current
use be permitted to continue. Mr. Tunevitsch also objected to any rates
increase which might result from
the appreciation of values by the installation
of infrastructure as proposed by the amendment.
In relation to the continuation of the use, Council’s response was that
a ‘minor scale’ of agricultural use could
be continued as an
existing use right, provided it did not cause any nuisance to the neighbourhood.
In relation to the possibility of increased rates, Council stated that the
proposed amendment would not affect Council rates as they
are calculated
according to the value of land as determined by the Valuer General.
Campbell Smith Phelps Pedley (CSPP) requested that one parcel of their
client’s land, at 47 Benvenue Road, be rezoned CLOSED
RESIDENTIAL, and
submitted a draft plan of subdivision showing 15 lots, ranging in size from 609
sq. m to 1433
sq. m, that is 15 more than the number of notional lots shown
on the ODP. CSPP contended that the proposed roads, services, and social
infrastructure would be able to support the additional lots, thus ensuring their
full utilisation.
In support of their request for closed residential zoning,
CSPP representation included a number of submissions:
(i) the zoning would
not set a precedent for other landowners in the area to seek
zoning. Three owners to the north of the subject parcel had all recently
submitted applications to the Council for approval
of low density subdivisions.
Those subdivisions would form a buffer to the adjoining rural land to the
northeast, so that it would be logical to extend the existing
closed residential
development over CSPP’s clients land.
(ii) there was a demand for closed residential type lots in the St. Leonards
area, as evidenced by current sales in Ashfield Court
and Mestre Court, and
other subdivisions which are being developed along St. Leonards Road and
Benvenue Road. In Launceston generally
there was a strong demand for, and a
shortage of closed residential lots.
With the number of low density lots
which would result from the rezoning proposed by the amendment, the requested
zoning would provide
a mix of lot sizes for potential purchasers in the ODP
(iii) the cost to provide full services to 1500 sq. m lots would be likely to
be much greater than for say 750 sq. m lots. This would
be contrary to the
current pressure for the provision of cheaper housing to enable the high demand
for houses to be satisfied at
reasonable prices. A further possibility was that
the land might have a very slow sales uptake, or even not be subdivided at
(iv) it would be a waste of land to allow only 1500 sq. m lots on the
subject land, and would put more pressure on land on the periphery
of the city
to be used for residential development. The land should be used for its highest
and best use, and to do otherwise was
not sustainable development.
Council’s response to the request for CLOSED RESIDENTIAL zoning did not
address the specific questions of lot demand and supply,
or the issue of
development costs and the ramifications for affordable housing. Council stated
that there had been considerable
consultation over the past five years. Rezoning
the whole area to LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL was considered the best option, and
infrastructure was appropriate for such zoning.
There was no
probability that all lots would be released concurrently; on the contrary, the
land may not be fully developed for 10-
30 years or more.
CSPP also raised four general issues in opposition to the amendment:
Lack of detailed information on the proposed stormwater charge
queried the basis for the calculation of the estimated cost of $470,000, and the
on-cost of 17 ½% for design and supervision.
Council’s response was
that the estimate had been prepared with strict adherence to the internal
estimating rates which were
used for Council designed projects. The 17 1//2 %
on-cost was an industry rate, and whilst it could vary depending on the
of the relevant works, it was considered to be appropriate in the
present instance.
Land not fully serviced
CSPP also submitted that the proposed
stormwater main, if located as shown on the ODP, would not serve the entirety of
their client’s
land unless there was a connection through neighbouring
land. Council’s response was that drainage connections were the
responsibility
of the property owner, even though works may be needed over an
adjoining property. However, in the interests of transparency the
indication of
an appropriate drainage route on the ODP was supported.
Planning strategy
CSPP contended that the amendment did not address
the Council’s strategic planning objectives, in that:
did not provide for diversity in affordable housing.
did not meet the specific needs of the aged and people with disabilities. (For
instance a retirement village was a Prohibited use.)
lots would not provide a residential amenity and traditional suburban
density housing would not contribute to a thriving and sustainable city.
In response, Council stated that low density development would
create diversity with the existing surrounding development, and the
proposed lot
size would not preclude various housing sizes and types. In relation to the
specific issue of retirement accommodation,
this was restricted by the
topography of the area. The creation and development of 87 new lots would have
a positive impact on local
businesses, and increase utilisation of the existing
social infrastructure.
The Objectives of the Resource Management and Planning System
referred to Objectives (a) and (b) of Part 1 of the schedule to the
Planning and Approvals Act 1993
which contains the objectives of the
Tasmanian Resource Management and Planning System (RMPS), which requires the
sustainable development
of natural and physical resources, and the fair, orderly
and sustainable use and development of land.
They contended that low density residential zoning was not sustainable, and
was not consistent with surrounding residential development,
all of which was of
closed residential density.
Council’s response was that the proposal was unlikely to have any
significant impact on natural resources and ecological processes.
contrary, the proposed ODP with its provision for solving the problem of
flooding of the existing creek, would provide for
future development of the area
in a fair and orderly manner.
Commission’s comments
(Note that where appropriate for the sake of convenience, this Decision
refers to the various titles by the numbers shown on the certified
(14, 30, etc) which are in fact the street addresses of the respective
Development of the land for residential use
The subject area has
previously been ‘earmarked’ for eventual residential development by
the current zonings of FUTURE
URBAN and RESERVED RESIDENTIAL.
The Intent of these two zones is stated in the planning scheme as, among
other things:
Future Urban
This zone seeks to reduce the amount of undeveloped pre-zoned vacant
residential land in some areas, where infrastructure constraints
and lack of
demand make co-ordinated development unlikely in the foreseeable future.
Reserved Residential
To enable essential planning to be carried out before subdivision,
including the location and types of roads, housing, recreation
areas and the
provision of essential services...”.
On the evidence, the amendment recognises that the constraints of the Future
Urban intent no longer apply, and the Reserved Residential
Also the land is located in an established urban precinct;
therefore residential zoning is considered to be appropriate, and is
From the suite of Residential zones in the planning scheme,
the most appropriate zoning to be considered for the subject land is LOW
RESIDENTIAL or CLOSED RESIDENTIAL.
Council’s s. 35 report considered the options for zoning, and
“Closed Residential would give a higher density of development and
in isolation could be seen as a good use of land. When viewed
across the river in Station Road, Norwood, this land is critical to
appeal of St. Leonards- not to prevent development but to present a level of
development that can be incorporated in the
wider landscape. The best use to
achieve this would be Low Density Residential where houses can be set on large
lots with substantial
landscaping. A further factor in justifying Low Density
Residential zoning is the impact the Higher Density Closed Residential zoning
could have had on traffic flows in the road network around St.
Council’s case for LOW DENSITY zoning rests on three grounds:
preference.
Council’s evidence contained unsupported
assertions as to the preference of the Council, the landowners and the community
LOW DENSITY zoning, although CSPP’s request for CLOSED RESIDENTIAL
zoning on parcel 47 calls into question the unanimity of
that preference.
capacity of infrastructure.
visual impact of development.
In relation to (1), in our opinion asserted preferences are not a
valid basis for objective planning decisions which will ensure compliance
the Objectives of the
Land Use Planning and Development Act,
particularly
Objective (b) of Part 1.
“to provide for the fair, orderly and sustainable use and development
of ... land..”
In relation to (2), Mr. Galea’s evidence was that both the road pattern
and the services infrastructure were capable of providing
for Closed Residential
Development.
In relation to (3), in our opinion the description of the subject land as
to the visual appal of St. Leonards, to such a degree that it
should dictate a choice between Low Density and Closed Residential
zoning, is an
overstatement. The Council’s contention refers to the impact as seen from
Station Road, Norwood. The only such
street in Norwood is Station Road West, a
minor cul-de-sac from which the subject land can hardly be seen.
From the West, only Quarantine Road is oriented to allow a view of the land
when travelling towards it. From the upper part of Quarantine
Road, the view is
almost totally obscured by trees. From the lower part, the land can be seen, but
the view is dominated by dense
foliage along the North Esk River, the large
Mount Esk aged care facility, Johnston Road, and especially the rural land
the east and beyond the subject land. From Penquite Road, some brief
glimpses of the land can be had, but since Norwood Avenue does
not face towards
St. Leonards, these are not considered to be significant.
Further it must be borne in mind that the existing visual effect is of vacant
land, and will be significantly impacted by the development
which the amendment
proposes to allow, whatever the zoning might be. Nevertheless, our conclusion
is that if some low density lots
were to be developed and landscaped on the
eastern part of the site, they would provide an appropriate transition to the
land beyond.
Regard must be had to issues such as those raised by the CSPP representation
(albeit that they were related to one particular title).
Such issues are the
efficient utilisation of infrastructure, the demand for, and the shortage of
closed residential type lots, the
development cost of larger lots and the
ramifications for affordable housing.
Our conclusion is that the rezoning proposal should provide a combination of
CLOSED RESIDENTIAL and LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL zoning.
We consider that the
amendment should be modified so that the proposed CLOSED RESIDENTIAL zoning will
include the
in the amendment as 14, 30, 56, 285A,29, and 30 respectively.
We make two consequential comments.
CLOSED RESIDENTIAL zoning will not prevent a landowner who genuinely wishes
to develop lots larger than the zone minimum from doing
so. In relation to any
concern that the zoning will potentially open the door to developments which the
Council and landowners had
wished to avoid, it should be noted that whilst there
are some differences in the Discretionary uses listed in the Tables of Uses,
Permitted (P1) and Permitted (P) uses are identical for the CLOSED RESIDENTIAL
and LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL zones.
In relation to the CSPP request for CLOSED RESIDENTIAL zoning for title 47,
notwithstanding the capacity of the infrastructure to
service the higher density
of development, we consider that the land should be zoned LOW DENSITY
RESIDENTIAL. It should be part of
the area of transition between the CLOSED
RESIDENTIAL development on the lower part of the subject land and the open rural
The drainage scheme.
In our view, it is unusual for a planning
scheme to include a detailed schedule of contributions for drainage, which could
varied by an amendment to the scheme. Also, variations in the CPI is a
questionable basis for adjustments to the cost of a drainage
Conventional practice suggests that the stormwater main should be constructed
at the outset by Council, and the cost recovered by
whatever mechanism Council
would normally employ. Mr. Galea acknowledged that there were alternative
methods available to Council
for the collection of infrastructure contributions.
However, in the present instance, he considered the procedure proposed by the
amendment to be suitable, because of the possible staging of development, so
that payment would only be required when land was actually
developed. Council
would be accepting some risk in regard to the recovery of contributions, but it
was necessary to consider the
greater good in the development of the area.
We recognise the logic of the Council’s proposed procedure, in view
The technical
feasibility of doing the work in sections
The avoidance of
an initial major capital outlay by the Council, to be carried for an
undetermined time or alternatively loaded onto
possibly reluctant
landowners.
Whilst the CPI
may be an unreliable tool over time, the schedule can be varied in the new
planning scheme, or by amendment in the
meantime if necessary.
contributions paid by any approved subdivisions will progressively reduce the
outstanding balance and thus the potential for significant
cost increases.
The submission
and approval of three recent subdivision proposals suggests that the time frame
for the total development of the area
may be significantly less than the
Council’s estimate of 10-30 years.
We expressed concern that the cost of the stormwater main might
increase by more than the CPI movement, and thus disadvantage a landowner
property was traversed by it (since the Council contribution is limited to the
scheduled estimate plus CPI). Mr. Galea acknowledged
the concern but was not
able to offer a remedy. However, Mr. Dent’s opinion was that private
enterprise could carry out the
work more cheaply than the Council’s
estimate, and that this difference would provide some buffer against inadequate
CPI adjustments.
Notwithstanding these considerations, whilst this provision may be useful in
providing a degree of predictability for prospective
developers, we consider it
to be inappropriate and unnecessary for the amendment to attempt to deal with
the issue of contributions
to the cost of drainage works. There are other
established and commonly employed procedures available to the Council for this
as was acknowledged by Mr. Galea.
The Outline Development Plan (ODP)
There are a number of
Development Plans included as Schedules in the planning scheme. Some, for
example the Plan for Little Saltwater
Creek Area, are schematic diagrams only.
Others, for example the Plan for Mount Stuart Drive, Newnham, are fully detailed
subdivision
proposals. The Plans are accompanied by development requirements
stated in the relevant zone provisions. The proposed ODP, comprising
provisions and a plan of the subject area goes beyond the former, but falls
short of the latter, and in so doing it exhibits
some defects.
Pursuant to Clause 16.3 of the planning scheme, Development of Land,
subdivision of land in the LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL zone is a
Discretionary
development. Clause 16.8.1 of the ordinance amendment sets aside this
development status, and then ties development
status as Permitted,
Discretionary, or Prohibited to compliance or otherwise with the provisions of a
number of following clauses.
These clauses detail the ODP’s development
requirements in regard to drainage, road network, subdivision design, public
space and road works.
Clause 16.8.1 represents these requirements as five criteria by which P
(Permitted), D (Discretionary) or X (Prohibited) status is
to be determined.
In our opinion, if the ODP is to have any standing, there is effectively only
one optional criterion. Clause 16.8.2 Drainage, and
Clause16.8.3 Road Network,
are both fundamental to the structure of the ODP and are, or should be,
mandatory. There is no alternative
to Clause 16.8.5 Open Space since it is
clearly earmarked on the ODP. It is unlikely that Clause16.8.6 Road Works could
The key consideration therefore is Clause 16.8.4 Subdivision Design. A table
in Clause 16.8.4 lists the various tiles which make
up the subject area, and
assigns to each title a ‘Lot Yield’ (which is apparently based on
the notional layout on the
ODP, although that layout is in no way binding). A
subdivision which proposed 20% more, or 20% less lots than the relevant Lot
would be Permitted; otherwise it would be Discretionary.
concerned that the Council has provided no explanation for adopting this
procedure, and no reason for nominating the particular
figure of 20%.
In relation to the proposed Discretionary status, since the Council’s
stated aim is to allow for variety in lot sizes, we see
no reason for
discouraging the provision of larger lots by downgrading their status to D, if
the number of proposed lots falls below
the Lot Yield less 20%. In the absence
of any explanation by the Council, we consider that that part of the provision
16.8.4 which relates to a lot density of – 20% should be
In relation to the proposed Permitted status, Council’s initial report
stated that the 87 lots notionally shown on the ODP would
comply with the zone
minimum of 1500 sq. m. We assume that in allowing the Lot Yield plus 20%, any
resultant lots would also comply
with the zone minimum. However, within the
limits of accuracy permitted by the small scale plan, an analysis of the effect
16.8.4 on the seven major titles- disregarding the two untypical
titles at 30 and 56 Abels Hill Road- raises some doubt.
The following table shows, for each of the seven titles:
(i) The effective area after allowing for roads, and Public Open Space if
applicable.
(ii) The ODP Lot Yield
(iii) The average area of those lots
(iv) The maximum number of lots for P status, i.e. Lot Yield +20%
(v) The average area of those lots. Note that in several instances the lots
would be sub-minimum.
(vi) The number of lots which would be produced by adopting the zone minimum of
1500 sq. m.
EFFECTIVE AREA
LOTS ON ODP
MAX. LOTS FOR ‘P’
LOTS IF 1500
Note: * indicates lots less than the zone minimum of 1500 sq. m
The following tentative conclusions may be drawn from this analysis:
(i) 4 of the 7 lots cannot be subdivided to the maximum number envisaged by the
+20% rule, because the lots would be smaller than
the zone minimum.
(ii) The total of the Lot Yield in 16.8.4 for the 7 lots is 80 lots.
(iii) The total yield if subdivided to +20% is 95 lots.
(iv) If sub-minimum lots are excluded, the number of lots with area not less
than the 1500 minimum is 95-3 = 92 lots, that is, within
3 lots of the
hypothetical total based on 16.8.4.
In our opinion, not only should the -20% provision be abandoned,
but also there is no point in the cumbersome Lot Yield provisions
16.8.4. Subdivision approval, insofar as it relates to lot area, should simply
be subject to the zone minimum of 1500
We also question the appropriateness of conferring permitted status at all,
on subdivision within the ODP. This is inconsistent with
the internal logic of
the planning scheme. In every other zone in the scheme, subdivision is a
Discretionary development, and this
is not relaxed even in the instances of
subdivisions which are in accordance with a detailed development Plan such as
those referred
Given the Council’s evidence that the lot
layout on the ODP is only notional, and not intended to dictate the pattern of
potential development, we cannot support the conferring of Permitted status
on a subdivision proposal ‘sight unseen’.
In relation to the plan shown as Schedule 15, it is clear that the essential
elements are the principal connecting roads, the main
stormwater drain and the
Public Open Space. In our opinion, since the lot layout has no standing, it
should not be shown on the
ODP. Further, we consider that given the principal
road layout, and the removal of the lot layout, there is no ground for the plan
to pre-empt the pattern of future development by indicating subdivision roads.
This would remove another defect in the plan, that
is, that notwithstanding the
Council’s aim of facilitating coordinated development, the plan as
certified effectively inhibits
such coordination in respect of titles 14, 30,
56, 285A and 29.
Our conclusion is that Schedule 15 should comprise an Outline Development
Plan showing, in respect of the amendment:
(a) the principal connecting roads, i.e. Abels Hill Road to Benvenue Road. (two
connections), and Hillary Street.
(Note that the roads should be
more accurately drawn, to eliminate the constrictions and tight curves shown in
titles 47 and 71A)
(b) the main stormwater drain
(c) the Public Open Space
Schedule 1 Objectives
(a) to promote the sustainable development of natural and physical resources
and the maintenance of ecological processes and genetic
Comment: Ecological processes and genetic diversity are not considered to be
issues in this instance. The adoption of an approved
Outline Development Plan,
modified as described, is seen as contributing to sustainable development of
(b) to provide for the fair, orderly and sustainable use and development of
air, land and water;
Comment: the amendment as certified is not considered to be an orderly
proposal, but can be improved by modification as described.
(c) to encourage public involvement in resource management and
Comment: public involvement has been ensured by the processes of community
consultation, advertising, public exhibition, representations
and a public
(d) to facilitate economic development in accordance with the objectives set
out in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c);
Comment: the amendment is intended to provide economic benefit by generating
construction activity and extending the potential
catchment for local
businesses.
(e) to promote the sharing of responsibility for resource management and
planning between the different spheres of government, the
community and industry
in the State;
Comment: the proposal has involved landowners and the community, the Council
as the Planning Authority, and the Commission as the
(a) to require sound strategic planning and co-ordinated action by state and
local Government;
Comment: a weakness of the amendment has
been the lack of sound strategic planning, in terms of issues such as housing
affordability
and economic utilisation of infrastructure. This can be addressed
through modification of the amendment.
(b) to establish a system of planning instruments to be the principal way of
setting objectives, policies and controls for the use,
development and
protection of land;
Comment: the amendment has been
processed through the Planning Scheme mechanism.
(c) to ensure that the effects on the environment are considered and provide
for explicit consideration of social and economic effects
when decisions are
made about the use and development of land;
preparation of the amendment has taken account of environmental factors, and the
social impact on the St. Leonards community.
However local views should be
tempered by a more strategic assessment of the City’s housing needs.
(d) to require land use and development planning and policy to be easily
integrated with environmental, social, economic, conservation
and resource
management policies at State, regional, and municipal
Comment: the amendment is not inconsistent with this
(e) to provide for the consolidation of approvals for land use or development
and related matters, and to co-ordinate planning approvals
with related
Comment: this Objective is not relevant to the
(f) to secure a pleasant, efficient and safe working, living and recreational
environment for all Tasmanians and visitors to
Comment: the amendment seeks to further this
(g) to conserve those buildings, areas or other places which are of
scientific, aesthetic, architectural or historical interest, or
otherwise of
special cultural value;
Comment: this Objective is not
relevant to the proposal.
(h) to protect public infrastructure and other assets and enable the orderly
provision and co-ordination of public utilities and other
facilities for the
benefit of the community;
Comment: the amendment has taken
full account of infrastructure issues.
(i) to provide a planning framework which fully considers land
capability;
Comment: the proposal has considered land
Application of State Policies
Interim State Policy for the Protection of Agricultural Land. 2008
With the subject land having
little potential for agricultural activities, and being in an urban location
previously designated for
residential development, it is considered that the
amendment is not in conflict with this Policy.
State Coastal Policy 1996
This Policy does not apply to the subject land.
State Policy for Water Quality Management 1997
The proposal for the construction of a main stormwater drain to replace the
existing open creek will ensure the effective collection
disposal of surface
water runoff.
In consideration of the foregoing discussion of the
identified issues, we conclude that:
is appropriate to rezone the subject land for residential use and
development.
proposed rezoning should comprise a combination of CLOSED RESIDENTIAL and LOW
DENSITY RESIDENTIAL zoning.
relation to Schedule 15, Outline Development Plan, whilst it is appropriate to
establish the primary connecting road network,
it is neither necessary nor
desirable to pre-determine the location or configuration of secondary
subdivision roads.
is no rationale for the determination of development status as P, D, or X by the
application of a “plot Ratio” based
on a notional lot layout. This
provision should be abandoned.
Development
status should be determined by the existing provisions of the planning scheme
for the relevant zones.
is neither necessary nor desirable for the amendment to include provisions
relating to contributions to the cost of drainage works.
Pursuant to
Section 41(a)
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
the Commission requires the planning authority to alter the draft amendment to a
substantial degree as set out in Annexure A, and
to submit the altered amendment
to the Commission by 19 June 2009.
Clarry Pryor John Vandenberg
Delegate Delegate
18 May 2009
the land identified by the following title references to CLOSED
RESIDENTIAL.
the Outline Development Plan in Schedule 15 by deleting:
notional lot layout and lot numbers;
proposed new roads except the roads connecting Abels Hill Road, Benvenue Road,
and Hillary Street.
the provisions relating to Lot Yield, and the determination of
P, D, or X development status.
the provisions relating to the contribution by developers to
cost of the proposed stormwater main.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (734 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter