URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASLPDT/2025/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:16:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v Glynn Moate Williams [2025] TASLPDT 6; (31 July 2025)
LEGAL PROFESSION DISCIPLINARY TRIBUNAL
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v Glynn Moate Williams
[2025] TASLPDT 6
PARTIES: Legal Profession Board of Tasmania Applicant
Glynn Moate Williams Respondent
FILE NO: 04/24DT
DELIVERED ON: 26 August 2025
DELIVERED AT: Hobart
HEARING DATE: 31 July 2025
THE TRIBUNAL: M. E. O’Farrell SC (Chairman)
P. G. Zeeman (Member)
D. Luttrell (Member)
respondent be reprimanded.
from 1 September 2025 and for 12 months the respondent is to meet with a senior
legal practitioner, to be approved by the Board
in advance, for 2 hours per
calendar month to discuss practice matters and is to request that senior
practitioner to report to the
Board every 3 months a summary of issues
discussed, and the practitioner is to bear the costs (if any) of the senior
legal practitioner.
order that the respondent provide an apology to Mr Roland Browne with terms to
be settled by the Tribunal.
to s 481 of the Act, the respondent is to pay the Board’s costs of an
incidental to the investigation and the application
as agreed or as taxed in
accordance with the
Supreme Court Rules 2000
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr N. Willing (instructed by Tremayne Faye and Rheinberger)
Respondent: Mr M. Whitten KC (instructed by Glynn Williams Legal
Decision Number: [2025] TASLPDT 6
Number of paragraphs: 54
DETERMINATION
Introduction
an undated application made under
Legal Profession Act 2007
(Tas) (‘the Act’) filed with Tribunal on 28 May 2024, the applicant
sought orders against the respondent, in the following
order that the respondent be reprimanded.
order that the respondent pay a fine, in a sum to be determined.
order that the respondent provide an apology to Mr Roland Browne with terms to
be settled by the Tribunal.
pursuant to
of the Act, the respondent is to pay the Board’s costs
of an incidental to the investigation and the application as agreed
or as taxed
in accordance with the
Supreme Court Rules 2000
further or consequential orders or declarations as the Tribunal considers
appropriate.
Tribunal heard the application on 31 July 2025. The parties had previously
advised the Tribunal at the directions hearing on
15 April 2025 that they had
reached an agreed position, to the effect that respondent accepted and
acknowledged that the conduct
alleged in the application amounted to
professional misconduct. They sought orders, by consent, in terms of paragraphs
4 of the application. They expressly accepted, however, that the
Tribunal was not bound by their consent, and was able to make other
findings and
orders as it sees fit in accordance with the Act.
the hearing, the Tribunal raised the possibility that the respondent may benefit
from having regular discussions with a senior
practitioner about his practice.
Following a short adjournment, the parties proposed the following order, by
That from 1 September 2025 and for 12 months the respondent
is to meet with a senior legal practitioner, to be approved by the Board
advance, for 2 hours per calendar month to discuss practice matters and is to
request that senior practitioner to report to the
Board every 3 months a summary
of issues discussed, and the respondent is to bear the costs (if any) of the
senior legal practitioner.
the reasons that follow we find the practitioner has engaged in professional
misconduct and make orders in the terms submitted
by consent, with the order set
out in the immediately preceding paragraph being order no 2.
respondent was retained in May 2020 by Ms Gail Burnett (‘the
client’) in relation to a sequestration order that was
made in the Federal
Circuit Court on 1 December 2017. She wanted it set aside.
client’s bankruptcy arose from a claim for unpaid fees and disbursements
of $4,559.42 brought against her in the Magistrates
Court by her former
solicitors, Messrs Fitzgerald and Browne (‘the former solicitors’)
Mr Browne, of that firm, made
the complaint giving rise to the present
application to the Board. In these reasons he is referred to as the
complainant. After
a four day hearing the Magistrate gave judgment against her
for the full amount and ordered she pay the costs of the proceedings.
client then appealed to the Supreme Court. However, the day before the appeal
was to be heard, she (by her then solicitors)
filed a notice of discontinuance.
She later applied to set that notice aside. In those proceedings she alleged
that her former
solicitors were not instructed to file the notice. In
dismissing that application, the judge who heard it rejected the allegation
also found that her appeal against the magistrate’s decision had little
merit. He ordered her to pay the costs of the
application, which upon taxation
amounted to $87,080.21. A certificate for that amount was issued.
is important to note that on 7 October 2016 the client applied for a review of
the taxation, however, she did not prosecute it
further. In mid 2017 the former
solicitors applied to the Associate Judge to have the application for review
dismissed. However,
on 6 September 2017 the Associate Judge dismissed their
application, with the consequence that the application for review remained
foot. Nevertheless, at no time was there a stay of execution for the
certificate or the judgment awarding costs.
due course the client brought an application to extend the time limited to
appeal to the Full Court for an appeal from the judge’s
decision to
dismiss her appeal from the magistrate. That application was also dismissed.
She persisted with an appeal to the Full
Court from that dismissal; however, her
appeal was stayed on a successful application that she provide security for
costs of $15,000.00.
It was by then very apparent that the judges of the
Supreme Court who had been involved in her various applications and appeals
not consider she had any prospects of success.
client paid the original judgment sum and costs ordered by the magistrate.
However, she did not pay all of the costs ordered in
the various proceedings in
the Supreme Court. Her former solicitors filed and served a bankruptcy notice.
She did not comply with
it. A creditors petition was issued and eventually a
sequestration order was made by a Registrar of the Federal Circuit Court.
the client still persisted; this time with an application to a judge of that
Court for a review of the sequestration order.
That application was dismissed.
She appealed to the Federal Court. On this occasion her former solicitors made
an interlocutory
application for the appeal to be dismissed. On 8 August 2019
that application was granted.
May 2020 the client and her son retained the respondent. They informed him that
they had been in discussions with a senior barrister,
in Melbourne, named John
Arthur. Mr Arthur is now deceased. The respondent deposed that in essence he
was asked to be a ‘letter
box’ solicitor, a suggestion about which
he felt uneasy. He informed the client and her son that he was not familiar
the law of bankruptcy. However, he agreed to act on the basis that he
would work with Mr Arthur. He had also only been involved
in one Federal Court
matter, which he described in his affidavit as ‘essentially
21 May 2020 the respondent sent the client a retainer agreement. In the letter
accompanying it he wrote:
2.1 I have, in the time we spent together, and with the documents you left with
me, formed certain opinions about how your legal
issue might be presented to a
Court in order to obtain the ultimate remedy, which is that the bankruptcy be
set aside, as the bankruptcy
order should never have been granted due to the
defective material on which it was based.
2.2 The basis of your approach to me, at least initially, is that I would
collate the information, obtain your instructions, and
seek an opinion from a
barrister in Melbourne.
1 June 2020 the respondent formally briefed Mr Arthur. The client and her son
signed Mr Arthur’s costs agreement on 2 June
15 June 2020 the respondent sent an email to Mr Arthur. In that email he
discussed the question of whether the client lacked capacity,
and the question
of whether there should be a litigation guardian appointed. (The respondent
deposed that it was Mr Arthur who first
raised the point.) Mr Arthur responded
by email that evening that if it could be established that the client was
suffering a disability,
both the sequestration order, the subsequent review and
appeal ‘are liable to be set aside
ex debito justitiae
suggested that urgent steps should be taken to obtain medical reports.
following day the respondent wrote to the client’s general practitioner
seeking a report. He set out the sad history of
the litigation and expressed
his view that the client ‘may well be a person under a legal incapacity
and in need of a legal
representative under the
Federal Court Rules 2011
The evidence before the Tribunal does not include Dr Hampton’s reply, if
there was one.
1 July 2020 the respondent wrote to Dr Philip Reid, a consultant psychiatrist,
seeking a report on the client’s capacity.
In that letter he noted that
Dr Hampton had provided further background. He also noted that ‘[i]n our
view [the client] may
well be a person under a legal incapacity and accordingly
in need of a legal representative under the
Federal Court Rules
a report, dated 5 August 2020, Dr Reid expressed a strong suspicion that the
client had ‘never exhibited reasonable capacity
through court
proceedings’, including ‘the Magistrates Court, Supreme Court and
proceedings regarding bankruptcy, then
and now.’ By an email sent to Mr
Arthur on 10 August 2020 the respondent said that Dr Reid confirms that the
client has been
psychotic throughout and ‘quite frankly this should be
obvious to any legal practitioner who deals with her’. He said
‘gut feeling is that there is something here to [pursue]’.
4 September 2020 the respondent filed an application in the Federal Court
seeking an annulment of the sequestration order. The
grounds for annulment
included the client’s alleged incapacity, but also, at paragraph 1(c) of
the application, an allegation
...the sequestration order was induced by the fraud of the First and Second
Respondents, as petitioning creditor, in Mr Browne informing
the Registrar that
the Applicant's review of the Costs Assessment dated 24 August, 2016 in proc no
8/2014/1066 was not on foot, when
Allegations
to similar effect were made at paragraphs 2(b), 3(a) and 4(iii) of the
application and similar allegations were included
in the client’s 482 page
affidavit filed in support.
11 September 2020 the respondent filed an interim application to appoint the
client’s son as litigation guardian. That application
was heard by
O’Callaghan J on 9 February 2021. The respondent appeared as counsel. In
his reasons dismissing the
application
his Honour noted:
...it seems to me that the annulment claim as at present constituted is not only
prolix but contains grounds which, for a variety
of reasons I outlined, are
untenable and an abuse of process, including because they seek to agitate claims
made and determined in
previous proceedings, or make claims that, if new, ought
to have been made in previous proceedings. The annulment application also
contains an allegation of fraud on the part of Mr Browne, who is a solicitor.
That allegation is that Mr Browne told a Registrar
of the Federal Circuit Court
that Ms Burnett's review of a costs assessment was not on foot, when it was. It
is not necessary in
these reasons to explore that matter, beyond saying that in
light of the affidavit filed in the proceeding by Mr Browne, and in the
of a single particular of the alleged fraud, the allegation against Mr Browne is
the hearing before us, we were invited to look at O’Callaghan J’s
reasons in the 9 pages that followed that passage.
The respondent’s
argument about the client’s incapacity relied on the following premises.
First, Dr Reid’s report.
Secondly, evidence from the client’s
trustee that the client had been uncooperative. Thirdly, some extracts from one
judgments of the Supreme Court relating to the client’s demeanour
and evidence. Fourthly, an assertion by the respondent from
the bar table that
he had been unable to obtain instructions from his client by reason of her
incapacity. Each of these arguments
was rejected. However, the first and
fourth points need to be addressed.
Reid’s report was rejected because it referred to numerous documents that
were not produced to the Court; the diagnosis given
was admitted to be
incomplete; and it did not address the correct tests for incapacity in the
proceedings.
for the former solicitors, who were the first and second respondents before
O’Callaghan J, opposed the respondent’s
assertion that the
respondent had been unable to obtain instructions on the basis that it was
contradictory and self-defeating.
He pointed out that the respondent had filed
a considerable amount of material in the Court, including a lengthy affidavit
client. It could not be the case, it was argued, that the respondent
would be able to do so unless he had competent instructions.
The Court accepted
that argument.
24 February 2021 the respondent filed an amended application. The allegations
of fraud had been struck through. It can be inferred
that the respondent now
accepted that the allegations of fraud should not be advanced. There is some
evidence that client instructed
him that they should be reinserted into the
application, but he refused to do so.
Reid provided a further report to the respondent on 12 March 2021. It confirmed
the client’s incapacity. On 19 March 2021
the respondent sent an email to
Justice O’Callaghan’s associate. He said that the application to
amend the application
would not be made by her client ‘as she is no longer
considered by me as a legal practitioner as competent to instruct.’
proposed that the client’s son would make the application.
9 April 2021 the respondent lodged an interlocutory application for the
appointment of a litigation representative for the client.
It was heard by
O’Callaghan J that day. His Honour dismissed the application on 15 April
In that decision his Honour
explains that the further report of Dr Reid was inadmissible because it did not
explain how his field
of specialised knowledge applied to the facts either
asserted or assumed; he had not stated or explained the grounds or reasoning
that led to his opinion and he had not been asked for his opinion on the core
issue of whether the applicant was capable of managing
her own affairs in the
proceeding. His Honour gave detailed reasons for his ruling.
30 April 2021 the respondent sought a further report from Dr Reid. In his
letter to Dr Reid he identified the problem that ‘in
the absence of a case
for fraud, as a legal practitioner, it is not possible for fraud to be
advanced.’ On 10 May 2021 Dr
Reid swore an affidavit annexing a report,
which answered questions put to him by the respondent.
7 May 2021, the respondent filed an affidavit made by the client in support of
the amended application. In that affidavit the
client asserted that the
complainant had ‘lied over his affidavit 17 November 2017 and others to
get bankruptcy form issued’
and that ‘the bankruptcy was obtained
falsely’ by the complainant. It will be recalled that the grounds of
been deleted from the amended application.
respondent appeared as counsel for the client on 12, 13 and 17 May 2021 at the
trial of the amended application. The application
There was an order that
required the former solicitors and the client’s trustee in bankruptcy to
file and serve any submissions
or evidence on the question of costs,
‘including whether the legal representative for the application should
bear any part
of the costs of the proceedings...’
his reasons O’Callaghan J pointed out that Dr Reid had first met and
consulted with the client in 2020. He found that Dr
Reid had, in effect
conceded that he could not give reliable evidence about the critical question of
Ms Burnett’s condition
and symptoms at the relevant time of her
appearances before the Magistrates Court and the Supreme Court. He also found
client had demonstrated ‘in a tolerably clear way the
consequences of the bankruptcy proceedings, and was capable of adequately
conducting it, or giving adequate instructions for the conduct of it...’.
His Honour went on to that there was ‘
nothing in this case that can
sensibly be said
in support of the proposition that the appropriate order
would the appropriate order would be to set aside the sequestration
[Emphasis added].
22 July 2021 the practitioner filed a Notice of Ceasing to Act for the client.
On 29 July 2021 O’Callaghan J ordered the
practitioner to pay fixed costs
of the respondents in the proceedings at $14,200.00.
the meantime, on 20 June 2021, the respondent wrote to his professional
indemnity insurer notifying it of the application against
him to pay the costs
personally. Mr Shaun McElwaine SC (as he then was) was appointed to act for the
insurer and his advice, delivered
in typically direct terms, was that the
respondent was at significant risk that the order to pay the costs personally
would be made.
application alleges that the respondent:
(a) commenced applications in the Federal Court on behalf of the client that
were demonstrably an abuse of process, or did not have
reasonable prospects of
success at the time he commenced them, whether he was instructed to commence
them or not;
(b) advanced a series of claims that the complainant had misled the Court and
procured the bankruptcy of the client by fraud, where
(i) there were no reasonable grounds for the allegations to be advanced;
(ii) the client was not, according to the respondent, competent to instruct him.
facts speak for themselves. In our view, the respondent has quite properly
conceded that his conduct amounted to professional
misconduct, and we find that
Disciplinary action
question for us is whether the orders, sought by the parties’ consent, are
sufficient for the Tribunal in the discharge
of its jurisdiction. That question
is to be considered in the context of the agreed position between the
Legal Services Commissioner v
the Queensland Civil and
Administrative Tribunal summarised the relevant law as
Legal Services Commissioner v
this Tribunal...questioned the applicability
of the proposition that, in determining civil penalty, a tribunal should not
from the position taken by both parties in relation to the orders to be
made, based on
NW Frozen Foods v Australian Competition and Consumer
Commonwealth v Director, Fair Work Building Industry
Inspectorate & Ors
Legal Services Commissioner v
. In the present case, the applicant referred to a statement by
Vice President Judge Hampel in
Victorian Legal Services Commissioner v
The High Court in
Commonwealth v Director Fair Work Building Industry
Inspectorate
set out the following principles which are
applicable here:
there is an
important public policy benefit in receiving, and if appropriate, accepting
agreed penalty submissions;
the decision of
the High Court in
Barbaro and Zirilli v The Queen
the inadmissibility of prosecution, or agreed penalty provisions in criminal
proceedings has had no application to cases of
upon persuasion
of the accuracy of the parties’ agreement as to facts and consequences,
and that the penalty the parties propose
is an appropriate one, it is a highly
desirable practice for the Court to accept the parties’ proposal.
It is clear that it is my duty to determine the level of conduct alleged, and to
impose sanctions. No agreement between a regulator
and a regulated practitioner
such as Mr Hyatt can supplant that duty. Subject to that overriding
responsibility, it is appropriate
for parties to put an agreed position before
the Tribunal. If satisfied the agreed penalty is an appropriate one, it follows
not lightly depart from that agreed position.
[32] The Tribunal accepts that, if satisfied of the accuracy of the agreement of
the parties as to the facts and their consequences,
it should not lightly depart
from the agreed position. That inevitably requires some consideration of the
relevant facts, in the
light of the principles relating to the Tribunal’s
powers to make orders on the determination of a discipline application.
adopt those principles. It was appropriate for the parties to put their
agreement before us, and we are also grateful for the
were put to us by Mr Willing for the applicant and Mr Whitten KC for the
respondent. However, it is important
for the respondent to appreciate the
considerable difficulty we have had in determining whether the agreement is the
correct one,
having regard to the disciplinary orders that we might make. In
our view, this case is not at the lower end of conduct which might
professional misconduct, being unsatisfactory professional conduct that involves
a substantial or consistent failure to
reach or maintain a reasonable standard
of competence and diligence. We do not accept that the submission that the
of the offending’ was low, because it was not deliberate.
The statutory test for professional misconduct and the disciplinary
response are
not necessarily tied to a standard of deliberate conduct. The measure is
competence and diligence; a point we will
adopt the eloquent statement by Cosgrove J in
Dickens v Law
as accurately
describing the character of the Tribunal’s power to make disciplinary
orders. Referring the Disciplinary Committee,
under the former
Practitioners Act 1959
, his Honour noted is that its powers ‘are
entirely protective in character and no element of punishment is
He continued:
But to say that is merely to say that the powers are to be exercised for the
purpose of, and in a manner seen to be likely to achieve,
the maintenance of
that high standard of conduct within the profession which will continue its good
reputation, and so protect, not
only the future of the profession, but also
protect its clients from harm. With this object in mind, the Committee is
required to
look to the future. Even if the practitioner's misconduct be
relatively slight, he may yet be struck off, if his capacities and
attitude have
been revealed to be such that his continuance in practice constitutes a threat
to the profession. On the other hand,
conduct which is itself more grave in
nature, may not warrant striking off, if it is seen as a temporary and
explicable departure
from the practitioner's own high standards. The
Committee’s task is to uphold the dignity and standards of the profession.
To enable them to do so, they have been given powers to fine, to order payment
of costs, to suspend, and to strike off. The exercise
of any of these powers
inevitably involves a deprivation of one kind or another to the practitioner.
But the deprivation is merely
part of the exercise of the discipline of the
profession. There is in it no retributive element, no intention to express
as there sometimes is in sentences for crime. The order which the
Committee is called upon to make is that order which, in its opinion,
necessary, and no more than is necessary, to maintain professional discipline
and high standards of conduct. It is not entirely
incorrect to describe such an
order as punishment, and that term is often used. But it is punishment of a
special kind, for a special
accept the thrust of Mr Whitten KC’s submissions to the effect that the
mistakes of the respondent can be explained in light
of the circumstances.
However, those submissions must be understood in the context of the admission of
professional misconduct.
They are not exculpatory. They are mitigatory.
we accept that the circumstances in which the practitioner first accepted the
instructions were fraught and involved a matter
in the Magistrates Court that
had blown out of proportion in the subsequent litigation in the Supreme Court
and the bankruptcy proceedings
in the Federal Court. However, an analysis of
the reasoning of the numerous judicial officers involved before the respondent
retained by the client and the fact not one of them had identified error
should have given the respondent reason to pause. The case
was hopeless.
the respondent accepted the retainer from his client and her son because they
instructed him that they had been dealing
with Mr Arthur, who was an expert in
bankruptcy. In
Yates Property Corporation Pty Ltd v
a Full Court of the
Federal Court said:
... it may be accepted that a solicitor who does not have specialist experience
in a particular field is entitled to rely heavily
on counsel. It is proper for a
solicitor who conducts a general practice to rely on the Bar to obtain
specialist advice. It may be
that for many solicitors who have no particular
experience in an area of law counsel is the source of specialist advice. In
a case the solicitor will only be guilty of negligence if counsel's advice
is obviously wrong - that is so wrong that the error should
be obvious to a
reasonably competent solicitor.
his affidavit read to the Tribunal, the respondent deposed:
I relied on John Arthur in all aspects of the case, including advice, preparing
the application to have Gail’s bankruptcy annulled
or set aside and
settling the evidence...
Whitten submitted that the respondent ‘blindly relied on counsel’s
advice’ and that it was not until 8 April
2021 that the respondent began
to scrutinise it more closely. We accept that submission to a degree. It is
acknowledged that, so
far as the law of bankruptcy was concerned, the respondent
had no particular expertise to evaluate what Mr Arthur was telling him.
However, the issues were not confined to an understanding of the law of
bankruptcy. A reasonably competent solicitor ought to know
that the material on
which allegations of fraud is based should be sound and for that purpose
precautionary inquiries should be made.
Where the allegation is made against a
legal practitioner it suffers the added vice that the reputation of the
profession may be
undermined. The respondent’s evidence was that:
I was not aware of that anything further was required in the Application by way
of particulars of the fraud allegation.
we asked Mr Whitten about the respondent’s understanding of allegations of
fraud, he took brief instructions and responded
to the effect that the
respondent was aware of the principle, but had little practical understanding
have made. We do not agree that the respondent
was entitled to rely on counsel’s advice in relation to the allegation of
in the absence of affirmative steps to ensure that they were soundly
based. That is so particularly in circumstances where he entertained
misgivings about his client’s capacity. A cursory examination of the
material she had filed in previous proceedings
would have alerted him to his
client’s propensity to make allegations of that nature.
ease with which the issue could have been resolved is demonstrated by the
respondent’s evidence that:
... with the benefit of hindsight, and an in-depth examination of the material
filed in Gail's various proceedings before I became
involved, the fraud
allegation against Mr Browne was unnecessary and should never have been made. I
realise now that I should have
undertaken my own independent inquiries before
signing off on the pleading. For instance, I now realise that the affidavit
filed by Gail for the hearing of her bankruptcy application before
Registrar Browning included a copy of the orders by Holt AsJ in
September 2017
dismissing the application by Messrs Browne and Fitzgerald to dismiss Gail's
costs review. Therefore, the Registrar
would have been presumed to know that the
review was still technically on foot. In that event, it is highly unlikely that
Mr Browne said or did not say to the Registrar during that hearing
could have misled the Court about the status of Gail's costs review
determination to issue the sequestration order. Those observations and that
analysis was never mentioned in any of John’s
advices or during his
discussion with me.
last sentence refers to Mr Arthur. We do not attribute much weight to it. We
also note the submission made on this point, to
the effect that following the
orders made by Holt AsJ in September 2017 the client took no further steps to
pursue the review of
the taxation. There was never an order staying the
certificate of taxation. Accordingly, the allegation could have no operative
effect on the bankruptcy proceedings.
in relation to the prosecution of the claim for the client’s incapacity we
accept that there was psychiatric evidence
concerning the client. However, what
seems to be lacking from the evidence before the Tribunal was any forensic
examination of the
facts that might support the opinion that the client was
incapacitated at the time of the proceedings in the Magistrates Court, the
Supreme Court, or in the bankruptcy proceedings in the Federal Circuit Court.
It was accepted on behalf of the practitioner that
the client’s ability to
represent herself in various courts, filing documents, making submissions and
appearing in person did
not support Dr Reid’s conclusion and that it was
going to make the ‘very high hurdle’ for the annulment of a
sequestration
order even higher.
we note the submission that pursuing the case to the extent he did lacked any
utility, because even if she had been successful
in persuading the Court to
annul her bankruptcy, her trustee would have been entitled to his costs, which
she would have been unable
to pay, potentially resulting in further proceedings
in bankruptcy.
we acknowledge that in about December 2020 Mr Arthur ceased to be involved
because the client’s son had insufficient
funds to pay his fees. From
that date forward, despite obvious disadvantages, the respondent continued to
act. He deposed that
he kept in touch with Mr Arthur. However, following Mr
Arthur’s departure the case was his professional responsibility and
alone. He was then both solicitor on the record, and counsel when it was before
the Court. He was responsible for all aspects
of the client’s case,
including settling her affidavit, obtaining admissible and relevant medical
evidence and presenting it
to the Court. The fact that he says he began to
doubt the quality of Mr Arthur’s work around 8 April 2021 does not assist
his position. We note the evidence that in his correspondence with Mr McElwaine
the respondent said that it was as a result of the
case management hearing of 8
February 2021, he realised that Mr Arthur’s work was questionable. We do
not consider much turns
on the discrepancy between the dates, because the point
should have been plain from the reasons of O’Callaghan J, 10 February
2021. There is a certain conceit involved in the failure to pay heed to his
Honour’s strong misgivings.
was submitted that the respondent has already suffered significant financial
impact as a result of this case. He suffered an order
that he personally pay
the complainant’s and trustee’s costs in the Federal Court. His
eventual contribution to those
costs was $14,200.00. We do not place much
weight on the submission that the respondent was required to write off a
considerable
amount of work in progress; the bulk of which was work that should
not have been undertaken in the first place.
note, however, that the costs order we are asked to make will result in a
significant financial impost on the respondent.
Accordingly,
we agree that it is not necessary to impose a fine on the respondent.
we regard the conduct as a serious case of a failure to meet a reasonable
standard of conduct and diligence, both qualitatively,
and quantitatively. It
is the protective nature of our powers and the need to look to the future, that
led us to suggest to the
parties at the hearing that the respondent, the
profession and the public might benefit from the imposition of the requirement
regularly report to a senior practitioner. We adhere to that view and make
the order terms of the draft submitted to us.
the hearing, the respondent tendered a draft letter of apology, which we have
settled. It is annexed to these reasons.
is the requirement to make an order ‘no more than is necessary to maintain
professional discipline’ that leads us to
the conclusion that we should do
no more than we are presently asked by the parties to do in order to determine
the matter.
Settled Letter
[Respondent’s Letterhead]
Roland Browne,
Fitzgerald and Browne
HOBART TAS 7001
Roland@fablawyers.net.au
Dear Mr Browne,
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v Williams No 04/24DT
I sincerely and unreservedly apologise for and unconditionally withdraw the
allegations contained in the application made against
you, Mr Fitzgerald and Mr
Cooke on behalf of Ms Gail Burnett which I caused to be filed to the Federal
Court of Australia on 10 September
I acknowledge that the allegations were unfounded and improper and were in
breach of my professional duties. I should never have
made them and I deeply
regret doing so.
Yours sincerely,
Glynn Williams
Burnett v Browne
Burnett v Browne
[2021] FCA 373.
Burnett v Browne (No 3)
[2020] QCAT 371 (Hon.
Tas. Unrep. A42/1981
at pp. 15-16
[1998] FCA 8
(1998) 85 FCR 84
, 108 (Drummond, Sunberg &
Finkelstein JJ) (reversed on appeal, but, the quote below was not criticised:
Wakim v McNally
[2002] FCAFC 208
, [46] (Branson, Mansfield & Stone
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (167 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter