URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASRPDComm/2009/35.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:20:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Northern Midlands Planning Scheme 1995 Amendment 02/09 [2009] TASRPDComm 35 (3 August 2009)
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Land Use Planning and Approvals
Resource Planning and Development
Commission Act 1997
Decision and Reasons for Decision
NORTHERN MIDLANDS PLANNING SCHEME 1995
Draft Amendment 02/09
Permit Application No P09-011
Draft Amendment 02/09 is to rezone 3.365 ha of land at 44 Phillip Street,
Perth (CT 23463/2) from Residential Reserved to Residential
Serviced zone.
Permit P09-011 is for a 38 lot subdivision at 44 Phillip Street,
meeting on 18 May 2009 and pursuant to Section 8 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission Act 1997
, the Commission
delegated to Rob Nolan:
powers and functions under
sections 40
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
in relation to draft
amendment 02/09 to the Northern Midlands Planning Scheme 1995 and Permit
No:P09-011; and
connection with the exercise of those powers in performance of those functions,
its powers under Part 3 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Representations
Three representations were received during the public exhibition period from the
Mr David J Morris - Simmons Wolfhagen on behalf of Miss Chelsea Goodrick
Mr Hugh Mackinnon
Mr Todd Wilkin.
Date and Place of Hearing Thursday 9 July 2009
Midlands Council Chambers
13 Smith Street, Longford
Attendance at the Hearing
P Goldier represented the Northern Midlands Council with Mr D Payton in
attendance.
Applicant/representor
Ms E Grayson represented the applicant Wilkin
Design with Mr T Wilkin, Mrs L Walduck, Mr P Krushka, Mrs R Bullen, Mr I Goninon
Mr D Goninon in attendance
Representor
Miss C Goodrick
Interested party
Mr W Challis
Issues raised in the representations
The representations on the draft amendment contended:
− increased potential for land use conflict between the proposed
residential subdivision and an existing horse training facility
located on the
adjacent property; and
− parts of the site are subject to periodic inundation. Future development
of the site may involve building up the natural
ground level which will cause
flooding to occur up stream and will slow the dissipation of flood waters.
The representation on the permit submitted that condition 6 (for Phillip Street)
of the permit is unfair in that it requires the
applicant to either rely on the
completion of a condition associated with a separate permit or undertake that
condition by constructing
a 6m wide fully sealed asphalt pavement from Napoleon
Street to Cromwell Street.
Council’s Response to the Representations
Council’s report considered the representations in the context of the
draft amendment and permit. Council resolved that the
draft amendment as
certified on 23 February 2009 and the submissions received from the representors
be forwarded to the Commission
for approval with out modification. Council did
not make a resolution regarding the issue raised in the applicant’s
representation
concerning condition 6 on the s.43A permit.
Commission’s assessment of the draft amendment
The Draft Amendment
The draft amendment seeks to rezone land at 44 Phillip Street, Perth (the site)
from Residential Reserved to Residential Serviced
The site comprises a 3.365ha title (CT 23463/2) located
on the north western outskirts of Perth. The site is bound by Phillip Street
the South, Napoleon Street to the west and Arthur Street to the north. The
eastern boundary is shared with the adjoining property
of representor Goodrick.
Phillip Street is a made, trafficable gravelled road with simple table drains.
Napoleon and Arthur Streets
are unmade roads within road
The site contains a dwelling and associated outbuildings. The adjoining
Goodrick block is of a similar size (3.2ha) and is used
for a horse training
facility. Council advises that an area of vacant land zoned Residential
Serviced on the opposite side of Phillip
Street has recently been granted a
permit for subdivision. Land use further to the south is predominantly
residential while land
use to the north and west is used for agricultural
purposes and zoned Rural.
The site is within the urban growth boundary for Perth.
Planning scheme provisions
The intent of the Residential Serviced (R1) zone includes.
(i) To identify areas for residential development based on land
and community need for a high level of environmental quality, amenity, and a
diverse choice of housing.
(ii) To provide for residential land use supplied with a planned level of
physical and social services appropriate to the communities
needs; including
reticulated water and sewerage, storm water, sealed roads, street lighting,
access to public open space and waste
disposal services.
The intent of the Residential Reserved (R4) zone is as follows.
(i) To provide for areas of future residential use.
(ii) To prevent activities which may restrict the efficient and effective
supply of residential land.
As the site is zoned residential reserved and within the urban growth boundary,
the future residential use and development has been
determined.
Council advised that there are water and sewerage services to the site boundary
and provision of services is within current capacities.
Storm water will be
direct to the stream way as shown on the planning scheme and away from the site.
The principal conditions for
Residential Serviced zoning can be
Land Use Conflict
The adjoining property to the east of the site is used for a horse training
facility and residence. Ms Goodrick objected to the
applications because of the
potential for land use conflict. The conflict was described in terms of
residents on future lots bordering
the horse training facility objecting to the
activities on that site and the future residential use disturbing the
The operation of the horse training facility was described as
‘thoroughbred stables’ where training can start at 4am
complaints from future residents could arise from the movement of vehicles,
verbal instructions and a range of other daily tasks.
The impact on the stables
from future residential use was described as horses being “spooked”
by construction work and
future residential use activity on the adjoining
The representation claimed the facility was established on agricultural land and
had existing use rights. Further it was speculated
that Council would have
difficulty dealing with complaints to protect the existing use.
The planning scheme came into operation 4 December 1997. It has been
established that the horse training facility use extended to
the whole Goodrick
property prior to the operation date of the planning scheme. Likewise the
development of the stables and stripping
shed preceded the planning scheme.
Therefore as use and development preceded the planning scheme and there is no
evidence of an
intensification of use, the horse training facility is protected
by s.20(3)-(6) of LUPAA. Further, as the use class ‘equestrian
facility’ is prohibited under the Residential Reserved and Residential
Serviced zoning the horse training facility is an existing
non-conforming
Having established there is existing use and development, the protection of the
horse training facility is in respect to that activity.
The protection does not
extend to limit the activities on the adjoining land.
The next matter is the representor’s claim that it is not strategic to
create the potential for land use conflict. Strategically
the area has been
zoned for future residential use and whether the adjoining land is rezoned now
or in the future, the potential
for conflict of use would still exist whilst the
horse training facility remains. In essence to realise the planning scheme
residential zoning should prevail over the prospect for land use
conflict where that conflict is predominately localised and
speculative.
Concerns were raised by the representor over Council’s response about any
complaints received over the operation of the horse
training facility. This is
a matter for the Council to address using the relevant legislation. The design
of the subdivision and
location of houses can reduce the potential for
complaint. In addition, actions such as planting may be taken on the Goodrick
to buffer the activities.
Storm Water and Inundation
The representation from Mr McKinnon, the adjoining land owner to the west,
raised issues about drainage, protection of the flood
plain from alteration to
the natural ground level and the protection of future value of land use
The site is virtually flat with higher ground to the west. The plans feature a
flood and streamway special area to the east of the
site and the natural
drainage flows are towards that feature. Council’s response to the
representation was to note the construction
of the extension to Napoleon Street
will form a cut-off for overland flows and storm water drainage was a matter for
the permit to
address. At the hearing Council submitted plans for the Midland
Highway Perth bypass that is proposed to follow an alignment uphill
west of the site. This road will also alter the natural drainage
In terms of zoning, storm water and inundation are assessed as not significant
risks and the risk can be managed through development
on the site and
arrangements for storm water disposal.
The above establishes a prima facie case for Residential Serviced zoning. A
broader view is that the site is one of 3 blocks in
the area west of Youl Road
that are zone Residential Reserved. The combined total area of the 3 blocks is
over 12ha although part
of the larger parcel of 6ha is subject to flood and
stream way requirements. As each block is developed there is the probability
that each will be treated as a separate parcel and the opportunity for
integration and alternative road layouts for example to avoid
long and parallel
culs de sac of Phillip Street, as shown with the current application.
For the area to be planned as a whole there would be the potential for
efficiencies in the provision of services and equitable arrangements
construction funding.
Commission’s assessment of the permit
The permit is for a 38 lot subdivision comprising lots fronting an extended
Napoleon Street, Phillip Street and a cul-de-sac to be
constructed within the
site. The proposed lots are assessed as meeting the relevant standards of the
planning scheme in terms of
sizes and dimensions of lots and solar
orientation.
Street constitution obligations
The Applicant’s representation objected to condition 6 on the permit that
provides alternative requirements in respect to the
construction of Phillip
Street. The first alternative is to construct a 6m wide sealed pavement on
Phillip Street from Napoleon
Street to Cromwell Street being a road construction
length of 240m although some 120m is beyond the site frontage taking in the
of the adjoining block (Goodrick’s land) the condition also
requires kerb and channel but only for the actual site frontage.
option is to construct a 2m wide pavement on Phillip Street from Napoleon Street
to Cromwell Street together with kerb
and channel as per the first
The alternatives in the condition arise from the current permit for land
opposite that has a 6m pavement construction condition on
its permit. Therein
lies the difficulty where it depends on which party constructs first has the
burden for the major road construction
The representation contended that as the prior permit for land opposite had the
construction requirement and this should hold the permit for this application be
limited to a 2m wide obligation.
Council was unable to find a resolution to the condition in response to the
representation through its report under s.39(2) of LUPAA.
The permit was
therefore submitted to the Commission without a recommendation for condition 6.
Ms Grayson identified options to progress the matter as follows:
− Council to undertake the works on Phillip Street and to recoup the
− there is agreement between the developers for sharing the cost of
construction on Phillip Street.
In respect to the latter option it was submitted that there had been discussion
with the developer for the land across Phillip Street
but there was no agreement
to proceed.
Council’s position is that Phillip Street requires an 8m wide pavement to
comply with its design standards for the function
of the road and it was not
prepared to enter into processes of undertaking the works and to recoup the
costs from the frontage owners.
The provision of alternatives as a condition of the permit, where the resolution
is with the parties and where both parties seek
to avoid the full costs of
construction is not an acceptable permit condition. A broader perspective
should also be brought to this
issue. Whilst the site is zoned for future
residential and land opposite is zoned Residential Serviced this is an area
strategy is to expand Perth. Despite the strategy there were no plans
produced to the Commission to give effect to the strategy
in terms of equitable
funding of road construction and provision of an appropriate layout of roads.
Under the current situation
there is a prospect of simply following reserve
roads on old title boundaries with little consideration for contemporary road
Buffer to the Horse Training Facility
Ms Goodrick referred to the provision of a buffer between the future residential
use and the horse training facility for uses she
contended were incompatible.
Council viewed the size of proposed blocks in the subdivision would provide for
houses to be located
at an adequate distance from the horse training facility
boundary. Whilst this is the probable outcome, the planning scheme siting
provisions allow walls to boundaries or minimum setbacks based on the height of
a wall. In addition through discretionary provisions,
grouped houses and
apartments may be approved. Therefore there are a number of situations that
would bring residential use closer
to the adjoining property boundary than would
appear to be initially the case.
It appears that in the past the owners of the adjoining lots planted a line of
trees on the boundary and then fenced either side
of the trees so that the
fence(s) is not on the boundary. The plan of subdivision does not reflect this
situation and proposes a
3m wide drainage easement for much of the length of the
common boundary for in-ground sewer and storm water piping. Therefore a
vegetation buffer along the common boundary within the site is not available due
to the easement.
In this situation it is preferred that activities carry their own buffer, and in
this case the horse training facility might need
to plant out their own side of
the boundary or take other measures if the activity needs greater protection
from the residential
Ms Goodrick suggested the provision of a high fence along the boundary to
protect the horse training facility but submitted that
this should not be at a
cost to them. The proposed subdivision shows 12 lots on the common boundary
which would place the neighbour,
Goodrick, exposed to significant costs if
required to pay a half share for fencing suitable for an urban
Application of State Policies
State Coastal Policy 1996
The site is not within 1km from the coast and therefore the
State Coastal
Policy 1996
is not applicable.
State Policy on Water Quality Management 1997
The site is within the sewered area and erosion and stormwater can be
appropriately managed. The draft amendment is assessed as
being prepared in
accordance with the Policy.
The national Environmental Protection Measures are not
applicable to the draft amendment.
Schedule 1 Objectives
promote the sustainable development of natural and physical resources and the
maintenance of ecological processes and genetic
The site has been significantly modified from its original habitat. The draft
amendment is assessed as not a threat to ecological
processes or genetic
(b) to provide for the fair, orderly and sustainable use and development of
air, land and water;
Without a plan for the efficient development of The Residential Reserved land in
this part of Perth, the draft amendment does not
demonstrate fair and orderly
development.
(c) to encourage public involvement in resource management and
The draft amendment has included public processes.
(d) to facilitate economic development in accordance with the objectives set
out in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c);
The draft amendment facilitates economic development but not fully in accordance
with the above objectives.
(e) to promote the sharing of responsibility for resource management and
planning between the different spheres of Government, the
community and industry
in the State.
The draft amendment and subsequent use or development would require the sharing
of responsibility consistent with the objective.
Part 2 Objectives
Part 2 Objectives are principally furthered except in terms
of securing a pleasant and efficient living environment.
The draft amendment should be preceded by a plan that demonstrates the preferred
development of the area of residential reserved
land in terms of services and
for the interconnectivity of roads and pedestrian paths. The conditions for
Residential Serviced zoning
have not been sufficiently demonstrated. The draft
amendment should be rejected.
As the draft amendment is rejected so must the permit be
The Commission rejects the draft amendment pursuant to
Section 41(b)
Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
) and refuses the permit.
Robin Nolan
Resource Planning and development Commission
3 August 2009
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (107 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter