URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCAT/2025/193.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
UQP (Interim Treatment Order) [2025] TASCAT 193 (3 October 2025)
UQP (Interim Treatment Order)
[2025] TASCAT 193
Mental Health Stream
UQP (the patient)
Dr Hammad Mahmoud (the applicant)
Hearing Date:
10 September 2025
Hearing Location:
On the papers
Date of Orders:
10 September 2025
Date Reasons Issued:
3 October 2025
V Jones, Ordinary member
Orders Made:
The Tribunal made an interim treatment order for UQP in the terms set out
in these reasons
Catchwords:
Protective Division – Mental Health Stream – Application for
treatment order – Application for an interim treatment
order – Order
Legislation Cited:
Mental Health Act 2013
Tasmanian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2020
Cases Cited:
CQD (Interim Treatment Order)
[2024] TASCAT 67
(Application for Treatment Order)
[2022] TASCAT 31
Health Tribunal
[2016] TASSC 34
B v Mental Health Tribunal
[2020] TASSC 10.
Representation:
2025/MHT012842
Publication Restriction:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
(the patient) is a 39-year-old woman. On 10 September 2025, the Tribunal
received an application for a treatment order for the
patient. The application
also requested the making of an interim treatment order.
application asserts that the patient has a diagnosis of delusional
the reasons outlined below I was satisfied that an interim treatment order
should be made in the terms sought by the applicant
and such order was made on
10 September 2025 at 3:50pm for the maximum period of 10 days.
request for a statement of reasons was received by the Tribunal from the
The nature of interim treatment orders
is unusual for the Tribunal to receive a request for a statement of reasons for
the making of an interim treatment order (ITO).
CQD (Interim Treatment
[2024] TASCAT 67
, President Schyvens provided commentary on the
nature of ITOs and the Tribunal’s usual procedures for dealing with such
applications
at [6] to [21], and in that context, commented at [18]:
Accordingly, nearly all requests for ITOs are determined on the papers, which
means, apart from attribution of views by the applicant,
the Tribunal has little
indication of the views of the patient. Proceeding in this manner, whilst
required and sanctioned by the
Act, is seemingly at odds with the
Tribunal’s objectives, particularly those espoused in
10(1)(a)(ii)(iii)
and (iv) of the
Tasmanian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
10. Main objectives of Tribunal
(1) The main objectives of the Tribunal in dealing
with matters within its jurisdiction are –
(a) in the exercise of its jurisdiction, to
promote the best principles of public administration, including –
(i) independence in decision-making; and
(ii) natural justice and procedural fairness;
(iii) high-quality, consistent
decision-making; and
(iv) transparency and accountability in the
performance and exercise of statutory functions, powers and duties.
Applicable legislation
Mental Health Act 2013
(the Act) provides in s 38 that a single Member of
the Tribunal may make an interim treatment order if satisfied of certain
criteria. Such an order may be made without conducting a hearing:
38. Interim treatment order
(1) Despite
a single member of the Tribunal may make an interim treatment order in respect
of a person if, but only if, the member is satisfied
(a) an approved medical practitioner has applied
for a treatment order in respect of the person; and
(b) the requirements of
to have been met in respect of the application; and
(c) the person meets the treatment criteria;
(d) the Tribunal cannot immediately determine the
application; and
(e) the delay that would be involved in awaiting a
decision of the Tribunal under
the interim treatment order not be made would, or is likely to, seriously
(i) the person's health or safety; or
(ii) the safety of other persons.
(4) The Tribunal member may make the interim treatment order on the basis of the
application alone, without any hearing or further
investigation.
in relation to the making of an interim treatment order.
(6) If an interim treatment order is made, the order
is, for all purposes, taken to be a treatment order made by the Tribunal except
sections 43
not apply in relation to the order.
(7) The interim treatment order –
(a) takes effect as soon as it is made; and
(b) continues in effect, subject to
subsection (8)
until the application is determined by the Tribunal.
(8) Any Tribunal member may revoke or amend the
interim treatment order at any time.
(9) The interim treatment order lapses after 10 days
(calculated from the precise time it is made) if, by then, the Tribunal has not
determined the application.
requirements of section 37 which the Tribunal must be satisfied appear to have
been met are:
37. Application for treatment order
(1) Any approved medical practitioner may apply to the
Tribunal for a treatment order in respect of a person.
(2) The application may be made whether or not the
person is subject to an assessment order.
(3) If the person is subject to an assessment order,
the application should only be made if –
(a) the applicant has assessed the person under
the authority of the assessment order; and
(b) the applicant is satisfied from the assessment
that the person meets the treatment criteria.
(4) If the person is not
subject to an assessment order, the application should only be made
(a) the person has been assessed by the applicant
and one other approved medical practitioner, separately, within the preceding 7
(b) the applicant and the other approved medical
practitioner are both satisfied from their respective assessments that the
meets the treatment criteria.
(5) The application in relation to a person is to be
in accordance with
section 195
be accompanied by –
(a) a statement by the applicant affirming that
(and explaining how) the person meets the treatment criteria; and
(c) an indication as to whether an interim
treatment order is needed; and
(d) if the person is subject to an assessment
order, a copy of that order.
(6) The applicant is to –
(a) give a copy of the application to the person
(together with a statement of rights in a form approved by the President of the
(b) place a copy of the application (and
accompanying documentation) on the person's clinical record (ensuring that such
record is created if one does not already exist).
Tribunal must then decide if the patient meets the treatment criteria:
40. Treatment criteria
The treatment criteria in relation to a person are –
(a) the person has a mental illness; and
(b) without treatment, the mental illness will, or is
likely to, seriously harm –
(i) the person's health or safety; or
(ii) the safety of other persons; and
(c) the treatment will be appropriate and effective in
terms of the outcomes referred to in
section 6(1)
(d) the treatment cannot be adequately given except
under a treatment order; and
(e) the person does not have decision-making capacity.
in exercising the discretion whether to make an ITO, the Tribunal must be alive
to the objects of the Act in s 12 and the
mental health service delivery
principles in Sch 1 of the Act.
The application and
application that was listed before me was signed and dated by Dr Mahmoud on 10
September 2025 at 10:30am.
Tribunal’s records indicate that the application was filed with the
Tribunal the same day, 10 September 2025, by way of
an email at 12:15pm from the
Legal Orders Co-ordinator (LOC) at the approved facility where UQP was an
inpatient. Shortly after this
time, the registry referred the application to me.
I attended to the application for an ITO and issued my order at
Evidence and consideration
Applicant status
first mandatory criteria that must be satisfied before the Tribunal might
exercise the discretion to make an ITO is that an AMP
has applied for a
treatment order. I was provided confirmation by the registry that Dr Mahmoud is
an AMP and his status as such is
valid until 14 July 2027. He was the applicant
for a treatment order for UQP. This criterion is met.
requirements
requirements of s 37 of the Act must appear to be met. In this matter: an AMP is
the applicant; the patient is the subject of
an assessment order; the applicant
assessed the patient under the authority of that order and was satisfied that
the treatment criteria
were met; the application was on an approved form and
otherwise met the requirements of s 37(5); and the applicant has advised that
copy of the application has been provided to the patient and placed on the
patient’s file. I am satisfied that the requirements
outlined in s 37 have
The treatment criteria
primary role of the Tribunal in considering whether to make an ITO is deciding
whether upon the evidence available the patient
meets the treatment criteria as
defined in s 40 of the Act.
(a) The person has a mental illness
application advises that the patient has a diagnosis of delusional disorder with
multiple Capgras delusions about her children
and other family members. It is
reported that she has been the subject of three mental health admissions to
hospital. As for the
current admission, the applicant states as follows:
[UQP] appears to be presenting with worsening psychosis with disturbance in her
thoughts and disturbance in her mood on the background
diagnosis of delusional
disorder. She has a disturbance in her thoughts, paranoid towards her family
members, that they are against
her in their efforts for her to receive help and
misidentifies other family members as her children and has an ongoing belief
family members have been swapped with doubles. She is presenting with a
disturbance in her mood with an inability to maintain her
mood state.
criterion is satisfied. The patient has a mental illness within the definition
of s 4 of the Act.
(b) Likelihood of serious harm
next criterion requires me to be satisfied that without treatment, the
patient’s mental illness will, or is likely to, seriously
patient’s health or safety, or the safety of other people. As summarised
in the matter of
TI (Application for Treatment Order)
[2022] TASCAT 31
– [39], this criterion has been the subject of interpretation
by Blow CJ in two matters:
S v Mental Health
[2016] TASSC 34
his Honour held:
The thresholds for the satisfaction of the criteria in
and (c) are fairly low. To be satisfied as to (b), a medical
practitioner need not be satisfied of any risk to other persons, nor
of any risk
to the safety of the patient. It is sufficient if the practitioner is satisfied
that, without treatment, the mental illness
is likely to seriously harm the
person's health, which of course includes the person's mental health.
Subsequently, his Honour provided additional comments as to the interpretation
of this criterion in the matter of
Health Tribunal
[2020] TASSC 10
is concerned with what is "likely". When that word is used in
legislation, it can have various meanings. It can mean "more probable
or "more than a 50% chance". It can refer to something that might well happen.
It can refer to a possibility that is more
than a remote or theoretical
possibility. The meaning of the word has been considered in a great many cases.
See, for example,
Boughey v The Queen
(1986) 161 CLR 10
Tillmanns Butcheries Pty
Ltd v Australasian Meat Industry Employees' Union
[1979] FCA 85
(1979) 42 FLR 331
Cream Holdings
Ltd v Banerjee
[2003] EWCA Civ 103
[2003] 3 WLR 999.
Much depends on the
legislative context. It is significant that the principal purpose or object
is the protection of mentally ill persons and others from risks
of harm. Having regard to the purpose and context of the provision,
that "likely" should be given a wide interpretation. It should not be
interpreted as meaning "more probable than not".
It must be interpreted as
meaning something more than a remote or theoretical possibility. I think it
should be interpreted as referring
to something that might well happen. Having
regard to the evidence that I have referred to, I consider that it was open to
the Tribunal
to conclude that, without treatment, the appellant's mental illness
was "likely" to result in her killing herself.
applicant addressed this criterion as follows:
Without immediate treatment under a treatment order, there is a risk to the self
through misadventure and further deterioration.
There is a risk that her
relationships could lead to her losing custody of her child. There would be a
potential increase in direct
self-risk if this were to occur. There is a
potential inadvertent risk to others due to the belief that others have been
evidence satisfies me that without treatment the mental illness is likely to
seriously harm the patient’s health or safety,
or the safety of
(c) Appropriate and effective treatment
further criterion of which I must be satisfied in order to exercise the
discretion to make an ITO is that the treatment proposed
will be appropriate and
effective in terms of the outcomes referred to in
of the Act:
6. Meaning of treatment
(1) For the
purposes of this Act, treatment is the professional intervention
necessary to –
(a) prevent or remedy mental illness;
(b) manage and alleviate, where possible,
the ill effects of mental illness; or
reduce the risks that persons with mental illness may, on that account, pose to
themselves or others; or
(d) monitor or
evaluate a person's mental state
in obiter as to the intention of this legislative criterion were made by Blow CJ
in the matter of
S v Mental Health Tribunal
[2016] TASSC 34
uses the words "the treatment will be appropriate and effective",
it is clear that the legislation is intended to apply to mentally
individuals whose symptoms cannot be treated or ameliorated in any way. For the
purposes of
treatment will be "appropriate and effective" if it is treatment
directed towards the management of the ill effects of mental illness,
just the monitoring of a person's mental state:
applicant proposed the patient required treatment as an inpatient at an approved
facility until discharge, and then with the community
mental health team. The
administration of antipsychotic, benzodiazepine and anticholinergic medications
was proposed, and had commenced
pursuant to s 55 of the Act. Standard diagnostic
testing was also proposed along with psychoeducation and supportive
psychotherapy.
The applicant described the treatment proposed as appropriate and
effective as:
Current treatment is evidence based treatment for psychosis, and there has been
past improvement and stability of [UQP]’s mental
state when taking these
prescribed treatments.
was satisfied on the evidence that the treatment was directed towards the
management of the ill effects of the patient’s mental
illness and the
monitoring of her mental state. This criterion is met.
(d) Treatment requires an order
next criterion requires me to be satisfied that the treatment cannot adequately
be given except under a treatment order.
applicant addressed this criterion in the application:
[UQP] lacks insight into her mental health issues and her capacity to take
decisions for his (sic) treatments appears to be affected
by this acute relapse.
There is no less restrictive and safe way to manage his (sic) current
presentation except under the mental
health act (sic).
in the application the applicant states:
If [UQP] was made a voluntary patient, she would leave the hospital as she does
not believe she is unwell and does not wish to take
prescribed medications, she
has recently attempted to leave the ward.
read in conjunction with the applicant’s assessment of the patient’s
current decision-making capacity (see below),
I am satisfied that this criterion
(e) Decision-making capacity
I must be satisfied that the patient currently does not have decision-making
capacity as defined in s 7 of the Act:
7. Capacity of adults and children to make decisions about their own
assessment and treatment
(1) For the purposes
of this Act, an adult is taken to have the capacity to make a decision about his
or her own assessment or treatment
decision-making capacity
person or body considering that capacity under this Act is satisfied that
(a) he or she is unable to make the
decision because of an impairment of, or disturbance in, the functioning of the
mind or brain;
(b) he or she is unable to
(i) understand information
relevant to the decision; or
(ii) retain
information relevant to the decision;
(iii) use or weigh information
relevant to the decision; or
communicate the decision (whether by speech, gesture or other means).
the assessment of the applicant, the patient is presenting with disturbance in
her thoughts and perceptions, which is directly
impacting her decision-making
capacity regarding treatment and her current behaviour and choices. He describes
the patient as being
unable to use or weigh information pertaining to her mental
illness and treatment due to her fluctuating psychotic symptoms.
Understandably
given the nature of an ITO application, there was no contradictory professional
evidence before me in relation to the
professional opinion of the applicant as
to the patient’s decision-making capacity. I am satisfied on the evidence
by the applicant, that this criterion is currently satisfied.
note the applicant ticked the box ‘yes’ next to the question
‘does the patient have decision making capacity?’,
however I find
this was an oversight and the no box was meant to be ticked based on the written
information provided.
Inability of the Tribunal
proceed to make an ITO I also need to be satisfied that the Tribunal cannot
immediately determine the application. To do so, amongst
other things, the
Tribunal must list the application before a three Member panel and afford the
parties procedural fairness, such
as providing reasonable notice of the hearing
of the application.
matter most certainly could not be dealt with immediately by the
Consequences of delay
to be able to consider the making of an ITO, I must be satisfied that the delay
involved with awaiting the outcome of a hearing
before a three Member panel
would, or is likely to, seriously harm the patients’ health or safety or
the safety of others.
Put another way, what would occur if no ITO was made and
the affirmed assessment order simply lapsed?
the reason outlined earlier, I am satisfied that without treatment, there is
currently a likely serious risk to the patient’s
health and safety and the
safety of others. If the assessment order were to lapse without an ITO in place
then the patient may exercise
her right to self-discharge. I am satisfied on the
evidence presented and summarised earlier in these reasons that there is a
probability that the patient would indeed leave the inpatient setting and
otherwise refuse treatment given her current mental state.
criterion is met.
indicated, I am satisfied that the patient meets the treatment criteria. Given I
am satisfied of the other procedural matters that
need to be addressed as
outlined in s 38 of the Act, I could proceed to decide whether I
should exercise my discretion to make the
ITO, or not, sought by the applicant.
In exercising my discretion, I am required to take account of the objects of the
and the mental health service delivery principles (Sch
cognisant of the limitations associated with dealing with such applications on
the papers, especially in relation to the ability
to take account of the
patient’s views, I am satisfied however that taking account of all
mandatory considerations, I should
make the ITO in the terms requested by the
applicant for the maximum period of 10 days.
Orders made
Tribunal made an interim order in the following terms to 20 September 2025 at
This Interim Treatment Order:
(a) is authority for the patient to be admitted to and if necessary detained in
an approved facility for the purposes of receiving
(b) authorises a combination of treatment settings and the admission or
readmission of the patient to those settings, including treatment
community; and
(c) authorises the following:
patient is to take the following medication (depending on clinical
indication):
Antipsychotic
Benzodiazepine
Anticholinergic
medication for treatment of any extrapyramidal side effects from taking
antipsychotic medication
Medications may be administered orally and/or by intra-muscular injection
and/or by depot injection as prescribed by a treating psychiatrist
clinical guidelines, with dosages adjusted according to clinical response and
tolerability.
medical and/or blood, and/or urine tests and/or diagnostic radiological and
medical imaging tests, as clinically indicated
and as directed by the treating
Community Mental Health Service (ACMHS) appointments (inclusive of home visits
as arranged when being treated in the community).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.87 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter