URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASWRCT/2021/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:23:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
T. v State Fire Commission t/as Tasmania Fire Service [2021] TASWRCT 19 (17 June 2021)
[2021] TASWRCT 19
WORKERS REHABILITATION AND COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
T. v State Fire Commission t/as Tasmania Fire Service
[2021] TASWRCT 19
STATE FIRE COMMISSION T/AS TASMANIA FIRE SERVICE
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
15, 16 & 17 March 2021
DELIVERED ON:
17 June 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Chief Commissioner Clues
CATCHWORDS:
Entitlement to compensation – PTSD – whether
psychiatric injury arises as a consequence of or secondary to physical injury
– whether notice of psychiatric injury was required – assessment of
permanent psychiatric impairment
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
FAI v Morrisson
[1993] TASSC 115
(1993) 2 Tas R 9
Apollo Nominees Pty Ltd
[2003] TASSC 134
State Fire Commission v
[2017] TASSC 20
DETERMINATION: 1. The worker has suffered permanent psychiatric
impairment assessed at 24% of the whole person.
2. The worker is entitled to
a lump sum payment of $98,653.50 pursuant to
of the Act in respect of his
permanent psychiatric impairment.
REPRESENTATION:
P. Jackson SC
Solicitors:
Tasmanian Compensation
Page Seager Lawyers
[2021] TASWRCT 19
Chief Commissioner Clues
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. The worker was employed by the State Fire Commission (the
employer) as a senior firefighter. On 2 May 2012 the worker attended
fire in the course of his employment. He entered the building with three other
firefighters. They were all wearing respirators
as well as a distress signal
unit (DSU). The building was fully ablaze and the structure was collapsing
around them. Whilst in
the building the DSUs on all of the firefighters
activated. This created significant noise. The worker was unable to deactivate
his own alarm and the alarms of the other firefighters. They were required to
continue to fight the fire with the malfunctioning
DSUs that continued to make
intense noise for a significant period of time (the incident).
2. As a result
of the incident the worker suffered injury. That injury was initially diagnosed
as “acoustic trauma”.
The worker was certified as totally
incapacitated for work from 7 May 2012. He gave notice to his employer of the
injury in compliance
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
(1). He made a claim for compensation with respect
to the injury on 7 May 2012, in compliance with
employer accepted liability for the claim and as at the date of the hearing the
worker continued to receive workers compensation
3. The worker
seeks a determination of whether he has an entitlement to a payment for
permanent impairment for a psychiatric injury,
namely Post Traumatic Stress
Disorder (PTSD) suffered as a result of the incident under
4. The issues to be determined by the Tribunal in this referral
are as follows:
(a) Does the worker suffer PTSD?
(b) Does the worker’s PTSD result from an injury which entitles the
worker to compensation under the Act?
(c) Does the worker’s PTSD and
the psychiatric impairment or symptoms associated with it arise as a consequence
of or secondary
to the physical injuries he suffered as a result of the
(d) What is the assessment of permanent psychiatric impairment as a
percentage of the whole person?
(e) What compensation, if any, is payable
pursuant to
of the Act in respect of permanent psychiatric impairment,
assessed as a percentage of whole person impairment?
5. In summary, the worker’s case is that he suffered
permanent psychiatric impairment, diagnosed PTSD as a result of the incident.
He claims his PTSD is a primary injury suffered as a result of the incident and
not as a consequence of, or secondary to, the physical
injury suffered. The
injury in this case is both the physical and psychiatric harm that the worker
suffered as a result of the incident.
The worker’s entitlement to
compensation for permanent impairment under
arises as a direct result of the
injury for which a claim for compensation has been made.
employer’s case is that the worker does not suffer from PTSD and/or
permanent psychiatric impairment and if he does,
it is a disease which is
separate from the physical injury (acoustic trauma) caused by the incident.
Further, if the worker does
suffer from PTSD it is a new condition and the
worker failed to give notice of that injury pursuant to
and it is secondary to the physical injury and cannot be taken into account in
any whole person assessment as a result
The Relevant Statutory Provisions
Section 32(1)(a)
of the Act provides:
“(1) Subject
to this Act, a person shall not be entitled to compensation under this Act for
an injury to a worker unless –
(a) notice of the injury has, as soon as
practicable after the occurrence of the injury and before the worker has
voluntarily left
the employment in which he suffered the injury, been given to
the employer of the worker or a person referred to in
Section 71(2)
of the Act provides:
“(2) The amount of
compensation payable under this section to a worker who suffers permanent
psychiatric impairment which entitles
the worker to compensation under this Act
is to be calculated as at the date of the injury as follows:
(a) a worker who suffers permanent psychiatric
impairment assessed at a percentage of the whole person of less than 10% is not
to compensation under this section;
(b) a worker who suffers permanent psychiatric
impairment assessed at a percentage of the whole person of between 10% and 70%,
is entitled to compensation calculated in accordance with the
following formula:
WPI is the percentage of whole person impairment;
BS is the basic salary;
(c) a worker who suffers permanent psychiatric
impairment assessed at a percentage of the whole person equal to more than 70%
is entitled
to compensation of 415 units.”
of the Act provides:
assessment of a degree of impairment is to be undertaken by an accredited
medical practitioner in accordance with –
(a) any relevant guidelines, issued under
, as in effect on the date on which the assessment is made; or
(b) if there are no such guidelines, the AMA
Guides as in effect on the date on which the assessment is made; or
(c) if there are no such guidelines and the AMA
Guides are not applicable or are unsuitable, any method as may be
prescribed.
(2) In assessing a degree of impairment of an
(a) regard is not to be had to any psychiatric
or psychological injury, impairment or symptoms arising as a consequence of, or
to, the physical injury; and
(b) the degree may comprise a combination of
impairments arising out of the same incident or occurring on the same date
assessed together
using the combination tables in the AMA Guides; and
(c) if a worker presents for assessment in
relation to injuries which occurred on different dates, the impairments are to
be assessed
separately; and
(d) an impairment arising otherwise than from
the injury is not to be taken into account in assessing the degree of the
resulting from the injury.
(3) If an assessment of a degree of impairment of a
person is, at any time, validly made under this section in accordance with
or a method prescribed for the purposes of
, as the case may be –
(a) the assessment is not to be taken to be
invalid by reason only that the guidelines, or the prescribed method, have or
to be in effect or have or has subsequently been amended; but
(b) the assessment ceases to apply in relation
to the person on and from the day on which a subsequent assessment of the person
made under this section in accordance with guidelines, or a method prescribed
for the purposes of
, as amended if at all, that is or are in force on the day on which the
subsequent assessment is made.”
The Evidence
10. It is agreed that the worker suffered an injury (acoustic
trauma) that occurred in the circumstances prescribed by
as a result
of the incident. It is further agreed that the worker has provided certificates
of incapacity for work and payments
of workers compensation have been made by
the employer to the worker pursuant to the Act.
The Worker’s Evidence
11. The worker is 52 years old. He is married and has two
children. He commenced employment with the employer in 1999. He described
as his “dream job”. At that time he was physically and mentally fit
and well. He worked from 1999 until 2012. He
commenced as a firefighter and
was promoted to senior firefighter.
12. Prior to the incident and during his
career, he estimated that he would attend four to six situations each year that
describe as dangerous and traumatic. He found dealing with these
situations very straightforward.
13. During his 13 years as a firefighter he
enjoyed his work and had very limited absenteeism. He kept physically fit by
very regularly, up to three times per day. He was a keen swimmer and
was involved in the Clifton Surf Club. He had a happy marriage
and was very
connected to his children. He also enjoyed a good social life, mainly
associated with his employment and sporting activities.
14. On the date of
the incident, he was working at the Clarence Fire Station. He was required to
attend a fire in Sandy Bay. When
he arrived the two storey structure was fully
15. He and three other officers were required to enter the property.
They worked in partners. Prior to entering the property he
put on full
firefighting apparatus which included a DSU. In normal circumstances when a DSU
activates a loud alarm goes off in the
firefighter’s helmet, the job then
ceases as it means that one of the firefighters in the team is in
16. Whilst inside the property, the structure started to collapse.
As a result of a malfunction the DSUs on all four firefighters
went into full
alarm. The worker tried to deactivate his own DSU and the others in his crew.
He could not do it. He contacted
the senior station officer who directed him
and the others in his crew to keep fighting the fire despite the malfunctioning
17. The worker stayed inside the structure with all four DSU
alarms sounding. He made mistakes, he could not concentrate, he thought
floor was going to collapse and he panicked for the safety of himself and his
18. After the fire was under control the worker immediately
noticed the pain in his ears was excruciating and he felt like he wanted
vomit. When he got back to the station he had a shower and wanted to be on his
19. The worker was the occupational health and safety representative.
He filled out safety forms. He reported the incident. The
relevant officer did
not treat the matter seriously.
20. The worker thought he had “stuffed
up”. He replayed the circumstances of the fire over and over again. He
had the energy to drive home. No-one was there. He went straight to
bed to sleep and hide. He could not sleep, he was panicking
team members again. He did not want to talk about the fire to anyone. He was
ashamed about how he performed and
how it had affected him. He thought and
dreamt about the fire.
21. After the incident, the worker had 6 weeks off
work. During that time he “stayed at home and hid”. He did not
to see anyone. He disconnected from his wife and children. He had no
something wrong with him. He could not stop thinking about the
22. The worker started doing “stupid things” at home.
For example he recalls putting the toaster on the stove. He went
on a few walks
with his wife and tried to help her with the shopping. When he was out and not
with his wife, he became disorientated.
Whenever he bumped into someone he knew
and they asked how he was, he would relive the fire.
23. The worker felt he
was losing his mind. He overreacted to sudden noise. He thought he was under
attack when he was not. He
was hyper-vigilant.
24. The worker tried to go
fire truck. He did go out
on a couple of false alarm calls. He tried to
isolate himself at work as much as he could because he knew he was “not
25. The worker continued to have trouble with sleep. When he
went to bed he relived the incident. He would often wake up in “pure
panic”. He became disorientated when driving and became distressed when
placed under pressure. On one occasion he got lost
driving from Clarence Fire
Station to Liverpool Street Station. He did not return to any firefighting
duties after the incident.
26. By 9 October 2012 he knew he “was
done”. He felt “sheer terror” at the thought of going back to
firefighting.
27. The worker’s general practitioner, Dr Saul, referred
him to Dr Sharman (occupational physician). Dr Sharman discouraged
from advising his employer about his mental health issues caused by the incident
because that could create problems with
his employer and the insurance company.
The worker did not want anyone at work to know that he was ‘not mentally
He decided to use up all of his sick leave and other leave
entitlements.
28. The worker continued to struggle. By 2014 his situation
had not improved. He remained off work. His relationship with his wife
children was not good. He told his wife that they were financially in trouble.
His wife advised him that she had a friend in
Queensland and she could get work
there. The worker was eager to take up the opportunity to leave Hobart because
he wanted to avoid
the fire stations, the fire trucks, his work and everyone he
knew that reminded him of the incident. He felt weak and worthless.
that the move to Queensland would help him. The worker resigned from his
employment with the employer.
29. Unfortunately,
the worker did not improve in Queensland and his symptoms remained the same. He
was irritable and prone to bursts
of anger. He overreacted to simple stressors.
He was reluctant to leave the house and if he did go out he often became
disorientated.
He remained disconnected from his wife and children. He was
unable to work. He described himself as being “just present,
more”. He continued to have nightmares about the
30. Finally, in May 2017 he had to admit he could not fix himself.
He discovered that Dr Cooper, who was a complementary health practitioner
he had consulted in Hobart, was practising in Queensland. He went to see Dr
Cooper who provided him with workers compensation
medical certificates
certifying him as totally incapacitated for work from 29 October 2013. The
worker continued to be certified
as totally incapacitated for work by Dr Cooper
as at the date of hearing.
31. The worker consulted Dr Cooper because he did
not like and suffered adverse reactions to traditional medications, such as
and burning skin (allodynia). As he was not improving he was eventually
referred to a psychiatrist (Dr Illesinghe) who in turn referred
clinical psychologist (Dr Cooney). He said that Dr Cooney has been providing him
with the help that he now realises he needs
and has been a great support to him.
Both Dr Illesinghe and Dr Cooney have diagnosed the worker as suffering from
PTSD as a result
of the incident.
32. The worker has now accepted that he has
PTSD. He said that his “mental pain feels like physical
33. Under cross-examination, the worker was questioned in
relation to his pre-existing diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS).
worker had been diagnosed with CFS prior to the incident. He stated that
condition did not affect his capacity for work.
34. The worker was referred
to an entry in his general practitioner’s medical records dated 29 March
2012. It refers to “CFS/fibromyalgia
– diagnosed by other doctors
in the past”. It also notes: “not doing exercise” and
“don’t feel
like doing any exercise”.
35. The worker stated
that until the incident he was able to work. The incident suddenly and
dramatically altered his life. The
incident diminished his mental capacity and
his capacity to work.
36. The worker gave evidence that two other
firefighters involved in the incident had made workers compensation claims and
returned to firefighting duties with the employer since then. He said
that one officer took a pay-out and another one worked in
non-operational
37. It was put to the worker that he did not mention mental health
issues to Dr Saul, Dr Cooper or Dr Sharman. The worker’s
• He did tell Dr Saul about his mental health issues and
Dr Saul knew he was struggling mentally. He told Dr Saul not to record
mental health issues on his medical records
• He did discuss
psychological problems, including depression with Dr Sharman.
Cooper knew he had mental health issues. However, Dr Cooper was not an expert in
mental health so he referred the worker
to a psychiatrist, Dr Illesinghe. Dr
Cooper took a long time to find a psychiatrist who was prepared to see the
worker because he
had a workers compensation claim.
The Worker’s Wife
38. The worker’s wife gave evidence that prior to the
incident the relationship between herself and the worker was
as was the worker’s relationship with their two
children. He was fun and involved with the family.
39. When the worker
commenced working for the employer he described it as his “dream
job” and his “forever job”.
He was motivated to go to work.
He rarely took sick days and never expressed any dissatisfaction with his
40. After the incident he changed dramatically. He was no longer her
“rock”. He became paranoid, angry, irritated and
distant. He
worries about and overreacts to everything.
41. Immediately after the
incident, the worker complained about severe pain in his ears and spent a lot of
time in bed. He hid in
the bedroom. He laid around. He did not want the
children to see him. He had insomnia. He would toss and turn. When he did
he would have nightmares.
42. The worker’s attitude to work
changed. He was very reluctant to go back. He tried to return to work but used
his leave. She would visit him at work because she knew he was
struggling and that there was something wrong with him. He never
discussed any
mental health issues with her. She hoped that time would fix how he was
feeling. However, it became apparent that
being at work had become too hard for
him. He did not want to face any of his work colleagues. He did not want to be
reminded of
the incident every day. The worker’s wife said it was
“gut wrenching” when the worker told her he could not return
anymore. He tried to go back but he could not do it.
43. After the incident,
the worker’s friends visited him but he never invited them in. He was
withdrawn. He did not want to
talk about the incident. The worker’s wife
did not know what was happening to him at the time. The worker lost touch with
his work colleagues and friends. They no longer had a social life and the
children did not bring anyone home. The worker’s
wife had to take him for
walks on the beach just to get him out of the house. He could not go out by
himself as he became disorientated.
He could not concentrate. He could not do
more than one task at a time.
44. After they moved to Queensland in 2014,
nothing changed. The worker spends the majority of his time in the lounge room
bedroom. He watches a lot of Netflix. He goes to bed late. He tosses
and turns. He finds it difficult to sleep.
45. Prior to the incident the
worker was “awesome”. He was super organised and helped out with
the home and family.
He took pride in his appearance. Now he needs prompting
to do everything.
46. Since the incident, the worker is a different person.
He is not the fun and energetic person he used to be. He has no future
and he “can’t get himself out of this state”.
cross-examination, it was put to the worker’s wife that prior to the
incident her husband had severe CFS and 3 to 4 weeks
prior to the incident he
had complained to a doctor that he could not exercise. The worker’s wife
responded that she was not
aware of that and that her husband had always been a
heavy exerciser.
48. The worker’s wife agreed that after the incident
the worker did complain about severe pain and ringing in his ears. She
that has not changed and he continues to be sensitive to noises and certain
frequencies. He also complains of hearing loss.
However, in addition to these
difficulties, after the incident the worker “went into a shell”. He
shut himself off
from 99% of the world.
Dr Evenhuis
49. Dr Evenhuis assessed the worker on two occasions. The
first was at his rooms on 11 June 2019 and the second was via Skype on
2020. He spoke to the worker’s wife on one occasion by phone on 10 July
2019. He considered reports prepared by the
worker’s treating clinicians
including Dr Cooper (integrative medical practitioner), Dr Illesinghe (treating
psychiatrist)
and Dr Cooney (treating clinical psychologist). He also
considered a report from Dr Sale (independent psychiatrist) who assessed
worker on behalf of the employer and its insurer.
50. Dr Evenhuis prepared
five reports dated 15 June 2019, 21 July 2019, 30 January 2020, 16 July 2020 and
1 February 2021. Those
reports were tendered into evidence by
51. When Dr Evenhuis initially saw the worker he could not form a
definitive diagnosis of the worker’s condition. In his first
report of 15
June 2019 he stated at pages 6 to 7:
diagnostic situation is somewhat complicated owing to the uncertainty as to how
much chronic fatigue syndrome is itself
contributing to his current situation.
[the worker]
did have pre-existing post traumatic symptoms that
he was able tolerate and managed by compartmentalisation but did become much
problematic once he ceased his employment. He also describes significantly
depressed mood associated with suicidal ideation.
[The worker]
he had trouble describing his internal state and his at times light-hearted
exterior belies the contents of his thoughts.
[the worker]
not currently receiving psychological support, it did not seem appropriate to
explore his post traumatic symptoms in detail as
doing so may well have
exacerbated his condition and he is also struggling with depressed mood and
suicidal ideation. However,
[the worker]
would certainly benefit from
further psychological input as well as psychiatric assessment to confirm his
diagnosis and manage his
ongoing symptoms.
From a diagnostic point of view, the situation is somewhat complicated
because of the potential overlap in symptoms between chronic
fatigue syndrome,
which was pre-existing, a major depressive disorder which is a diagnostic
possibility, and post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) for which the picture is
somewhat incomplete. Regardless of whether
[the worker]
meets the full
criteria for PTSD, there is evidence of intrusive memories, hyperarousal,
avoidance behaviour and negative changes
in mood along with significant exposure
to trauma.”
52. At page 8 of the same report, Dr Evenhuis states that the
worker “needs longitudinal review by a psychiatrist for the purposes
diagnostic clarification and optimisation of treatment”.
53. After the
worker saw Dr Evenhuis on this first occasion he was eventually referred to a
psychiatrist (Dr Illesinghe) and a clinical
psychologist (Dr Cooney).
his report of 16 July 2020, Dr Evenhuis notes at page 1 that:
“Longitudinal
review by his treating team has confirmed that post-traumatic stress disorder is
the primary diagnosis.”
55. At page 5 of the same report, Dr Evenhuis confirms that in
his opinion the worker meets the diagnostic criteria for PTSD. He
say that with respect to causation the worker’s PTSD results from
“exposure to multiple traumatic situations
culminating in an incident
where he and colleagues were impacted by malfunctioning alarms. [The
worker’s] presentation was
initially complicated by his past history of
chronic fatigue and his tendency to be in denial regarding symptoms and it has
8 years to confirm a diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder
56. In Dr Evenhuis’s final report of 1 February 2021, he
concludes at page 2:
[the worker’s]
treating psychologist and psychiatrist
both diagnosed PTSD and that according to correspondence from June 2020,
[the worker]
scored 76 on the Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Checklist
– 5 which is well above the diagnostic cut off. In my opinion, there
strong evidence that
[the worker]
is suffering from PTSD and little
evidence that he was suffering from this condition prior to the index workplace
incident. It follows
that his PTSD is a result of that incident.
In my opinion,
[the worker’s]
PTSD was a result of his exposure
to the index workplace incident as well as his exposure to other fires during
his employment. It
is well recognised that the effects of trauma are
cumulative. It is likely that earlier exposure to trauma impacted upon his
and made him more susceptible towards developing post traumatic
symptoms. He decompensated following the incident in May 2012.
According to
the history provided by
[the worker]
, two of his colleagues who were also
at that fire were unable to return to active duty subsequently. Whilst
may have suffered acoustic injury, commenting on this lies outside of
my expertise and I cannot see how that acoustic injury could
give rise to PTSD.
[The worker]
was not traumatised by his hearing related symptoms but by
the traumatic incident itself (and other earlier incidents). It is my
understanding that
[the worker]
felt that his life was under threat
during the May 2012 incident. His PTSD developed following this incident, and
in my opinion,
it was the May 2012 incident that represents the traumatic event
required in criterion A.”
57. In relation to Dr Sale’s opinion that the worker did
not meet the criteria for PTSD, Dr Evenhuis noted that Dr Sale had
explored the history that got him to his PTSD diagnosis.
58. Under intense
cross-examination, Dr Evenhuis gave clear evidence that the worker’s PTSD
was not secondary to any physical
injury the worker suffered as a result of the
incident. He said that physical injury does not cause PTSD.
59. Dr Evenhuis
was adamant that he had assessed the relationship of psychiatric or
psychological injury or impairment to the worker’s
physical injury.
During cross-examination Dr Evenhuis said that:
• It was not the acoustic injury which caused the PTSD,
it was the traumatic event (the incident) which included an acoustic
• It was more likely than not that the worker would have
suffered PTSD in the absence of the acoustic injury.
worker’s PTSD symptoms have not been centred on his acoustic symptoms. He
does not have flashbacks to having discharge
coming out of his ears, he has
flashbacks to the fire where he felt his life was under threat.
worker’s behaviour suggests that he was troubled by the incident
immediately after it occurred. He developed avoidance
and hyperarousal
behaviour early on. He had no understanding of and downplayed his symptoms of
PTSD. He uses humour and denial
to deflect people from his level of distress.
He has been reticent to discuss his symptoms relating to PTSD. PTSD symptoms
be “crowded out” by other problems.
60. Dr Evenhuis was unconcerned that previous doctors that the
worker had consulted including Dr Saul, Dr Sharman and Dr Cooper had
diagnosed PTSD. He observed that none of these doctors are psychologists or
psychiatrists and that in general practice, if a
patient presents with physical
symptoms often doctors do not look for a psychological or psychiatric cause. Dr
Evenhuis said that
he often sees patients where their treating doctors have
missed a psychiatric condition. In his view there is a clear relationship
between the trauma associated with the incident and the worker’s
61. As at the date Dr Evenhuis last saw the worker on 13 July 2020, he
assessed the worker’s permanent psychiatric impairment
to be 24% of his
whole person.
Dr Illesinghe
62. Dr Illesinghe is the worker’s treating psychiatrist.
The worker was referred to him by Dr Cooper in early 2020. Dr Illesinghe
the worker on two occasions. The first was on 2 April 2020 by telehealth and
the second was on 1 February 2021 in person. Dr
Illesinghe’s undated
proof of evidence and report dated 11 June 2020 were tendered into evidence by
63. Dr Illesinghe is of the opinion that the worker is suffering
from PTSD and that the incident was the major or most significant
contributing
factor to that PTSD. He confirms that the worker meets all the criteria for
PTSD and that because the worker had not
received treatment for this condition
over the last 8 years that has led to chronic symptoms and ingrained behaviour
patterns. Dr
Illesinghe believes the worker requires intensive, short-term as
well as long-term, treatment. Dr Illesinghe was not cross-examined.
64. As from 21 May 2020 the worker has received treatment from
Dr Cooney, a clinical psychologist. His reports of 30 June 2020 and
22 February
2021 were tendered into evidence by consent. As at the date of Dr
Cooney’s second report he had seen the worker
on 15 occasions.
opinion of Dr Cooney is that the worker meets all of the criteria for a
diagnosis of PTSD and that the incident was the clear
precipitating factor in
the development of that PTSD. He reported that being inside a house that is
fully ablaze is a life-threatening
situation which the worker endured on the
date of the incident with intense fear, indecision and helplessness that was
by the alarms which adversely affected his judgement and decision
66. Mr Dart was working with the worker at the time of the
incident. He prepared a report in relation to the incident. The report
the form of an email to Adam Doran, dated 28 July 2012 and is titled
“Structure fire 29 View Street, Sandy Bay”.
The report was tendered
in evidence by consent and Mr Dart was not cross-examined. The report confirms
that at the time of the
• Roofing tiles were exploding from the roof due to the
heat of the fire and falling on the ground near the workers.
workers were confined to a small area.
• All four DSUs were activating
at the same time and the noise was extremely loud, distracting, disorientating
and painful.
• The worker was the occupational health and safety
representative on the shift. When the workers returned to the station,
worker reported the incident. He was offered no assistance, advice or
Worker’s Medical Records from Lauderdale Doctors
67. Various medical records and doctors’ notes were
tendered in evidence by consent as part of the papers for the use of the
Tribunal. These included the Lauderdale Doctors Surgery medical records. This
is the surgery that the worker attended after the
68. The records
include a report to Dr Saul from Mr Moore (otolaryngologist) dated 24 August
2012. He states:
may be prudent for you to consider some psychological
69. There is a report to Dr Saul from S. Grenness (audiologist)
dated 19 March 2013. She notes:
“In my opinion
[the worker]
also has other significant psychological issues such as
possible depression and treatment and assistance with these mental health
would greatly assist
[the worker]
[The worker]
however was not
favourably disposed to seeking assistance at this
70. There is also a report to Dr Saul from Dr Sharman
(occupational physician) dated 20 June 2013. He states that as a result of
incident the worker developed “a hyperacusis/tinnitus condition (similar
to that suffered by two other employees also affected
by the same event) however
he has also suffered an exacerbation of his underlying CFS condition and an
associated psychological illness.
This has additionally impacted on his
capacity to work.”
The Employer’s Evidence
71. The employer relied upon the evidence of Dr Sale. Dr Sale
is now retired, but at the time he assessed the worker on 20 November
was a practising independent psychiatrist.
72. Dr Sale prepared two reports,
the first dated 4 December 2019 and the second dated 5 November 2020. Those
reports were tendered
into evidence by consent.
73. Dr Sale examined the
worker on one occasion on 21 November 2019 at the request of the solicitors
acting for the employer/insurer.
The examination was conducted via Skype.
74. In Dr Sale’s report dated 4 December 2019 he accepted that his
capacity to assess the worker’s mental state was somewhat
limited by the
need to use
Sale noted the worker’s current mental health symptoms to include
“low mood, excessive fatigue, anxiety if required
to leave his residence,
poor libido and
accepted that the worker’s complaints were somewhat generalistic. He said
the worker sought prompting but Dr Sale was
restrained in this.
76. Dr Sale
reviewed a number of reports and documents many of which were not in evidence.
He did note there was a “battle
of opinions” in relation to the
worker’s ongoing symptoms. It was noted that many of the worker’s
were not in keeping with an acoustic
Dr Sale’s first report he stated
• He did not believe he had a clear understanding of how
events unfolded in the early stages of the worker’s claim.
could not determine when Dr Cooper first became involved following the
worker’s injury.
• He could not tell from the medical
certificates alone when chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) or fibromyalgia symptoms
• He was uncertain whether the Lauderdale practice doctors
continued to be involved in the worker’s care after he departed
Queensland in 2014.
• He thought there could be value in seeking
relevant medical records from the Lauderdale practice and Dr Cooper.
• He noted a lack of objective findings in the audiometry assessment
and that behavioural aspects of the assessment were probably
• He thought it would be useful to know:
− whether there were any problems with the worker’s
work participation up to the time of the acoustic incident;
the worker’s ability to remain at work was already deteriorating at the
time of the incident;
− whether it was true that the other firefighters
at the incident left the Tasmanian Fire Service after the incident and how
times and for how long the faulty alarms sounded.
78. In this case Dr Sale found the diagnosis of the
worker’s condition to be “a particular
“Setting aside the issue of Post-Traumatic
Stress Disorder, the key features of this assessment are that
[the worker]
has been subject to chronic fatigue symptoms since 2003. Since that time, he
has relied on the assistance of a complimentary Health
Practitioner. He has not
sought second opinions, and Dr Cooper has not referred him
80. Dr Sale states
“As a psychiatrist, I have been prone to regard
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome, at least in some patients with this pattern of
to reflect a somatoform disorder, or according to DSM-V, Somatic
Symptom Disorder. To that end, I have gained an impression through
practice that this condition appears to be more likely to occur in those who
have a particular investment in their physical
performance or body habitus. In
this respect,
[the worker]
is absolutely typical, having been involved
elite training and participation in Ironman contests. However,
whether or not
[the worker’s]
problems reflect some psychological
condition is difficult to ascertain, given that he has lived with this problem
for 16 years, and
during this time has relied on the opinions and advice of an
unconventional medical practitioner.”
81. Dr Sale is of the opinion that the worker suffers chronic
fatigue syndrome which is a somatoform or Somatic Symptom Disorder and
does not attract a whole person impairment rating under the WorkCover
Sale accepts that the worker’s somatoform disorder was aggravated by the
incident but qualifies this by stating that
the aggravation was temporary
because the condition “probably has a deteriorative trend anyway”.
Further, the condition
was aggravated by the workers compensation claim process
and the worker’s “adherence to unorthodox treatment
Dr Sale’s second report of 5 November 2020 he considered the reports from
Dr Cooney and Dr Illesinghe. He noted that
“there had been an increasing
embrace of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder being the proposed basis of [the
difficulties”
84. Despite
the fact that both Dr Cooney and Dr Illesinghe diagnosed the worker as suffering
from PTSD, Dr Sale formed the opinion
that these reports from the treaters were
of “limited value” and he could see no reason to alter his previous
cross-examination it was put to Dr Sale that the worker met all of the DSM-V
diagnostic criteria for
agreed that the worker met some of the criteria but he was only able to obtain a
limited history from the worker.
86. Dr Sale accepted that the article he
attached to his report titled “The mental health of firefighters”
concluded that
both current and retired firefighters suffered higher rates of
PTSD, 8% in current firefighters and 18% in retired
firefighters
Sale agreed that CFS was not a distinct diagnosis, it is a term used to describe
a mixture of symptoms and should not be used
if another diagnosis is
88. Counsel for the worker referred Dr Sale to another article he
attached to his first report titled “Chronic fatigue syndrome
practice guidelines –
In those guidelines, the authors state at
“In everyday clinical practice
‘somatisation’ and ‘somatoform’ are unhelpful diagnostic
labels which
are best avoided in patients with
89. Dr Sale disagreed with this. His evidence was that CFS was
different in different people. In the worker’s case he accepted
diagnosis of CFS which he believed reflected a somatoform disorder. He accepted
that the incident could have aggravated the
worker’s CFS.
to preparing his second report Dr Sale agreed with counsel for the worker that
he was not provided with all of the documents
he suggested would be helpful in
his first report; he did not conduct a further examination of the worker and he
did not obtain further
information about the worker from the worker’s
Consideration
Does the worker suffer PTSD?
91. The employer submits that it accepted liability for a claim
made by the worker in May 2012 for compensation in respect of an injury
by him on 2 May 2012. The injury was initially diagnosed as “acoustic
trauma”. This diagnosis appears on all
of the worker’s medical
certificates. In 2017 Dr Cooper added the diagnosis of severe CFS/SEID
(systemic exertion intolerance
disease) to the worker’s medical
certificates. Dr Cooper does provide a diagnosis of PTSD on a medical
certificate dated 20
January 2021.
92. The worker was not referred to a
treating psychiatrist until around April 2020. At that time he was referred to
Dr Illesinghe.
In his report dated 11 June 2020 he says “I confirm that
[the worker] is suffering from a post-traumatic stress disorder”.
says “My opinion is that the incident at work on 2 May 2012, was the major
contributory factor in the development
condition.”
worker did not receive any psychological treatment until May 2020. At that time
he saw Dr Cooney. In his report dated 30
June 2020 he says “I completely
agree with the diagnosis of PTSD”. He confirms in that report that the
worker fits the
diagnostic criteria pursuant to DSM-V. In his report dated 22
February 2021 he confirms the worker also meets the diagnostic criteria
DSM-IV. In that report Dr Cooney says:
“Based on the history
[the worker]
has provided, there were no symptoms of Post-Traumatic
Stress Disorder prior to the incident of 2 May 2012. The incident of 2 May
is the clear precipitating factor in the development of his Post-Traumatic
Stress Disorder”.
94. In Dr Evenhuis’s first report of 15 June 2019 he
thought that the worker’s symptoms were “quite suggestive of
However, Dr Evenhuis felt the diagnostic situation was somewhat complicated for
a number of reasons
95. Dr Evenhuis
initially provided three diagnostic possibilities for the worker’s
psychiatric condition; PTSD, major depressive
disorder and adjustment disorder
with mixed anxiety. He favoured the PTSD diagnosis and noted that there had been
little focus on
the worker’s psychological symptoms which were now
chronic. He said the worker required “longitudinal review by a
psychiatrist
for the purposes of diagnostic clarification and optimisation of
treatment”.
Evenhuis interviewed the worker’s wife on 10 July 2019. He interviewed
the worker again on 13 July 2020. By that time
the worker had seen a
psychologist and a psychiatrist. He was receiving treatment for his
psychological/psychiatric condition.
After assessing the worker again and
reviewing the reports from the worker’s treating psychiatrist and
psychologist, Dr Evenhuis
concluded that the worker:
“continues to describe
significant post-traumatic symptoms following exposure to multiple traumatic
situations culminating in
an incident where he and his colleagues were impacted
by malfunctioning alarms.
[The worker’s]
presentation was
initially complicated by his past history of chronic fatigue and his tendency to
be in denial regarding symptoms
and it has taken 8 years to confirm a diagnosis
of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
97. Dr Sale does not accept the diagnosis of PTSD. Having
considered his reports and the evidence he gave at the hearing I reject
opinion that he worker does not suffer from PSTD. I do so on the basis
• He only interviewed the worker on one occasion via
Skype and admitted in his first report that his capacity to assess the
worker’s mental state was somewhat limited by the need to use
• He did not establish a rapport with the worker.
requested further information to assist him with his assessment but it was not
provided to him.
• He focused on the fact that the worker had CFS
symptoms prior to the incident. The evidence was that these symptoms did not
impact upon the worker’s capacity to work. It impacted upon his ability
to exercise at an elite level. As a result of his
CFS, the worker struggled to
exercise, however after the incident he struggled to do anything.
98. Dr Sale rejected the diagnosis of PTSD without providing
any clear explanation as to why. He considered that in the worker’s
he suffered CFS which was a “somatoform
the article Dr Sale attached to his report titled “Chronic fatigue
syndrome Clinical practice guidelines – 2002”
it states at
“somatisation” and “somatoform” are unhelpful diagnostic
labels which are best avoided in patients with
100. Further, in the same
article it states at
to two-thirds of people presenting with persistent fatigue have some other
identifiable medical or psychiatric disorder
that accounts for the symptom, and
careful assessment to exclude these is essential before making a diagnosis of
not satisfied that with respect to this worker that Dr
Sale’s assessment met this standard.
101. The worker did not want to
admit to himself or others that he had psychological or psychiatric symptoms.
It is clear from the
early medical reports and records that he was struggling
However, the focus was on his physical symptoms only.
102. It is possible
that the worker was at a greater risk of suffering PTSD but that is irrelevant
to his claim. The evidence supports
a diagnosis of PTSD. Applying the relevant
diagnostic criteria, the worker was exposed to actual or threatened serious
the time of the incident. He directly experienced a traumatic event.
Immediately after the incident he presented with the following
symptoms that
have continued since then:
• Intrusive thoughts.
• Avoidance of trauma
related stimuli.
• Altered mood (negative beliefs about
• Hyperarousal and
overreaction.
• Distress.
• Impaired functioning.
CFS does not explain these symptoms.
103. The worker
suffered a physical injury to his ears as a result of the incident. This
physical injury became the focus of the
worker’s claim. The worker was
reluctant to discuss his symptoms of PTSD or the incident that caused it with
anyone. He finds
it hard to articulate and elucidate his symptoms.
these reasons I am satisfied the worker suffered PTSD as a result of the
incident. PTSD is a disease and his employment
was the major or most
significant contributing factor to that disease. I find that he continues to
suffer PTSD and has a permanent
psychiatric impairment as a result.
Does the worker’s PTSD result from an injury which
entitles the worker to compensation under the Act?
105. At paragraphs 10 and 11 of the employer’s written
submissions dated 17 March 2021, the employer argues that:
of the Act imposes on an employer liability to pay compensation to
a worker in accordance with the Act immediately upon the happening
of an injury
in circumstances that satisfy the preconditions to liability imposed by that
That liability crystallises into a liability to make a payment of
compensation under one of the payment provisions of the Act
) in the event that the preconditions to payment under one of those
provisions is satisfied.
If liability is imposed on an employer by
, there is nonetheless no
liability under any of the payment provisions unless certain things are done by
the worker under
, which is an ‘entitlement provision’, that is,
it provides a bar to an entitlement to payment of compensation unless
things prescribed by
The critical requirements of
are that if a worker is to be entitled to
compensation under the Act ‘for an injury’ the worker must give
notice of ‘the
injury’ as soon as practicable after the occurrence
of the injury; and must make a claim for compensation ‘with respect
injury’ within 6 months after the date of occurrence of the
Those formulations are consistent with the fact that the foundational
liability created by
attaches in respect of an injury, not in respect of
the consequences of an injury.”
106. On behalf of the worker it is argued that once the worker
made his claim for compensation in relation to the incident, that claim
all injuries resulting from the incident, both physical and
psychiatric.
107. Once the worker suffered injury as a result of the
incident, the employer’s liability to pay workers compensation and the
worker’s entitlement to receive workers compensation vested or
crystallised. The date that any other medical condition that
results from the
incident is diagnosed, is irrelevant. For the same reasons, the requirement to
give notice of injury pursuant to
relates to the date of the original
108. I refer to the case of FAI v Morrisson
[1993] TASSC 115
In that case the worker was assaulted at work on 15 June 1990. He
suffered physical injuries and made a claim for workers compensation.
notice to his employer of those injuries in compliance with
of the Act. He made a claim for compensation with respect to those injuries in
compliance with
(1) of the Act. The employer admitted
liability for the worker’s claim and he was paid workers compensation
109. On 11 September 1991 the worker became incapacitated for
work as a result of a mental disorder diagnosed as PTSD. The Workers
Compensation Commissioner determined the worker had been totally incapacitated
for work ever since and that the PTSD and the incapacity
resulted from the
110. It was argued on appeal that the PSTD was a disease and
separate from the injury caused by the assault. In that case the evidence
established that it was the circumstances in which the worker’s physical
injuries were inflicted which were the main precipitating
cause of the
development of the PTSD and that without the physical injuries, the PTSD would
not have resulted.
111. In that case Crawford J (as he then was) held at [11]
would be wrong to suggest that each of the physical injuries and the disease
provides a separate foundation as an injury
for liability to pay
compensation to the extent that based on each he has a separate and potential
claim for weekly payments.”
112. Crawford J notes at [12]:
Section 25(1)
requires for the vesting of liability to pay compensation that the ‘worker
suffers an injury’. This expression was explained
by Underwood J in
Electrolytic Zinc Company of Australasia Ltd v Maister
[1990] TASSC 29
Tas R 91 at 98-99.”
113. Crawford J states at [13]:
“Although it may not
always be an appropriate term, I find it convenient in this case to adopt the
expression of Underwood J
of the suffering of an injury within
suffering of ‘the relevant event’ for I find that it best expresses
the conclusion I have come to on this part
of the case. Underwood J continued at
‘Whether the injury which grounds liability to pay compensation is a
disease or not, the word ‘suffers’ connotes,
as it did under the
repealed legislation, a definable point in time when the injury was suffered,
sustained, occurred to, or befell
the worker. It is the occurrence of injury in
the circumstances prescribed by
or (b) which attracts the liability to
pay compensation.’”
114. At [14] Crawford J says:
“As soon as the
assault on Mr Morrisson was completed and he had suffered physical injury there
was vested in the employer liability
to pay compensation under the Act by virtue
The conclusion I come to is that the event which vested that
liability in the employer and the right to compensation in Mr Morrisson
suffering of the physical injuries in the course of the assault upon him.
Whatever physical or mental injuries subsequently
developed from that can only
be considered as relevant consequences when later sections of the Act are
considered to ascertain what
amounts of compensation, if any, must be paid by
the employer. By way of example, if in employment a worker suffers multiple
of his leg from which he largely recovers but subsequently
osteoarthritis develops in the knee as a consequence of those injuries
development of that disease, osteoarthritis, does not found in the worker a new
right to compensation under
The right to compensation vests at the time
of the original injuries and the development of the disease would not have the
of moving the foundation for the worker's entitlement from par(a) of
, an entitlement based on an injury which is not a disease, to par(b), an
entitlement based on an injury which is a
115. Finally, Crawford J states at [17]:
“Consistent with these
principles is Harris v TSS Pty Ltd 46/1992 in which Underwood J considered the
requirement in
to give ‘notice of the injury’. He held at 5
and 6 that the conditions precedent to entitlement to compensation prescribed
only apply to the injury the occurrence of which creates the liability to
pay compensation ‘in accordance with the provisions
of this Act’
Once notice of the injury has been given and a claim for compensation
with respect to it has been made there is an entitlement to
compensation and the
notice need not be given and the claim need not be made again when some
consequence of the original injury manifests
116. In the Full Court decision of Thornton v Apollo Nominees
[2003] TASSC 134
, Crawford J repeated the effect of much of what he said
in FAI v Morrison (supra). He said at [31]:
“It is a well
understood principle of workers compensation legislation that the rights and
liabilities of the worker and the
employer respectively to receive and pay
compensation, vest immediately at the time of the suffering of the original
[Footnotes omitted]
117. In that case Crawford J noted at [29]:
“When a worker suffers
an accident at work, the injuries that follow can be numerous. Not all of them
may be identified at first...
A doctor’s labelling of a condition may
change, as may the diagnosis.”
118. I find that it is what occurred in this case. The
worker’s psychiatric condition was not identified at first and then was
given a number of different labels. The formal diagnosis of PTSD was not made
until April 2020. I find that the worker suffered
PTSD as a result of the
119. I find that foundational liability for the worker’s
claim was established on the date that he made his claim for workers
compensation with respect to the incident. For the reasons outlined, due to the
fact that the worker’s initial claim met the
requirements of
that his PTSD may not have been identified by his treating doctors and was not
formally diagnosed until 2020 does not impact
upon his entitlement to receive
workers compensation benefits with respect to his PTSD. The worker was unable
to give notice of
his PTSD until that condition was diagnosed. However, because
his initial claim met the requirements of
he is not disentitled to workers
compensation in respect of his PTSD as a result of his failure to give notice of
it by virtue of
the lapse of time since the original claim was made.
Does the worker’s PTSD and the psychiatric impairment
or symptoms associated with it arise as a consequence of or secondary
physical injuries he suffered as a result of the incident?
120. I determine that the answer to the above question is no
and therefore
of the Act does not apply.
121. The very clear
evidence of Dr Evenhuis is that it was not the worker’s “acoustic
injury which caused his PTSD, it
was the traumatic event which included an
acoustic injury”.
122. The following is an exchange between counsel for
the employer (Mr Jackson SC) and Dr Evenhuis in relation to this issue:
Jackson: Dr Cooper didn’t tell you that a source of major concern to both
[the worker]
and his wife was the discharge from his ears?
Dr Evenhuis: No.
Mr Jackson: So you didn’t have any of that information when you reached
the conclusion that you couldn’t see how the acoustic
injury could give
rise to PTSD?
Dr Evenhuis: Now I have that information, my opinion hasn’t
Mr Jackson: You couldn’t really express that opinion without all of
that information, could you?
Dr Evenhuis: I expressed an opinion based on the information I had, I now
have additional information and my opinion hasn’t
Mr Jackson: So you don’t accept that in somebody at risk of
decompensation as the result of cumulative significant trauma over
a number of
years who has managed until then to compartmentalize could be triggered by the
kind of experiences
[the worker]
you know now, was having directly as a
result of his physical injury?
Dr Evenhuis: I do not accept that under these circumstances because his
decompensation happened after a major trauma.
Mr Jackson: That’s it? Nothing more than that?
Dr Evenhuis: That was what was caused his decompensation. If his
post-traumatic symptoms now were centred around acoustic symptoms,
that would be
a different story, but they’re not. He doesn’t have flashbacks of
having discharge coming out of his ears,
he has flashbacks to the fire where he
felt his life was under threat.”
123. Dr Illesinghe’s evidence is that the worker suffers
PTSD as a result of the incident and the incident is the major contributing
factor to the development of the worker’s condition.
124. Dr Cooney is
of the opinion that the incident was the clear precipitating factor in the
development of the worker’s PTSD.
125. I find this is not a case where
the worker suffered purely physical injury arising out of or in the course of
his employment
creating an entitlement to compensation under
goes on to develop psychiatric or psychological disorder, impairment or symptoms
arising as a consequence of, or secondary
to the physical injury.
126. I find
that the worker suffered both physical and psychiatric injuries as a direct
result of the incident. For the reasons outlined
above, liability for both
injuries attaches under
The fact that the worker’s psychiatric
injury was not diagnosed until many years after the incident is not relevant to
issue of the employer’s liability to pay compensation in respect of
his psychiatric injury including an entitlement to be paid
compensation under
127. This case is distinguishable from State Fire Commission v Benefield
[2017] TASSC 20.
Unlike Benefield, in this case the worker’s PTSD did not
have its own separate causative circumstances from the physical injury.
Benefield, the worker’s PTSD was not caused by the worker’s loss of
function, frustration with the workers compensation
process or his ongoing
experience of pain.
128. The injury in this case is all the harm (both
physical and psychiatric) which resulted from the incident and which
collectively
is the compensable injury that falls within
of the Act for
the purpose of determining the worker’s lump sum entitlement.
the purpose of the worker’s claim under
, he sustained as a direct
result of the incident an acoustic trauma (physical injury) and PTSD
(psychiatric injury).
130. The worker’s PTSD is a primary not a
secondary disorder. It is not a consequence of or secondary to the
physical injury. The worker suffered PTSD as a result of the
incident not because of the acoustic injury he suffered.
131. The symptoms of
the worker’s acoustic trauma and PTSD have continued since the incident
and the worker’s suffers
permanent psychiatric impairment as a result.
There was no evidence before me that he suffers permanent impairment resulting
the physical injury.
132. The worker suffered PTSD as a result of the
incident. He was not diagnosed with PTSD until he was referred to Dr Illesinghe
(treating psychiatrist) in April 2020. The fact that the worker’s PTSD
remained undiagnosed for many years is not evidence
that he did not suffer PTSD
as a direct result of the incident.
What is the assessment of permanent psychiatric impairment as a
percentage of the whole person?
133. The only assessment of the worker’s permanent
psychiatric impairment was conducted by Dr Evenhuis. Dr Evenhuis is an
assessor for the purpose of the Act and has undertaken a permanent
impairment assessment under the Tasmanian Guidelines to Whole
Person Impairment
with respect to the diagnosis he made of PTSD.
134. The relevant guidelines
for the purposes of
are the WorkCover Tasmania Guidelines for the Assessment
of Permanent Impairment Version 3 which are dated 1 October 2011 (the
Guidelines).
135. Dr Evenhuis last saw the worker on 13 July 2020. He
conducted an assessment of the worker’s permanent whole person impairment
at that time.
136. In Dr Evenhuis’s report dated 16 July 2020 he refers
to the six areas of function set out in the Guidelines (paragraph
chapter 7).
137. Dr Evenhuis assesses the percentage whole person impairment
in accordance with the Guidelines as follows:
• Self-care and Personal hygiene – class
• Social and Recreational activities – class
• Travel – class 3
• Social Functioning – class
• Concentration, Persistence and Pace – class
• Adaptation – class 5
138. This gives rise to a total score of 19, a median score of
3 and a whole person impairment of 24% (see page 48 of the Guidelines).
What compensation, if any, is payable pursuant to
the Act in respect of permanent psychiatric impairment, assessed at a percentage
of whole person impairment?
139. I am satisfied that Dr Evenhuis’s most recent
assessment of a 24% whole person impairment has been made in accordance with
of the Act and that compensation of $98,653.50 is payable pursuant to
the Act in respect of the worker’s permanent psychiatric
impairment.
Determination
140. I find that as soon as the worker walked out of the
incident he was a changed man. His physical injuries can only explain some
the severe symptoms he suffered from that date. I find that the worker suffered
psychiatric symptoms, impairment and PTSD as a
direct result of the
141. I determine that the worker has suffered a whole person
impairment of 24% and that the worker is entitled to a lump sum payment
$98,653.50 pursuant to
of the Act in respect of his permanent psychiatric
impairment.
CHIEF COMMISSIONER
His resignation was effective
from 8 December 2014, document 184 – supplementary court
See page 6 of Dr
Sale’s report dated 4 December
See page 4 of Dr
Sale’s report dated 4 December
See page 6 of Dr
Sale’s report dated 4 December
See pages 12-13 of Dr
Sale’s report dated 4 December
See page 15 of Dr
Sale’s report dated 4 December
See page 13 of Dr
Sale’s report dated 4 December
See page 14 of Dr
Sale’s report dated 4 December
See page 14 of Dr
Sale’s report dated 4 December
See page 15 of Dr
Sale’s report dated 4 December
See page 2 of Dr
Sale’s report dated 5 November
See pages 3 and 4 of
Dr Sale’s report dated 5 November
See pages 179-181 of
the supplementary court
See pages 122-133 of
the first court book.
pages 134-179 of the first court
See page 146 of the
first court book.
Illesinghe’s report dated 11 June
See page 7 of Dr
Evenhuis’s report dated 15 June
See pages 6-7 of Dr
Evenhuis’s report dated 15 June
See pages 7-8 of Dr
Evenhuis’s report dated 15 June
See page 5 of Dr
Evenhuis’s report dated 16 July
See page 14 of Dr
Sale’s report dated 4 December
Page 146 of the first
court book.
Page 144 of the
first court book.
paragraphs 68 to 70 above.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (291 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter