URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASHPT/2020/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Pharmacy Board of Australia v Cindy Strachan [2020] TASHPT 5 (3 August 2020)
[2020] TASHPT 5
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL
Pharmacy Board of Australia v Cindy Strachan
PHARMACY BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
STRACHAN, Cindy
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
23 July 2020
DELIVERED ON:
3 August 2020
DECISION OF:
Deputy Chairperson Wilkins
CATCHWORDS:
Pharmacist failed to apply for re-registration within time
– registration lapsed – practising as a pharmacist whilst
unregistered – professional misconduct
Dental Board of Australia v Ho (Review and Regulation)
Dental Board of Australia v Masters (Review and Regulation)
[2014] VCAT 1497
Medical Board of Australia v Willcourt (Review and
Regulation)
[2018] VCAT 1032
Medical Board of Australia v Xie
(Review and Regulation)
[2019] VCAT 1924
Health Practitioner National
2009 (Qld) s5, s193, s196
DETERMINATION:
Ms Strachan has engaged in professional misconduct.
Ms Strachan is reprimanded.
Ms Strachan is required to pay a fine of $800 to the Pharmacy Board of
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
Solicitors:
J. Shears, Australian Health Practitioner Regulation
Respondent:
[2020] TASHPT 5
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. On 11 March 2020 the Pharmacy Board of Australia (“the
Board”) referred to the Tribunal the conduct of Ms Strachan,
pursuant to
s193 of the Health Practitioner National Law Act 2009 (Qld) (“the
National Law”) and
Health Practitioners Tribunal Act
2. The Board had a reasonable belief that Ms Strachan’s conduct
constituted professional misconduct within the meaning of s193(1)(a)(i)
National Law. It was therefore mandatory that the Board make the referral to
the Tribunal.
3. The conduct of Ms Strachan that caused the referral to be
made was that she had practised as a pharmacist for several months from
2019 until mid-May 2019 whilst being aware that she had not renewed her
registration as a pharmacist, and was therefore not
registered to
Background leading to the referral
4. The following matters were not in dispute between the
• Ms Strachan has been registered as a pharmacist since
• Pharmacists are required to renew their registration annually.
The registration period runs from 1 December until 30 November
the following
• Ms Strachan’s registration expired on 30 November 2018.
Following a one month grace period Ms Strachan’s registration
lapsed on 31
December 2018. Ms Strachan was de-registered as a pharmacist from 1 January
• Ms Strachan mistakenly thought that her registration continued
until the end of January 2019. Her failure to renew was caused
by financial
difficulties which prevented her from paying the annual registration
• On 1 February 2019 Ms Strachan contacted the Australian Health
Practitioner Regulation Agency (AHPRA). She was told she needed
to apply for
re-registration.
• Ms Strachan continued to work as a pharmacist at
Chemist Warehouse in Glenorchy in Tasmania. She was aware that she should
have been practising as a pharmacist whilst she was not registered
19 February 2019 Ms Strachan applied to AHPRA for registration as a
pharmacist.
• On 28 February 2019 AHPRA wrote to her advising that
further information was required and her identity documentation was not
• On 18 March 2019 AHPRA advised Ms Strachan that her
identity documentation was still incomplete. She managed to provide all
necessary documentation for re-registration after this time.
2019 Ms Strachan’s employer became aware that Ms Strachan was not
registered as a pharmacist, and she was stood
down from her employment from 12
May 2019, pending renewal of her registration. Ms Strachan was subjected to
internal disciplinary
action by the employer.
• Ms Strachan’s
application for registration as a pharmacist was completed with effect from 28
May 2019, and on 30 May
2019 the suspension by her employer was
• In August 2019 AHPRA received an anonymous complaint against
Ms Strachan and her employer in relation to Ms Strachan practising
registered pharmacist whilst unregistered. In her response to the notification,
Ms Strachan advised AHPRA that her employer
had been unaware of her lack of
registration until it undertook the internal audit which alerted it to her
Events subsequent to the referral
5. In April 2020, which was about a month after this referral
was made, AHPRA received a notification from Tasmania Police that Ms
had been arrested on the morning of 26 April 2020 after returning a positive
roadside test for methylamphetamine, and following
a search of the vehicle she
was driving, had been further charged with offences including supplying and
possession of drugs and medication.
She told police at the time she was
arrested that she was on her way to work (at this time she was working as a
pharmacist, but
with a different employer). Ms Strachan has since been stood
down from that employment. She has advised the Board that she intends
the charges relating to supply and possession of drugs.
6. The Board formed
the view that there were facts which were sufficient for it to form a reasonable
belief that because of Ms Strachan’s
health and/or conduct, she posed a
risk to persons in the course of her practice as a pharmacist. As a
consequence, the Board determined
that it was necessary to take immediate action
to protect public health and safety, and suspended Ms Strachan’s
registration
from 21 May 2020. Her registration continues to be
7. The only matter that is before the Tribunal at this time is the
issue relating to Ms Strachan practising whilst unregistered in
2019, and I have
not taken these subsequent events into account, except to the extent that they
inform the Tribunal as to Ms Strachan’s
current personal
circumstances.
The Board’s submissions
8. The Board, by its referral to the Tribunal, seeks a
determination that Ms Strachan’s conduct, in practising as a pharmacist
whilst not being registered to do so, amounts to professional misconduct. It
further seeks that Ms Strachan be reprimanded by the
Tribunal, and that a fine
be imposed pursuant to s196(2)(c) of the National Law.
9. The Board submits
an appropriate fine would be in the order of $5,000 - $7,000.
10. The Board
in support of its submissions referred me to the decisions of Dental Board of
Australia v Ho (Review and Regulation)
[2019] VCAT 467
, and Dental Board of
Australia v Masters (Review and Regulation)
[2014] VCAT 1497.
11. In Dental
Board of Australia v Ho, Dr Ho had failed to advise the Dental Board of a change
of professional address, and as a result
he inadvertently failed to renew his
registration. The Tribunal accepted that Dr Ho practised unregistered for a
period of approximately
four weeks without realising his registration had
lapsed. After he became aware of the lapsed registration he contacted AHPRA and
was advised that he needed to apply to re-register, and that he must not
practise dentistry until re-registered. For about two weeks
following that, he
knowingly continued to treat some patients who were part way through treatment
with him, rather than referring
them to another dentist. At about the end of
that two week period, he applied for re-registration. The registration process
Tribunal determined that Dr Ho had engaged in unprofessional conduct in failing
to notify the Board of his change of address.
The Tribunal further determined
that his conduct in practising whilst not registered constituted professional
misconduct.
13. As a result of those findings, the Tribunal determined to
reprimand Dr Ho and impose a fine of $7,000 upon him.
14. In discussing the
sanction imposed, the Tribunal in Dental Board of Australia v Dr Ho noted
“a reprimand is a serious form
of censure and condemnation” (at
paragraph 87).
15. In relation to the fine, the Tribunal noted at paragraphs
89 and following:
the hearing before us, we raised with the parties that given the five months
that passed before Dr Ho was registered, should
the fine be somewhat lower. We
did not raise this out of sympathy for Dr Ho. He brought this situation on
himself. We did so in
the context of a fine ......not being
punishment.”
“The parties responded that the agreed proposed fine was
‘discounted’ considering the time from application to
re-registration.
The Board explained that this was the time it took to consider
and decide the issue, and Dr Ho in no way delayed the
process.....”
“Further, to the extent that different cases and different fines
provide a yardstick for the fine in this case, as the Board
submitted here, the
$7,000 fine is consistent with the reasoning of VCAT in Medical Board of
Australia v Willcourt (Review and Regulation)
[2018] VCAT 1032.
In that case,
VCAT reprimanded Dr Willcourt and fined him
16. In Dental Board of Australia v Masters the Tribunal was
satisfied that Dr Masters’ record keeping was of lesser standard
might reasonably have been expected, and that he had engaged in unprofessional
conduct in failing to keep and maintain proper
records for a particular patient,
and by failing to refer that patient to a specialist. The Tribunal determined
to reprimand Dr
Masters and to impose a fine. In relation to the reprimand, the
Tribunal noted at paragraph 31 “A reprimand is a serious sanction
reflects the gravity of the conduct before us.” In relation to the
additional sanction of a fine, the Tribunal noted
at paragraph 32 “We
consider that the imposition of a fine is appropriate. The importance of
adequate record keeping cannot
be overemphasised. In order to ensure the
protection of the public, Dr Masters and other practitioners must be deterred
from taking
shortcuts in this area of their practice. We consider that the
proposed fine will achieve that purpose.”
17. In this case, counsel for
the Board submitted that Masters demonstrated the protective element in imposing
a fine, and submitted
that similar considerations apply to the requirement to be
registered as apply to the requirement to keep appropriate records.
What is Ms Strachan’s position?
18. Ms Strachan says that she thought she continued to be
registered to practise as a pharmacist until the end of January 2019. She
clearly incorrect about that, and she accepts that she was mistaken. It is
incumbent upon health professionals that they take
responsibility for ensuring
that their registration is current at all times. Ms Strachan concedes that she
was aware, from the beginning
of February 2019 at least, that she ought not to
have been practising as a pharmacist without registration.
19. In relation to
the question of what would be an appropriate sanction, Ms Strachan submitted
that her financial situation is such
that any fine would have to be paid off by
her off over a number of years. She is presently in receipt of the Jobseeker
but she said she did not know whether it would continue after six
months, as she is a New Zealand citizen. She is a single mother
children, two of whom are 9 and 10 years of age, and the third is an adult who
works part time as a sales assistant.
20. She said that she felt it would be
better for her to have to undertake further education, including education about
registration.
In general, Ms Strachan said she felt she was being punished.
She said she knew her actions were inappropriate, but she also had
not expected
the re-registration process to take several months. She says that she has
learnt from her mistake.
Determination as to conduct
21. The Board seeks a determination that Ms Strachan has
engaged in professional misconduct.
22. “Professional
misconduct” is defined in s5 of the National Law to include
“unprofessional conduct by the practitioner
that amounts to conduct that
is substantially below the standard reasonably expected of a registered health
practitioner of an equivalent
level of training or expertise”.
23. Renewal of registration every year is a requirement for all practising
pharmacists, and includes the provision of a statement
by the practitioner that
covers such matters as continuing professional development, professional
indemnity insurance, and any change
in criminal history. The registration
process provides the Board with information each year that enables it to review
practitioners’
fitness for practice. It is a safety mechanism for the
benefit of the public.
24. I am satisfied that Ms Strachan’s conduct,
in practising as a pharmacist whilst knowing that she was unregistered, and that
she ought not have been practising, was conduct below the standard reasonably
expected of any practising pharmacist, and amounted
to professional misconduct
under s196(1) of the National Law. I indicated as much to the parties at the
conclusion of the hearing
of the referral, but I reserved my decision in
relation to the issue of an appropriate sanction.
Determination as to sanction
25. The Tribunal’s primary consideration is the
protection of the public, and the maintenance of the reputation of the
profession.
Sanctions are imposed to further those considerations, and not to
punish the practitioner – however, it is recognised that
in imposing
sanctions, elements of specific or general deterrence may be appropriate, to
either deter the particular individual from
repeating misconduct, or to
generally deter other health professionals from engaging in similar conduct
26. The Board has sought an order that Ms Strachan be reprimanded. A
reprimand is a serious sanction and ought to be regarded as
such. In Medical
Board of Australia v Xie (Review and Regulation)
[2019] VCAT 1924
, the Tribunal
stated at paragraphs 58 and 59:
is well understood that a reprimand is not a trivial determination. A sanction
of this form does not trivialise a lapse
in professional standards. For a
professional person it has the potential for serious adverse implications. It
tells the public,
patients and other practitioners that the standards expected
of a practitioner have not been met and that the practitioner has been
We consider that a reprimand sufficiently addresses the need for general
deterrence and meets the requirements of an appropriate
determination in that it
protects the community and the integrity of the profession. In our view the
order to reprimand will flag
to others that the behaviour is to be
condemned.”
27. The Tribunal has the power to reprimand under s196(2)(a) of
the National Law. I consider that a reprimand is appropriate in the
circumstances. Registration of health professionals is an important mechanism
that safeguards the public. For a pharmacist to knowingly
practise without
being registered is a serious departure from appropriate professional conduct.
It ought to be recognised as such,
and condemned.
28. The Board has also
sought an order that Ms Strachan be fined. I have determined that Ms Strachan
has engaged in conduct that
amount to professional misconduct. As a consequence
of that determination, the Tribunal is empowered by S196(2)(c) of the National
Law to require Ms Strachan pay a fine, not in excess of $30 000. The Board
submits that the protection of the public is furthered
by the imposition of a
fine, as a matter of general deterrence.
29. I consider that it is
appropriate that a fine be imposed on Ms Strachan, not only as a matter of
specific deterrence, but as a
matter of general deterrence and to emphasise the
need for practising pharmacists to be assiduous in ensuring they are registered
at all times.
30. In the VCAT decisions of Ho, Masters and Willcourt
referred to above, in each case the health practitioner against whom sanctions
(including the imposition of a fine of between $5000 and $7000) were imposed was
continuing to practise in his professional field.
31. Were Ms
Strachan’s circumstances to be different, I would have imposed a fine of
$5000 upon her. However, she is currently
suspended from practising as a result
of the immediate action decision. Although it was not specifically put to me, I
the Board is likely to await the outcome of the police charges
against Ms Strachan before finalising its investigation about the
matters which
led to the immediate action being taken. Her financial position is precarious,
in that she does not know if she will
continue to receive benefits after
November this year. It may well take the police proceedings at least that long
to be dealt with.
I am conscious that she has two young children, who are
dependent upon her.
32. Although I consider a fine of $5000 would normally be
appropriate in the circumstances before me, I consider that the imposition
fine in that amount would have a disproportionately adverse effect upon Ms
Strachan at this time. My indication about what
would normally be an
appropriate fine ought to satisfy the requirement for the protection of the
public by way of general deterrence.
I impose a fine of $800 upon Ms Strachan,
to be payable to the Board at the rate of $50 per fortnight, the first payment
within two weeks of the date of this determination.
Strachan submitted that a condition requiring her to undertake further
professional education would be an appropriate sanction,
rather than a fine. In
the circumstances, I consider there would be no value in imposing such a
condition. Ms Strachan has acknowledged
her mistake. The consequences have
been significant for her. There is little likelihood of any repeated conduct in
future of her
failing to re-register, or of practising whilst unregistered.
34. Having found that Ms Strachan has engaged in professional
misconduct under s5 and s196(1) of the National Law, I make the following
determinations:
(a) Ms Strachan is reprimanded;
(b) Ms Strachan is fined
$800, payable to the Board at the rate of $50 per fortnight. The first payment
is to be made within two weeks
of the date of this determination.
L D WILKINS
DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (138 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter