URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASLPDT/2022/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:16:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Roberts v Walker [2022] TASLPDT 1; (19 January 2022)
[2022] TASLPDT 1
LEGAL PROFESSION DISCIPLINARY TRIBUNAL
Roberts v Walker
[2022] TASLPDT 1
PARTIES: DANIEL ROBERTS
DAVID FREDERICK WALKER
DELIVERED ON: 19 January 2022
DELIVERED AT: Hobart
HEARING DATE: On the Papers
THE TRIBUNAL: P. L. Jackson SC (Chairman)
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: In person
Respondent: C. Gunson SC
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Decision Number: [2022] TASLPDT 1
Number of paragraphs: 54
REASONS FOR DECISION 19 January 2022
THE PROCEEDINGS
1. The Applicant applied to the Tribunal pursuant to
s. 458(1)(a)
Legal Profession Act 2007
) to have a matter to which a
determination of the Legal Profession Board of Tasmania (
determined by the Tribunal.
2. The Applicant was served with notice of the Board’s determination on
4 March 2014.
3. By its determination, the Board dismissed a complaint made by the
Applicant against the Respondent on 30 November 2012.
A copy of the complaint is at pages 15 – 22 of the documents that were
before the Board when it made its
determination.
4. In dismissing the complaint, the Board exercised the discretion given to
of the Act.
That is, having completed an investigation of the Applicant’s
complaint it was satisfied that there was no reasonable likelihood
practitioner would be found guilty of either unsatisfactory professional conduct
or professional misconduct and dismissed
the complaint without proceeding to a
5. The factual background to this matter, (in particular, the same Federal
Magistrates Court proceedings involving the Applicant)
is essentially the same
as the factual background to another complaint made by the Applicant to the
Board. That other complaint was
also the subject of a
application to the
Tribunal and the Tribunal’s decision in that other matter is reported as
Roberts v Edwards
[2019] TASLPDT
The person referred to in the Tribunal’s decision in that other matter
as the Independent Children's Lawyer (
) is the Respondent in this
6. To a large extent, proceedings in this matter followed the same course as
those other proceedings.
However, for various reasons there was some further delay in constituting a
Tribunal for the purpose of conducting the hearing of
this matter (on the
papers, at the request of the parties).
Of more recent significance, the Tribunal has been awaiting judgment in an
appeal to the Supreme Court from an order made by the
Tribunal in another
matter, in which the parties to that appeal have both raised for determination
by the Supreme Court a question
that goes to the heart of the Tribunal’s
of the Act.
The Tribunal has been informed that the appeal in question was heard by a
single Judge on 24 June 2020, that judgment was reserved,
and that as at the
date of publication of this determination the judgment is yet to be handed
7. The Tribunal has a duty to proceed to determination of an application
before it as expeditiously as possible. Pursuit of that objective
frustrated in this case in various ways but for the last nineteen months by the
decision that was taken once it was informed
that this point was to be argued
before a Judge, that it was politic for the Tribunal to wait until it had the
Supreme Court’s
decision on the matter.
In view of the delay in delivery of that judgment, and the conclusions the
Tribunal had already come to in respect of this application
before it became
aware that the jurisdictional point was to be argued in the Supreme Court, the
Tribunal has decided to wait no longer
for that judgment and to proceed to
publication of its determination in respect of this application, and its reasons
therefor, without
further delay.
SUMMARY DISMISSAL UNDER S. 451(a) OF THE ACT
8. Section 451(a) of the Act provides:
After an investigation of a complaint against an Australian legal
practitioner has been completed, the Board may dismiss the complaint
satisfied that –
(a) there is no reasonable likelihood that the practitioner will be found
guilty of either unsatisfactory professional conduct or
professional misconduct;
Neither the Investigation Report nor the Board’s reasons for its
decision gave any attention to the meaning of the words in
no reasonable likelihood that the practitioner will be found guilty
” relevant misconduct.
Betts v Legal Profession Complaints Committee
[2019] WASAT 25
the State Administrative Tribunal of Western Australia was dealing with an
application for review of the dismissal by the respondent
Committee of a
complaint pursuant to
Legal Profession Act 2008
That provision is in all relevant terms identical to
of the Act.
The Tribunal said (at [44]-[45]):
The meaning of the words ‘reasonable likelihood’
contained within s 425 of the LP Act, was addressed by the Tribunal in
and Legal Profession Complaints Committee
[2010] WASAT 31
26 The word ‘likelihood’ means ‘the chance or fact of
being likely’, and ‘a thing that is likely’
‘probability’ (Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, 6th ed, 2007) and
the word ‘likely’ means ‘that
looks as if it would happen, be
realised, or prove to be what is alleged or suggested; probable’ (Shorter
Oxford English Dictionary).
However, the word is qualified by the requirement
that the likelihood be ‘reasonable’. The word
‘reasonable’
means ‘not greatly less or more than might be
thought likely or appropriate; of a fair, average, or considerable amount’
(Shorter Oxford English Dictionary).
27 The meaning of the phrase ‘reasonable likelihood’ in the
context of s 425 of the LP Act is synonymous with the phrase
‘reasonably
likely’. The meaning of that phrase was discussed in Department of
Agriculture and Rural Affairs v Binnie
[1989] VicRp 73
[1989] VR 836
(Marks J, Young CJ
and Teague J agreeing) in the following passage:
The relevant expression here is ‘reasonably likely’ which has
some analogy to ‘fair probability’. It suggests
the mathematical
approach; the word ‘reasonably’ being a qualification of
‘likely’, alternatively, a measure
in colloquial language of the
likelihood.
The expression ‘reasonably likely’ is substantially idiomatic,
its meaning not necessarily unlocked by close dissection.
In its ordinary use,
it speaks of a chance of an event occurring or not occurring which is real
— not fanciful or remote. It
does not refer to a chance which is more
likely than not to occur, that is, one which is ‘odds on’ or where
between nil
and certainty it should be placed. A chance which in common parlance
is described as ‘reasonable’ is one that is ‘fair’,
‘sufficient’ or ‘worth noting’.
28 Those observations are equally apt to describe the meaning of
‘reasonable likelihood’ in s 425 of the LP Act.
[45] It is of course well understood that given the consequences for a
practitioner of an adverse determination in the context of
disciplinary action,
that clear and cogent evidence will be required before a finding of either
unsatisfactory professional conduct
or professional misconduct is made: Legal
Practitioners Complaints Committee and Trowell
[2009] WASAT 42
Therefore although the standard of proof in the Tribunal is on the balance of
probabilities, the Tribunal must nevertheless feel
persuasion’ of the occurrence or existence of a relevant fact when
determining whether it has been made out:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
at 361–362 (Dixon J).
The observations in par. [45] must be read in the context of the Tribunal in
that case having (as it explained at [41]) a jurisdiction
that is expressly one
involving review by way of a hearing
, with the express purpose of
producing the correct and preferable decision, and permitting consideration of
new material whether
or not it existed at the time the decision was made (s.
435(1) of the WA
Legal Profession Act
Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
In other words, the
Tribunal was directing itself as to correct legal principles that were to guide
its consideration of the original
complaint itself.
Nevertheless, we accept the interpretation given by the State Administrative
Tribunal (WA) to the relevant words applies equally
to s. 451(a) of the Act and
that the relevant standard of satisfaction is to be arrived at having regard to
the principles explained
in par. [45]. We have had regard to that interpretation
and those principles in assessing whether the discretion to dismiss the
under s. 451(a) was enlivened by the results of the investigation of
the complaint.
THE “MATTER” FOR DETERMINATION UNDER s. 458
10. It is necessary to briefly explain what the as-yet unresolved
to determination
of this matter without waiting for the outstanding judgment of the Supreme
Section 458(1)(a) of the Act provides:
(1) The complainant, or the Australian legal practitioner who is the
subject of the complaint, who is served with a notice of the
determination of
the Board in relation to a complaint may, within 21 days after the date of that
determination –
(a) apply to the Tribunal or Supreme
Court to have
the matter to which the determination relates
determined by the Tribunal or Supreme Court
[emphasis added]
The Tribunal understands that an issue in the appeal that is pending in the
Supreme Court is the meaning of the words in the emphasised
passage “the
11. The Tribunal has generally in the past proceeded on the basis that it is
the complaint made to the Board that is to be regarded
for the purposes of s.
458(1)(a) of the Act to be “
the matter to which the determination [of
the Board] relates
” and that it is therefore the complaint itself the
Tribunal is to determine.
However, the Tribunal understands that the Supreme Court has now been asked
to rule that at least where the Board exercises jurisdiction
to summarily
dismiss a complaint under s. 433(1) or s. 451 of the Act, the Tribunal on an
application to it under s. 458(1)(a) does
not acquire jurisdiction to determine
the complaint itself but merely whether the Board’s determination to
dismiss the complaint
12. Although it appears the same question arose in
B v A Legal Practitioner
[2020] TASSC 50
, Brett J found it unnecessary to
resolve it in that case, which was a matter in which the Board dismissed a
complaint under s. 433(1)(a)
as lacking in substance and the complainant applied
to the Tribunal under s. 458(1)(a).
His Honour nonetheless might be thought to have expressed doubt about the
Tribunal’s approach to s. 458(1)(a) when he said
, at [11]):
[Section 458(1)(a)] provides for the Tribunal to determine "the
matter to which the (Board's) determination relates". The question
arises as to
whether this provision requires the Tribunal to consider again whether the
complaint ought to have been summarily dismissed
under s 433, or alternatively,
whether the Tribunal was actually determining the complaint. It seems that the
Tribunal may have assumed
that its task was the latter. It is possible to
identify potential injustice arising from proceeding in this way, because,
irrespective
of whether the Tribunal agrees that the complaint is lacking in
substance, it will be finally determined without the benefit of an
investigation
pursuant to
We respectfully note that the concern expressed by his Honour in the final
sentence seems to overlook the fact that unlike s. 451,
s. 433 is in
the act, not
, and the Act clearly contemplates mandatory dismissal of a
complaint under s. 433 before any investigation has been undertaken (s.
whilst the discretion given to the Board by s. 451(a) is expressly only
available to the Board after it has completed an
investigation.
13. After careful consideration, the Tribunal has come to the view that it
can resolve this Application without needing to address
the nature of its
itself or is merely the basis for summary
dismissal of the complaint, and
therefore without delaying any longer the determination of this Application.
That is because, for the reasons that follow, it has determined that the
Board was correct in its assessment of the materials that
it had before it when
it made its decision to summarily dismiss the complaint under s. 451(a).
It was open to the Board to reach the necessary level of satisfaction as to
the likelihood that the Respondent would be found guilty
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct to enliven its
discretion under s. 451(a) to summarily dismiss
the complaint. Therefore the
exercise of that discretion was sound and the dismissal of the complaint should
14. A point of particular significance is that in this case the Board’s
decision came after investigation pursuant to
of the Act had been
completed, and was reached with the benefit of, and based on consideration of,
the detailed Investigation Report.
Having regard to the observations made by Brett J in
B v A Legal
Practitioner
[2020] TASSC 50
, quoted in par. [12] of these reasons,
the Tribunal is satisfied that no potential injustice of the kind referred to by
can arise from the decision that it has come to, even if that is a
decision that might be perceived as amounting to the Tribunal
determining the complaint itself.
On either approach, the complaint will not have been finally determined
without the benefit of an investigation pursuant to
The Tribunal’s determination of the matter to which the determination
of the Board relates, if “the matter” is
limited to whether it was
open to the Board to come to the level of satisfaction required for it to
exercise the discretion to dismiss
the complaint under s. 451(a), merely means
that the Board’s dismissal of the complaint will be undisturbed.
BACKGROUND TO THE COMPLAINT
15. We have taken the following brief summary of the background to the
complaint from the Board’s reasons for its determination,
modification:
(a) The Applicant's estranged partner (
) commenced proceedings
in the Federal Magistrates Court in 2009 in which she sought to gain increased
access to her child (
). The Applicant was at all relevant times
the father of the Child and her primary carer. The Applicant opposed the
application.
(b) In December 2009, the Court appointed the Respondent an Independent
Children's Lawyer for the purposes of the proceedings and,
at the same time,
made interim orders providing for the Child to reside with the Applicant, with
the Mother to have access one night
(c) In November 2010, orders were made with the effect of increasing the
mother’s access until the Child’s second birthday
in April 2011,
with a further increase to commence from that date.
(d) The Applicant’s instructions to his solicitor were consistently to
oppose any increases in the mother’s access to
the Child and the parties
remained in dispute concerning access arrangements throughout
(e) To try to assist in resolving the dispute, expert reports were commissioned
by the Respondent from a psychologist (
Mr. de Jong
). An allegation that
the Respondent failed to properly brief Mr. de Jong arises in that
(f) The matter was listed for trial in February 2012. However, the Magistrate
ordered the parties to try to settle their dispute
Settlement was reached on 2 February 2012 and embodied in consent orders made on
that day that resulted
in the Mother having increased access to the Child. This
settlement gave rise to an allegation that the Respondent exerted undue
on the Applicant to agree to those orders.
(g) The Applicant alleged in his complaint to the Board that this outcome
resulted at least in part from the Respondent’s failure
to act in the
Child’s best interest. Apart from that broadly framed general allegation,
the allegation that the Respondent
exerted undue pressure upon the Applicant,
including by threats, to agree to terms, also arise in this context.
THE COMPLAINT
16. From the particulars of the complaint set out in the Applicant’s
complaint form (IR 19 - 20) the Board formulated allegations
(adopted by the
Applicant as his complaint - IR 2, 75) that the Respondent:
to pass all relevant information to Mr. de Jong for assessment particularly in
relation to the mother of the child not attending
drug and alcohol
counselling.
the complainant into agreeing to execute court orders in respect to access to
his daughter, and in doing so threatened
the complainant; and
to act in the best interests of the complainant's child.
Those allegations will require further elucidation by reference to evidence
contained in the Investigation Report.
The order in which we have stated the allegations is the reverse of the
order in which the Board addressed them in its determination.
It is convenient
to do it that way because much of the background and the evidence relating to
the first of the allegations (in the
order we have stated them) is relevant to
the others.
THE COMPLAINT THAT THE RESPONDENT FAILED TO PROVIDE ALL
RELEVANT INFORMATION TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
17. Formulation of this allegation appears to have grown out of the following
statement in the initial complaint form (at IR 19):
Took 1 year 6 months to get documentation to wheather [sic] the mother
had undergone the psychologist recomend [sic] counselling,
which she had not,
this should have been done before my daughter turned 2, which is when the mother
was to receive extra time ...
The allegation is expanded upon at IR 104, where in a letter to the Board
dated 22 May 2013 the Applicant says:
Mr Walker failed to Subpoena any information as to whether [the
mother] had complied with orders to under go [sic] a minimum of 12
Psychological treatment through the Sisters of Charity Outreach Service, as part
of parenting orders dated 23/11/2010.
The orders stated that [the mother] was only to have more access time from
[the child's] 2nd birthday (8/4/2011) if she was doing
the courses
[The mother] had not complied with the Orders of 23/11/2010.
Mr Walker should not have allowed the extra access time to commence, if he
was acting in my daughter's best interest, as per the strong
evidence in all the
The expanded allegation is thus that it was particularly in relation to the
mother not attending drug and alcohol counselling that
the information given by
the Respondent to Mr. de Jong was deficient. The recommendation for counselling
had come from Mr. de Jong
in the first place, in two reports from him addressed
to the Court, dated 8 April 2010 (IR 39-57, in particular at par. 58 in that
report), and to the Respondent, dated 17 October 2010 (IR 100-102).
18. On 23 November 2010 the Court made orders by consent of the parties
that relevantly included the following
2. That until further Order the Child is to live with the
3. That until further Order the Child is to spend time with the Mother as
(a) Until such time as the Child turns 2 years of age on 8 April
the first' week of a two week cycle from 10:00 am on Saturday to 6:00 pm on
Sunday and from 9:30 am to 5:00 pm on Tuesday and
each alternate week
thereafter.
the second week of a two week cycle from l2:00 noon on Sunday to 5:00 pm on
Monday and from 9:30 am to 5:00 pm on Thursday and
each alternate weekend
thereafter.
(b) From the Child's second birthday in April 2011 as follows:
the first week of a two week cycle from 10:00 am on Saturday to 6:00 pm on
Sunday and from 9:30 am on Tuesday to 5:00 pm on Wednesday
and each alternate
week thereafter.
the second week of a two week cycle from 12:00 noon on Sunday to 5:00 pm on
Monday and from 12:00 noon on Wednesday to 5:00 pm
on Thursday and each
alternate week thereafter.
(c) Such further or other time as is agreed between the
.................
9. That the Mother and Father will attend counselling as follows:
a) The Mother with the Alcohol and Drug Service, Grove Street Ulverstone,
and with Sisters of Charity Outreach service and with Centacare
"Weathering the
Storm" program.
(b) The father with Centacare "Weathering the Storm" program and such
other counselling as is recommended by Centacare and notified
by the Independent
Par. 9(a) of the 2010 Orders is central to the allegation and is based on
the recommendations made by Mr. de Jong in the two reports
referred to in the
previous paragraph of these reasons.
The 2010 Orders concluded with the following note (IR 68):
The Court notes it is the intention of the parents to review the
matter in March 2011 but that in the absence of any Order to the
contrary the
Orders contained in Order 3(b) hereof will come into effect.
19. The Applicant was not correct in asserting (at IR 104) that par. 9 of the
2010 Orders (
counselling order)
“.... stated that [the mother] was only to have more access time
from [the child's] 2nd birthday (8/4/2011) if she was doing
the courses
Neither the counselling order nor any other order made on 23 November 2010,
or subsequently, conditioned the counselling order in
Nevertheless, it is apparent that based on the misconception that the
counselling order was made subject to such a condition, the
Applicant’s
complaint was that Mr. de Jong had not been briefed, adequately or at all,
during the 4½ months between the
date when the counselling order was made
and the date of the child’
birthday (8 April 2011)
concerning the Mother’s lack of compliance.
The Applicant asserts that Mr. de Jong should have been briefed with
evidence that the mother had not complied with the counselling
order; and that
the Respondent should have done that in order to obtain evidence with which to
prevent the mother’s access
to the child increasing pursuant to par. 3(b)
of the 2010 Orders.
20. It is clear that the counselling order was based on the recommendations
made by Mr. de Jong.
In his report addressed to the Court dated 8 April 2010, Mr. de Jong made
the following recommendations (at IR 228, pars. 58, 59):
58. Most importantly the mother should access drug and alcohol counselling
through the Grove Street Centre. .......... The mother
will need continuing
support to overcome her reliance on alcohol and/or other drugs. The mother could
also benefit considerably from
focused psychological treatment to integrate past
traumatic experiences and develop better self awareness and coping skills.
59. Both the mother and the father would benefit from participation in a
post separation parenting program, such as the 'Weathering
Family Separation'
program offered by Centacare in Devonport. This would assist them build a better
parental alliance and more fully
understand the importance of shielding Isabelle
from any conflict between them.
21. In his report dated 17 October 2010 addressed to the Respondent, Mr. de
Jong relevantly added, in respect of the Mother (IR 142):
treatment should persist for a continuous period of 12 months
as a minimum. Her history of personal trauma, which probably underlies
use, also warrants individual psychological treatment with a registered
psychologist for a continuous period of 12 months.
The Sisters of Charity
Outreach Service may be especially suitable because of their focus on trauma,
but any registered psychologist
should also be suitable.
22. However, it appears that the counselling order was probably also based on
a document lodged with the Court on 15 September 2010
by the Respondent,
entitled ‘Pre-Trial Court Document’. That document (dated 14
September 2010) included the following,
under the heading
’Proposals’ (at IR 209):
That the Mother's time with the Child be reviewed after a period of
with a view to increasing such time subject to the mother producing a
satisfactory report as to her receiving psychological treatment
and alcohol and
drug counselling.
That document also noted (at IR 210):
Mr. de Jong has recommended that the Mother should have
psychological
treatment and ongoing drug and alcohol counselling before there is
extension of the time that the Child spends with
The document also contained proposals (at IR 209) as to the Mother’s
access to the Child that did not include an increase in
her access from the date
of the Child’
birthday. It seems clear enough that the
provision for that in the orders made by consent of the parties (including,
although not
strictly a party, the Respondent in his capacity as ICL) must have
been negotiated between 15 September 2010 and 23 November 2011.
23. The evidence does not reveal any communication between the Respondent and
Mr. de Jong between November 2010 and April 2011.
However, there is nothing in the 2010 Orders or in any other evidence that
would reasonably be expected to have required that the
Respondent initiate any
such communication.
(a) Neither the counselling order, nor any other order made on 23 November 2010,
was to that effect.
(b) In an undated letter addressed “To: Whom It May Concern”, the
Applicant says (plainly referring to the 2010 Orders):
I signed this
agreement on the understanding that the changes would only happen if [the Child]
attended the required counselling with
a positive outcome
There is no evidence of any statement to that effect having been made to him
by the Respondent or anyone else.
(c) In an undated letter addressed “To Whom It May Concern” the
Applicant’s mother says (IR 77):
Daniel & I attended Family Law Court in Burnie on
March 2011. ....... The lawyer representing [the Mother] stated
that her client was attending the required counselling
, however she did not
have the paper work yet and that there was no urgency to this matter
.......... I was shocked that the lawyer standing in for [the Applicant’s
solicitor], did not contest this statement.
(d) In his letter referred to at par. [23](b) above, the Applicant
I attended the Family Law Court in Burnie, on Tuesday 22nd March
2011, accompanied by my mother. My intent was to ask the court to
increase of access time, until [the Mother] completed the recommended
counselling. A lawyer representing [the Mother] stated
that there was no urgency
to this matter, and that her client .... was undertaking the required
counselling, however she did not
have the paperwork yet.
24. The attendance at the Court on 22 March 2011 was for the purpose of the
review referred to in the note to the 2010 Orders referred
to at the end of par.
[18] above (IR 68).
In his letter to the Board dated 22 May 2013 at par. No. 4 (IR 104) the
Applicant said:
Mr Walker advised that the Orders dated 23rd November 2010 would
reviewed in March 2011. This did not happen.
Clearly, that is not correct. In fact, it appears that the meeting at the
Court on 22 March 2011 probably resulted from a request
by the Applicant’s
solicitor, acting on instructions from the Applicant.
In a letter to the Respondent dated 11 February 2011 (IR 208) the
Applicant’s solicitor said:
I am instructed to write to your [sic] to request that you convene
a further ICL conference in this matter as soon as practicable
There is no direct evidence that the meeting on 22 March resulted from that
request, but that appears to be the only reasonable inference.
25. That letter from the Applicant’s solicitor to the Respondent dated
11 February 2011 also contained the following:
Of further concern is [the Mother's] failure to undergo
counselling which does not give Mr Roberts confidence that she is genuine
attempt to rehabilitate herself. His concerns are shared by Centacare’s
David Nancarrow who I note recently wrote to
you expressing some concerns about
[the Mother’s] failure to attend alcohol/drug counselling and relationship
counselling.
The interim Orders agreed in November 2010 envisaged an increase in the
amount of time [the Child] would spend with her mother upon
her attaining two
years of age. Those interim orders also required both parents undergo specific
counselling, which Mr Roberts has
done but [the Mother] has not and consequently
Mr Roberts does not believe the increase in [the Child’s] time with her
should occur until [the Mother] has demonstrated a willingness to comply
with the Orders which are designed to promote [the Child's]
26. No request was made by the Applicant’s solicitor that the
Respondent commission any further report from Mr. de Jong, or
that he take any
other specified action in respect of the Applicant’s concerns about the
Mother’s apparent lack of compliance
with the counselling order.
There is no evidence that the Applicant’s solicitor was instructed to
take any action to have the Court revoke or modify the
order for automatic
increase in the Mother’s access as from the date of the Child’
27. At IR 105, the Applicant says:
Mr Walker did not submit the Subpoena to the Court until 2nd August
2011. This should have been done prior to 8th April 2011 being
[the Child's]
This statement reflects what seems to have been a misconception that the
altered access arrangements as from the date of the Child’
birthday were conditional upon compliance with the counselling order. However,
again, this was not the case.
28. That statement refers to subpoenas addressed to Youth and Family Focus
and the Drug and Alcohol Service in order to obtain access
to records concerning
the Mother.
It is not revealed in the Investigation Report when those subpoenas were
issued, but the records and what they revealed are referred
to in two letters to
the Applicant from his solicitor dated 22 November 2011 (IR 62) and 12 December
2011 (IR 61), and in a letter
from the Respondent to Mr. de Jong dated 16
January 2012 (IR 83 – 84).
There is no evidence that the Respondent was ever asked to take steps to
obtain any such information prior to 8 April 2011; and there
is no evidence of
circumstances that would necessarily have required him to do that.
In his letter to the Applicant dated 22 November 2011, the Applicant’s
solicitor said:
As you know, those subpoenas were issued by the Court at the
request of the ICL. The purpose of inspecting the records was to ascertain
whether or not [the Child] has complied with Mr de Jong's recommendation that
she undergo ‘focussed alcohol and drug counselling’
for a minimum of
twelve months.
The timing of the subpoenas appears to be consistent with the
Respondent’s proposal to the Court in September 2010 that the
time with the Child be reviewed after a period of 12 months and that any
increase in her access to the child then be subject
to compliance with what
became the counselling order.
29. The Respondent sent the material obtained by those subpoenas to Mr. de
Jong with a letter dated 16 January 2012 (IR 83-84), in
which he also gave Mr.
de Jong information concerning the content of other documents the Respondent had
inspected in the possession
of Youth and Family
30. In addition to the two reports by Mr. de Jong already referred to there
was a third report dated 2 February 2010. All three reports
were included in the
Investigation Report and received appropriate attention in the Investigation
In its reasons for its determination the Board said (at p.6):
The Board has considered several reports of the Psychologist, and
from their content, it is clear to the Board that the Psychologist
aware of the specific issues relating to the mother's alleged drug use and
failure to attend counselling.
Having regard to those reports and to all of the background evidence we have
canvassed in the preceding paragraphs, we agree with
that observation.
31. Having regard to the material that was before the Board when it made its
decision to dismiss the complaint, in our view it was
clearly open to the Board
to be satisfied that there was no reasonable likelihood the Respondent would be
found guilty of either
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct in respect of this allegation.
Based on all the relevant evidence to be found in the Investigation Report,
we have reached the same conclusion.
If the correct interpretation of s. 458 of the Act requires the Tribunal to
consider again whether the complaint could and ought
to have been summarily
dismissed under s. 451(a), we conclude that the Board’s discretion was
properly exercised in respect
of this allegation.
If, alternatively, the correct interpretation of s. 458 of the Act requires
the Tribunal to actually determine the complaint, the
outcome will be the same.
The Tribunal is of the view that in those circumstances, the complaint so far as
it relates to this allegation,
should be dismissed and that will be achieved if
the Board’s decision stands.
THE COMPLAINT THAT THE RESPONDENT PRESSURED THE COMPLAINANT INTO AGREEING
TO EXECUTE COURT ORDERS IN RESPECT TO ACCESS TO HIS DAUGHTER,
AND IN DOING SO
THREATENED THE COMPLAINANT
32. The complaint relates to the orders that were made by the Court on 2
February 2012, referred to at par. [15](f) above (
2012 Orders
). So far as
relevant, those orders are at IR 69-74.
33. The evidence in the Investigator’s Report makes it plain that
increases in the Mother’s access to the Child were of
central concern to
the Applicant throughout his involvement with the Respondent in connection with
the litigation between the Applicant
and the Mother.
An overall effect of the 2012 Orders was to increase the Mother’s
access to the Child.
The Applicant was convinced that as with par. 3(b) of the 2010 Orders, the
2012 Orders were a result of acquiescence by the Respondent
to the wishes of the
Mother, against the recommendations of Mr. de Jong (as the Court-appointed
psychologist), and that the Respondent
was acting against the interests of both
the Child and the Applicant in urging the Applicant to agree to the 2012
The Applicant perceived that the Respondent was ignoring information that
both he and his mother provided to the Respondent demonstrating
that the Mother
was non-compliant with pre-conditions to her increased access (IR 35-36).
34. The Applicant plainly believed from early after the event that he was
subjected to inappropriate pressure by the Respondent to
agree to further
increases in the mother’s access from 2 February 2012 (IR 36-37).
Specifically, at IR 37 he said (in an undated
letter addressed “To: Whom
It May Concern”) that during the proceedings on 2 February 2012:
Family Law Court in Burnie on February 2nd 2012, there were two
days allowed for trial.
The Magistrate spoke to the lawyers and instructed that they speak to both
parents to try to come to a satisfactory agreement, without
The ICL, David Walker, came and spoke to me and strongly suggested that I
sign the access agreement or it would be a worse outcome
for me if I decided to
proceed, as the Magistrate did not want it to go to trial. Also if we wished to
proceed with the trial, it
would not go ahead at this time, but be deferred to a
later date.
Both my mother and I were dismayed & shocked by what happened that
day. I felt I was pushed into signing the agreement, and we
were effectively
gagged from speaking out about our concerns or presenting information which
proved our concerns.
35. The Applicant’s mother essentially confirmed the impressions
attributed to her in that letter in a letter she sent to the
Board dated 14 May
2013, in which she said (at IR 235):
I was present at the Burnie Court on 2nd February 2012.
I was shocked at the way Mr Walker spoke to Daniel that day, my opinion is
that he spoke in a very threatening manner and made it
clear that Daniel should
sign the orders, or if he insisted on proceeding to trial, then the outcome
would be worse for him.
ln [a submission to the Board], Mr. Walker states that it is an important
part of the role of the ICL to express a view honestly and
"without fear or
I don't believe this has happened in this case. Mr De Jong made
recommendations, which I believe Mr Walker either overlooked or chose
He has clearly favoured the mother.
........ Mr Walker insisted on increasing the access time with [the
Child’s] mother.
36. In his submissions to the Board on this point the Respondent denied that
he acted inappropriately or, more specifically, threateningly,
on 2 February
His submissions are annexure “B” to the Investigation report at
IR 80-82 (excluding attachments).
He began with the accurate observation that the Applicant’s complaint
initially asserted that he had said to the Applicant
at the Court on 2 February
if you do not sign the Orders, and go into Court I will make it a
lot worse for you
”. He denied that he used those words and that was
not how the complaint was ultimately framed.
He then provided the following more general response to this allegation (at
“............
2. In my role as Independent Children's Lawyer over 25 years, I have been
involved in many conferences and negotiations and can say
I have never
threatened a parent in such a way.
3. Mr. Roberts was represented at all times during the negotiations at
..... capable Counsel [who] I do not believe would have let such a threat
be made without complaint.
4. The negotiations took place at Court over a large part of the day with
both parties represented by Counsel.
5. It may well be that Mr. Roberts felt pressure to settle. No doubt the
Mother also did.
6. It is possible I expressed a view to both parties that if the trial
proceeded they
might not achieve what they each wanted or even what the proposed
agreement was.
7. An important part of the rule of Independent Children's Lawyer is to
express a view honestly and "without fear or favour whether
parents agree or
8. Another important factor which was present was the need in [the
Child’s] best
interests to bring about an end to the long standing litigation and
hostilities between her parents (as much as possible).
37. In his detailed report dated 2 February 2012 (IR 128-135) Mr. de Jong
concluded with recommendations that essentially extended
to increased access by
the Mother, including unsupervised daytime access to the Child.
It is clear from the report that Mr. de Jong paid considerable attention to
the Child’s welfare in the particular context of
concerns that had plainly
been communicated to him, and that he had confirmed for himself by direct
interviews, about exposing the
Child to unsupervised access by the Mother.
Broadly speaking, whilst Mr. de Jong’s recommendations did not descend
to the same level of detail as the 2012 Orders, those
orders do not seem to be
at odds with his recommendations.
38. As important background to those recommendations, we note that the letter
dated 16 January 2012 to Mr. de Jong in which the Respondent
commissioned his
report dated 2 February 2012 (IR 83-84, excluding attachments) the Respondent
provided a very full brief, which
plainly extended to evidence concerning the
Mother’s alleged unreliability and history of drug and alcohol issues,
the evidence that had been obtained by the subpoenas issued by the
Respondent and otherwise.
In addition, Mr. de Jong’s report recites in detail the information
that he obtained at interview with the Applicant on 31
January 2012, in which it
is clear the Applicant took full advantage of the opportunity to put to Mr. de
Jong his case against increased
access for the Mother.
39. In the circumstances, robust advocacy by the Respondent in favour of the
orders in the terms that were made on 2 February 2012
in his role as ICL, that
were not inconsistent with Mr. de Jong’s recommendations, was not only
appropriate but, if it became
necessary, probably part of the duties attaching
to his role as ICL.
Included in the Investigation Report at IR 174-189 is a document headed
“GUIDELINES FOR INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYERS”
described as
guidelines “
endorsed by the Chief Justice of the Family Court of
Australia, and also by the Federal Magistrates Court of
Relevantly, those include the following:
The role of the ICL is unique. The [ICL] ..... has special
responsibilities.
Decisions in particular cases as to how the !CL progresses the case and
how s/he involves the child in the case are ultimately, ....
in the ICL's
discretion.
The !CL is expected to use his/her professional judgment and skill,
subject to any directions or orders of the Court. ......
The way in which the ICL acts may not always meet with the approval of
parties or the child, but this does not mean that the ICL has failed in
professional responsibilities.
The ICL Is to act impartially and in a manner which is unfettered by
considerations other than the best interests of the child.
The ICL must be truly independent of the Court and the parties to the
proceedings.
The professional relationship provided by the ICL will be one of a
skilful, competent and impartial best interests advocate.
The ICL should assist the parties to reach a resolution, whether by
negotiation or judicial determination, that is in the child's
The ICL is to promote the timely resolution of the proceedings that is
with the best interests of the child.
............
The ICL is to remain independent, objective and focused upon promoting
the child's best interests In all dealings throughout the
proceedings.
The ICL must at all times be and be seen to be independent and at arm's
from any other party to the proceedings.
The ICL is to act as an "honest broker" on behalf of the child in any
negotiations
with the other parties and their legal representatives.
40. Having regard to the material that was before the Board when it made its
decision to dismiss the complaint, in our view it was
clearly open to the Board
to be satisfied that there was no reasonable likelihood the Respondent would be
found guilty of either
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct in respect of this allegation.
Based on all the relevant evidence to be found in the Investigation Report,
we have reached the same conclusion.
If the correct interpretation of s. 458 of the Act requires the Tribunal to
consider again whether the complaint could and ought
to have been summarily
dismissed under s. 451(a), we conclude that the Board’s discretion was
properly exercised in respect
of this allegation.
If, alternatively, the correct interpretation of s. 458 of the Act requires
the Tribunal to actually determine the complaint, the
outcome will be the same.
The Tribunal is of the view that in those circumstances, the complaint so far as
it relates to this allegation,
should be dismissed and that will be achieved if
the Board’s decision stands.
THE COMPLAINT THAT THE RESPONDENT
FAILED TO ACT IN THE BEST INTERESTS OF THE CHILD
41. Albeit that we would express it differently, the Board (correctly in our
view) identified the more specific elements of this allegation
to be that -
- the Respondent acted contrary to Mr. de Jong’s recommendations;
- contrary to his proper role and his duty as ICL, the Respondent conducted
himself with bias in favour of the mother.
42. In his submission to the Board in response to this allegation the
Respondent made the point that it is not uncommon for one or
both parties to
disputes concerning custody of and access to a child to have different views as
to what is in the child's best interest
(IR 80, par. No. 1).
It should hardly need to be said that were it otherwise, there would not
commonly be any need for separate representation of children.
Self-evidently,
separate representation is substantially designed to ensure that a child’s
interests are properly and objectively
identified, addressed and provided for in
circumstances where the parties are not in agreement about those things.
This was without doubt such a case. As the evidence discloses, the
Respondent was unquestionably correct to say in his submission
to the Board
The proceedings were contentious, and there was high conflict
between the parties
43. The evidence largely supports related points made by the Respondent in
his submission to the Board (at IR 81) that:
(a) There was never any indication from the Applicant’s solicitor that he
was of the view that the Respondent was acting otherwise
than in the
Child’s best interest;
(b) No application was made for his removal as ICL; and
(c) The only opposition to his conduct of the case was the Mother’s
objecting to the Subpoenas that he issued for her records
with Youth &
Family Focus.
The second and third points needs some qualification in light of the
Tribunal’s finding in
Roberts v Edwards
[2019] TASLPDT 8 (at
[29]-[31]) that the Applicant did enquire of his solicitor whether he could have
the Respondent removed as ICL
and that the solicitor was guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct in giving incorrect advice in response to
that enquiry to
the effect that it was not possible to seek the removal of an
That said, our conclusions concerning the allegations made by the Applicant
against the Respondent, and the evidence concerning the
allegations and the
Respondent’s conduct generally in his role as ICL, do not suggest any
substantial prospect of having the
Respondent removed from that role.
44. There is no substance in the proposition that the Respondent acted
contrary to Mr. de Jong’s recommendations, and we need
say little more
45. It is to be noted that the Court approved the 2012 Orders in the
knowledge of what Mr. de Jong had recommended. It made those
orders by consent
of the parties in the knowledge that they were advanced to the Court as consent
orders by counsel acting on behalf
of the Applicant and by counsel acting on
behalf of the Mother, and by the Respondent as ICL.
46. So far as the interests of the Child were to be specifically addressed,
the Court had before it a “Pre-trial Document”
filed by the
Respondent on 27 January 2012 (IR 211-212), which identified Mr. de Jong’s
earlier report dated 12 April 2010
and another report to be provided at trial
(clearly, his report dated 2 February 2012), together with the documents
subpoenaed by
the Respondent from Youth and Family Focus and the Department of
Health and Human Services, Drug and Alcohol Service.
That document proposed orders that were not far removed from those finally
agreed upon on 2 February 2012 and the “short summary
of argument”
advanced for those orders by the Respondent in that document was as follows:
(a) It seems clear that the Father has been the primary carer of the
(b) Whilst both parents have been involved in alcohol and drug use, it
appears that the Mother's use has been more serious and ongoing
although she
asserts it has ceased.
(c) It appears that the Child could be at risk in the care of the Mother for
extended periods of time if she has not changed her
(d) It appears that the Father has a greater capacity to provide for the
physical and emotional needs of the Child but he may not
promote the Mother's
relationship with the child.
(e) Mr. de Jong has recommended that the Mother should have psychological
treatment and ongoing drug and alcohol counselling before
there is an extension
of the time that the Child spends with her (but this is subject to the proposed
further assessment).
(f) Both parties have raised allegations as to conditions in the other's
the Child and the
assertions as to risk to the Child and those factual allegations need to be
tested. The views expressed above are
therefore preliminary views subject to
evidence at Trial.
None of that is inconsistent with Mr. de Jong’s recommendations and
nothing there suggests bias in favour of the Mother or
lack of attention to the
interests of the Child.
47. The same is to be said of the involvement of the Respondent in earlier
proceedings relating, in particular, to the 2010 Orders.
Those were again orders made by consent, by a court that had Mr. de
Jong’s recommendations before it, along with documents
subpoenaed by the
Respondent from Youth and Family Focus and the Department of Health and Human
Services, Drug and Alcohol Service.
And again, the Court had before it a “Pre-trial Document” filed
by the Respondent on 15 September 2010 (IR 209-210) in
which arguments were
advanced by the Respondent in favour of proposed orders, and both the proposed
orders and the arguments were
consistent with Mr. de Jong’s
recommendations.
48. The Tribunal agrees with the Board’s assessment that evidence from
the Respondent’s file to be found in the Investigation
Report supports a
statement by the Respondent in his submission to the Board (at IR 80) that
carried out independent investigation, subpoenaed
information, arranged expert reports and from time to time in my role as "honest
broker" attempted to mediate agreement in correspondence and by Independent
Children's Lawyer conference.
To that we would add the more pertinent observation that our consideration
of that evidence discloses nothing to suggest the Respondent
did not bring to
his work as ICL an unbiased mind; and certainly we are not persuaded that he
acted in any way at any time contrary
to Mr. de Jong’s recommendations (or
indeed inconsistently with anything that conclusions expressed by Mr. de Jong
as to the Child’s best interests); or that he acted in any way
at any time that indicated bias in favour of the mother, against
Child’s interests.
49. Having regard to the material that was before the Board when it made its
decision to dismiss the complaint, in our view it was
clearly open to the Board
to be satisfied that there was no reasonable likelihood the Respondent would be
found guilty of either
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct in respect of this allegation.
Based on all the relevant evidence to be found in the Investigation Report,
we have reached the same conclusion.
If the correct interpretation of s. 458 of the Act requires the Tribunal to
consider again whether the complaint could and ought
to have been summarily
dismissed under s. 451(a), we conclude that the Board’s discretion was
properly exercised in respect
of this allegation.
If, alternatively, the correct interpretation of s. 458 of the Act requires
the Tribunal to actually determine the complaint, the
outcome will be the same.
The Tribunal is of the view that in those circumstances, the complaint so far as
it relates to this allegation,
should be dismissed and that will be achieved if
the Board’s decision stands.
50. Having been asked to determine this matter without a hearing, and having
regard to all of the materials the Board had before
it when it made its
determination to summarily dismiss the Applicant’s complaint under s.
451(a) of the Act, we have come to
the same conclusion as was reached by the
Board in respect of each of the three matters of complaint and therefore the
as a whole.
51. We have also concluded that if it is in fact the function of the Tribunal
on this Application to actually determine the complaint,
for all of the reasons
expressed as to each of the allegations we would dismiss the complaint.
52. Regardless of whether s. 458 of the Act requires the Tribunal to consider
again whether the complaint could and ought to have
been summarily dismissed
under s. 451(a), or alternatively, to actually determine the complaint, the
outcome will be the same.
The complaint should be dismissed and that will be achieved if the
Board’s decision stands.
53. In the circumstances, no order in respect of the complaint itself should
be necessary. The Board’s determination that the
complaint is dismissed
will stand.
54. It is also unnecessary to make any order in respect of the Application.
None of the orders provided for in Division 3 of Part
4.7 of the Act are
appropriate to the determination the Tribunal has come to and the Tribunal
having discharged its function under
s. 458 of the act, no order is necessary to
dispose of the Application.
Those materials amount to a
total of 252 pages, comprising a document headed “INVESTIGATION
REPORT” (pp. 1 – 14)
and the annexures to that report listed at p. 3
of the report as marked ‘A’ to ‘K’, which we will refer
in totality as “
Investigation Report
”, as appropriate.
http://classic.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/tas/TASLPDT/2019/8.pdf
Roberts v Edwards
[2019] TASLPDT 8, [4] – [7].
The issue has been argued in
two appeals to the Court in 2020 but as will be seen, in the one in which a
judgment has already been
handed down the Judge expressly found it unnecessary
to determine the point.
Cf,, the nature of the
rehearing under s. 458(1)(a) according to
Boland v Boxall
[2016] TASSC
We note that a more demanding
interpretation was given to the words
“no reasonable
” by Refshauge ACJ in
Legal Practitioner “M“
v Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory
ACTSC 312, at [135]. The equivalent provision in the
Legal Profession Act
s. 412(1)(a).
His Honour said:
Section 412
Legal Profession Act
provides that it may
dismiss the complaint if it is satisfied that there is “no reasonable
likelihood that the practitioner
will be found guilty by the ACAT“ as
required. The words “no reasonable likelihood“ are strong words
that there must be, for such a finding, absolutely no likelihood of
the .... relevant finding.
However, closer examination of all that his Honour said on the point in the
context of other, related, provisions of the ACT legislation
that differ from
the Tasmanian Act, mean that the case is distinguishable from this one and in
our view the correct interpretation
is the one adopted in respect of the WA
legislation that we have quoted from
Betts v Legal Profession Complaints
That is largely a legacy of s.
458 as it was before amendments made to it by the
Legal Profession Amendment
, as outlined by Blow CJ in
Boland v Boxall
at [6]-[7].
Section 433(1) provides for
summary dismissal of a complaint without conducting or completing an
investigation. It provides:
(1) The Board must dismiss a complaint if –
(a) the complaint is in the opinion of the
Board vexatious, misconceived, frivolous or lacking in substance;
conduct complained about has been the subject of a previous complaint under
the Legal Profession Act 1993 (the
repealed Act
Act that has been dismissed; or
. . . . . . . .
(d) the conduct complained about is the
subject of another complaint; or
(e) the complaint is not one that the Board
has power to deal
set out the allegations as they appear at IR 2 – 3, save that we have
removed identification of the child and her
mother by their names.
He did not have leave of
the Court to copy those documents.
The Board correctly noted
that the Applicant also brought his concerns about the Respondent to the
attention of Ministers of the
Crown and others who he perceived might help him,
and sought to enlist their assistance. The evidence discloses that the
Applicant’s
mother made similar overtures.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (464 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter