URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASLPDT/2023/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:16:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
NX & LX v A Legal Practitioner QDW [2023] TASLPDT 2; (1 August 2023)
Legal Profession Disciplinary Tribunal
Citation : NX
& LX v A Legal Practitioner QDW [2023]TASLPDT 2
Parties NX &
LX Applicant/ Complainants
Legal Practitioner QDW
Respondent/Practitioner
DR Wallace –
Deputy Chairperson
February 2020
Delivered On 1
Determination The complaint lacked substance and is dismissed
Applicant/Complainants: In
Respondent/Practitioner: Mr T Barrett
Applicants: In person
Respondent/Practitioner Tierney
The Tribunal ordered pursuant to s.470(20 of the Legal Profession
2007 that the names of the parties be anonymised and not published
communicated to any other person.
Reasons for Decision
Background to Complaint
is a rehearing of the determination by the
Legal Profession Board
Tasmania (Board) pursuant to Section 433 (1)(a) of the
Legal Profession Act
(‘LPA’) summarily dismissing as lacking in substance, the
Applicant/Complainants (hereafter the Complainants) complaint
against QDW an
Australian legal practitioner (hereafter the practitioner).
It arose from the law practice of QDW’s a [law practice] being solicitors
for the Complainants in litigation concerning the
defective building of their
house in Southern Tasmania. The practitioner was the sole principal of the law
practice and employed
solicitor ‘KBC’.
matter is related to a rehearing by the Tribunal of determinations by the Board
of matters relating to complaint allegations by
the Complainants against
‘KBC’ an Australian lawyer. This application was heard on the 24th
of February 2020, at the
same time as the related matter. Following the decision
of the Supreme Court of Tasmania
clarifying the powers of the Tribunal, the application resumed in March 2023 in
the related matter. The Tribunal now publishes its
reasons in this and the
the 3 December 2013 the Complainants first complained of the practitioner to the
original complaint on the Board’s required form was that the
“practitioner] approved and endorsed [KBC’s] actions and
behaviour. He did not want to hear our grievances and did not
advise us to whom
we could complain to
They recorded they hoped to achieve the practitioner disciplined, to resolve a
dispute about fees and to receive financial compensation.
A letter to the Board accompanying the original complaint, gave a brief history
of their engagement of the project manager, the
engagement of the builder of the
house, the discovery of defects, engagement of lawyers, and the course of
litigation culminating
in its settlement, and issues they had with
‘KBC’ and counsel engaged for them. The only reference to the
practitioner
was the last sentence of the letter “[
Mr QDW ] approved
and endorsed all of [‘KBC’s] actions”.
the 7 January 2014 the Complainants wrote to the
that they had given further
thought to their complaint and attached a revised complaint. The letter set out
their allegation and
the only interaction they had with the practitioner was
between the 1st of August 2012, and the 27
of September 2012. With
the assistance of the Board the complaint was revised to
that as follows -
“In or around August 2012, the Practitioner failed to address the
Complainants grievances and concerns in relation to the manner
in which their
legal matter was effected by the Practitioner’s legal firm and further
failed to conduct a proper review and
or assessment of the actions of the legal
practitioner who had carriage of the matter”.
practitioner was given notice of the complaint
and made a submission in
.The practitioner denied
the allegation and said he performed the work as required of him by his
engagement and advised the Complainants
accordingly. The Complainants responded
on the 28th of March 2014, to the practitioner’s submission to the Board,
expand their complaint to matters the practitioner had not been asked
The Board Determination
Complaint Report (
prepared by the Chief Executive of the Board dated the 7 April 2014 for the
Board’s consideration. No investigation was
necessary. The Complaint
Report for ‘KBC’ ,(
) of 8 pages was before the Board but
as that matter was being investigated, no other material concerning the
complaint was. The
report contains the material that was before the
Board when it made its determination. The Board had both the
practitioner’s
response and the Complainant’s response to that of
the practitioner, before it. The Board gave written reasons for determining
complaint was lacking in substance and in accordance with s. 433(1)(a) of
‘LPA’ dismissed the complaint.
The Rehearing
10.1 The Complainants lodged an application to have the Tribunal rehear its
determination on the 13 of May 2013 after been given notice
by the Board of its
decision, even though reasons had not been given. It was accepted a valid
application had been made. The investigation
in the related matter had not been
concluded and no steps were taken until it was, as both this and, if an
application to rehear
was made in the related matter, were to be dealt with
10.2 Both matters were substantially delayed for reasons which are
unnecessary to canvass but were heard in February 2020, and the
related matter
as well in March 2020 and March 2023.
10.3 On the rehearing the Tribunal had regard only to the material and
information that was before the Board when it made its determination.
account of submissions in the context of the complaint and the provisions of the
‘LPA’ as to the conduct amounting
to either unsatisfactory
professional conduct or professional misconduct. The Tribunal took no account of
extraneous and irrelevant
information and material that was not before the Board
when it made its determination. A large volume of such material found its
into submissions.
Tribunal can ascertain the material facts from the written material before the
Board contained in the folder entitled “
Material Before the Legal
Profession Board on which it made its Decision”
which contains the two
Complaint Reports
We are satisfied of the following -
‘KBC’] was the solicitor assigned to act for the Complainants by the
law practice and he engaged counsel.
practitioner had no direct dealings with the Complainants until he received a
letter on Wednesday the 1st of August
. The practitioner as sole
principal of the law practice obtained general knowledge of the Complainants
matter during its course by
being kept informed in weekly file management
Complainants letter of the 1
of August 2012 relevantly outlined
their position and what they wanted from the practitioner as follows -
(i) it expressed a concern they were only 5 weeks away from trial and had
no confidence in counsel engaged
(ii) stated they were asked to instruct counsel to enter negotiations to
secure a compromise settlement”
, but they considered our
case is strong and solid ... not only do we want to be properly
compensated for our financial loss but we want to see justice
. (iii) contained a paragraph stating “During
the past 3 years we
have been given estimates of the costs to trial. The latest was in September
then the following quote from the estimate was set out and
the costs to the end of the
including this firms fees, counsels fees, expert fees, court filing fees,
and GST is $55,000.0
. The paragraph further stated that
a sum of $81,503.00 had been invoiced since 1 September 2011 and the total paid
to the law practice
was $141,382.56.
(iv) In a new paragraph it stated
“We are in an impossible
situation and turn to you in desperation as we do not know what to do. The case
is somewhat complex,
with lots of complicated facets.”
and later in a new paragraph stated-
“On Friday (27
) we had a 20 minute telephone
conference (we reside in the UK)
with [counsel] and Mr [‘KBC’]. We discovered with horror that
we were not able to discuss the main basic issues. They
had not been
understood. It was proposed to us ...that we instruct [counsel] to invite the
principal solicitor and his assistant
solicitor acting for the respondents over
from Adelaide for the day to enable [ counsel] and Mr [‘KBC’] to
it out’. How can we possibly contemplate doing
and then the last two paragraphs followed which are-
have just spent the past 24 hours working on how we feel is
the best way of salvaging an appalling situation. Perhaps you might like
consult with [Mr ‘KBC’] on this development
(vii) “We d
o not want to consult or speak to anyone outside of your
company without consulting you first and asking if you would please help
We ask, as a matter of urgency, if you would look into [to] the status of our
case, review recent correspondence and assess our situation.
We sincerely
trust we do not cause any offence but the situation leaves us no other
alternative”
Respectfully yours
The numbering (i) to (vii) and highlighting in bold is ours.
practitioner responded the same day by
as follows-
“I refer to your letter of 1 August 2012 sent to me by
As requested I shall review the status of your case in the context of your
concerns and I expect to be able to advise you of the outcome
August 2012.”
16. The Complainants responded by email the next day the 2nd of August 2012
“We cannot thank you enough for agreeing to look into matters
relating to our case and we shall refrain from making any decision
[‘KBC’] until we have received your findings.
We have been informed that [counsel] and Mr [‘KBC’] have the
view ( which is not ours or what the evidence argues) that
the builder must bear
a substantial amount of the responsibility for our financial loss and any
settlement with [‘project manager’]
must reflect this. If your
enquiries lead you to the financial status of the builder you ought to be aware
that a paragraph was removed
from our ‘comprehensive’ Witness
Statement. We agreed to its removal to keep all our focus on [‘project
The paragraph that was removed is set out below. Mr
[‘KBC’ ]communicated with us 14 June 2011 and again on 6 July 2011
when he informed us that he was conducting a ‘search’ on the
[builder’s] asset. However, [the builder]r sold his
house and we were
unable to quarantine the proceeds. We supply this information because otherwise
you will not come across it otherwise
Once again our
“[ NX & LX “]
The email set out the removed paragraph 148 that ‘KBC’ removed
from the Complainants witness statement because it had
been inserted by the
Complainants, was irrelevant to the case for trial, and consequently
inadmissible.
practitioner did not respond to the email of the 2
of August 2012.
There was no express or implicit extension of his retainer to review and report
other than agreed earlier. He provided
his report on the 6 August
practitioner ‘s response to the Board following the complaint disclosed
the extent and effort he went to, and the enquiries
he made, in undertaking his
review and preparing and providing his report and advice
report, firstly dealt with 5 matters of factual and legal issues the
Complainants matter involved. They were clearly set out and
the practitioner
concluded in that part of his review it “
has not disclosed any material
in the advice provided to
you by either [counsel] or Mr [‘KBC’]”
the report dealt with matters for the Complainants consideration. The context
was in assessing the Complainants current
situation in the litigation, as
possibly negotiating a settlement as distinct from proceeding with two imminent
court proceedings,
bearing unrecoverable costs arising from the first for
discovery whatever the result, and the second court proceedings to trial and
waiting for a decision. The practitioner set out a range of damages he opined
were recoverable in a best case, worst case scenario
of establishing a 80%
proportional liability against the project manager. The practitioner advised,
that compared to his view, counsel’s
opinion was well into the higher end
of the range of damages. The practitioner concluded that pursuing a possible
settlement at the
level suggested by counsel “
is commercially
appropriate and if achieved removes the real risk of a lower figure being
awarded by the
the practitioner’s report and advice the litigation settled about the
of August 2012 after counsel negotiated a settlement with
the project manager’s
next communication the practitioner received from the Complainants was the
of September
The relevant parts are set
out as follows-
made you aware that we had great concerns and anxieties over
the way our court case was being dealt with and registered elements
of our deep
dissatisfaction in our email to you of the 1 August 2012.
...........We reserve the right not to pay invoices........
Mr[‘KBC’] without authority, approval or instruction has
used Settlement Trust Account funds to pay [a law firm’s]
invoices which
we seriously contest.
..........................
Please will you look into this matter and rectify the situation
immediately.
Thank you for your consideration
Kind Regards
the 27th of September 2012, the practitioner replied by
to the Complainants email
of September, as follows -
indicated in my review of the 6 of August 2012, my review of
this matter did not reveal anything that would warrant dissatisfaction
part. Its subsequent settlement was in accord with the independent assessments
of three legal practitioners.
As your claimed reservation of the right not to pay this firm’s
invoices is inconsistent with the terms upon which this
firm was engaged, such
a right is not able to be reserved. The deduction of this firm’s costs
was done with my approval.”
next communication the practitioner received from the Complainants was the next
day the 28 of September 2012.
Part of it is set out below -
“We wish to make it clear to you our concerns and dissatisfaction
are over the ‘entire’ way our case has been
handled. Although
neither you nor[‘KBC’] have expressed any interest in exactly what
our grievances are we shall continue
to produce a comprehensive document
outlining them...”
Practitioners Response to Board
receiving notice of the complaint, the practitioner responded to the Board on
the 23rd of January 2014.
confirmed the correspondence already set out in the preceding paragraphs and the
extent of his review and advice in accordance
with what was asked of him on the
1st August 2012. The practitioner also advised the Board of the exchange of
emails of the 25th
and 27th September concerning the costs from settlement
Complainants’ response to practitioners’ submission
Complainants responded to the practitioner’s submission to the Board on
the 28th of March 2014.
asserted the practitioner had not addressed four concerns raised with him in
their letter
of August 2012 being:
concerns in respect of ‘KBC’ briefing to [counsel] and [counsels]
severe lack of knowledge.
‘KBC’ failure to provide costs estimate in accordance with the
‘KBC’ failure to secure the asset of the builder.
‘KBC’s ‘tampering’ with our Witness
The Complainants accepted and were satisfied the practitioner did conduct a
The reference to letter
, were the Complainants emails of the 1st of
August 2012, and the 2nd of August 2012, set out previously.
It is noted the practitioner was not sent a copy of the Complainants letter
of the 28th of March 2014, so he never responded. The
Board considered the
practitioner had responded as the matters raised had concerned ‘KBC’
to which he reported to the
Complainants there were no material faults in his
advice that warranted their concern.
Board Determination
Board had before it all the information in the Complaint Report (
the 7th of April 2014.
complaint considered by the Board was the revised complaint of the 7th of
January 2014.
to the Board noted the grievances identified from the
Complainants letter of 1 August to the practitioner, were levelled at counsel
and not [KBC], but the practitioner had dealt with grievances as he said in his
had not disclosed any material faults in the advice provided to
you by either of [counsel] [KBC]
CMT report to the Board stated the Complainants response of 28 March 2014,
sought to raise other unrelated issues regarding ‘KBC’
that did not
form part of the Board correspondence to the practitioner (although are included
in their complaint of ‘KBC’).
CMT recommendation to the Board was to consider the complaint being summarily
dismissed pursuant to S.433(1)(a) of the ‘LPA’
as lacking in
substance and or misconceived. The Board dismissed the complaint as lacking in
Submissions to the Tribunal
32.1 The Complainants submissions to the Tribunal were several, repetitive,
and voluminous, and generally unhelpful to the task of
the Tribunal. They were
largely misconceived as not addressing the complaint. They agitated some form of
accessorial liability or
fault by the practitioner for alleged misconduct of
‘KBC’, by allegedly condoning such misconduct that founded
disciplinary
action against the practitioner.
32.2 The basis for this attack was speculation and assumptions, having no
basis in fact on any material or information before us,
but arising from the
practitioner’s responses to correspondence. Firstly, in his report of 6th
of August 2012, where he stated
his review disclosed no material faults in
counsel or [‘KBC’s] advice. Secondly, arising since the complaint
from the practitioners’ response to the Board that he had no
matter from
weekly file management meetings. There was no material what these constituted
before the Board or us.
32.3 The Complainants were making submissions similar to the original
complaint lodged with the Board in December
and revisited that early
form of complaint in their submission to the Tribunal dated the 27th of January
32.4 The complaint before the Board was revised from the earlier, to that of
of January 2014, set out at paragraph [7] of these reasons.
The revision of the original complaint was its replacement with the new
complaint now had a temporal connection to events in or around August 2012.
Submission 27.01.2016
The submission on page 1 stated in bold “
The substance of our
complaint made against [QDW] was that he had condoned the misconduct of Mr
The basis for this assertion by the Complainants throughout their submissions
is they extract the words of the practitioner from
his report of the
of August 2012, which stated
“it is apparent that my
review has not disclosed any material faults in the advices provided to you by
either [counsel] and
Mr [QDW] had confirmed in his submission that he had approved of
Mr [KBC’s] actions and
No such assertion is found in the practitioner’s submission to the
Board, nor was it contained in the practitioner’s
report of the
of August of 2012, to the Complainants.
(ii) Submission 15.01.2017 - 75 pp specifically 10 pages 65-75
The submission repeats the assertion that from communications with them and
the Board the practitioner was
“fully aware and gave total support to
Mr [KBC] behaviour and
He had made
no attempt to distance himself or create space between him and Mr
Later the submission continued that-
“ [practitioner]
was deliberately and systematically protecting
[‘LVR’] [of the project manager] throughout your firms engagement
you [ the practitioner] failed to adequately respond to our correspondence
in August /September 2012 and again in your submission
to the LPBT in January
2014. A proper investigation should have found that you had committed the
following offences;
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct
Professional
Not acting in
the clients best interests
incompetence
Fraud-taking
money under false pretences
Corruption.”
(iii) This submission also claimed
the practitioner failed to
answer the matters they say called for an answer, in their letter to the Board
of 28 March 2014.
We deal with this in paragraphs [36 -37] of these reasons when discussing
the complaint and making our determination.
(iv) Other submissions- the other submissions of the Complainants are
irrelevant as they placed information before us that was not
before the Board
or were repeating the submission that the practitioner is guilty of misconduct
because KBC must be guilty of misconduct.
practitioner by counsel made
submissions
. Counsel submitted
the complaint is that formulated from the Complainants letter to the Board of 7
January 2014, agreed to by the
Complainants and considered by the Board.
submitted that the letter of complaint of 7 January 2014 related to the events
around August 2012 to 25 September 2012, and
the events the Complainants were
looking at for the practitioner’s review and advice were those around the
timing of their
letter to the practitioner of 1 August 2012, and how they were
to go forward. Not, as later raised and submitted to the Tribunal,
‘entire’ conduct of KBC from the time of his being instructed in
August 2009 to completion of the retainer.
Consideration of Complaint and Determination
do not find it necessary to consider counsel’s other submissions.
our opinion the practitioner undertook what he was engaged to do by letter of
the 1 August 2012 and agreed to by email on the 2
of August 2012.
He was asked “
to look into the status of the case, review some of the
recent correspondence and assess our situation.”
The practitioner
agreed to review the status of the case in the context of their
preamble to the Complainants request was background information. There was no
retainer or request to -
(i) review ‘KBC’s briefing of counsel;
(ii) address or examine alleged failure to issue a cost estimate since
September 2011;
(iii) enquire into and review any failure to secure the builders asset;
(iv) enquire into or review alleged tampering with their Witness Statements
either in the request of 1 August or when incidentally
mentioned in the
Complainants email of the 2nd of August 2012.
There was no acknowledgement or agreement by the practitioner to add to or
vary the terms of his engagement of the 1st of August
None of the matters (i) to (iv) above were of any priority in the short
space of time the practitioner had to come to grips with
the issues he agreed to
assess in their case, prepare and finalise his advice and report.
circumstances conveyed to the practitioner was the status of the case, being the
pending court hearing in Melbourne over discovery
and getting ready for a trial
5 weeks away. In doing the review the recent correspondence was that from the
of July 2012, after the telephone conference with the
Complainants and their resistance to have counsel approach respondents for
out of court settlement, the subsequent written advice of both ‘KBC’
and counsel, the Complainants resistance to take
their lawyers advice, all in
this period up to and during the practitioner’s limited retainer to
produce the
420 of the ‘LPA’ defines unsatisfactory professional
unsatisfactory professional conduct
includes conduct
of an Australian legal practitioner occurring in connection with the practice of
law that falls short of the standard
of competence and diligence that a member
of the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably competent Australian legal
practitioner
421 of the ‘LPA’ defines professional misconduct as
For the purposes of this Act -
professional misconduct
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of an Australian
legal practitioner, where the conduct involves a substantial or consistent
failure to reach or maintain a reasonable standard of competence and diligence;
(b) conduct of an Australian legal practitioner whether occurring in
connection with the practice of law or occurring otherwise
than in the practice
of law that would, if established, justify a finding that the practitioner is
not a fit and proper person to
engage in egal practice.
is no material or information provided to the Tribunal of anything the
practitioner was involved in, aided, counselled, or participated
in or in any
way acted or omitted to act either with ‘KBC’ or counsel, or
performed himself that was or could be the
subject of disciplinary action being
taken against him as a legal practitioner or law practice concerning the
Complainants.
dismissal of complaints where no investigation has occurred is provided for in
Section 433(1)(a) of the ‘LPA’
which provides that-
(1) The Board must dismiss a complaint if-
a) the complaint is in the opinion of the Board vexatious,
misconceived, frivolous or lacking in substance
the reasons expressed we are satisfied the complaint has no prospect of success;
it is unarguable and must necessarily fail. It
is our determination that the
complaint lacks substance, and the Board’s determination to dismiss the
complaint under s.433(1)(a)
of the ‘LPA’ is not
complaint allegation and the content of the Complainants submissions before the
Tribunal were meritless of demonstrating any unsatisfactory
professional conduct
or professional misconduct of the practitioner. Yet, serious allegations were
made against him, including of
criminal conduct, when from the material before
us, all the practitioner did was to respond to what he was asked to do
competently
and in a timely way.
Determination
The Tribunal is satisfied the complaint is lacking in substance. The
determination of the Board that the complaint be dismissed pursuant
Legal Profession Act 2007
as lacking in substance was correct
and the complaint is dismissed.
The Legal Profession Board of
Tasmania v Disciplinary Tribunal [2022]TASSC
NX & LX v A legal
Practitioner KBC [2023] TASLPDT 1 of 1
Page 14 CRT Tab
Following discussions with
the Board as required by
letter 7.01.2014 Page 14-17
Letter Board
9.1.2014 ( not in CRT)
2014 Pages 28-121
Practitioner response to Board
Page 28-122
page 22 paragraph
Achieved in the
higher range set out
Page 28 - 122 CRT
Pages 125 of the
Submission 15.01.2017
page 2of 75 Index B Tab 2
submission 27.01 2016 page his 6
of August letter e 1 Index B Tab
submission 27.01.2016 page
1 Index B Tab 7
15.01.2017 page 1 Index B Tab2
submission 15.01.2017 page
1 Index B Tab 2
Submission 3
2023 Page 14
As set out and
contained in Practitioners response to Board Annexure D Pages 41-, 1-55 and
draft but not sent letter to Complainants
2012 Page 56-57
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (208 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter