URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCAT/2025/195.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SE v Crown Equipment Pty Limited [2025] TASCAT 195 (10 October 2025)
SE v Crown Equipment Pty Limited
[2025] TASCAT 195
Personal Compensation
SE (Worker)
Crown Equipment Pty Limited (Employer)
Hearing Date:
15 September 2025
Hearing Location:
Date of Orders:
10 October 2025
Date Reasons Issued:
10 October 2025
RM Grueber – Deputy President
Orders Made:
1. The employer is to reinstate weekly payments of workers compensation to
the worker as from 26 September 2023 to be paid in accordance
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
2. The parties have leave to
apply in respect to the quantum of any back payments of weekly payments of
compensation.
3. Within 14 days the parties are to file a joint
memorandum for proposed agreed orders in respect to the costs arising in
with the referral.
4. If the parties are unable to agree
proposed orders for the purposes of (3) then within 21 days the parties are to
each file and
serve submissions in respect to costs.
Catchwords:
Workers compensation – Entitlement to compensation – Whether
employer entitled to permanently terminate weekly payments
where worker receives
overtime payments in excess of weekly rate
Legislation Cited:
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
Cases Cited:
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of
Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian
Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
The Queen v A2
Walker v J & A Freeman Building Services
[2006] TASSC
Attorney-General (Tas) v CL
[2018] TASFC 6
Onestop Metal
Recycling Pty Ltd v Young
Director of Housing v
[2021] TASSC 33
Parsons v State of Tasmania
[2001] TASSC
White v Vero Insurance and Police Citizens & Youth Club
[2007] TASSC 88
Dianne Atkinson v Nipper Cleaning Services Pty Ltd
Rebecca Anne Viney v Roney Management Pty Ltd
[1996] TASSC
Parsons v State of Tasmania
[2001] TASSC 101
Representation:
Worker: J Dunn - McLean McKenzie & Topfer
Employer: N Willing - HWL
Publication Restriction:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication.
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Referral and background
worker has filed a referral pursuant to s 42 of the
Workers Rehabilitation
and Compensation Act 1988
(the Act) in connection with a back injury he
sustained on 16 May 2023.
worker’s claim for workers compensation was accepted by the employer.
Since the date of his injury the worker has been
certified as incapacitated for
work, either totally or partially, with no gap in certification. The
worker’s weekly rate payment
is $1,690.08.
worker’s usual employment with the employer was as a field service
technician, servicing equipment such as forklifts.
to 12 July the worker was certified as incapacitated for work. Between 12 July
2023 and 21 October 2023 the worker undertook
work for the employer as part of
an agreed return to work plan. During that time he was certified as fit for
suitable duties, being
“administrative duties only”. His
certification was subject to restrictions requiring rest breaks every 30
a lifting limit of 5kg and no operation of machinery. The
certification recognised that he had reduced capacity for bending, squatting
twisting, pulling and pushing, and standing and driving. The certification was
unrestricted in terms of hours of work. Following
20 October 2023 the worker
continued to undertake duties for the employer but at no time was certified as
fit for normal duties.
11 of the 12 pay weeks between 20 July 2023 and 12 October 2023 the worker
earned in excess of his weekly compensation rate.
was an agreed fact that the employer terminated the worker’s entitlement
to weekly payments of compensation on or about 26
September 2023.
September 2023 the worker has had periods in which his earnings were less than
the weekly payment rate. The agreed facts included
a summary of payments between
8 June 2023 and 17 October 2024. In respect to the 54 pay weeks after the date
of termination the
worker earned in excess of the weekly payment figure on 9
occasions and equal to or less than that figure on the remaining 45
29 February 2024 the worker has topped up his earnings using his leave
entitlements.
was an agreed fact that the termination of the worker’s weekly payments by
the employer was made in reliance on s 86(1)(b)
of the Act. Section 86 sets out
circumstances where an employer may terminate or reduce payments without an
order by the Tribunal.
Section 86(1)(b) applies in the circumstance where a
worker is in receipt of weekly payments in respect of partial incapacity and
receiving weekly earnings in excess of the amount upon which the amount of the
weekly payment was determined.
simply, the issue before me is that the employer contends that s 86(1)(b)
permits it to permanently cease making weekly payments
and the worker contends
that the entitlement to cease weekly payments is only for the period that the
worker is receiving weekly
payments in excess of the amount upon which such
weekly payment was determined.
issue turns on the interpretation of s 86. Section 86 provides:
86. Cases in which employer may terminate or reduce payments
(1) Except in pursuance of a determination
made by the Tribunal under
an employer may, subject to this section, terminate or reduce a weekly payment
made to a worker only where –
(a) the payment is in respect of total incapacity
and the worker has returned to work;
(b) the worker is in receipt of the weekly payment
in respect of partial incapacity and is receiving weekly earnings in excess of
the amount upon which the amount of such weekly payment was determined;
(c) a medical
practitioner who has examined the worker has certified that, in his opinion, the
worker has wholly recovered or substantially
recovered from the effects of the
injury in respect of which the payment is being made or that the worker's
incapacity is no longer
due, wholly or substantially, to that injury; or
(d) . . . . . . . .
(e) a worker's entitlement to weekly payments
has expired as provided by
section 69B(2E)
(2) A certificate referred to in
specify the grounds upon which the opinion expressed in it is given.
(3) An employer who, for the reasons
specified in
intends to terminate or reduce a weekly payment made to a worker shall cause to
be served on the worker –
(a) a notice of his intention to terminate the
weekly payment being made to the worker, or to reduce that payment by the amount
in the notice at the expiration of a period of 10 days from the day on
which the notice was served on the worker; and
(b) where the employer's intention to terminate or
reduce is based on a certificate referred to in
a copy of that certificate.
(3A) A notice referred to in
to contain a statement informing the worker of the worker's right to refer the
termination or reduction of the weekly payments
to the Tribunal for
determination.
(4) A worker who has been served with a
notice under
who wishes to dispute the termination or reduction of the weekly payments being
made to him may within a period of 60 days from
the date on which the weekly
payments were terminated or reduced, refer the matter to the Tribunal for
determination.
(5) An employer who terminates or reduces a
weekly payment otherwise than in accordance with this section is guilty of an
and is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding 20 penalty
Consideration
approach to construction of a legislative provision is well settled. The meaning
of s 86 is to be determined according to the
ordinary and grammatical meaning of
the text having regard to the context and purpose of the surrounding sections
and of the Act:
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory
[2009] HCA 41
and [47] and
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
. A purposive
approach is to be taken and context is to be considered at the first stage of
the process of construction: The Queen
[2019] HCA 35
objects of the Act are set out in s 2A. They include to establish a
rehabilitation and compensation scheme for workplace injuries
that provides fair
and appropriate compensation to workers and is fair, affordable, efficient and
affective. The scheme of the Act
includes provisions relating to entitlement to
compensation in Pt III, provisions regulating claims for compensation in Pt IV,
in respect to the amount of compensation payable in Pt VI and
provisions relating to the payment of compensation in Pt VII. Section
within Pt VII. The Act is beneficial legislation that as a general rule ought be
given an interpretation favourable to workers,
subject to the confines of the
actual language employed, which may be relevant to construing a provision which
is ambiguous:
Walker v J & A Freeman Building Services
[2006] TASSC
Attorney-General (Tas) v CL
[2018] TASFC 6
is useful to first note s 69, which falls within Pt VI. Section 69(1)
establishes the rate at which weekly payments are to be
paid for total and
partial incapacity:
69. Amount of compensation in case of incapacity
(1) Subject to this section, where total or
partial incapacity for work results from an injury suffered by a worker and
existence of such total or partial incapacity is supported by a
certificate in a form approved by the Board signed by a medical practitioner
accredited person, the compensation payable to him under this Act is–
(a) in the case of the total incapacity of
the worker for work, weekly payments equal to–
(i) the normal weekly earnings of the worker;
(ii) the ordinary time rate of pay of the
worker for the work in which, and for the hours during which, the worker was
engaged immediately
before the period of incapacity–
whichever is the greater; or
(b) in the case of the partial incapacity of
the worker for work, weekly payments for the period of that incapacity equal to
the difference
between the worker's weekly payment calculated in accordance with
paragraph (a) and the amount that the worker is earning or would
be able to earn
in suitable employment or business during that period of incapacity.
69 and 70 determine how normal weekly earnings are calculated for the purposes
of s 69(1)(a)(i).
Rebecca Anne Viney v Roney Management Pty Ltd
[1996] TASSC 27
Zeeman J observed that “section 69(1)(b), in its application, may call for
a reduction” in the context of the relationship
between s 69 and s 86.
His Honour said at [11]-[12]:
11. ...There is no warrant for distinguishing between a reduction within the
meaning of s 86 and a decrease in the weekly payment
payable by operation of s
12. The supposed distinction between a reduction and a decrease in a weekly
payment is a distinction without a difference. In any
event, particular
provisions of ss 69 and 86 support the proposition that the Act does not permit
an employer to apply s 69 in such
a way that there is a termination or reduction
of a weekly payment without that being authorised by s 86 or by an order made
Parsons v State of Tasmania
[2001] TASSC 101
Blow J, as he then
was, said in the context of an issue concerning a further claim after a lawful
termination and the operation of
s 81AB before the insertion of s 80A:
8. ...An employer that has not invoked s 81AA or s 81A but who wishes to dispute
liability for the continuation of weekly payments
can only do so by referring
the matter to the Tribunal pursuant to s 81A(5) or s 88. The employer may not
unilaterally terminate
or reduce weekly payments unless one of the exceptional
situations listed in s 86(1) applies.
Honour’s approach is consistent with s 69(1) setting the relevant amount
of the weekly payment and s 86(1)(b) providing
the authority to the employer to
terminate or reduce a weekly payment from time to time to reflect the
entitlement in s 69(1)(b).
86(1) provides four circumstances where an employer may unilaterally terminate
or reduce a weekly payment being made to a
worker, set out in (1)(a), (b), (c)
and (e). The section provides a practical distinction between terminations or
reductions under
(1)(a) and (b) and terminations or reductions under (1)(c) and
(e). As noted by Slicer J in
White v Vero
Insurance and Police Citizens & Youth Club
[2007] TASSC 88
86(1)(b) governs weekly payments, incapacity.
86(3) requires that an employer who intends to terminate or reduce a weekly
payment in accordance with s 86(1)(c) or (e) must
serve a notice of intention to
terminate the weekly payment on the worker. There is no such obligation to
provide notice in respect
to termination or reduction under s 86(1)(a) and (b).
86(4) provides that a worker who has been served with a notice under s 86(3) may
refer the termination or reduction to the
Tribunal. Section 86(4) does not
apply to terminations pursuant to s 86(1)(a) and (b).
86(1)(c) and (e) apply in circumstances where the employer contends that the
worker has wholly or substantially recovered
or the worker’s entitlement
to weekly payments has ceased by expiration of the time limited for weekly
payments in the Act.
In each case the termination or reduction is made in
circumstances where, subject to challenge pursuant to s 86(4) there is no
entitlement to weekly payments.
Full Court of the Supreme Court considered s 86(1)(a) in
Dianne Atkinson v
Nipper Cleaning Services Pty Ltd
A105/1993. In that case a worker suffered
a back injury as a result of which she was totally incapacitated for work.
a period of total incapacity she continued to be incapacitated for
work with the respondent employer but resumed work with another
employer. Cox
CJ, with whom Underwood J agreed said:
I agree that as the employer only showed a return to work in respect of a
portion of the worker's employment, termination of the
whole of the weekly
payment was not justified. Section 21 of the 1927 Act spoke of the employer's
right to terminate or diminish
a weekly payment "where the circumstances are
such as to justify termination or diminution, as the case may be". In Upston v
Electro Metallurgical Company Pty Ltd (supra) I expressed a view that
if the worker returned to work and as a result received a sum
equal to or
greater than the weekly compensation payment, then the circumstances were
obviously such as to justify the termination
of that payment, for so long as
this situation continued he could not expect to receive both wages and weekly
compensation; but if
on returning to work he received less than the weekly
compensation payment, those circumstances would justify a diminution of the
weekly payments. Notwithstanding the absence of those express words from s86, I
think it is implicit in that provision that a like
approach should be adopted.
Honour’s approach, referring to circumstances of earnings “for so
long as this situation continued” contemplates
the possibility of a
fluctuation in earnings and would be consistent with a reduction or termination
under s 86(1)(a) being limited
to the period of the relevant earnings.
Onestop Metal Recycling Pty Ltd v Young
[2017] TASSC 41
considered a situation where a worker was initially partially incapacitated and
was provided with suitable employment
for which she was paid her normal weekly
earnings, and then subsequently experienced total incapacity for work. His
Honour dismissed
a contention that the worker would require an order from the
Tribunal to establish his entitlement to payment for total incapacity.
his Honour said:
18. ... it is entirely commonplace for workers to suffer compensable injury
which at times results in a partial incapacity for work
and is so certified, and
at other times results in total incapacity for work and is so certified. The
scheme of the
that such fluctuations should not present an obstacle to the continued receipt
of weekly payments of compensation by the worker
or routinely require a fresh
claim for compensation.
[24]-[25] his Honour went on to say:
24. It is beyond argument, in my view, that where a foundational liability is
established under the
the making of a claim which is not disputed and is thus deemed to be accepted,
then compensation continues to be payable in accordance
with the provisions of
they may be lawfully ceased. The payments of weekly compensation may at times be
for a partial incapacity, and at other times
for a total incapacity, but there
is only one claim for compensation to which
applies in the case of any claim for compensation by a worker
against an employer in respect of an injury for which the worker has
previously made a claim for compensation. Unless there is a break in the
continuity of the provision of supporting medical certificates
as contemplated
, an employer is not entitled to treat the provision of
certificates, albeit different in terms of the extent of the incapacity
as a claim for compensation to which
25. That the appellant in the present case was able to provide suitable duties
for the respondent for which he was paid his normal
weekly earnings, does not
mean that the appellant's liability under
had not crystallised. It merely means that during periods
when the respondent was certified as fit for suitable duties, the amount
weekly compensation to which he was entitled, which entitlement was calculated
it must be emphasised in accordance with the very
provisions of
and (b), was nil. That state of affairs could have changed
at any time. It did change on 23 and 24 November 2015 and it changed again
has remained so since 11 December 2015. It is simply the case that
expresses a limitation on the amount of
compensation payable during such periods. I do not regard anything in the
judgment of the
majority in Arnotts Snack Products Pty Ltd v
[1985] HCA 2
(1985) 155 CLR 171
at 178 in relation to
the concept of partial incapacity for work as suggesting otherwise.
Honour did not refer to s 86(1), but he clearly contemplated that weekly
payments may fluctuate with fluctuating capacity, and
that after a period of
partial incapacity during which the worker was receiving payments equal to his
normal weekly earnings a subsequent
period of incapacity would entitle the
worker to weekly payments.
86(1)(b) provides that a termination or reduction may be made where “the
worker is in receipt of the weekly payment
in respect of partial incapacity and
is receiving weekly earnings in excess of the amount upon which the amount of
such weekly payment
was determined”. The paragraph uses the present tense
‘is receiving’. This may be compared to paragraphs (a) (c)
which use the terms “has returned to work”, “has certified
that...the worker has wholly recovered”,
and “has expired”,
where the auxiliary verb ‘has’ and the past participles
‘returned’, ‘certified’,
‘recovered’ and
‘expired’ describe past actions connected to the present
circumstance of the worker.
grammatical approach to s 86(1)(b) would therefore apply its operation to the
individual periods of weekly earnings, that is, earnings
received by the worker
for the relevant week.
literal meaning would result in a circumstance where a reduction or termination
of weekly payments applies for the period of
the power to terminate or reduce under s 86(1)(b) is for a defined period or
periods, not indefinitely. If in the next relevant
period the worker earns less
than the amount upon which the amount of the weekly payment was determined the
worker would be entitled
to a payment of compensation.
86(1)(b) so construed would apply the calculation of payments for partial
incapacity in s 69(1)(b) in a flexible manner. Such
an approach is consistent
with the recognition that capacity may fluctuate, the beneficial nature of the
legislation and the principle
that a worker not receive more while on workers
compensation than if the worker had continued in his usual employment: s
the entitlement to weekly payments of compensation terminated permanently in the
same that it does under s 86(1)(c) and (e) then
it would be expected that s
86(1)(b) would be included in the requirement to provide notice in s 86(3) and
the right to refer in
s 86 (4). The absence of an obligation by an employer to
give notice of termination or reduction is also consistent with this
interpretation.
The use of ‘may’ in s 86(1) indicates that the power
to terminate or reduce is a discretionary one that and employer
must choose to
Director of Housing v Lefevre
[2021] TASSC 33
[48]. A reduction
or termination for the relevant pay period as a set off against earnings will be
apparent to a worker. A decision
to permanently terminate or reduce would not
require notice and will not be apparent to a worker unless communicated by the
alternative construction is that the termination or reduction is permanent in
effect. If so, a worker who receives an atypical
or occasional increase in
earnings while partially incapacitated, for example by temporarily undertaking
higher duties with a higher
pay rate, or being required to work a period of
overtime, or undertaking a trial of additional hours of substantive work which
unsuccessful, would be subject to permanent termination or reduction of
weekly payments notwithstanding the workers subsequent ongoing
incapacity and reduction in earnings. Another common circumstance is that a
worker who is partially incapacitated and undertaking
work may require treatment
for the work injury, such as surgery, that results in the worker experiencing
total incapacity. If the
termination or reduction is permanent then the worker
will not have an immediate right to receive weekly payments for the total
incapacity.
Such an interpretation and outcome is inconsistent with the ordinary
meaning of the text of the section, the context of Pt VII and
the beneficial
nature of the Act.
is no prejudice to an employer in a construction that the right to terminate or
reduce applies to the period of earnings. If
a worker continues to receive
earnings in excess of the weekly payments the employer will not be required to
make payments. If the
worker’s earnings reduce below the weekly payment
figure and the employer contends that that figure should be reduced to reflect
the worker’s retained capacity or that the worker has fully recovered
capacity for work the employer can seek a review of the
weekly payments under s
88 or use s 86(1)(c).
Determination
the facts of this case the worker has been incapacitated for his pre-injury work
since the date of his injury. He has experienced
fluctuating levels of capacity,
but they constitute a single period of incapacity:
White v Vero Insurance and Police Citizens &
at [18]. The worker has only been able to earn more than his
weekly payment rate when the employer has paid him overtime. He is entitled
make up payments where his weekly earnings are less than the workers
compensation rate.
employer ceased paying the worker’s entitlement to medical and other
expenses on 26 September 2024 pursuant to s 75(2) of
the Act. The parties did
not address this in submissions. The obligation to make such payments will flow
from the orders that I
will make in respect to weekly payments and it is not
necessary for me to make a separate order or to hear the parties in respect
that matter.
worker has taken periods of leave to top up his pay in lieu of weekly payments.
Section 84A and s 84B provide respectively for
the recrediting of sick leave and
annual and long service leave taken during periods in respect of which an
employer is subsequently
found to be liable to pay weekly payments.
am satisfied that the employer’s permanent termination of weekly payments
from 26 September 2023 was unlawful. Accordingly:
employer is to reinstate weekly payments of workers compensation to the worker
as from 26 September 2023 to be paid in accordance
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
parties have leave to apply in respect to the quantum of any back payments of
weekly payments of compensation.
14 days the parties are to file a joint memorandum for proposed agreed orders in
respect to the costs arising in connection
with the referral.
the parties are unable to agree proposed orders for the purposes of (3) then
within 21 days the parties are to each file and serve
submissions in respect to
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.83 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter