URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASPComm/2025/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:19:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tasmanian Planning Scheme - Brighton amendment RZ 2025-03 [2025] TASPComm 9 (2 June 2025)
Tasmanian Planning Scheme - Brighton
RZ 2025-03 Burrows Avenue
Specific Area Plan
Planning authority
Brighton Council
Date of decision
2 June 2025
The draft amendment is approved under
section 40Q(3)
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
John Ramsay
Executive Commissioner
REASONS FOR DECISION
its meeting of 1 April 2025, the planning authority resolved to initiate and
certify the draft amendment and request the Commission
to dispense with the
requirements of sections 40G to 40H and 40J to 40P of the
Land Use Planning
and Approvals Act 1993
(the Act) relating to exhibition in accordance with
section 40I.
The draft amendment proposes to make several changes to the BRI-S12.0 Burrows
Avenue Specific Area Plan (SAP). The changes are detailed
Amend the wording of BRI-S12.7.1 P1.2 and BRI-S12.8.1 P2.2, by removing
‘Council’s adopted Key Infrastructure Investments
and Defined
Infrastructure Charges policy that is relevant to the land’ and replacing
with ‘Council’s adopted Infrastructure
Contributions Policy that is
relevant to the land.’
The Infrastructure Contributions Policy replaces Council’s Key
Infrastructure Investments and Charges Policy. Copies of both
policies were
provided by the planning authority along with a description of the differences
described in the table below (provided
in the planning authority’s
supporting report).
Key Infrastructure Investments and Charges Policy (superseded
Infrastructure Contribution Policy (amended policy)
Planning Authority Comments
– The removal of the ability for TasWater to impose
headworks charges has resulted in situation where the outlay coasts of
infrastructure has prohibited strategic development. Effectively TasWater has no
means to recoup its costs and its investment
in new capacity building
infrastructure has been limited.
– The result of this has meant that in the case of
residential rezonings and subdivisions, the first to develop must incur
coasts that then benefit all subsequent developers within that area.
– Council can fill this void by acting as an intermediary
and provide an investment in the upfront contribution to these infrastructure
– There may be cases where strategic infrastructure other
than sewerage or water, such as roads, bridges, stormwater and the
like, may be
appropriate for such a strategic investment by Council
- The situation often arises where the first to undertake
development must incur major costs for critical infrastructure that then
all subsequent developers within that area. This is called the “first
mover” problem and it can be a significant
barrier to achieving strategic
development outcomes.
– The issue is more prevalent for infill development
projects where land has recently been “upzoned” and there
multiple property owners. This can also result in development occurring in an
ad-hoc manner that creates undesirable and inefficient
- Council can fill this void by acting as an intermediary and
provide an investment in the upfront contribution to these infrastructure
or collect contributions to provide a coordinated approach to infrastructure
- This policy will generally be applied to infrastructure that
is the responsibility of Council, such as roads, bridges, stormwater,
and the like. There may be occasions where Council act as an intermediary to
collect funds for other infrastructure authorities
such as TasWater,
TasNetworks, etc.
The updates to the background section in the amended policy provide
developers with a clearer understanding of its rationale.
The amended policy explicitly identifies infill development and fragmented
land ownership as key challenges, offering greater clarity
on the factors
affecting infrastructure provision.
Additionally, it clarifies Council’s role, emphasizing that its
primary responsibility is for Council-managed infrastructure.
However, in some
cases, Council may act on behalf of other infrastructure authorities, such as
TasWater and TasNetworks. This reference
does not impose new obligations but
simply clarifies that Council may serve as a collector of contributions for
these entities, rather
than directly funding their infrastructure.
The amended policy (6.4-6.5) does not introduce a new principle but rather
formally names the existing issue as the "first mover"
problem to enhance
understanding. This terminology provides a clearer and more structured
explanation without altering the original
It is important to note that the background section does not function as a
set of policy principles or provisions that Council officers
are responsible for
implementing.
On this basis, the changes to the background section are minor refinements
that do not expand the scope of the amended policy.
Application
The infrastructure investments of Council may include but are not limited to the
following general areas:
(b) sewerage;
(c) roads and other transport;
(d) public open space infrastructure;
(e) stormwater drainage;
(f) carparking.
Application
The infrastructure investments of Council may include but are not limited to the
following general areas:
(a) roads and other transport;
(b) public open space and recreation infrastructure;
(c) stormwater drainage;
(d) carparking; or
(e) social infrastructure (e.g. buildings for youth hubs, social services, etc.)
The removal of water and sewerage form the list indicates that Council does
not provide those services.
Addition of social infrastructure While this appears to be a new category,
it does not fundamentally change Council’s role.
Many councils already
invest in community infrastructure (e.g., community centres, public facilities).
The inclusion of social infrastructure
clarifies that Council may also support
community-based infrastructure when it aligns with strategic development
objectives. It does
not introduce new financial burdens but rather provides a
clearer scope for the types of infrastructure that align with Council’s
strategic priorities.
The mention of recreation infrastructure does not expand Council’s
role but rather clarifies what public open space investment
may include.
Given that section 6.19 states that infrastructure investments “may
include but are not limited to” the listed areas,
these changes are minor
refinements rather than an expansion of Council’s role and do not
introduce a broader scope to the
Roles & Responsibilities
– Councillors are to:
(c) approve the Key Infrastructure Investment Policy
Roles & Responsibilities
– Councillors are to:
There is no 8.1 (c) in the new policy.
*NB: reference to 8.2 above should be to 8.1
information
The area subject to the SAP
is approximately 26ha, irregularly shaped and comprised of the properties
bounded by Racecourse Road to
the north, Elderslie Road to the south, Morrison
Street to the east and Brooke and Cartwright Streets to the west (as shown in
: LISTMap area of the Burrows Avenue SAP.
Issues raised in representations
The draft amendment was referred to TasWater under
section 56S
Water and Sewerage Industry Act 2008
. In response
TasWater made a representation stating it had no objection to the draft
amendment and that TasWater did not wish to
attend any hearing.
In response to a referral from the planning authority Tas Networks provided a
submission dated 14 May 2025 stating it had no issue
with the draft amendment.
Consideration of the draft amendment
section 40I of the Act, the Commission may dispense with the requirements of
sections 40G, 40H, 40J, 40K, 40L, 40M, 40N, 40O,
and 40P in relation to a draft
amendment if the Commission is satisfied that the draft amendment is for the
purpose of:
(i) correcting an error in the LPS;
(ii) removing an anomaly in the LPS;
(iii) clarifying or simplifying the LPS;
(iv) removing an inconsistency in the LPS;
(v) removing an inconsistency between the LPS and this Act or any other Act;
(vi) removing an inconsistency between the LPS and the SPPs;
(vii) making a change to a procedure set out in the LPS;
(viii) bringing the LPS into conformity with a State Policy;
(ix) changing the structure of the provisions of the LPS, or the form of a
provision of an LPS, so that the LPS conforms with the
structure to which an LPS
is required by the SPPs to conform or the form that a provision of an LPS is to
(x) a prescribed purpose –
and if it is satisfied that the public interest will not be prejudiced by the
draft amendment not being publicly exhibited.
its section 40F report, the planning authority requested the Commission dispense
with the requirement to publicly exhibit the proposed
amendment in accordance
with Section 40I(2)(b)(iv) of the Act due to the simplicity of the proposed
Commission does not agree that public exhibition can be dispensed with based on
the simplicity of the proposed changes or because
of reliance on sub paragraph
(iv) of section 40I of the Act.
simple amendment may be significant, so simplicity alone is not an appropriate
test. Further the changes to the policy do not remove
an inconsistency in the
LPS which is the test under sub paragraph (iv).
amendment to the text of the LPS is a change to the name of a policy. Where such
an amendment is proposed, it is necessary to
review the change in the policy to
determine whether the changes are such that there may be a public interest in
the changes and
the amendment should not be the subject of the section 40I
Commission has reviewed the terms of the new policy. When the policy differences
are considered, they essentially clarify the
terms of the existing policy. The
irrelevant references to TasWater
Council to collect funds for other infrastructure providers
add an existing
Council infrastructure responsibility to the list of Council infrastructure
investments referred to in the policy
i.e. social infrastructure.
changes clarify the terms of a policy that is referred to in the LPS and thus
the test in subparagraph (iii) of section 40I(2)(b)
“clarifying or simplifying the LPS”.
those reasons the Commission is satisfied that the public interest would not be
prejudiced by the draft amendment not being publicly
exhibited. Under section
40I the Commission dispensed with the requirements of sections 40G, 40H, 40J,
40K, 40L, 40M, 40N, 40O and
Commission must also consider whether the draft amendment meets the LPS criteria
as set out under section 34(2) of the Act:
(a) contains all the provisions that the SPPs specify must be contained in an
(b) is in accordance with section 32; and
(c) furthers the objectives set out in Schedule 1; and
(d) is consistent with each State policy; and
(da) satisfies the relevant criteria in relation to the TPPs; and
(e) as far as practicable, is consistent with the regional land use strategy, if
any, for the regional area in which is situated
the land to which the relevant
planning instrument relates; and
(f) has regard to the strategic plan, prepared under
Government Act 1993
, that applies in relation to the land to which the relevant
planning instrument relates; and
(g) as far as practicable, is consistent with and co-ordinated with any LPSs
that apply to municipal areas that are adjacent to the
municipal area to which
the relevant planning instrument relates; and
(h) has regard to the safety requirements set out in the standards prescribed
Gas Safety Act 2019
Specific Area Plan
intent of the Burrows Avenue SAP is to provide for sufficient public
infrastructure, housing diversity, improved residential amenity,
pedestrian connectivity, public and private landscaping and the construction of
an unmade road.
achieve this the SAP incorporates a precinct, associated local area objectives
and associated definitions. The SAP applies in addition
to the underlying zone
provisions and contains Development Standards relating to frontage
infrastructure, landscaping, housing diversity,
development and works in the
proposed precinct and subdivision.
Commission consideration
draft amendment reflects the renaming of the Council’s policy. The
Commission notes that while there are minor changes within
the updated policy,
the changes do not alter the operation or intent of the SAP.
Schedule 1 Objectives
planning authority in its supporting report dated 1 April 2025 submitted that
the draft amendment would further the Schedule 1
objectives by providing for the
fair, orderly and sustainable development of the area, improve strategic
outcomes and facilitate
economic development.
consideration
Commission accepts the submission provided by the planning authority and finds
that the purpose of the draft SAP is consistent
with fair, orderly and
sustainable use and development, and that it seeks to further the Schedule 1
objectives of the Act.
State Policies
State Policy on Water Quality Management
the supporting report dated 1 April 2025 the planning authority submitted that
the draft amendment would have no direct impact
on water quality and any impact
on water quality will be regulated through future development
applications.
National Environment Protection Measures
the supporting report dated 1 April 2025 the planning authority submitted the
draft amendment would not trigger consideration under
Commission consideration
Commission finds that the Water Quality Policy would be adequately addressed
through future development applications.
Commission finds the draft amendment is not inconsistent with any of the NEPMs
and that no other State Policies are relevant to
the draft amendment.
Regional land use strategy
relevant regional land use strategy is the Southern Tasmania Regional Land Use
Strategy 2010-2035 (regional strategy).
the supporting report dated 1 April 2025 the planning authority submitted that
the draft amendment was consistent with SRD 2.1,
2.6 and 2.9 as it provided a
strong framework for developers and Council to work together.
planning authority submitted that the draft amendment was consistent with ROS
1.5 which states:
‘This is a strategic approach to infrastructure investment to ensure that
the Council delivers the highest appropriate opportunities
for growth, whilst
ensuring efficiency and amenity for the community, economy, and environmental
sustainability.’
planning authority submitted that the proposal was consistent with P1 2.2
(relating to coordination, prioritisation and sequencing
of infrastructure) and
LUTI 1.6 (relating to road connections between existing and potential future
roads) as the draft amendment
makes provision for local infrastructure
requirements.
Commission consideration
Commission finds that the draft amendment is, as far as is practicable,
consistent with the regional strategy.
Decision on draft amendment
Commission is satisfied that the draft amendment meets the LPS criteria and
gives its approval.
Attachments
Annexure A – Approved amendment
Approved amendment
Amend clause BRI-S12.7.1 P1.2 and BRI-S12.8.1 P2.2 of the BRI-S12.0 Burrows
Avenue Specific Area Plan as follows:
BRI-S12.7.1 Infrastructure provision for multiple dwellings
This clause is in addition to General Residential Zone – Clause 8.4
Development Standards for Dwellings
(a) multiple dwelling development delivers sufficient council infrastructure to
provide for road and pedestrian network connectivity
and amenity; and
(b) developer contributions are made towards the cost and provision of council
infrastructure in accordance with the relevant policy
adopted by council
Acceptable Solutions
Performance Criteria
No Acceptable Solution.
Council infrastructure must be provided or upgraded as required, having
(a) the demand that the development places on council infrastructure;
(b) any existing council infrastructure;
(c) the topography and other site conditions; and
(d) any advice from a State authority, regulated entity or council.
For council infrastructure that has been provided by council, an
infrastructure contribution must be paid, having regard to Council’s
adopted Infrastructure Contributions Policy that is relevant to the land.
BRI-S12.8.1 Subdivision - Precinct A
This clause is in substitution for General Residential Zone - Clauses 8.6.1
Lot design A1 and P1; and 8.6.1 A4 and P4.
That subdivision within Precinct A provides for consistency with the
purpose of the specific area plan and the development framework.
Acceptable Solutions
Performance Criteria
No Acceptable Solution.
Council infrastructure must be provided or upgraded as required, having
(a) the demand that the development places on council infrastructure;
(b) any existing council infrastructure;
(c) the topography and other site conditions; and
(d) any advice from a State authority, regulated entity or council
For council infrastructure that has been provided by council, an
infrastructure contribution must be paid, having regard to Council’s
adopted Infrastructure Contributions Policy that is relevant to the land.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.49 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter