URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASSC/2025/43.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:21:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Baker v Smith [2025] TASSC 43 (18 September 2025)
[2025] TASSC 43
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA
[2025] TASSC 43
: BAKER, Jordie
SMITH, Andrew (Sergeant)
DELIVERED ON:
18 September 2025
HEARING DATE:
24 July 2025
Cuthbertson J
Traffic law – Offences – Particular offences – Failure to
supply other information or giving false information –
Duty of owner to
give information – Information to identify driver – Ambit of duty
– Obligations of police –
Form of demand – Allegation offence
committed as the driver or occupant of a motor vehicle – Privilege against
self-incrimination
– Right to silence.
Police Offences Act
Aust Dig Traffic Law [1207]
Magistrates – Appeal and review – Tasmania – Motion to
review – Other matters –
Police Offences Act 1935
- Applicant found guilty of failing to comply with a driver demand notice -
Where the magistrate found that the notice of demand
was issued validly by the
officer and was not complied with - Findings of the magistrate reasonably open -
A magistrate acting reasonably
could have found the complaint proved - Appeal
Aust Dig Magistrates [1349]
Legislation:
Acts Interpretation Act 1931
Justices Act 1959
Police Offences Act 1935
Road Safety (Alcohol and Drugs) Act 1970
Vehicle and Traffic Act 1999
Arachchi v Orlowski
Arnesto v Hickman
[2016] TASSC 26
Aviation Consolidated
Holdings Pty Ltd v McMullen
[2025] TASFC 6
Bob Brown Foundation v
Barnett (No 2)
[2023] TASSC 6
Bonde v De Bomford
Coco v The Queen
[1994] HCA 15
Commissioner of Taxation v Citibank Ltd
(1988) 20 FCR
DPP (NSW) v Hammoud
[2006] NSWSC 562
Petty v The Queen
[1991] HCA 34
[2009] TASSC 43
19 Tas R 21
[1976] 1 NSWLR
Woon v The Queen
[1964] HCA 23
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Office of Director of Public
Prosecutions
Judgment Number:
[2025] TASSC 43
paragraphs:
Serial No 43/2025
File No 2688/2024
JORDIE CARL BAKER v SERGEANT ANDREW
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT CUTHBERTSON J
18 September 2025
Introduction
On 23 August 2024, Magistrate Edwards found the applicant guilty of failing to
comply with a driver demand notice contrary to s
37G(1) of the
Offences Act 1993.
The charge concerned a notice served by a police officer,
Constable Joel Young, on the applicant as the owner or registered operator
vehicle which had been involved in a single vehicle crash at Wynyard on 18 March
2023. Police had attended the site of the crash
on that date, but the driver had
left the scene. The notice, which was served on the applicant on 22 July 2023,
required him to provide
information as to the identity of the driver or occupant
of the vehicle at the time of the crash within seven days. It is common
that the applicant did not comply with the notice.
The applicant appeals the finding of guilt on a number of grounds. Those
grounds, in summary, concern whether the evidence was sufficient
to prove the
offence and the validity of the notice that was issued to the applicant. The
notice to review was filed on 17 September
2024, four days outside of the time
provided by
Justices Act 1959
. The applicant has filed
an application for extension of time supported by an affidavit of his solicitor,
Mr Wright. Mr Wright explains
that he was responsible for the delay "due to my
own commitments with other matters". The respondent makes no submissions as to
that application. I have decided it is appropriate to grant the extension of
time. No-one is prejudiced by the delay which amounted
to two business days. The
notice to review raises matters relating to the proper interpretation of s 37G
Police Offences Act.
It was appropriate that those matters be
fully ventilated and determined.
The notice to review raises issues as to:
construction of s 37G of the
Police Offences Act
whether it was
open to the magistrate to find that the notice provided to the applicant was
validly issued.
It is convenient to deal at the onset with
the construction issue as it informs the resolution of a number of the
applicant's grounds
Construction of s 37G of the
Police Offences Act
Section 37G of the
Police Offences Act
provides as
37G Requirement of owner or registered operator to
provide details
(1) Where a person is alleged to have committed an
offence against any State or Commonwealth legislation as the driver or an
of a motor vehicle, the owner or registered operator of the motor
vehicle, on demand by a police officer, must give to the officer
information as the officer requires as to the identity and whereabouts of the
driver or any occupant of the vehicle at any
time relevant to the charge.
Penalty: Fine not exceeding 100 penalty units or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 12 months, or both.
(2) A demand for information may be made orally or
by a notice of demand served in accordance with section 37GA.
(3) If a demand is made orally, a police officer
is to serve a notice of demand in accordance with section 37GA as soon as
practicable
after making the demand.
(4) It is a defence in proceedings for an offence
under subsection (1), if the owner or registered operator establishes that he or
she has taken all reasonable steps to ascertain the information required under
that subsection but has been unable to ascertain the
information."
Consideration of the operation of the defence pursuant to s 37G(4) does not
arise in the circumstances of this case. The applicant
has not relied on the
subsection to justify his failure to comply with the demand.
Section 37A of the
Police Offences Act
relevantly provides that "unless
the contrary intention appears", "owner", when used in reference to a motor
vehicle, means a person
registered in the record of motor vehicles, kept in
accordance with
Vehicle and Traffic Act 1999
, as the owner of
the vehicle. It also includes a person who a police officer reasonably believes
is the owner of the motor vehicle.
37GA of the
Police Offences Act
deals with notices of demand. A notice
given pursuant to that section is one way of making a demand for the purposes of
s 37G(2). If a s 37G demand is made orally, a s 37GA notice is to be
served as soon as practicable after making the demand: s 37G(3).
Section 37GA
provides as follows:
37GA Notice of demand
(1) A police officer may serve a notice of demand
on the owner or registered operator of a motor vehicle if the police officer is
satisfied that the driver or an occupant of that motor vehicle has committed an
(2) A notice of demand is to–
(a) indicate the offence to which it relates;
(b) specify the registration number of the motor
vehicle that was involved in the offence; and
(c) specify that the owner or registered
operator is to provide to a police officer, within 7 days after the owner or
registered operator
is served with the notice, a statutory declaration stating
(i) the name, address and, if known, the
date of birth and driver licence number of the driver or occupant of the motor
the time the offence was committed; or
(ii) if the owner or registered operator
does not know the details referred to in subparagraph (i) –
(A) any information that may lead to
the identification of the driver or occupant of the motor vehicle; or
(B) the reasonable steps that the
owner or registered operator has taken to obtain such information.
(3) An owner or registered operator must comply
with the notice of demand.
Penalty: Fine not exceeding 50 penalty units."
The applicant submitted in his outline of contentions that proof of an offence
against s 37G(1) of the
Police Offences Act
requires that the following
matters be established beyond reasonable doubt:
(a) That the applicant was the registered owner of the vehicle to which the
demand relates;
(b) The police officer is satisfied that the driver or an occupant of the that
motor vehicle had committed an offence; and
(c) The registered proprietor of the vehicle failed to furnish the relevant
details, pursuant to the notice.
The applicant also argued that a notice of demand was required to comply with
s 37GA of the
Police Offences Act.
The respondent submits that the elements of an offence created by s 37G(1) are
found in the combined operation of ss 37G and 37GA
Police Offences
The starting point is s 37G(1) which provides the following four
elements of the offence:
(a) a person is alleged to have committed an offence against any State or
Commonwealth legislation as the driver or the occupant
of a motor vehicle;
(b) a police officer has made a demand of the owner or registered operator of
the motor vehicle;
(c) that demand is for the owner or registered operator to give information as
to the identity and whereabouts of the driver or
any occupant of the vehicle at
any time relevant to the allegation;
(d) the owner or registered operator does not give to the officer the required
information.
In addition, the respondent submits that ss 37G(2) and (3) requires that a
person be served with a notice of demand pursuant to
s 37GA. The words "in
accordance with" in both of those subsections import the requirements of s
37GA(2) into the elements of the
s 37G(1) offence. Those elements, if satisfied,
will necessarily satisfy elements (b) and (c) set out at [9] above. They
(a) The owner or registered operator has been served with a notice of
(b) The notice indicates the offence to which it relates;
(c) The notice specifies the registration number of the motor vehicle that was
involved in the alleged offence;
(d) The notice specifies the information outlined in s 37GA(2)(c).
The respondent further submits that the precondition for service of a notice of
demand pursuant to s 37GA, namely that a police
officer is satisfied that that
the driver or an occupant of that motor vehicle has committed an offence, is not
imported into the
offence created by s 37G(1). The only precondition for making
a demand is that a person is alleged to have committed an offence against
State or Commonwealth legislation as the driver or occupant of a motor
The preconditions for the making of a demand pursuant to s 37G(1) and the
service of a notice pursuant to s 37GA are distinct. That
there is an option to
make a demand pursuant to s 37G(1) by way of a notice served in accordance with
s 37GA, and an obligation (albeit
one that is directory rather than
to serve a notice in
accordance with s 37GA following the making of an oral demand, squarely raises
the question whether the s 37GA(1)
precondition is ever relevant to proof of a s
37G(1) offence. This is particularly so where ss 37G(2) and (3) refer to
of a notice of demand in accordance with s 37GA in circumstances
where the only reference to service in the latter provision is in
which also prescribes the precondition for service undertaken pursuant to that
In my view, a construction which imports the s 37GA(1) precondition into the s
37G(1) offence is not open for the following reasons:
preconditions of each provision are entirely different. A demand pursuant to s
37G(1) may be made where it is "alleged" that a
person has committed an offence
against any State or Commonwealth legislation
as the driver or an
of a motor vehicle. By contrast, the precondition under s 37GA(1)
requires satisfaction that a driver or occupant of a motor vehicle
has committed
an offence. The latter precondition is not limited to offences committed "as the
driver or an occupant" of a motor
vehicle, although can encompass such an
Section 37GA,
like s 37G(1), is a penal provision. It creates a standalone offence where an
owner or registered operator fails to
comply with a notice of demand. The
penalty available for a breach of s 37GA is different to that for a breach of s
37G(1): s 37GA(3).
Section 37GA does not include an express defence analogous
to that provided by s 37G(4). Distinct offences are, therefore, created
provision, each with their own discrete elements.
A demand made
pursuant to s 37G(1) encompasses the possibility of the requirement being made
orally in dynamic circumstances. A s
37GA demand does not have that character,
hence the different nature of the precondition.
A demand made
pursuant to either section is an investigatory tool. The terms of s 37GA(1) are
such that the police officer who serves
the notice is personally required to be
satisfied that the driver or an occupant of the relevant motor vehicle has
committed an offence
of any type. Section 37G(1), by contrast, enables
police officer to make a demand of an owner or registered operator in
circumstances where there is
allegation a person has committed an
offence as the driver or occupant of the relevant vehicle. It does not require
the police officer
who makes the demand to be the one who made the allegation.
This reflects, again, the dynamic circumstances in which such a demand
made. A police officer may, for example, be tasked with making the demand
pursuant to s 37G(1) in circumstances where they
are not necessarily personally
satisfied that an offence has been committed by a driver or occupant of the
relevant vehicle.
precondition for service of a notice pursuant to s 37GA was incorporated as a
precondition for the making of a demand pursuant
to s 37G(1), this would render
the condition of the power provided by s 37G(1) otiose as a notice is ultimately
required to be issued
in all circumstances: s 37G(1). The words setting out the
condition of power in s 37G(1) must have been intended to have work to
In my view, proof of an offence contrary to s 37G(1) requires that there be an
that a person has committed an offence of the kind described
in the subsection as a precondition to the making of the demand, whether
one that is oral or by way of s 37GA notice.
It is unnecessary to decide whether s 37G(1) can be breached on the basis of an
oral demand prior to the service of a s 37GA notice
as the issue does not arise
in this case. What is clear, however, is that when a demand is made in the first
instance by notice or
is followed by such a notice where the demand is made
orally, it is one that is to be in accordance with s 37GA. The phrase "is to"
directory, not mandatory: see
Acts Interpretation Act
Accordingly, a
police officer is obliged to provide a notice which conforms with the matters
set out in s 37GA(2) (which itself is
directory in its terms). However,
consistent with the directory nature of the obligation, not every failure to
comply will result
in invalidity: see
Foundation v Barnett (No 2)
[2023] TASSC 6
per Blow CJ at [14]-[16]
[ per Crawford J at
In my view, an offence contrary to s 37G relating to a demand made by way of s
37GA notice (as is the case in this matter) is made
out where it is proved
beyond reasonable doubt that:
(a) a person is alleged to have committed an offence against any State or
Commonwealth legislation as the driver or the occupant
of a motor vehicle;
(b) a police officer;
(c) serves a notice of demand on the owner or registered operator of the motor
(d) the notice:
(i) indicates the offence to which it relates, that is, the offence which is
alleged to have been committed by a person as the driver
or occupant of a motor
(ii) specifies the registration number of the motor vehicle that was involved
in the offence;
(iii) specifies that the owner or registered operator is to provide a statutory
declaration stating the information set out in s
37GA(2)(c) within 7 days after
the owner or registered operator is served with the notice;
(e) the owner or registered operator does not comply with the notice of demand.
The hearing
The particulars of the complaint preferred against the applicant were as
"You are charged with on the 18
March 2023,
you were the owner of a motor vehicle, namely silver Ford Ranger with
registration plates F76GH and it is alleged that
the driver or any occupant of
the said vehicle has committed an offence against State or Commonwealth
legislation at 8.55pm on the
March, 2023 and upon a demand by
police officer, namely Joel YOUNG on 22
July 2023, that you give
all such information as the police officer may require as to the identity and
whereabouts of the driver
at the relevant time, you did fail to provide such
The hearing commenced before the magistrate on 18 April 2024. The prosecution
called one witness, namely Constable Young. He gave
evidence that he spoke to
the applicant under caution about a crash that occurred on 18 March and then
issued him with a driver demand.
He was asked about his involvement in the
investigation concerning that car. He stated he was the lead investigator at
into that crash. His evidence was that the crash occurred on 18 March
at approximately 9.00pm. When he arrived at the scene, he
believed there was
some severe damage to the vehicle. At that time, he did not know where the
driver was. “They” received
information from witnesses about who
the driver was or likely to be. Constable Young gave the following evidence
after he got information from witnesses:
then other units picked up the driver who was the defendant. He was then taken
to hospital by other units, and I heard this
occur over the radio, and then from
there I was there when the vehicle was removed. At that point I was not the
investigating officer,
so until Constable Carr had left the district, I did not
have control of the investigation."
Constable Young gave evidence that once Constable Carr left the district, he
took over the investigation by following up with witnesses
who had been there on
the night, obtained statutory declarations from people, CCTV and warrants for
medical records. It was after
those enquiries that he spoke with the applicant.
This occurred at the Burnie Police Station on 22 July. The conversation that
place was captured on Constable Young's body worn camera.
The body worn camera footage was tendered during the hearing. The interaction
with the applicant captured on the footage included
service of the notice of
demand. Constable Young gave evidence that he did not receive a response on any
after 22 July 2023 and that the requirements of the
notice were not met within the seven day period provided to the applicant. A
copy of the notice was also tendered on the hearing.
Under cross-examination, Constable Young gave evidence that "we had received
information who [the driver of the car] was likely
to be". It was put to him
that he had received information about the registered owner of the vehicle and
he answered "yes". He
confirmed that no one could identify the driver at that
time. Again, it was put to him that it was correct to say that he had received
information about the registered owner but not the driver and he answered "I
guess so, yeah". As to issuing the driver demand notice,
he indicated he
believed the applicant was the driver but could not prove it was him. He
confirmed he had reviewed CCTV footage
from inside the Wynyard Golf Club but
that there was no footage outside the Wynyard Golf Club that he had reviewed.
He accepted
that he did not have any footage to determine who the driver was. He
accepted he "never had any ID of the driver". He accepted that
as a result he
would not know whether the driver was under the influence of alcohol or not. He
confirmed his intention was for the
applicant to provide the details of the
driver of the car rather than those of an occupant. He was cross-examined as to
the potential
for the notice to be confusing. It was also put to him that the
notice was pre-prepared and issued in an attempt to abrogate the
applicant's
right to silence. Constable Young stated "there's always the potential that the
applicant will either speak or he won't
camera footage
Given the importance of this evidence to the magistrate's decision and the
applicant's grounds of review, it is necessary to set
out what transpired on 22
July 2023 as captured in the body worn camera footage in some detail.
The interaction between Constable Young and the applicant commenced with
Constable Young cautioning the applicant. Constable Young
then asked the
applicant the following:
"Firstly, what happened on the
March with your car?"
The applicant responded:
"Well, I'm not one hundred per cent sure and I'm yet to seek legal advice so
I probably don't really want to answer any questions
at the moment."
The applicant went on to say that he wanted to get a bit of advice first.
Following that exchange, Constable Young stated the following:
"Um, if that's the case, what I will do – is this is a driver demand,
which is essentially us trying to find out...well, to
give you this to say, 'cos
you're the registered owner,..."
The applicant responded:
Constable Young continued:
"...we give you to find out who the registered owner or who was the driver
who was driving the vehicle at that particular point in
Throughout that portion of the exchange, the applicant said "yep", "yep",
"yep". Constable Young was holding a form which he then
provided to the
applicant. He invited the applicant to read it to himself. The applicant
appeared to read it, spending some time
doing so. Constable Young then read the
form out to the applicant. The document he read out to the applicant is the
notice of demand
that was tendered at the hearing. The applicant nods at times
while the notice is being read. Its contents are set out later in these
reading the notice to the applicant, Constable Young told him to bring the form
next week", with it filled out.
Constable Young explained how to fill out the form and advised that a failure to
comply with the
notice would result in a fine being imposed. The applicant
nodded and stated "yep" on multiple occasions during the course of that
explanation being given. After a further exchange concerning the applicant's
desire to obtain legal advice and not wanting to participate
in an interview,
Constable Young stated the following:
"What essentially – I am
99.99 percent sure you are the driver. But, like I said, I've got to prove that
you are the driver
regarding all these offences. I don't know if you remember
what the other officer said, like there are witnesses and other stuff
to you as the driver at the time."
There was then a discussion about charging and the length of time that it would
take for the matter to resolve. The exchange ended
with the applicant stating he
would "get this all sorted out" as he left the room.
The notice tendered on the trial is a standard form headed "Requirement on the
Registered Operator or Owner of a Motor Vehicle".
It is a form used not only
for a notice of demand under s 37GA of the
Police Offences Act
for demands under
Traffic Act
and s 37N of the
Police Offences Act
. The form sets out the
applicant's name and address in full. It then sets out the following
information:
"At (time):
The person who was the driver or occupant (s37GA only) of a motor
vehicle, registration number:
In (public street):
At (suburb) in Tasmania:
Committed an offence in that
(he or she) did on the said date, against:
Safety (Alcohol and Drugs) Act 1970
Offence details:
of March 2023 police attended a single vehicle
crash on Golf Links Road, Wynyard. The driver of the vehicle was not present at
secene (sic) when police arrived. CCTV footage and statements obtained by
police indicate that the driver of the vehicle was under
the influence of
alcohol when driving
The notice then sets out the following instructions:
"I now direct you, pursuant to the powers conferred upon me by
Section 51(3)
Traffic Act 1925
Section 37GA
Police Offences Act 1935
to provide me with
the following information so that proceedings may be taken against the driver or
occupant for the offence as so
name and address of the driver or occupant of such vehicle driven as aforesaid
and if known, the date of birth and drivers license
number of driver or occupant
of the motor vehicle at the time the offence was committed.
you are unable to ascertain the details of such driver or occupant, you are
directed to specify any information that may lead to
the identification of the
driver/occupant, including all the reasonable steps you have taken to ascertain
the information required.
have (7) seven days to comply with these directions and report the results to me
via the attached declaration, within that period,
or sooner if practicable
Name of Officer:
Constable J. Young
The form includes a section titled "Registered Operator/Owner Declaration"
where the details of the driver or occupant of the motor
vehicle may be
provided. It also provides space to include information of the reasonable steps
taken to ascertain the information
sought by the notice. It is required to be
completed as a statutory declaration.
No further evidence was called on the trial. At the conclusion of the
prosecution case, the applicant submitted he had no case to
answer. On 5 July
2024, the magistrate ruled the applicant had a case to answer. No issue is
taken with that ruling. The applicant
advised that he did not wish to give or
adduce evidence.
Magistrate's decision
The magistrate provided her decision in writing on 23 August 2024. She first
noted there was no challenge to the evidence that the
notice had never been
returned to the police once issued. The magistrate observed the defence case,
in essence, challenged the validity
of the issuing of the driver demand
After setting out the evidence and relevant provisions, the magistrate's
decision proceeded as follows:
submits that on the hearing, the court did not receive any evidence regarding
the registration and ownership of F76GH. It
is clear on the body worn camera
footage that the officer asserts that the defendant is the registered owner of
the car in question,
to which he replies 'yes'. The form is then gone through,
including statements that the car in question is F76GH and it is asserted
the defendant is the registered owner. He does not dispute this. Both the body
worn camera and the notice in question were
tendered into evidence with no
challenge as to this. I am satisfied that the defendant was the registered
owner of F76GH.
further submits the notice is invalid as it refers simply to the
Road Safety
(Alcohol and Drugs) Act
, without specifying an offence. With respect, I
disagree. The section referred to states
'Committed an offence in that (he
or she) did on the said date,
and then leaves a line.
To my mind, this is clearly to state the piece of legislation as it then goes on
to state, in the next section,
'Offence details'
. In this section it is
detailed the offence alleged is driving under the influence of alcohol. While
it may not specifically identify
the section of the Act, the offence alleged is
further submits the notice is invalid due to ambiguity, in requesting details of
. It is a pro-forma notice which
clearly can be tailored to either a demand for information of a driver or
occupant, whoever is alleged
to have committed an offence. The detail that has
been filled in, in the notice, makes it abundantly clear that, in this instance,
it is the driver of the vehicle who is alleged to have committed the offence and
that is the information being sought. I reject
the submission that it is
Overarching
a number of these submissions is reference to the matters espoused by Wood J, in
the case of
Arnesto v Hickman
[2016] TASSC
, which dealt with
section 55A(1)
Police Offences Act
right to require a person give their name and address, once certain other
factors are met. In circumstances where a statutory
requirement impinges on a
fundamental right to silence, clearly the principal of statutory construction
falls in favour of the least
infringement of the common law right and requires
clear words and basic reasons as to the infringement on that right.
the language of the section clearly and expressly states that the person must
give the information. This is also clear in the
notice that is given. The
notice states the direction, the reasons for it and what must occur. The
requirements are met.
challenge that the officer held a reasonable belief as to the offence alleged
having been committed. They state, in their
written submissions that the
officer agreed under cross-examination that the footage was from inside the
Wynyard Golf Club and did
not depict the motor vehicle or any evidence of the
driver being under the influence. They further argue that officer agreed that
the witness statements obtained did not demonstrate that the driver was under
the influence.
officer was asked under cross-examination whether the CCTV was from inside the
Wynyard Golf Club, to which he agreed. He also
agreed that there was no footage
outside. He agreed with the proposition that the footage did not determine who
the driver was,
but nothing more than that. He did not assert or agree that it
did not depict the motor vehicle, the crash or the driver itself,
even if they
could not be identified.
office was cross-examined on the statements taken and agreed they did not help
identify who the driver was. He also agreed he
driver of the vehicle was under the influence of alcohol. I note that my
determination is based on whether the officer
is satisfied an offence has been
committed, that is, he reasonably believed the driver, whoever that may have
been, was driving under
the influence.
seems to be akin to the need for the officer to hold a
reasonable belief
. It is not based on the mere fact of an accident, but
rather an aggregate of all the information received leads to the belief;
CCTV, medical and witness statements and surrounding circumstances,
including inferences such as that which could be drawn from the
driver leaving
the scene. It seems clear that information did not help him determine 'who' the
driver was, hence the notice of demand
being issued, but I am satisfied he was
satisfied the driver, whoever it may be, had committed an offence.
information gathered clearly founded a reasonable basis for satisfaction that an
offence had occurred. It can clearly be inferred
from the evidence gathered and
the specific details put into the notice."
The magistrate determined that the notice of demand was issued validly by the
officer and was not complied with. As a consequence,
she found the charge
The nature of the review
The notice to review asserts the magistrate "erred in fact and in law in
finding that the charge of failing to comply with a driver
demand notice,
contrary to Section 37G(1) of the
Police Offences
was proven beyond reasonable doubt" on five grounds.
The nature of a review pursuant to
Justices Act
is well-settled. Relevantly, a notice to review shall allege "an error or
mistake on the part of a magistrate on a matter or
question of fact alone, or of
law alone, or of both fact and law":
As explained by Crawford CJ in
Phillips v Arnold
[2009] TASSC 43
(2009) 19 Tas R 21
(Blow and Porter JJ agreeing):
"A motion to review is not of
the nature of an appeal by way of rehearing and the principles
Warren v Coombes
(1979) 142 CLR 531
do not apply. On a review of the conclusion of a
magistrate based on the evidence, the question is whether upon the evidence the
magistrate might, as a reasonable person, have come to the conclusion to which
he or she did.
& Co Pty Ltd
[1962] VicRp 48
[1963] TASStRp 9
[1963] Tas SR 69
Benson v Rogers
[1966] TASStRp 13
[1966] Tas SR
Richardson v
[1970] TASStRp 6
[1970] Tas SR 105
Grounds (a) and (b) – the finding the applicant was the registered
owner of the vehicle
These two grounds are related in that they attack the magistrate's finding
that the applicant was the registered owner of the motor
vehicle. The grounds
assert error on the part of the magistrate as follows:
"a By finding
that there was sufficient evidence before the Court that the Applicant was the
registered owner of the vehicle, registration
number F76GH, on the basis that on
Body Worn Camera footage, when the Police Officer asserted that the Applicant
was the registered
owner of the vehicle, he responded 'yes' when in fact, the
Body Worn Camera footage did not depict the same.
b By finding that the Court was satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the
Applicant was the registered owner of the vehicle, registration
number F76GH, on
the basis that on that Body Worn Camera footage, the Application (sic) did not
dispute being the registered owner,
however, he did not confirm the same
therefore the Court could not be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt as to who the
owner of the vehicle was. "
By these grounds, the applicant attacks the factual finding that the applicant
responded 'yes' when the police officer asserted
he was the registered owner of
the vehicle, together with the magistrate's alleged reliance on the applicant's
failure to dispute
the assertion he was the registered
Applicant's submission
The applicant's submissions in respect of these grounds are set out in his
outline of contentions as follows:
"9 Her Honour refers to the Body
Worn Camera footage and to the moments after the Applicant exercised his right
to silence. The issuing
Officer indicated, prior to handing the form to the
Applicant, that he was issuing the notice to the Applicant as the registered
owner. The issuing Officer had not asserted the registration of the vehicle and
the Applicant had not commenced to read the form.
There was no confirmation in
the footage that the registration of the vehicle was, in fact, the vehicle that
belonged to him.
learned Magistrate also found that, during the course of going through the
questions on the form, there was a statement that the
car in question was
vehicle registration number F76GH. Contrary to what was captured, the following
finding that "
it is asserted that the defendant is the registered owner
did not occur. The form itself does not meet the requirements of the Act and
does not refer to the Applicant as the registered
owner in any form.
Honour then observed that the applicant did not dispute that he was the
registered owner when, in fact, it was not stated to him.
In any event, that
comment misunderstands the burden of proof and the Magistrate erred in fact and
in law in being satisfied that
the Applicant was the registered owner of vehicle
F76GH when there was no evidence to support that finding."
During the course of the review hearing, counsel for the applicant argued that:
"...the fact the form was read and he didn't object or didn't say,
'that's not my vehicle' is not evidence to suggest beyond reasonable
vehicle was his. The normal practice... in regards to proof of these sorts of
matters is to produce a certificate or registration.
That was not produced. That
the evidence that the prosecution will required to present to the Court... to
evidence the ownership,
but the Court never received that."
As to the asserted error in ground (a), counsel for the applicant stated:
"...the fact that [the applicant] just comments about a yes before receiving
the form is not beyond reasonable doubt satisfaction
who the registered owner is
and that is an element of the offence required by prosecution services to prove
and they did not prove
As I understand it, the applicant argues that his affirmative response to the
proposition he was the registered owner of the car was
not capable of supporting
the finding he was the registered owner of the car in circumstances where
Constable Young's assertion had
not been preceded by notification of the
registration number or a description of the vehicle.
As to ground (b), the applicant notes he was under no obligation to make any
objection to the assertion he was the registered owner.
He had previously
indicated he wished to exercise his right to silence. By extrapolating an
admission from his failure to dispute
he was the owner, the applicant says the
magistrate was in error.
Respondent's
submissions
The respondent submitted that the definition of "owner" pursuant to s 37A of
Police Offences Act
was relevant to the determination of these
grounds. As a consequence, the applicant is the owner of the motor vehicle in
if the police officer reasonably believes that he is the owner. The
respondent submits that Constable Young's assertion, as captured
on the body
worn camera, that the applicant is the registered owner, is evidence which
establishes his belief that the applicant
was the "registered owner" of the
motor vehicle to which the allegation set out in the notice related. The
respondent also referred
to the evidence that Constable Young gave during the
course of the hearing, including under cross-examination, where it was put to
him that he had received information about the registered owner of the
The respondent acknowledges that the magistrate did not rely on the extended
definition of “owner” in her reasons for
decision. The magistrate
did, however, determine that she was satisfied the applicant was the registered
owner of F76GH which the
respondent submits was a higher standard than required.
The respondent submits that no miscarriage of justice has resulted to the
applicant as a consequence.
As to the magistrate's reliance on that part of the body worn camera footage
where the applicant responded affirmatively to Constable
Young's assertion that
he was the registered owner, the respondent submits that there can be no doubt
that the applicant knew at
that point that the motor vehicle in question bore
the registration number F76GH. In support of that submission, the respondent
to the earlier part of the interaction where Constable Young asks the
applicant "what happened on 18 March with your car?".
The respondent also submits that the magistrate was entitled to rely on other
aspects of the interaction between the applicant and
Constable Young, including
the fact that the applicant did not dispute that he was the owner. In this
respect, the respondent relies
[1964] HCA 23
(1964) 109 CLR 529
where Kitto J said at
"The accused person's reaction or failure
to react to the making of the statement may, according to the circumstances,
afford evidence
that he admits that the statement or some part of it is
and at 537:
"The point here is that, whether or not
an accused person's reactions to statements or questions put
to him in the course of an interview
indicate either that he admits any
particular fact suggested to him or only in his own mind recognizes that it is a
fact, those reactions
may have evidential value upon the ultimate
question of fact in the case because they show, when considered in the light of
the circumstances,
that he has a consciousness of guilt of the crime
The respondent notes that this proposition from
was accepted by
Brett J in the case of
Bonde v De Bomford
[2019] TASSC 12
where his Honour stated:
"A reasonable
inference from the comments of the respondent at the scene, as reported by both
police officers, is that she was admitting
having been the driver of the
motorcycle. It would also be relevant to assess what she said in the light of
any failure by her to
explain further that another person was in fact the driver
of the motorcycle: see
Woon v The Queen
[1964] HCA 23
109 CLR 529."
The respondent submits that the body worn camera footage indicates that there
was a clear mutual understanding about the subject
of the conversation and that
it related to the car with the registration F76GH, which was the car that
Constable Young observed in
the aftermath of the crash. In relation to the
submission that the evidence supports the conclusion that Constable Young held a
that the applicant was the registered owner of the car, the respondent
further submits that the evidence supported he also had a
reasonable basis for
the belief. This is because Constable Young gave evidence he conducted an
investigation into the crash which
culminated in him serving the driver demand
on the applicant. The respondent submits the conversation cannot be considered
in a vortex.
Relevant to the reasonableness of Constable Young's belief is the
fact he had arranged for the applicant to come and see him at the
police station
for interview.
On that basis, the respondent asserts the magistrate was entitled to draw an
inference on the totality of the circumstances that
the applicant was the owner
of the vehicle on the basis that Constable Young referred to information he
received which culminated
in him serving the driver demand on the applicant and
pre-filling the details on the form. The respondent submits the entry of that
information into the driver demand notice is also something that can be taken
into account as evidence of Constable Young's state
of mind. In any event, the
respondent submits that the applicant made a clear and express admission to the
proposition that he was
the registered owner.
It was open to
find beyond reasonable doubt that the applicant was the owner
It is an element of an offence contrary to s 37G(1) that a demand be made of
an owner or registered operator either orally or by
way of service of notice of
demand. Pursuant to s 37A of the
Police Offences Act,
proof that a
person is registered in the record of motor vehicles kept in accordance with
Vehicle and Traffic Act
as the owner, is capable of
establishing this element of the offence. In this case, the magistrate found the
applicant was the "registered"
owner of the motor vehicle. She did not rely on
the extended definition of owner.
An evidentiary certificate signed by the Registrar pursuant to
Vehicle and Traffic Act
certifying an entry in the register kept under
of that act, “is evidence in legal proceedings of facts recorded in the
entry and, in the absence of evidence to the contrary,
as proof of those
facts”. The applicant is right to identify that this would be an
acceptable way to prove that a person was
an owner of the relevant motor vehicle
within the meaning of s 37A of the
Police Offences Act.
correct to say that such a certificate is
in order to prove that
fact. There is nothing in the definition of s 37A of the
Police Offences Act
Vehicle and Traffic Act
to support such a proposition.
Indeed, the terms of
Vehicle and Traffic Act
contemplate that
evidence may be capable of displacing the evidence contained in
such a certificate.
Whether the applicant was the "owner" of the relevant motor vehicle was a
question of fact to be determined by the magistrate. As
such, the applicant is
required to establish that the magistrate could not reasonably have come to the
conclusion that the complaint
was proved beyond reasonable doubt:
Aviation Consolidated Holdings Pty Ltd v
[2025] TASFC 6
, Porter AJ at [18].
In my view, it was open to the magistrate to conclude beyond reasonable doubt
that the applicant was the owner, and, more particularly,
the registered owner
of the motor vehicle. During the exchange between the applicant and Constable
Young, which was captured on the
body worn camera footage, Constable Young
asserts that the applicant is the registered owner of the vehicle. In fact, he
applicant he was giving him the notice because he was the registered
owner of the vehicle. The applicant responds 'yes'. While Constable
Young’s assertion was not accompanied by or preceded by any reference to
the registration plates or description of the motor
vehicle in question, it was
not made in a vacuum. Prior to that part of the exchange, Constable Young asked
the applicant "what happened
on 18 March with your car?". The applicant stated
he was not "100% sure", would like to get some legal advice and probably did not
want to answer any questions at that moment. Constable Young also gave evidence
that the applicant had been picked up on the night
of the crash and taken to the
hospital by "other units" based on information that he was the driver of the
vehicle at the time of
the crash. Based on this context, it was open for the
magistrate to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the applicant was well
aware that the discussion with Constable Young concerned the car involved in the
crash on 18 March 2023 and that it was asserted
he was the registered owner. It
was also open for the magistrate to conclude that the applicant's affirmative
response to the proposition
he was the registered owner of the car in question
was an admission of that fact. The applicant continued to nod and respond 'yep'
when the notice was read to him which included an express reference to the
registration plate and a description of the incident that
gave rise to the
notice. The magistrate did not err in reaching that conclusion.
As to the allegation that the magistrate made the finding based on the
applicant not disputing being the registered owner, it is
clear that was not the
only basis for doing so. The alleged error in ground (b) asserts this is an
erroneous finding of fact. The
argument in this Court went down a slightly
different route, suggesting the magistrate made a positive finding the applicant
the registered owner because he did not deny it, and by doing so, ignored
the applicant's right to silence. I do not consider that
to be a fair reading of
the magistrate's reasons. As I have pointed out, the applicant's absence of
denial was not the sole basis
for the finding. The magistrate at [15] of her
reasons notes that the form was gone through, that it included statements that
vehicle in question is F76GH and it was asserted he is the registered owner
and he did not dispute this. This is in the context of
the magistrate
identifying the applicant had earlier responded affirmatively to the proposition
that he was the registered owner.
What the magistrate did not say, but is quite
apparent on viewing the footage, is that the applicant continues to nod and say
when the form is read to him. In my view, the comment that the applicant
did "not dispute" he was the registered owner is not a reference
applicant remaining silent in the face of the assertion he was the registered
owner; he patently did not. The reference to
the applicant not disputing he was
the registered owner is clearly a reference to his conduct generally throughout
the course of
the form being read to him. As the High Court made clear in
, "an accused person's words, conduct or demeanour at a time a
statement is made may amount to an acceptance of it", even where he
or she does
not intend to manifest agreement with it. An accused person's reaction has
evidential value when considered in light
of the circumstances: Kitto J at
Accordingly, grounds (a) and (b) are not made out.
– the finding the driver demand notice was not ambiguous and was validly
This ground alleges as follows:
"By finding the driver demand
notice was validly issued despite the ambiguity in its form and the ambiguity of
representations made
by the Investigating Officer at the time of issuing the
driver demand notice to the Applicant."
Submissions
The relevant ambiguity is not particularised in the ground. The applicant's
outline of contentions in respect of this ground are
as follows:
"12 Section 37GA(2) directs the contents of the notice (citing
Acts Interpretation Act
s 10A(1)(b)).
observed above, the notice does not specify the owner or the registered
proprietor and simply says to 'the applicant' and his address.
argued before the learned Magistrate, the notice is ambiguous at best to the
extent that it refers to 'driver' or 'occupant'. If
the notice was validly
issued, it had to state whether it was the driver that committed an offence or
it had to state whether it
was the occupant that committed the offence. It did
not do either but referred to both 'driver' and 'occupant'.
the notice to be validly issued, the police officer issuing the notice of demand
had to be satisfied on a reasonable basis that
an offence is being committed.
The evidence given did not support a reasonable belief for the driver, who
remained unidentified,
as committed an offence and was not founded on any
factual basis reasonably open on the evidence."
During the review hearing, the applicant expanded on this ground. The first
aspect of ambiguity alleged is the failure to comply
with s 37GA(2)(a) which
provides that a notice of demand is to indicate the offence to which it relates.
The applicant complains
that the form issued to the applicant just refers to an
entire act. The applicant submits that s37G is a coercive piece of legislation
impinging on the fundamental right to silence. Consequently, certainty is
required when seeking to undermine such a right. The basis
upon which that right
is being undermined is required to be highlighted to the recipient of the notice
without ambiguity. The applicant
particularly relied on the decision of
Arnesto v Hickman
[2016] TASSC 26
in support of this proposition. I
understood the applicant to argue that this decision is authority for the
proposition that the
notice requires full articulation of the offence to which
it relates including the name of the legislation and the specific offence
provision said to have been breached.
The applicant also argues that the notice should be specific as to whether it
is alleged that the occupier or the driver of the
car has committed the offence.
If the notice fails to do so, the applicant argues it does not give sufficient
or accurate notice
to the recipient of the basis for it being issued and is,
therefore, invalid.
The respondent submitted that the notice specified the act of parliament said
to have contained the alleged offence. It also stated
that the allegation was
that the driver was "under the influence of alcohol when driving". The
respondent submits that this information
provided a clear indication that the
offence to which the notice referred is found in
Road Safety
(Alcohol and Drugs) Act
namely driving under the influence of alcohol. The
respondent submits that s 37GA(2)(a) does not require the precise offence
to be specified on the notice of demand. The respondent argues the
word "indicate" was a deliberate choice made by parliament and
can be contrasted
with the word "specify" used in subsections (2)(b) and (2)(c) of s 37GA. The
respondent relied on the Macquarie
Dictionary definition of "indicate" which
means "to be a sign of" or "to point out or to point to". The respondent argues
the information
in the notice of demand, therefore, satisfied the relevant
requirements of s 37GA.
As to the applicant's assertion that the form failed to make clear whether it
was the driver or the occupant of the car who was
said to have committed an
offence, the respondent argues that the particulars of the offence set out in
the notice made it clear
that it was the driver of the car who was the subject
of the allegation. Further, the respondent submits there is no requirement
the notice contain the information at the level of detail which the applicant
asserts should be provided. The respondent also
relied on the decision of
Arnesto v Hickman
, and particularly [47] of that decision where Wood J
"The interpretation argued on behalf of Ms Arnesto does
not necessitate that police officers, in requiring a person to state their
and address, communicate a complex or comprehensive level of detail."
The notice was not invalid
The applicant relies on two alleged instances of ambiguity in the notice which
are said to offend the requirements of s 37GA. The
applicant asserts the notice
is invalid as a consequence.
As noted above, the requirements of a notice of demand set out in s 37GA(2) are
expressed in directory rather than mandatory language:
Acts Interpretation Act
Pursuant to s 37GA(2)(a), a notice of demand is
required to "indicate" the offence to which it relates. I agree with the
respondent's
observation that the choice of language here is significant. The
other matters required to be set out in the notice pursuant to s
37GA(2)(b) and
(c), which relate to the registration number of the motor vehicle, the content
and form of the information to be provided
and the time frame for doing so, are
to be "specified" rather than "indicated". The ordinary and natural meaning of
the word "indicate"
according to the Macquarie Dictionary, Eighth Edition, 2020
is, relevantly:
"1.To be a sign of,... imply; 2. To point out or
point to; direct attention to... 3. To show, or make known...; 4. To state or
especially briefly or in a general way."
By contrast, the ordinary and natural meaning of "specify" in the same
dictionary is, relevantly, "to mention or name specifically
or definitely; state
in detail".
The context and purpose of the provision also supports the proposition that
something less than specificity is required. Taking
a version of the
circumstances involved in this case way of example, it would be impossible to
specify with particularity the precise
alcohol related offence that a person is
alleged to have committed as a driver until such time as the identity of the
driver is known.
Road Safety (Alcohol and Drugs) Act
provides for
different blood alcohol limits depending on the licence status or prior
convictions of the driver: see,
and (2). This is but one example of why
it would be impractical to advise of the precise offence a person is alleged to
have committed
when driving a car.
In this case, the magistrate concluded at [16] of her decision that while the
notice did not "specifically identify the section
Road Safety
(Alcohol and Drugs)
] Act, the offence alleged is clear". In my view, there
is no error demonstrated in that conclusion. Section 37GA(2)(a) does not require
a precise identification of the alleged offence. It is sufficient that the
notice express in a general way the offence or offences
alleged to have been
committed by the driver or occupant of the vehicle as the driver or occupant of
that vehicle. The notice did
that, and more. It notified the act of parliament
which was said to have been breached. The particulars described how that act of
parliament was said to have been breached with sufficient detail to enable the
recipient to understand that it was alleged the driver
was driving the vehicle
whilst under the influence of alcohol at the time of the crash. Such conduct can
constitute a number of different
offences contrary to the
Road Safety
(Alcohol and Drugs) Act
, including driving under the influence of alcohol
contrary to
of that Act.
The second issue arises from the terms of s 37G(1) and the requirements of a
notice as set out in s 37GA(2)(c). Section 37G(1) provides
that the power to
make a demand and the obligation to comply with it arises "where a person is
alleged to have committed an offence
against any State or Commonwealth
legislation as the driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle". A demand made by
way of a s 37G notice
is required to "specify" that the owner of the motor
vehicle is to provide a statutory declaration stating "the name, address and,
known, the date of birth and driver licence number of the driver or occupant of
the motor vehicle at the time the offence was
committed", or alternatively,
where they do not know the details, information that may lead to the
identification of the driver or
occupant of the motor vehicle or the reasonable
steps taken to obtain such information.
The contents of the form utilised for the purpose of a s 37GA notice is such
that it may be issued in order to obtain identifying
details of a driver or
occupant of a car. The applicant asserts that the form did not expressly state
whether information was sought
as to the driver or the occupant of the relevant
vehicle and that a failure to do so means it was not validly issued.
In my view, there is no substance to this argument. First, when the content of
the notice is considered as a whole together with
what Constable Young said to
the applicant, it could not be said that the demand was ambiguous as to whether
information was being
sought regarding the driver or occupant of the car.
Constable Young expressly told the applicant the notice was being issued so
could "find out who ... was the driver who was driving the vehicle at that
particular point in time". He later made it clear
the demand was directed at
assisting them prove that the applicant was the driver at the relevant time. In
addition, the particulars
of the offence alleged to have been committed as set
out in the form were clearly related to the driver of the car, not the occupant.
The notice expressly referred to seeking information "so that proceedings may be
taken against the driver or occupant for the offence
as so stated". The offence
"so stated" was one alleged to have been committed by the driver. There was no
error in the magistrate
concluding that the notice "makes it abundantly clear
that, in this instance, it is the driver of the vehicle who is alleged to have
committed the offence and that is the information being sought". Nor did the
magistrate err in rejecting the submission the notice
was ambiguous and finding
the statutory requirements were met.
This ground is not made out.
Ground (d) – the finding that
Constable Young held a reasonable belief that an offence had been
This ground reads as follows:
"The learned Magistrate erred in fact
and in law in determining that the officer held a reasonable belief that an
offence had occurred
giving the paucity of information available to the office
(sic) as to who was driving and as a consequence, the Driver Demand Notice
invalidly issued."
Applicant's submissions
The applicant's outline of contentions addresses this ground as
"16 As her Honour agreed in her decision, for the issuing
Officer to be so satisfied that an offence had occurred, the Officer had
a reasonable belief that an offence had been committed, that offence being
driving under the influence.
Honour found that the information gathered by the police officer clearly found
(sic) the reasonable basis for satisfaction of
the Officer that an offence had
occurred. That finding, it is respectfully submitted, does not stand up to
scrutiny on the evidence
that the Officer had given and the information
is clear from the evidence of the issuing officer, Constable Young, whilst under
cross-examination, he did not have any information
that the driver was under the
influence of alcohol or not. When that question was put to him, he agreed it
these circumstances the issuing Officer could not hold reasonable belief that
the driver was under the influence of alcohol when
driving as the information
was clearly devoid of that fact and the Officer admitted the same.
is submitted, in these circumstances, the notice was invalidly issued and as a
result, the Applicant was not obliged to comply
with that notice, even if the
Court was satisfied the Applicant was the registered proprietor."
The applicant maintained that the relevant precondition for the issuing of the
notice was whether the police officer was satisfied
that the driver or occupant
of the motor vehicle had committed an offence. The applicant submitted this
required proof the issuing
officer was so satisfied and that there was a
reasonable basis for that state of satisfaction. Ultimately, the applicant
there was no evidence that Constable Young had a reasonable basis for
being so satisfied.
Respondent's submissions
Consistently with their arguments concerning the construction of s 37G(1), the
respondent submits it is not a precondition to making
a demand pursuant to s
37G(1) that a police officer be satisfied that the driver or occupant of that
vehicle has committed an offence.
The respondent submits that what is sufficient
is proof that a person is alleged to have committed an offence of the kind
to in s 37G(1) as the driver or occupant of a motor vehicle. In any
event, the respondent submits that the magistrate's finding was
open and her
conclusion that Constable Young reasonably believed the driver, who ever that
may have been, was driving under the influence
necessarily satisfied the
precondition under s 37G(1). Having satisfied herself to a higher standard than
required, the respondent
submits that no substantial miscarriage of justice has
resulted from any error in that regard.
The respondent submits that there was sufficient evidence on the hearing to
justify the conclusion that a person was alleged to
have committed an offence as
the driver. In any event, there was sufficient evidence that Constable Young was
satisfied that the
driver of the vehicle had committed an offence. He gave
evidence that he observed the aftermath of a crash, received information
witnesses and other police officers, and subsequently obtained statements, CCTV
and medical records relating to the matter.
In addition, Constable Young stated
during the course of his interaction with the applicant, "I'm 99.99% sure you
are the driver
but like I said I have to prove you are the driver regarding all
of these offences". The allegation was expressly set out in the
notice which was
provided to the applicant. That notice, together with Constable Young's
statement, was sufficient to establish that:
(a) Constable Young held a belief
that an offence has been committed, in this case by the applicant; and (b) that
belief was based
on reasonable grounds in all of the
circumstances.
The precondition for issuing a notice was
established beyond reasonable doubt
As I have already identified, the relevant precondition for the making of a
demand pursuant to s 37G(1), whether orally or by way
of a s 37GA notice, is an
allegation that a person has committed an offence against any State or
Commonwealth legislation as the
driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle. This
is similar to the preconditions for the making of demands for information
to s 37N of the
Police Offences Act
Traffic Act
. I have been unable to identify any decisions in this
like provisions in other jurisdictions which are of some assistance in dealing
with this issue.
DPP (NSW) v Hammoud
[2006] NSWSC 562
McClellan CJ at CL dealt with an appeal from a decision of a magistrate
dismissing a charge of failing to comply with a demand for
information contrary
Road Transport (General) Act
(NSW). That provision empowered an authorised officer to require
information of the responsible person for a vehicle as to the name
address of the driver "if the driver of a motor vehicle is
have committed an offence under the road transport legislation". The magistrate
had dismissed the charge on the basis that the
form of the demand made a
general, rather than specific, allegation.
McClellan CJ at CL observed that the relevant law was the subject of a decision
of the Court of Criminal Appeal in
[1976] 1 NSWLR 84
where Street CJ, with whom Begg and Ash JJ, agreed said at
"The section is aimed, in a far more general context, at
enabling the police to ascertain, from the owner of a vehicle, particulars
the driver of that vehicle at the time of the incident the subject of the
allegation. The obligation on the owner or custodian
arises merely in
consequence of there being an allegation made that a driver of a stated vehicle
was guilty of an offence. The truth
of the allegation in any of its particular
portions does not form a condition precedent to the arising of the statutory
to furnish information.
Specifically, this extends both to the portion of the allegation of guilt of
an offence, as well as to the identity of the motor vehicle
being driven. This
is the single composite allegation which conditions the operation of the
With reference to this decision, McClellan CJ at CL held at [18] that:
"The section did not require an investigation of factual matters, and a
determination of whether a prima facie case could be made
out of an offence by
the third party
or indeed any assessment of the evidence in relation to that
matter at all
. All that the section required was that the respondent be
informed that the police were alleging that an offence had been committed
sought information as to the driver of the vehicle at the time when that offence
was allegedly committed." (emphasis added)
The magistrate was in error in determining that the exercise of the power
pursuant to s 37G(1) was conditioned on the police officer
being satisfied on
reasonable grounds that the driver or an occupant of that motor vehicle has
committed an offence. This should
not be taken as a criticism. It is clear that
both the prosecutor and counsel for the applicant made submissions to the effect
the relevant precondition for making the demand was to be found in s
37GA(1). The magistrate found that Constable Young was satisfied
driver of the vehicle had committed an offence based on "an aggregate of all the
information received...including CCTV,
medical and witness statements and
surrounding circumstances, including inferences such as that which could be
drawn from the driver
leaving the scene". In my view, that conclusion was
readily open, albeit one that answered the wrong question. What is clear,
is that there was an
that the driver of the motor
vehicle the subject of the demand for information had committed an offence as
the driver of the vehicle
by driving under the influence of the alcohol which is
an offence against State legislation, namely the
Road Safety (Alcohol and
. That information was clearly set out in the notice.
The error alleged by the applicant is not made out. To the extent the
magistrate was in error in determining whether the condition
of the power to
make a demand was fulfilled based on an incorrect construction of s 37G(1), no
substantial miscarriage of justice
has occurred. The notice, which clearly
evidenced the existence of the precondition for the exercise of the power, was
without objection. The magistrate's findings were also clearly
sufficient to establish that there was a relevant allegation.
This ground is not made out.
Ground (e) – was the demand
invalid because it was not necessary?
This ground of review is as follows:
"That the learned Magistrate
erred in fact and in law in finding the issuing of the Notice of Demand whilst
asserting 99% certainty
that the Applicant was the driver, was validly issued in
undermining the Applicant's common law rights against self-incrimination
right to silence."
This ground alleges invalidity based on Constable Young's statement to the
applicant when issuing the notice that he was 99.99%
certain that the applicant
was the driver.
Applicant's submission
The applicant submitted in his outline of contentions that consideration must
be given to whether the issuing of the notice was
a deliberate act directed at
undermining the applicant's common law rights of silence and the right against
self-incrimination. The
applicant referred to the decision of
where Wood J stated at [37] that the common law is part of the
context to be taken into account when construing the provision she
dealing with. Her Honour, in this context, referred to the High Court decision
Petty v The Queen
[1991] HCA 34
Mason, Toohey and McHugh JJ stated that a person's right "to remain silent when
questioned or asked to supply information by
any person in authority about the
occurrence of an offence, the identity of the participants and the roles which
they played" was
"a fundamental rule of the common law which, subject to some
specific statutory modifications, is applied in the administration of
criminal law in this country."
While the applicant acknowledges that ss 37G and 37GA of the
Police Offences
plainly encroach on the right to silence and the privilege against
self-incrimination, he argues the question is one of degree. The
submits these fundamental principles favour the least infringement of common law
rights, and must not extend beyond the
area of operation for which parliament
has clearly provided.
Against this background, the applicant repeated his submissions that there
should be no ambiguity and the reason for the demand
must be based on reasonable
evidence rather than supposition. The applicant further submits that the use of
the driver demand notice
should not occur in circumstances where a police
officer is deliberately undermining common law rights by seeking that the
respond and incriminate himself. This argument was framed as
"32 If, as the Officer believed that the driver was under
the influence of alcohol, there was no evidence to support such an inference
there was no evidence to suggest any blood alcohol reading from any other
individual that would result in a successful prosecution
of the driver. In these
circumstances, it would make the Notice of Demand futile in a prosecution."
The applicant explained further during the review hearing that although these
rights were abrogated by ss 37G and 37GA, their utilisation
was still amenable
to curial supervision. Essentially, as I understood the argument, in
circumstances where Constable Young said
he was 99.99% certain that the
applicant was the driver, the issuing of a notice of demand was not necessary
and should not occur
given the gravity of taking a step that undermines such
fundamental rights. Further, the magistrate should not have found that the
notice was validly issued in the circumstances of futility referred to at [81]
Respondent's submissions
The respondent submitted that there was no warrant to import what was described
as "ceiling" as well as a "floor" as a condition
of the exercise of the relevant
power by a police officer. The respondent submits that ss 37G and 37GA are as
clear as they could
be, that is they are specific statutory modifications to the
right to silence. The only relevant matters conditioning the powers
outlined at the beginning of s 37G(1) or s 37GA(1), depending on which mechanism
is utilised.
Notice not invalidly issued
ground is without merit. The applicant correctly accepted that s 37G abrogated a
person's right to silence and privilege against
self-incrimination in the
circumstances provided for by the provision. There is nothing in the terms of
the section to suggest that
it only operates in circumstances where the officer
issuing the demand cannot prove the identity of the driver or occupant of a
by other evidence. No part of the provision suggests that a demand may
only be issued where it is necessary to do so in order to
establish the identity
of a driver or occupant of a vehicle at the relevant time. It also fails at a
factual level as Constable Young's
evidence during the hearing was that he
utilised poor wording when issuing the demand, that he believed the applicant
was the driver
but "could not prove it was him". To import a requirement of
necessity would undermine the clear language of the provision which
conditions the operation of the provision to circumstances were a person is
alleged to have committed a relevant offence as
a driver or occupant of a motor
To the extent this ground asserts that issuing the notice was "futile" and thus
invalid as the officer could not prove the driver
was in fact driving under the
influence, the submission misunderstands the evidence and, again, the operation
of the provision. As
I have already noted, the demand was made on the basis of
an allegation that the driver of the motor vehicle was driving under the
influence of alcohol at the time of the crash. The applicant relies on those
parts of Constable Young's evidence in cross-examination
where he agreed he
"never had any ID of the driver" and "as a result, [he] wouldn't know whether
the driver was under the influence
of alcohol or not". The questions and answers
relied upon, first, do not support the proposition that there was "no evidence
any blood alcohol reading from any other individual ...would result
in a successful prosecution of the driver". There is also no
warrant to limit
the operation of s 37G to circumstances where there is evidence capable of
resulting in a successful prosecution
of the driver or occupant. There is no
textual support for such a limitation. The condition of the relevant power is
that there is
an allegation that a relevant offence was committed, nothing
The authorities relied upon by the applicant also do not support importing such
limitations on the exercise of the power. Cases
Coco v The Queen
[1994] HCA 15
179 CLR 427
recognise that a statute will only be interpreted to have abrogated a
fundamental right by the use of clear words to that effect.
It is also accepted
that a construction which interferes with such rights to a lesser extent is to
be preferred to another:
Arachchi v Orlowski
[2003] VSC 161
per Nettle J at [26]. While the relevant principles of
statutory construction demand close scrutiny and a strict reading of provisions
such as s 37G (
Commissioner of Taxation v
Citibank Ltd
(1988) 20 FCR 403
per French J at 433), they do not warrant the
importation of limitations which derive no support from the clear language of
the relevant
This ground is not made out.
For these reasons, the applicant's motion to review filed on 17 September 2024
Interpretation Act 1931
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (421 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter