URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASSC/2025/49.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:21:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Singh v Director of Public Prosecutions [2025] TASSC 49 (8 October 2025)
[2025] TASSC 49
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA
Director of Public Prosecutions
[2025] TASSC
: SINGH, Hitesh
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
PROSECUTIONS
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Cuthbertson J
Magistrates – Appeal and review – Tasmania – Motion to
review – Other matters – Review of sentence -
Grounds for
interference – Whether sentence manifestly excessive – Assault with
indecent intent – Offender committing
offence in the course of employment
as a taxi driver – Partially suspended sentence imposed - Sentence of five
months' imprisonment
with two suspended not manifestly excessive.
Magistrates [1349]
Magistrates – Appeal and review – Tasmania – Motion to
review – Other matters – Review of sentence -
Grounds for
interference – Specific error – Failure to suspend whole of sentence
not a specific error.
Aust Dig Magistrates [1349]
Legislation
Community Protection (Offender Reporting) Act
Criminal Code 1924
Police Offences Act
Sentencing Act 1999
Cases cited:
[2000] HCA 54
202 CLR 321
Gordon v State of Tasmania
[2020] TASCCA 17
[1996] TASSC 144
[2006] TASSC 54
15 Tas R 375
Mulholland v Tasmania
; Tas R 313
[2009] VSCA 260
[2025] TASSC
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Director of Public Prosecutions
Judgment Number:
[2025] TASSC 49
paragraphs:
Serial No 49/2025
File No 3018/2024
HITESH SINGH v DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
PROSECUTIONS
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT CUTHBERTSON J
8 October 2025
This is a motion to review a sentence imposed by Magistrate Brown in the
Launceston Magistrates Court. The applicant pleaded guilty
on 17 October 2024 to
a charge of assault with indecent intent contrary to
Offences Act
. He committed the offence while he was working as a taxi
driver. The complainant was his passenger. He was convicted and sentenced
October 2024 to five months' imprisonment. The execution of two months of that
sentence was suspended for a period of two years
from the date of the
applicant's release from custody, on condition that he commit no imprisonable
offence during that period. An
order was also made placing the applicant's name
Community Protection (Offender Reporting) Act
register for
four years from the date of sentence.
During the course of the hearing of the motion to review, I granted leave to
the applicant to amend the notice. The respondent did
not oppose that course.
The amended notice to review contains two grounds. The first is that the
sentence imposed was manifestly
excessive in all of the circumstances of the
case. The second ground asserts that the magistrate erred in law by imposing a
suspended sentence of imprisonment instead of imposing a wholly suspended
sentence of imprisonment. The applicant accepts that the
offence was one for
which imprisonment was appropriate. He argues, however, that the failure to
suspend the whole of the sentence
was demonstrative of error.
the reasons that follow, the notice to review is dismissed.
The particulars of the charge to which the applicant pleaded guilty are as
"You are charged with on the 1st July, 2023 in Launceston
in Tasmania, with indecent intent, assaulting [the complainant], by putting
hand under her top and touching her breast with your hand over her bra."
At the time of committing the offence, the applicant was working as a taxi
driver with Taxi Combined. He was 37 years old, married
and had a young child.
He and his wife had moved to Australia from Nepal in 2018. The applicant was the
holder of a subclass 491
The complainant was 22 years old at the time of the offence. The applicant and
the complainant were not known to each other before
the events giving rise to
the charge.
On 1 July 2023, the complainant had been at her cousin's 21
birthday party in Invermay. She got into a taxi that was being driven by the
applicant at approximately 12.30 am. The taxi had been
pre-booked by one of the
complainant's family members to drive her home to Riverside. The complainant has
epilepsy and a learning
disability.
A CCTV system was operating in the taxi and audio-visually recorded the entire
journey. The footage was tendered on the sentencing
hearing and was played
during the course of the review hearing over counsel for the applicant's
objection. I determined the objection
was without merit. The footage was part of
the material before the magistrate and clearly relevant to my determination of
this motion
sentencing the applicant, the magistrate summarised the facts as
"On the 1st of July 2023, soon after midnight, the
defendant ... collected the complainant in his taxi to drive her from a social
event that she ... had attended in Invermay to her home in Riverside. The
complainant was 22 years of age. She had been to a social
function as I
understand it with her family. She had consumed alcohol. The facts put to me
indicate that she suffers from epilepsy
and has a learning disability although
of course ... the details of those latter matters were not known to the
defendant. However,
it seems to me the combination of when and where the
defendant [sic] was collected by the defendant and as a result of remarks she
made during her interaction with the defendant during the trip that it must have
been abundantly clear to the defendant by the time
the offence occurred that the
complainant was somewhat affected by alcohol. The video tape also makes it
abundantly clear, perhaps
in a way that the raw facts as read to the court don't
that the complainant presented as a somewhat quiet, somewhat shy person who
really unfailingly polite through the episode but also, it seems to me,
presented as someone who was in many ways quite unsophisticated
and certainly in
no way a forceful or strong personality and of course she presented as, I say, a
young woman, exactly what she was
and her demeanour and behaviour was consistent
with someone who was to some extent affected by consumption of alcohol, although
that I don't mean to indicate that she was in any way severely affected but,
as I say,...her behaviour and her remarks that she had
had, I think, quote, too
much to drink, indicate that alcohol was a factor for her that night.
The CCTV played also makes it clear that, really, from the moment she entered
the cab alone that the defendant was sexually interested
in the complainant and
was keen to pursue that with her. I accept Ms Judd's characterisation that the
whole interaction between the
defendant and the complainant culminating, almost
culminating in the indecent assault – in the assault with indecent intent
– which is before me, can properly be described as a predatory episode
from the outset. As I say, the defendant really pursued
the complainant and his
sexual interest in her relentlessly through the trip that she took with him. He
initially suggested some
expression soon developed into expressing a very clear desire that he wished to
have sexual relations with her. As I say, a notion that he pursued really quite
relentlessly. The complainant's reaction initially
to his advances was polite.
She did not, I accept, entirely reject his advances but it seemed to me that a
proper characterisation
of her behaviour and her responses and looking at what
she agreed to do and the manner in which she did agree to it was – could,
I think, properly be characterised as a polite, perhaps a deflection of the
defendant's interest by her suggesting .... that she
was perhaps open to forming
some type of relationship in the future but that she would not be interested in
doing that until they
got to know each other better and that she didn't wish to
pursue any sort of advance in their relationship that night. Not satisfied
that, as I say, the defendant continued to pressure her and pursue her and
pursue his sexual interest in the complainant. He
did so, amongst other things,
by lying about his age and indicating that he was 29 when, of course, he was
quite a bit older. Eventually,
in the course of the interaction between the
parties, he turned from his place at the driver's seat towards the complainant
behind him in the rear passenger seat and the behaviour culminated,
almost culminated in the defendant touching the complainant and
placing his hand
down her top and touching her breast. That behaviour was continued over a period
of some four or five minutes or
thereabout and, of course, technically makes out
to the offence which is before me and to which he's pleaded guilty. However, not
being satisfied ... with doing that, the defendant then continued his pursuit of
the complainant by attempting to have her to agree
to stay in the cab and to get
in the back seat with him, something that she did not agree to and she
eventually decamped after paying
When... the trip and the interaction which occurred between them while the
vehicle was stationary, which of course includes the offence
in question, when
all that finally ended the complainant went into her home where she was met by
her mother who was babysitting her
two young children. The complainant was, by
then, enormously distressed by what had happened during the episode and was
seems, inconsolable but did tell her mother about what had
applicant makes no complaint about this summary of the facts.
the entirety of the interaction between the applicant and the complainant was
audio-visually recorded, the circumstances of the
offending were readily
ascertainable. It is appropriate to highlight some further aspects of the events
giving rise to the charges
as they emerge from the CCTV footage and the facts
that were put to the magistrate during the course of the sentencing
magistrate described the applicant's conduct towards the complainant as
predatory from the outset and noted the relentless way
in which he sought to
pursue his sexual interest in her. Both of these observations are accurate.
a brief discussion and only shortly after the complainant entered the taxi, the
applicant asked her where her partner was.
As the complainant commenced
explaining her partner had recently left her, the applicant quickly told her not
to worry, that he was
with her and would care for her now. He immediately
followed this comment by asking if she lived alone. She said yes. The applicant
repeated she was not to worry, he would be her partner. He then asked if she
wanted to make him her partner. The complainant responded
"maybe". The applicant
told the complainant he was serious, that she was really beautiful and a nice
girl. He told her he would
earn money for her and her baby as well. He repeated
that he really liked her and asked if she wanted to be his partner. This all
occurred within one and a half minutes of the complainant getting into the taxi.
applicant continued in a similar vein for a further five minutes. In that time,
he said he would take the complainant on a date
"tonight" and asked if she
wanted to spend time with him. The complainant responded, "if I get to know
you". The complainant suggested
adding the applicant on Snapchat. He then
suggested spending time with the complainant if they stopped. The complainant
don't mind". After a short period of silence, the applicant asked the
complainant some questions about her children, who was looking
after them, and
ascertained they were not at her home that night. He then asked, "so I can spend
time with you tonight?" The complainant
said, "probably not tonight because I
reckon I will pass the fuck out". The applicant continued questioning the
complainant about
whether she wanted to spend time with him. She responded,
"probably not tonight because I am too pissed". The applicant persisted
his suggestion of spending time with the complainant "now" over her repeated
indication she did not want to that night.
taxi ride to the complainant's house took approximately 12 minutes. There was a
period of silence for the last five minutes of
the journey. During that period,
the complainant was slumped forward, looking at her phone. As soon as the
applicant pulled over,
he again suggested spending time with the complainant
that night, offering to give her a good massage, and indicating he wanted to
and kiss her. The complainant again said, "I probably won't tonight" and gave
the applicant her phone so he could add himself
on Snapchat. The applicant had
the complainant's phone for a number of minutes. He asked the complainant
whether there was anyone
in the house that night. The complainant indicated
there was. The applicant suggested spending time together in the car. The
complainant
repeated that she was tired, and said, "probably not tonight",
"probably not at the moment" and gave like responses in the face of
applicant's persistent attempts to get her to spend time with him in the cab.
She also advised him she was "on disability" because
of her epilepsy. The
applicant at one stage said he felt hurt. On the occasions when the complainant
told him "not tonight" or "I
want to get to know you first", the applicant
immediately responded by insisting he wanted to spend time with her "tonight"
things with her. He progressed to telling her he needed her now, that his
body was really hard, and that he wanted to get naked with
her. The complainant
said she was too drunk and had too many drinks.
The conduct the subject of the charge occurred while the applicant was still
seated in the front seat of the cab. He took off his
seatbelt and turned around
with his left shoulder back to the camera and put his right arm behind the seat
towards the complainant.
He then put his hand under her top and touched her
breast with his hand over her bra. His arm was in this position for
approximately
five minutes. It was the respondent's case that throughout the
entire time the accused was touching the complainant's breast with
his hand. She
later told police that while this was occurring, she did not know what to do.
The applicant made reference to the complainant's
breasts, asking if her baby
drank from "this one" and when he would get to do so. The applicant suggested he
would go to the back
of the car so the complainant could suck his dick. The
complainant told him, "I reckon I will go home". He repeated this request
number of times. The applicant accused the complainant of not loving him. Just
before the complainant got out of the taxi, the
applicant again asked if anyone
was inside her house. Both the applicant and complainant were outside of the
taxi for a period. The
applicant briefly got into the rear of the taxi and
attempted to persuade the complainant to join him there. She declined the
invitation.
The applicant ultimately drove off. This was approximately 20
minutes after he first pulled up at the complainant's address.
The magistrate made a number of observations about the complainant including
that it must have been clear she was affected to some
extent by alcohol,
presented as unsophisticated and as a shy, not at all forceful personality.
Having viewed the footage, those observations
were clearly open. If anything,
the magistrate's comments do not convey the full extent of the complainant's
vulnerability. Not only
did she present as someone affected by alcohol, she made
a number of references to being so affected. She repeatedly indicated she
tired. She referred expressly to her disability. She was unfailingly polite to
the applicant in the face of his persistent attempts
to engage her in sexual
activity, but repeatedly indicated she did not want to do so that night.
Victim impact statement
A written victim impact statement was provided to the Court for the magistrate
to read to himself. The magistrate summarised that
material as
"Turning to the matter of victim impact I note what was put
to me in that regard. The episode clearly had a significant impact on
complainant and has had continued to do so to date. Those effects are some
predictably but, of course, sadly, those are precisely
the sort of consequences
which often flow from offending of this sort.
There was, of course, the initial distress and upset. Serious though that was
but that was then followed by her continuing to suffer
symptoms since that date
including being emotionally libel (sic) generally. That she has also had
episodes where she has self-harmed,
something that she had not done since her
adolescent years which has obviously caused her enormous distress and alarm.
The complainant has also, as she described it, lost faith or confidence in
– in other people and as a direct result of this
she has found herself
simply unable to use an Uber or a taxi or indeed any form of public transport.
An attempt to do so ended, frankly,
in tears and that's meant that she's more
– she is – needs to rely on – on family and friends to get
had an isolating affect on her as well and that continues to be
As I say these are the sorts of issues which often flow from offending such
as this. She's enjoyed a number of counselling episodes
but unfortunately those
symptoms continue and I imagine might be likely to continue to varying degrees
of seriousness from time to
time over a prolonged period."
applicant did not take issue with the victim impact statement at either the
sentencing hearing or during the course of this
Prosecution's sentencing submissions
was noted that the applicant had no prior convictions and was entitled to the
utilitarian benefit of his plea of guilty. The prosecutor
outlined a number of
aspects of the offending which made it serious and called for a sentence with a
focus on general deterrence,
denunciation and protection of the public. Of
particular note was that the assault was committed by a taxi driver, in public
late at night, against a vulnerable young woman who had been at a
social function, drinking. It was submitted that women in such
circumstances
should be able to use public transport on their own late at night without fear
of unwarranted advances and of being
sexually assaulted. It was submitted that
the applicant was persistent in circumstances where the complainant said she
would prefer
to get to know him first. The touching of the complainant's breast
over her bra was not fleeting; it lasted for approximately five
Prosecution submitted that this was an incredibly intimate act and committed for
the applicant's own sexual gratification.
was submitted that the complainant had told the applicant she had been drinking,
and at one stage she said she had "had many drinks".
From at least that point,
it should have been apparent to the applicant that there was a level of
intoxication.
Prosecution
also submitted that the applicant's lack of prior convictions was of limited
weight in the circumstances of this offence
as this effectively facilitated his
opportunity to assault the complainant. He would not have been able to obtain
working with vulnerable
people registration which allowed him to work as a taxi
driver if he had relevant prior matters.
Matters in mitigation
The following matters were put on behalf of the applicant during the plea in
mitigation:
He was now 38
years old and had been married for eight years. There was one child of the
relationship born in 2022. The applicant
did not have any other family in
The applicant
and his wife moved to Australia in 2018. The applicant's wife was then on a
student visa. They moved to Launceston in
The applicant
presently held a subclass 491 visa. He and his wife lived in rental
accommodation. He was employed part-time as a food
services assistant in an aged
care facility. The applicant's wife had recently returned to part-time work and
they shared their income
and expenses.
The applicant
had qualifications in engineering and had been employed in that industry in
Since living in
Australia he had worked for a cleaning services business, as a taxi driver and
also in a supermarket before obtaining
his current employment.
His employment
as a taxi driver lasted for 12 months. He lost that employment following this
offending as his working with vulnerable
people registration was revoked.
The applicant
had no criminal history.
The applicant
accepted the complainant was a vulnerable person, that there was a power
imbalance by virtue of his role as a male taxi
driver, that he was in a position
of trust and responsibility which he breached by committing this offence.
He accepted that
his conversation with and behaviour towards the complainant breached community
expectations of a taxi driver in those
circumstances.
The applicant
asserted that it was not apparent to him at the time that the complainant was so
affected by alcohol that it was impacting
her to the extent that she lacked
capacity. He accepted, however, that he knew she had been drinking earlier that
evening at a party.
He also said it was not apparent to him that the complainant
suffered from any learning disability or intellectual disability.
The applicant
had pleaded guilty as soon as the new complaint had been laid.
Some aspects of the plea in mitigation require further elaboration due to the
importance particular aspects of it played in the
hearing before this Court. As
to the applicant's visa, it was submitted that there was a risk it would be
cancelled. It was described
as a "working visa". During the sentencing hearing,
the applicant's counsel confirmed the visa was subject to a character test but
stated the following:
"It is not a situation where his visa will
automatically be revoked as a result of this, but it is certainly going to bring
question and that puts him at risk in having the visa cancelled."
It was submitted on behalf of the applicant that he had perceived that the
complainant was interested in potentially seeing him
on a social basis on a
later date and potentially pursuing a relationship with him based on the
conversations and her presenting
her phone to him to add him on social media.
The magistrate questioned whether that was a completely fair characterisation of
situation. He stated:
"I mean, it seemed to me that by the point
that perhaps the phone was handed over it seems to me that it was pretty obvious
the complainant had said and done and her actions she had been
drinking. She struck me throughout that as being a pretty sort of
good humoured
but timid person and he was really persistent. So it seems to me what we are
dealing with is a man in his late 30's
with considerable life experience who was
obviously stone cold sober and his massing very real pressure on this person who
seemed to me might be said to be was possibly too polite to know how to
handle it. Would you cavil it any of that?"
In response, the applicant's counsel stated that:
"I would accept all of that, and certainty readily accept that Mr Singh ...
perpetuated the entire conversation, he was the instigator,
that was readily
apparent from the CCTV footage. It was also apparent that, and we don't dispute
it all, that, the complainant was
clear that she did not want to do anything
that night and that she...was interested in going home and that was it, however,
to be seen in the context that there was, if the complainant was truly
being polite, in my submission she could have paid for the
fare in cash and
left. There was no reason for her to hand over her phone to [the applicant] and
ask him to put in his Snapchat details.
It also reached a point where, it was
clear that she was not interested in anything and certainly, she made that clear
and Mr Singh,
at least on one occasion said, okay, I'll see you later then."
applicant's counsel described him as misguided in his behaviour, acknowledging
it was totally inappropriate. It was submitted
the applicant was remorseful now
as evidenced by his plea of guilty. He had also disclosed the offending to his
wife which had caused
him shame and embarrassment.
The magistrate commenced his sentencing comments by noting the applicant had
pleaded guilty to one count of assault with indecent
intent relating to his
actions towards the complainant on 1 July 2023, which involved placing his hand
down her top and touching
her breast over her bra for some minutes.
After referring to the factual background as set out at [9] above, together
with the victim impact statement, the magistrate noted
the offending had a
significant impact on the complainant and continued to do so as at the date of
sentencing. The magistrate noted
the submissions made in mitigation, the
applicant's plea of guilty, lack of prior matters, his background in terms of
his country
of origin, the length of time he had spent in Australia, his family
situation, his position and involvement in the community before
concluding as
"In summary it seems to me that this is a serious example
of a breach of ...
section 35(3).
As I indicated the behaviour here was
predatory, it was prolonged and has had significant consequences.
When I say prolonged I mean that the ... episode itself, that is the actual
offence, was one which wasn't a fleeting touch or anything
like that but rather
the defendant maintaining his position with his hand down her top and over her
breast for something like –
or something close to five minutes. And, of
course, when I say that it was prolonged, it needs to be seen as being prolonged
the entire trip where the defendant behaved in a way that .. I've
outlined really from start to finish.
I also accept that the defendant abused his position as a taxi driver by
dealing with the young woman in question as he did. She was
alone. She had been
drinking and she was entitled not to be offended against or harassed or pursued
in that way ... in this trip.
It seems to me therefore that he can properly be
said to have been in something of a position of trust. It seems to me,
that the submission that general deterrence is a significant factor
in sentencing has real weight.
This offending was, frankly in my view, brazen in that it was something which
was pursued from really the moment she got in the cab
until she left. And it was
also, of course, caught on CCTV – a camera – the camera being
something that the defendant
... must necessarily have known was operative but
he pressed on regardless.
As I say the behaviour making up the offence was part of a relentless pursuit
of his sexual interest in the complainant. So it seems
to me in all those
circumstances that personal deterrence is also of relevance here. I accept that
the defendant lost his job as
a result of this and no doubt the institution of
proceedings, being charged, coming to court and the like has itself been
of a salutary lesson already and that those have all underlined that
this behaviour was utterly and entirely unacceptable.
At the end of the day I've reached the view that a term of imprisonment is,
in my view, the only appropriate response to this offending.
Obviously assault with indecent intent is an offence at the lower end of the
scale of ... the regime of sexual offences in Tasmania.
However, it is also fair
to say that it is an offence which covers a wide range of conduct from what
might be described as quite
minor offending through to more serious sorts of ...
offending and, in my view, this, as I say, this represents ...a serious example
of this offence and I note the presence of a number of aggravating factors as
I've attempted to outline in these reasons.
As I say, the defendant has no prior matters and I accept that ... he's found
himself a new job so ...he is someone who has shown
himself to be industrious.
He has a wife and child.
It might be hoped with all those factors that the defendant's prospects of
reformation are therefore not to be ignored.
I also accept that the conviction that will be imposed today may well affect
his visa or visa status. However, it seems to me that
that is a matter of far
lesser importance and of course it's not to be forgotten that it's the conduct
which the defendant has pleaded
guilty to which will doubtlessly be crucial in
that regard and not the sentence that I impose.
However, I accept there may be some extra – a further extra period of
punishment at play here. How that pans out is something,
of course, that I can't
predict but I accept that it's a ... factor.
In all this it's not to be forgotten that the defendant is, of course, a
mature man and he did behave in an utterly deplorable fashion
towards the
complainant and that ... the actual offence itself was prolonged and preceded by
highly inappropriate conduct and that
that conduct even continued after the
offence had been technically completed.
In all those circumstances the defendant is convicted. He is sentenced to
five months imprisonment. Two months of that term of imprisonment
is suspended
for a period of two years from his release on condition that he commit no
imprisonable offence during that two year
The – that sentence is, of course, also designed to be seen as a clear
condemnation of this sort of conduct."
magistrate also ordered that the applicant's name be placed on the register kept
pursuant to the
Community Correction (Offender Reporting) Act
, concluding
that "it was plainly a case where" such an order ought be made.
Was the sentence manifestly excessive?
applicant and the respondent referred to previous sentences imposed by this
Court on charges of indecent assault in the course
of their respective
arguments. The decisions referred to by the applicant were:
26 August 2021 – Blow CJ. 19 year old put his hand under the
complainant's underwear and touched the outside of her vagina while
sitting next
to her in the backseat of a car. Complainant told him to stop. He removed his
hand a short time later. Matter was reported
to police six months later. EMR had
no prior matters. He had drunk a lot on the night of the offence. He pleaded
guilty. A community
correction order was made for two years with a condition
that he perform 84 hours of community service.
Mayar Majok
25 September 2023 – Blow CJ.
The complainant was the 28
year old's former partner. They had recently separated. He was staying the night
at the complainant's house
where she lived with family in another room. She woke
during the course of the night and found the offender in her bed naked. He
touching her genitalia and anus under her underpants. She pushed the offender
away and he left the room. After the complainant
confronted him about his
conduct the next morning, the offender voluntarily attended the police station
and confessed to indecent
assault. He pleaded guilty. He had no prior matters.
At the time of sentencing he was living under the same roof as the complainant
for the purposes of raising their child together. He was sentenced to 12 months'
imprisonment, wholly suspended for three years.
Community service and home
detention were not available as the offender lived interstate. A three year
Community Protection (Offender
Reporting) order was made.
– 5 July 2022 – Pearce J. 19 year old indecently assaulted his
18 year old friend. They were sharing a bed fully clothed.
The complainant woke
to find the offender rubbing her breasts with his hands under her bra for
between one to three minutes. He then
rubbed the top of her vagina for between
five to ten minutes under her underpants. The complainant did not say or do
anything to
indicate consent. The next day after the complainant had left the
offender's house, he messaged her indicating he hoped the touching
had not made
things weird and referred to himself as a dickhead. The complainant ceased
not reported for over four years. The
offender was interviewed and admitted his conduct. He told police about the
messages. He pleaded
guilty. He had no prior convictions. A psychologist
assessed him and concluded there were good reasons to consider the offending
an isolated incident and that he posed a low risk of sexual recidivism. A
Community Protection (Offender Reporting) order was
not made. He was convicted
of two counts of indecent assault. A two year community corrections order was
made with a condition he
perform 105 hours of community service.
– 28 February 2025 – Cuthbertson J. 22 year old indecently
assaulted his 24 year old female friend when sharing a bed
with her fully
clothed. On six occasions, he commenced indecently touching the complainant
while she was asleep. He touched and kissed
her breast under her clothing,
rubbed her vagina over the top of her clothing, ground his penis into her upper
thigh and buttocks
area, touched her vagina and moved his penis in between her
upper thighs. The complainant reported the matter the same day. The offender
made some admissions. He pleaded guilty. He had no relevant prior convictions. A
forensic psychologist assessed he was in the lowest
risk category for future
risk of committing sexual offences. He was convicted of six counts of indecent
assault. He was sentenced
to three months' imprisonment, wholly suspended for 12
months and subject to the special condition that he perform 75 hours of
Gall-Strauss
– 20 March 2024 - Blow CJ. 19 year old with a degree of intellectual
impairment was found guilty of three indecent assaults
of a female of a similar
age. The offending occurred when they were sharing a bed fully clothed. The
offender touched the complainant's
breast under her bra and touched her vagina
on two occasions. He had no prior convictions. He was convicted and sentenced to
months' wholly suspended imprisonment. A four year Community Protection
(Offender Reporting) order was made.
– 4 April 2023 – Brett J. 47 year old female found guilty of
three counts of indecent assault of a younger female work
colleague after a
social gathering at the offender's home. When the offender's husband had gone to
bed, she exposed the complainant's
breasts by pulling the front of her dress
down then sucked one of them. The offender then masturbated herself and as the
complainant
was organising herself to leave, the offender wiped her hand she had
used to masturbate across the complainant's face. She then started
the complainant's clothing, pulling the shorts down that she was wearing under
her dress. The offender lost her employment,
resigning in the face of inevitable
termination. Her reputation in the business community had been negatively
affected. She had no
prior convictions. She was sentenced to six months'
imprisonment wholly suspended for 18 months. A Community Protection (Offender
Reporting) order was not made.
The respondent
referred to the following decisions:
Satpal Singh
– 11 December 2024 – Martin AJ. 35 year old taxi driver was
found guilty of indecent assault of a young female passenger.
The offender had
picked the complainant up at 4.30am and suggested she sit in the front passenger
seat. He first touched and squeezed
her knee and asked if she wanted a massage
when she complained of having sore knees. He did not drive the complainant to
as requested but took her to a beach some distance away. During the
drive he asked probing questions about her personal life and
refused her
requests to pull over. When he eventually stopped he placed his hands all over
the complainant, managing to get his hand
under her shirt and bra and on her
legs. The complainant pushed the offender away, but he managed to touch the
complainant's breasts
and mid-section. The complainant managed to get away and
called police. In sentencing the offender, Martin AJ considered the offender's
conduct was well-removed from the lowest end of the scale of seriousness given
its context. He stated:
"People in our community trust taxi drivers
to keep them safe, particularly women alone on a street in the early hours of
the morning.
You took advantage of your position as a taxi driver and you abused
the trust placed in you. You used your position to entice a vulnerable
person into your taxi at 4.30am, and you did so with the possibility of a sexual
encounter in mind. You immediately set about
putting your sexual idea into
action and you ignored the requests of the victim to stop and let her out. You
ignored her offers to
pay. The accumulative effect was that you put the victim
through a harrowing experience, culminating in the indecent assault."
The offender held a temporary visa. He was convicted. He was sentenced to 12
months' imprisonment with nine months suspended. A two
year Community Protection
(Offender Reporting) order was made to operate from the date of his release from
– 28 July 2021 – Martin AJ. 78 year old, in poor health and
suffering mild dementia, was found guilty of one count of
indecent assault of a
19 year old complainant who was a close friend of the family. She was visiting
the offender in hospital and
sat down on the bed to talk to him. The offender
put his arm around the complainant then put his hand up under her t-shirt and
her breast over her bra. He told the complainant she had a nice pair. The
offender had a good prior record. He was convicted and
fined $3,000. The Court
noted that if he had been a suitable candidate, some form of home detention or
community service would probably
have been ordered. His health issues rendered
those options unsuitable.
– 3 December 2020 – Pearce J. 53 year old male found guilty of
two counts of indecent assault of a 23 year old female
who had autism spectrum
disorder and an intellectual disability. The offender approached her in the
public library and touched her
breasts and vagina on the outside of her
clothing. He then attended her supported accommodation that evening and touched
breasts and vagina outside her clothing again. He had a significant
record of prior convictions for dishonesty offences, together
with a range of
prior matters relating to the indecent touching of younger females. He had
previously received sentences of imprisonment
for such offences. There had been
a gap in his offending. He had a previous diagnosis of borderline personality
disorder. He was
sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment with six months suspended
for a period of two years from release. A 12 month probation order
was also made
a condition of the suspended sentence. A seven year Community Protection
(Offender Reporting) order was made to operate
from the date of his release from
Applicant's submissions
The applicant highlighted that the offence of assault with indecent intent is a
less serious offence than its indictable equivalent,
indecent assault. The
summary offence carries a maximum penalty of two years' imprisonment. This is to
be contrasted with the maximum
period of imprisonment provided for by the
Criminal Code
, namely 21 years. Although not
referred to by the applicant, where the crime of indecent assault is tried
summarily, the maximum
period of imprisonment is three years for a first offence
and five years for a second or subsequent offence: see s 13 of the
Sentencing Act 1999.
applicant submitted the offence itself "was objectively at the lower end of
seriousness for indecent assault, even considering
the vulnerabilities of the
complainant" as there was no touching of the vagina or genitalia, the touching
of the breast was over
the clothing, there were no threats of violence to the
complainant or any other threat to ensure the offending would not be reported
and it was a single count.
applicant submitted that the following features were mitigating:
The defendant
pleaded guilty which spared the complainant from giving evidence;
The offence was
un-premeditated;
The conviction
and any sentence could affect his visa status;
The applicant
had lost his registration to work with vulnerable people and lost his
employment, both of which were extra curial penalties;
The applicant's
visa would be cancelled which was an additional extra curial punishment. Even if
the Court took the view the cancellation
was merely a possibility, that prospect
alone would cause the applicant anxiety which was a matter to be taken into
The applicant noted the magistrate did not obtain a pre-sentence report.
Reference was made to the decision of Evans J in
James v Turner
[2006] TASSC 54
15 Tas R 375.
In that case, his Honour concluded a magistrate had erred in failing to make
enquiries of an unrepresented defendant about matters
relevant to sentence prior
to imposing a custodial sentence. No opportunity had been given to the applicant
to dissuade the magistrate
from imposing an immediate period of imprisonment.
Evans J noted at [8] that "if it was thought that a wholly suspended sentence
imprisonment lacked sufficient punitive impact, it may be that it could have
been coupled with a community service order. The
learned magistrate did not have
the information he needed in order to assess these options." Evans J concluded
the magistrate had
erred in his approach to sentencing the applicant in that
case as he failed to seek the information needed to undertake the necessary
assessment.
applicant argues that the decision not to wholly suspend the sentence rendered
his sentence manifestly excessive. He argued that
had the magistrate engaged in
a thorough analysis of whether actual imprisonment was necessary, it would have
necessitated an assessment
of whether whole suspension or whole suspension
combined with community service orders was appropriate in achieving deterrence
rehabilitation or reform. In this case, the magistrate did not seek a
pre-sentence report or consider reform or rehabilitation, let
alone suitability
for community service. As a consequence, the magistrate deprived himself of
information that would have furnished
appropriate material to assist to
determine the question of whether a whole suspension of the sentence was
appropriate and whether
it could achieve the applicant's reform.
The applicant also argued that it would have been appropriate for the
magistrate to take into account the recording of the applicant's
name on the
Community Protection (Offender Reporting) Act
register when fixing the
sentence. Reference was made to the decision of Pearce J in
Mulholland v Tasmania
[2017] TASCCA 2
313 at [26]. The applicant argued that the decision to wholly or partly suspend
the sentence was arrived at independent of
any consideration of that order.
The applicant also relied on an analysis of sentencing practices of courts in
relation to charges of indecent assault and assault
with indecent intent. The
applicant submitted that when comparing his offence to the conduct the subject
of those other matters,
it was hard to reconcile the requirement to serve
imprisonment. The following comparative features were identified:
applicant's conduct involved touching of the breast above clothing, compared to
the skin on skin touching of the vagina, vulva
or anus in cases of
Majok, Turnbull, Stewart
Gaull-Strauss
lack of prior relationship between the applicant and complainant compared with
EMR, Majok, Turnbull, Stewart
Gaull-Strauss;
breach of trust involved in the cases of
Majok, Turnbull
was far greater by reason of the relationships between those
offenders and the victims;
complainant in this case was awake and aware of the offending compared to the
circumstances that occurred in
applicant pleaded guilty in contrast to
Gaull-Strauss
who were convicted at trial.
The applicant argued that given the comparative features, he received a
markedly harsher sentence for less objectively or subjectively
offending. It was argued that discrepancy can only have arisen as a result of
some undefinable error in the exercise of the
sentencing discretion which is to
say the sentence was unreasonable or plainly unjust.
respondent's submissions
The respondent referred to the limitations on the value of sentencing
statistics because of the variety of circumstances in which
such offending can
occur. The respondent submitted, however, that the applicant's offending was a
serious example of the type of
offence given the number of aggravating factors
The respondent submitted that the magistrate was correct to characterise the
offending as a serious example of this offence, warranting
imprisonment. The assault involved a taxi driver driving a young woman who was
particularly vulnerable and affected by
alcohol. It involved a breach of the
standards expected of those engaged in such employment. The complainant was
unknown to the applicant,
yet he relentlessly pursued his sexual interest in her
while he was driving her home and despite her polite refusal to engage in
sexual activity that night. The touching of her breast lasted for approximately
five minutes and was not fleeting. Subsequently,
the applicant continued to
attempt to engage the complainant in sexual acts after the offending and after
she left the taxi, which
highlighted the seriousness of his conduct. The
offending had a significant impact on the complainant. The respondent argues
a sentence reflecting general deterrence, denunciation and vindication of
the complainant were all important sentencing factors.
the respondent acknowledges that the imposition of the registration reporting
obligations on the offender is relevant to sentence,
the weight, if any, to be
attributed to it depends on the nature and extent of any actual punitive effect
on an offender in the circumstances
of the case, judged in the context of the
nature and gravity of the offence:
at 325-326. In this
particular case, no material was put before the magistrate from which he could
conclude that the making of such
an order would have a punitive impact of any
significance upon the applicant.
respondent acknowledges there were some mitigating factors, including the
applicant's prospects of reform. There was also an
absence of some aggravating
factors. The applicant's offending was not planned. No threats, force or weapons
were used. These matters
were, however, properly considered by the magistrate.
all the circumstances, the respondent submitted that the sentence was not
manifestly excessive.
Sentence was not manifestly
principles which apply to a motion to review a sentence on the ground of
manifest excess are well-settled. They were recently
summarised by Pearce J in
Watson v Woodgate
[2025] TASSC 26
"To succeed on a ground that a sentence is manifestly
excessive it is not enough to establish that the sentence may be regarded by
some as too harsh. An appeal court may not substitute its own opinion for that
of the magistrate merely because it may have exercised
the sentencing discretion
differently:
Lowndes v The
[1999] HCA 29
195 CLR 665
. This Court
must be persuaded of error of the second type referred to
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR
at 505, that is, that the sentence imposed by the sentencing court is,
on the facts, unreasonable or plainly unjust, such that the
appellate court may
infer that in some way there has been a failure to properly exercise the
sentencing discretion. Manifest excess
or inadequacy must be plainly apparent.
An applicant must show that the sentence is so obviously excessive that it is
outside the
proper limits of the broad sentencing discretion of a
magistrate:
[2009] TASSC 10
TGW v Tasmania
[2017] TASCCA
26 Tas R 106
applicant does not argue that the magistrate erred in imposing a sentence of
imprisonment or that the head sentence was too long.
The argument is that the
failure to suspend the whole of the sentence rendered it manifestly excessive.
Sentencing Act
1999 provides no legislative guidance as to the exercise
of the discretion to suspend a sentence of imprisonment in whole or in part,
save that it mandates the imposition of a condition that the offender not commit
another offence punishable by imprisonment during
the period the order is in
force: s 24(1). In
Dinsdale v The Queen
[2000] HCA 54
202 CLR 321
, Kirby J explained at 346 that "two distinct steps
are involved". The first is a determination that a sentence of imprisonment, and
not some lesser penalty, is warranted. The second is the determination of the
portion to be suspended. In
Gordon v State of
[2020] TASCCA 17
, Porter AJ explained that consideration of an
order suspending the execution of all or part of a terms of
imprisonment:
"involves close attention to how the exercise of that
discretion would contribute to the rehabilitation of the offender. However,
power to suspend is not confined by reference wholly, mainly or specially to the
effect the suspension would have on the rehabilitation.
Attention can be given
to circumstances personal to the offender as well as objective features of the
Dinsdale v The Queen
[2000] HCA 54
per Gaudron and Gummow JJ at [26], per Kirby J at [86]-[87]."
this case, the magistrate concluded that the offending warranted the imposition
of a sentence of imprisonment, and not some lesser
sentence, because the
applicant abused his position as a taxi driver to engage in the predatory,
prolonged and brazen indecent touching
of a vulnerable young female. He
considered personal and general deterrence warranted the imposition of such a
considering whether and how much of the sentence to suspend, the magistrate
noted the applicant had no priors, a new job, his
family circumstances, his
prospects of rehabilitation and the effect of a conviction on his visa. In
imposing a sentence which required
some to be served, the magistrate explained
it was designed to denounce the conduct.
my view, the applicant has failed to demonstrate that the sentence imposed was
unreasonable or plainly unjust. The magistrate's
characterisation of the
applicant's offending was entirely justified. It represented a serious example
of the offence of assault
with indecent intent. The maximum period of
imprisonment that could have been imposed was two years. The sentence imposed
short of that maximum. The comparative sentences relied upon by the
applicant were of little assistance. The range of circumstances
in which such an
offence and its analogue can occur varies considerably. There was much about the
circumstances of the applicant's
offending which distinguished it from the
comparative cases he relied upon, not least the context in which it
abuse of the applicant's position as a taxi driver, combined with the persistent
and predatory way in which he sought to engage
a vulnerable complainant in
sexual activity, warranted a sentence which emphasised general deterrence and
denunciation of the applicant's
conduct. As Crawford J (as he then was)
explained in
[1996] TASSC 144
"The community is entitled to expect that taxi drivers can be
trusted. That particularly applies to the carriage of female passengers
night. The applicant's privileged position as a licensed taxi driver carried
with it a responsibility to conform with the trust
the deceased and other
passengers reposed in him."
See also Cox CJ at [21] and Zeeman J at [69] in that same decision.
mitigating factors relied upon by the applicant were, of course, relevant to
sentence. The weight to be given to them in the
sentencing exercise were matters
for the magistrate to determine consistent with the relevant principles to be
applied. The applicant's
argument is that if all the factors had been
appropriately considered, the only appropriate sentence was one that did not
any of it to be served immediately. A partial answer to this argument
lies in a consideration of some of the particular factors relied
upon by the
applicant to demonstrate that they did not attract the sort of weight that
demanded such an outcome.
applicant emphasised the extra curial punishments he suffered as a consequence
of his offending as justifying the imposition
of a penalty falling short of
actual imprisonment. In this respect, he relied on his loss of working with
vulnerable people registration
and employment as a taxi driver, together with
the potential impact on his visa status. In
Mulholland v Tasmania,
J at [27] (Tennent and Brett JJ agreeing) noted that:
detriment suffered by an offender as a result of having committed a crime may,
in some circumstances, properly be taken
into account in determining sentence.
.... An example may be injury suffered by an offender in committing a crime, or
inflicted on
the offender as retribution or revenge, or some type of financial
consequence:
(1994) 76 A
R v Daetz; R v
[2003] NSWCCA 216
139 A Crim R
[2009] VSCA
213 A Crim R 461
[2014] NSWCCA 53
239 A Crim R 487.
However, the
weight to be attributed to extra-curial punishment depends on the circumstances
of the case, and in some cases it may
attract little or no weight:
Daetz; R v Wilson
per James J, with whom Tobias JA and Hulme J agreed,
at 411 [62]."
applicant's loss of employment as a taxi driver and of his working with
vulnerable people registration were matters which, in
my view, were not required
to be ascribed significant weight. In
[2009] VSCA 260
, the Victorian Court of Appeal considered the extent to
which a real estate agent's loss of occupation and mandatory disqualification
from working in that occupation for at least 10 years, was mitigatory in the
context of an offence committed in the course of employment.
While the Court of
Appeal accepted that the sentencing judge was entitled to afford these matters
some weight, he was not bound to
do so. With respect to the issue of
disqualification, the Court of Appeal considered at [28] there was a distinction
between "a disqualification
resulting from criminal conduct in the course of the
employment from which the person is disqualified and criminal conduct remote
from that employment but having that consequence." In this case, the applicant
lost his employment which required working with vulnerable
people registration,
together with his right to work in any other field requiring such registration
as a result of criminal conduct
in the course of that very employment. It could
not be said that the criminal conduct was remote from that consequence. His
breached the trust placed in him in his occupation and as a holder of
such registration. I do not consider the loss of employment
or his right to work
in areas requiring working with vulnerable people registration to be a
disproportionate outcome of his offending
which would attract significant
potential impact on the applicant's visa status is one that was acknowledged by
the magistrate. In those jurisdictions where
courts consider reduced migration
prospects as mitigatory, it is usually necessary to establish the nature of the
risk and the hardship
it would cause: see discussion in Bagaric et al,
Sentencing in Australia,
11th ed (2025) at [500.19000]. The information
provided to the magistrate fell short of identifying the likely effect of any
upon the applicant's visa status.
order made pursuant to the
Community Protection (Offender Reporting) Act
was not a factor that the magistrate was required to accord particular weight in
the circumstances. As Pearce J concluded in
at [31], the
weight to be attributed to the imposition of such obligations "depends on the
nature and extent of any actual punitive
effect on an offender in the
circumstances of each case, judged in the context of the nature and gravity of
the offence". In this
instance, there was no information before the magistrate
to suggest that it would have a punitive effect of any significance.
applicant's complaint that the magistrate did not obtain a pre-sentence report
was not asserted to constitute a specific error.
It is difficult to
conceptualise how it is was relevant to the argument that the sentence imposed
was unreasonable or plainly unjust
in light of all the circumstances. This was
not a case of the kind Evans J was dealing with in
James v Turner.
applicant was represented in the sentencing hearing. The magistrate had the
benefit of both written and oral submissions in mitigation.
It is not a case
where it can properly be said that the magistrate was deprived of relevant
information. No request was made of the
magistrate to obtain a report. The
magistrate acknowledged the applicant's prospects of reform. He had before him
sufficient information
to assess the available sentencing options.
my view, the sentence imposed by the magistrate is unimpeachable. It balanced
the objectives of punishment, denunciation, general
and specific deterrence and
vindication of the complainant with the applicant's prospects of reform,
reflected in the partial suspension
of the sentence. The conduct warranted a
condign response.
ground is not made out.
Specific error - partly suspended
sentence v wholly suspended sentence
Applicant's submissions
The applicant largely relied on his arguments in support of the complaint of
manifest excess when addressing this ground. He argued
that the exercise of the
discretion at the second stage of the two distinct steps identified by Kirby J
miscarried, as a careful analysis of comparative cases in
combination with the circumstances of the case were such that the magistrate
"could not have concluded that a partially suspended sentence was the only
appropriate sentencing order".
The applicant takes no issue with the magistrate's conclusion that the
applicant's offence was one that warranted a sentence of
imprisonment. Given
that the magistrate had decided that reform of the applicant was possible or
achievable, he argued attention
needed to be directed to sentencing options to
achieve that aim. Instead, the magistrate proceeded to impose a custodial
which was only partly suspended without engaging in an analysis of why
a whole suspension was inappropriate. The applicant also complains
magistrate had failed to signal to counsel that he was minded to impose actual
time in custody. The applicant's ultimate
submission is that a wholly suspended
sentence, including community service, was the proper disposition given all of
the factors
relied upon.
There was no specific
It is difficult to comprehend the nature of the specific error alleged here. To
the extent it is based on the result, it is no different
from a complaint that
the sentence was manifestly excessive. I have already explained why, in my view,
the sentence was not unreasonable
or plainly unjust. Those reasons are also
sufficient to explain why the assertion that the proper disposition was a wholly
sentence including in combination with community service is untenable.
the extent this ground suggests the magistrate did not approach the task in two
stages described by Kirby J, it is also untenable.
The magistrate did not elide
the two stages of the exercise of the discretion. He first determined that a
term of imprisonment was
the only appropriate response to the offending. This is
a clear expression of his conclusion that "a sentence of imprisonment, and
some lesser sentence, is called for". The magistrate then determined whether the
term of imprisonment should be suspended, how
much of it should be suspended and
for how long. He did so after canvassing the matters relevant to the exercise of
the sentencing
discretion, including the nature of the offending, the
applicant's personal circumstances, his prospects of reformation and the
visa implications. His conclusion that the applicant was required to
serve three months of that sentence was preceded by the observation
applicant's conduct was utterly deplorable, prolonged, and commenced with highly
inappropriate conduct which continued after
the offence had been technically
completed. It was followed by the statement that the sentence was designed to be
seen as a clear
condemnation of this sort of conduct. The magistrate's approach,
in my view, was in accordance with that outlined in
contrary to the applicant's assertion, the magistrate did analyse the relevant
circumstances before concluding that the appropriate
sentence was one that
included a period of imprisonment to be served immediately.
specific error has been identified. This ground is also not made out.
these reasons, the motion to review is
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (324 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter