URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASSC/2025/44.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:21:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Viney v Clark [2025] TASSC 44 (24 September 2025)
[2025] TASSC 44
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA
[2025] TASSC 44
: VINEY, Coden
CLARK, Natalie (Acting Sergeant)
DELIVERED ON:
24 September 2025
HEARING DATE:
16 September 2025
Magistrates – Appeal and review – Tasmania – Motion to
review – Other matters – Appeal against sentence
– Applicant
alleged sentence manifestly excessive – Magistrate activated 2 month
suspended sentence and imposed 4 months'
imprisonment and 12 month community
correction order for a number of varied offences – Applicant alleged
insufficient weight
given to Applicant's deprived background – Specific
deterrence and rehabilitation significant considerations given the Applicant's
continued pattern of offending and unwillingness to abide by the law –
Magistrate's decision within proper exercise of sentencing
discretion –
Motion to review dismissed.
Aust Dig Magistrates [1349]
Legislation:
Sentencing Act 1997
Barrett v Wilson
[2015] TASSC
Bugmy v The Queen
(2013) 249 CLR 571
Jamieson v State of
[2015] TASSC
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Tasmania Legal
Respondent:
Office of Director of Public
Prosecutions
Judgment Number:
[2025] TASSC 44
paragraphs:
Serial No 44/2025
File No 2462/2025
CODEN JAMES VINEY v ACTING SERGEANT NATALIE
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT BRETT J
24 September 2025
applicant seeks review of a sentence imposed on him by Magistrate Hughes on 4
July 2025. The sentence was imposed on the applicant's
plea of guilty to a
number of summary charges, in particular driving while disqualified, burglary
and stealing, failing to appear
in breach of bail, possessing methyl amphetamine
and stealing groceries. The applicant's commission of each of these offences was
in breach of a suspended sentence of two months' imprisonment and the
prosecution applied, under
Sentencing Act
activation of the suspended sentence. The magistrate activated that sentence and
imposed a global sentence on the pleas
of guilty of four months' imprisonment to
be served cumulatively on the activated suspended sentence, making a total
custodial period
of six months. The magistrate also made a community corrections
order with an operational period of 12 months commencing on the applicant's
release from custody.
sole ground of review is that the sentence is manifestly excessive. The notice
to review does not assert specific error in relation
to the activation of the
suspended sentence, and on the hearing of the review, the applicant's counsel
confirmed that no complaint
is made about that aspect of the sentence. However,
the combined effect of the activated sentence and the sentence imposed for the
fresh matters is relevant to the question of whether the four-month sentence for
the new offending is manifestly excessive. The principles
applicable in respect
of such a ground are well established and not in doubt. I can only interfere
with the sentence if I am satisfied
that, notwithstanding the absence of
specific error, error can be inferred from the severity of the sentence. In
other words, the
ground will only be upheld if the sentence is so severe as to
not fall within the bounds of a reasonable exercise of discretion by
sentencing magistrate. The fact that I might have imposed a different sentence
is not a relevant consideration.
will become apparent, the most significant sentencing consideration for the
magistrate was the interaction between specific deterrence
and rehabilitation.
Of course, other considerations such as general deterrence and vindication of
victims were also important. Further,
the applicant's counsel on review stressed
the weight which should be given to the effect of the applicant's deprived
background,
relying on the principles set down by the High Court in
(2013) 249 CLR 571. Given this emphasis on the applicant's
personal circumstances, it is appropriate in my view before describing
applicant's criminal conduct, and in order to provide context for it, to set out
the applicant's prior record of offending, and
general background. This is not
to say, of course, that an offender should be sentenced on the basis of his
record, but in this case
the context provided by the applicant's personal
circumstances and background, is critical to the assessment of the need for
deterrence and his prospects of rehabilitation, and a proper
understanding of the role played by problems experienced by him in childhood
as a young person.
applicant was 35 years of age when he committed the relevant offences. Apart
from his criminal history, the magistrate was given
relatively brief information
applicant had grown up
in Launceston and attended school to grade 10. His home
life and upbringing had been characterised by family violence perpetrated
father upon his mother. His mother, when he was very young, would lock the
applicant and his siblings out of the house. He
fell into crime at a young age
and at the age of 9 years, was sentenced to detention at the Ashley Youth
Detention Centre. During
his time there, he was subjected to both sexual and
physical abuse at the hands of guards. He was a member of a successful
class-action
suit in relation to such abuse and is due to receive a substantial
amount of money by way of compensation in the near future. He
had just started
work as a lawnmowing contractor on a part-time basis and this was the first paid
employment that he had ever held.
reference to the applicant being sentenced to detention at a young age is
confirmed by the applicant's criminal history. The
record also sets out the
applicant's lengthy and continuous history of offending since that time. There
is persistent and repeated
offending both as a youth and an adult in relation to
traffic matters, including 17 convictions for driving while disqualified and
many others for unlicensed driving, as well as other serious traffic offences
such as evading police. He also has a lengthy history
of convictions for
dishonesty offences including a number of examples of burglary and stealing as
well as more serious offences of
aggravated burglary and aggravated armed
robbery. There are also a significant number of convictions for drug and bail
Although his counsel submitted that in more recent times his offending
had been reducing, any such reduction is recent and limited.
A further and very
significant aspect of his record is that he has been sentenced to imprisonment
on numerous occasions but also
has been offered community-based alternatives
including a number of suspended sentences. The applicant has a poor record of
with community-based orders and most if not all of the suspended
sentences have been the subject of successful breach applications.
He was also
placed on a drug treatment order in 2009, but the order was terminated before
the completion of the associated program,
and he was resentenced.
last sentence imposed before the offending that was dealt with by the
magistrate, was imposed on 1 August 2023. It was this sentence
that included the
suspended sentence that was activated by the magistrate. The sentence was a
period of imprisonment of six months
commencing on 1 August 2023, two months of
which was suspended for a period of 12 months. It also included a 12-month
driving disqualification.
The sentence was imposed for six counts of
disqualified driving, five counts of driving a motor vehicle while a prescribed
drug is present in blood and one count of possession of cannabis. These
offences had been committed on various occasions during 2021.
offending before the magistrate commenced with the offence of driving while
disqualified which was committed on 29 January 2024.
This was only six months
after the imposition of the sentence. The applicant was in prison for four
months of that period, and must
only have been released for two months before he
started to offend again. The disqualified driving was not associated with any
aggravating
circumstances, the applicant had been pulled over for random breath
and drug tests, both of which were negative. In mitigation, the
magistrate was
told that the applicant was driving because his son had called him in distress
regarding a medical emergency. He tried
to find someone else to pick him up but
was unsuccessful and then decided to drive. Although this was not disputed by
the prosecution,
the magistrate was not given any further detail about the
asserted "medical emergency". On 9 March 2024, the applicant committed
burglary and stealing at an hotel in Brisbane Street, Launceston. This involved
entering the hotel foyer, stealing three sets of
keys and then using the keys to
enter three hotel rooms. This occurred during the afternoon although the
applicant returned later
that day and re-entered the hotel before leaving a
short time later. On each occasion, he used a pin code to enter the hotel. The
only property stolen was the keys. The applicant committed these crimes with a
co-accused. In mitigation, the applicant's counsel
asserted that he was simply
following his co-accused. It must be said that this did not really explain to
any significant extent
his participation or how it was said that he was less
culpable than the co-accused. The next offence was committed on 20 March 2024
when the applicant failed to appear in court. His counsel asserted that he
simply forgot the court date. Three days later on 22 March
2024, at 5 pm, the
applicant attempted to leave a Coles supermarket store with a shopping trolley
full of items for which he had
not made payment. CCTV revealed that the
applicant and two accomplices had stopped at a self-operated checkout to scan
which were put back in the trolley with many which had not been paid
for. He and his companions then left the store with all of the
items. The stolen
property had an aggregate value of $217.45. The only matter put in mitigation
was that one of the female accomplices
was also the co-offender in the hotel
burglary. It is not clear as to if and how this was said to amount to
mitigation. Finally,
the applicant pleaded guilty to possession of methyl
amphetamine on 26 July 2024. The methyl amphetamine was found when he was
after his arrest for an unrelated matter.
the sentencing proceedings, his counsel submitted, and it would seem the
magistrate accepted, that despite this offending, the
applicant had shown some
commitment to rehabilitation and had taken a number of steps in that direction.
In particular, he had obtained
employment. He had given up drugs and been
drug-free since December 2023. He claimed to be regularly attending drug and
counselling
appointments. It was not explained how this submission was
consistent with the applicant's possession of methyl amphetamine in July
apart from a submission that it amounted to a "lapse" rather than a relapse.
magistrate was clearly prepared to entertain the possibility that the applicant
was committed to rehabilitation but of course
was also required to deal with
further examples of the type of offending which had been a constant feature of
the applicant's life
to date. His Honour obviously considered balancing these
considerations by sentencing the applicant to home detention, and accordingly
ordered a presentence report for the purpose of assessment of suitability for a
applicant was not suitable
for such an order. The reasons offered for this conclusion included the
applicant's long history of illicit
substance use and the lack of a suitable
residence. The report author also recorded contact with the Alcohol and Drugs
service, which
advised that the applicant intermittently attended appointments
and was prompted to reengage only when his Suboxone supply was suspended.
However, the primary reason for the conclusion of unsuitability, and the reason
which the magistrate clearly considered to be the
most compelling, was that the
applicant disengaged in the assessment process before it was complete. No
explanation for this was
offered to the magistrate on behalf of the
my opinion, there is no merit in the submission that the severity of the overall
sentence renders it manifestly excessive. In
fact, in my view, the magistrate
dealt with the applicant relatively leniently. As I have already indicated, the
primary questions
for the magistrate concerned his Honour's assessment of the
need for specific deterrence and the applicant's prospects of rehabilitation.
The need for specific deterrence was significant. Despite being subject to a
suspended sentence and claiming to be committed to rehabilitation,
the applicant
had persisted with serious offending of a similar nature to that which he had
been committing throughout his life.
Whatever his reason, driving in breach of a
court ordered disqualification imposed for similar offending demonstrated a
clear unwillingness
to abide by the law. The applicant had 17 prior convictions
for driving whilst disqualified, as well as for other traffic offences.
Disqualifications are imposed by courts for good reason, usually to do with
punishment for offending in relation to driving a motor
vehicle, and compliance
with such orders is critical to the court's capacity to enforce driving laws and
hence maintain a safe driving
environment. The breach of such orders undermines
their force and effect and must incur significant punishment. Further, the
legislature
has provided for an increased penalty for subsequent offences which
indicates a legislative intention that repeated driving in breach
disqualification, where previous sentences have not had the desired deterrent
effect, should incur higher sentences. See comments
by Pearce J in
[2015] TASSC 3
Jamieson v State of
[2015] TASSC 50.
The applicant's criminal history demonstrates
a stubborn persistence with respect to such offending. Both general and specific
were clearly relevant to the sentence to be imposed for this offence.
Further, the applicant had committed serious dishonesty offences
on two separate
occasions. The fact that the applicant committed these offences in company with
others increased the objective seriousness
of the offending and did not provide
mitigation. Stealing the groceries was obviously premeditated and systematic and
again demonstrated
dishonesty of a high order. These offences were not
victimless crimes. In relation to the hotel, the applicant and his co-offender
had entered hotel rooms thereby intruding upon the sense of privacy and security
to which the hotel proprietor and guests were entitled.
Again, both general
deterrence, specific deterrence and vindication of the victims were important
sentencing considerations.
relation to the applicant's counsel's submissions concerning the relevance of
the principles in
, the first matter
that should be pointed out is that the notice to review did not assert specific
error in respect of the magistrate's
application of these principles. Further,
and in any event, a fair examination of his Honour's sentencing comments and
during sentencing submissions, would indicate that the magistrate was
well aware of the need to place appropriate emphasis on the
applicant's personal
circumstances including the difficulties in his background. It was not submitted
to the magistrate that the
background was connected to the offending in the
manner discussed in
, in particular that it somehow reduced his
moral culpability for this offending. In view of the nature of the offending and
the applicant's
criminal record, such a submission would have been untenable.
For example, deprivation of the type suffered by the applicant when
he was young
might well explain an inability to properly control himself when frustrated or
to react inappropriately when placed
in difficult situations. See
at [44]. However, none of the relevant offending fell into that category, it
was all offending that was clearly premeditated or at
least the product of
deliberate decision-making. However, the applicant's background was relevant to
the magistrate's assessment
of his prospects of rehabilitation. In this respect,
my impression is that the magistrate was prepared to adopt a particularly
approach. His decision to obtain the home detention assessment and to
ultimately impose a sentence which included a community correction
demonstrates such.
further matter that needs to be emphasised is that imprisonment should not
necessarily be regarded as inconsistent with rehabilitation.
There is no reason
at all why serving such a sentence should negatively impact on a genuine
commitment to rehabilitation. In fact,
it can often be the case that a true
commitment to rehabilitation will be predicated upon an acceptance of the
necessity to first
atone for past conduct. Of course, I am mindful that in this
case, imprisonment would have had an impact on the applicant's employment,
although again the magistrate was not given any significant information about
this. In any event, by the time of the sentence, the
magistrate had developed
justifiable scepticism about the applicant's commitment to rehabilitation, and
the efficacy of community-based
orders and home detention. He was particularly
concerned about the applicant's disengagement from the assessment process. His
was perfectly justified in taking that view. In the end, given the
applicant's unsuitability for a home detention order, and having
regard to the
other important sentencing considerations, the magistrate was left with little
option other than to impose a sentence
of imprisonment. The global sentence of
four months' imprisonment can, in my view, be seen as a relatively lenient
Accordingly,
there is no basis to infer error on the part of the magistrate from the severity
of the sentence. The sentence was well
within the range of a proper exercise of
the sentencing discretion. The motion to review is
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (119 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter