URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASRMPAT/2021/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:19:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
L Costanzo and Ors v Break O'Day Council and L Wilton and Anor [2021] TASRMPAT 13 (16 April 2021)
L Costanzo and Ors v Break O’Day Council and L Wilton
[2021] TASRMPAT 13
: Louise Costanzo, Alan Richmond and Hans
First Respondent
: Break O’Day Council
Respondents
: Lynne Louise Wilton and Paul Bunn
Subject Land:
21040 Tasman Highway, Chain of Lagoons
Planning Appeal
Hearing Date(s):
15 & 16 March 2021
Decision Date:
16 April 2021
Delivered At:
M Duvnjak, Chairperson
K Loveday, Member
First Respondent:
D Morris & R Holbrook
Second Respondents:
S McElwaine SC & N Billett
Solicitors:
: Tremayne Fay & Rheinberger
First Respondent:
Simmons Wolfhagen
Second Respondents:
Billett Legal
Catchwords:
Planning Appeal – Break O’Day Interim Planning
Scheme – Planning Directive No: 6 – Visitor Accommodation Use
Standards – P1 – Clause 14.4.1 A1 and P1 - Conditions
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. The Appellants, Louise Costanzo, Alan Richmond and
Hans Bosman, (the Appellants) have appealed a decision by the First Respondent,
Break O’Day Council (the Council) to approve a development application
made by the Second Respondent, Lynne Wilton and Paul
Bunn (the Second
Respondents).
2. The Appellants filed a Notice of Appeal on 9 October 2020 and revised
grounds of appeal were filed on 3 November 2020. By the time
the matter was
heard by the Tribunal, the amended grounds of appeal were as follows:
“A. The application does not comply with the applicable use standard
of Planning Directive No. 6, Exemption and Standards for
Visitor Accommodation
in Planning Schemes, use standard Visitor Accommodation P1.
Particulars: The application is not compatible with the character and
use of the area, will create an unreasonable loss of residential
application does not comply with applicable use and development standards as
1. Clause 14.4.1 of the Break O’Day Interim
Planning Scheme 2013, Development Standards for Building Design and Siting,
Particulars: The application uses in excess of 20% of the site and does
not comply with P1 in that the proportion of the site used
for development does
not have adequate regard to:
The size of
the site and the management of natural hazards including the need for bushfire
mitigation, or the environmental qualities
of the land;
coverage of adjacent properties; and
The landscape
character of the area and the need to remove
vegetation.
2. Clause 14.4.1 of the Planning Scheme,
Development Standards for Building Design and Siting, A6 the colour of external
where there is no applicable performance criteria.
Particulars: The application includes, a galvanised custom orb steel
skillion roof on the bathroom building and a Surfmist Colourbond
gable roof on
the barn building. These external colours/materials are light and reflective in
nature and therefore do not comply
with A6 in that they will not be the same
shades and tones of the surrounding landscape and vegetation.
Ground 2 will be abandoned if condition number 10 of the permit is amended
“Plans detailing the external colours and materials, not including
metal finished or Surfmist Colourbond, are to be submitted
to the satisfaction
of Council’s General Manager, which are the same shades and tones of the
surrounding landscape and vegetation,
prior to the commencement of
3. Clause 14.4.1 of the Planning Scheme, Development Standards for
Building Design and Siting, A10/P10 external lighting.
Particulars: The Permit includes a condition (No: 3) which requires
outdoor lighting “be located, designed and baffled to ensure
direct light is emitted outside the boundaries of the site”, this
condition is worded in a way which contradicts the
requirement of P10 which
requires lighting “does not make the building visible from outside the
site”, given that baffled
lighting which does not emit direct light
outside the boundaries may still make the development visible.
Ground B3 will be abandoned if condition number 3 is amended to
“Outdoor lighting must be positioned such that it does not make the
buildings visible from outside the site boundaries:
4. Clause 14.4.2 of the Planning Scheme, Development Standards for
Building design and Siting, A1/P1 and A2/P2 relating to native
vegetation.
Particulars: The developments includes areas of the site where native
vegetation cover is present and therefore A1 is not met. The
application
particularly in relation to the siting and location of buildings with bushfire
hazard management area has not minimised
vegetation removal and therefore does
not meet P1.
Planting detail do not specify how they meet either A2 or P2 by being
sourced from the site, the vicinity or within the municipality.
Ground B4 will be abandoned if a condition in the following terms is
included in the permit:
“Detailed landscaping plans are to be submitted to the satisfaction
of Council’s General Manager which include details
of the genus, species
and providence of all plans, prior to the commencement of works”.
The Proposal
5. The development application (DA060-20) seeks approval for visitor
accommodation (the Proposal) at 21040 Tasman Highway, Chain of
Lagoons (the
Property). The Proposal involves the use and development of four visitor
accommodation pods, eight ‘glamping’
tents, two outbuildings,
associated amenities, and change of use within an existing building.
6. It was agreed between the planning experts who appeared before the
Tribunal at the hearing of the appeal, that the proposed use
and development
included the following components:
visitor accommodation pods;
‘glamping’ tents;
new buildings – two storage buildings and an amenities
Alterations
and change of use to an existing outbuilding to provide a reception, dining and
lounge facility;
walking tracks;
wastewater management infrastructure;
stormwater collection;
Landscaping
in the form of earthen mounds.
7. The Property has an area of 8.782ha and is accessed by a reserve road,
over which the Second Respondents hold a Crown licence for
access. The Property
currently contains a dwelling and associated outbuildings, with a dual use class
approval for both residential
and visitor accommodation use. Two dams are
located on the Property, both of which have been assessed by the Department of
Industries, Parks, Water and Environment and do not require a permit. It
appears uncontroversial that the Property was previously
utilised for grazing
purposes, but stock has since been removed and the Property has undergone both
natural and assisted regeneration
of native vegetation.
8. Plan A01 for the proposal, reproduced below, identifies the location of
the various elements of the development and the existing
and proposed vegetation
and screening.
9. The adjoining properties are identified in Figure 1 from the Facts Agreed
Plans reproduced below and described in Table 1 also
Table 1: Uses adjoining the Property
Current Use Class
21074 Tasman Highway, Chain of Lagoons.
PID 7627383
CT 245240/1
Land area: 9.986 hectares
Residential
Residential Use Class
21036 Tasman Highway, Chain of Lagoons.
PID 1555964
Land area: 3.441 hectares
Residential
Residential and Visitor Accommodation Use Classes (DA277-2010)
East / South / SE
Little Beach Conservation Area
PID 7133252
Parks and Wildlife
Natural and Cultural Values Management and Passive Recreation
Natural and cultural values management and Passive recreation use classes.
The State Government allows camping at Little Beach Conservation Area and if
separately classified “overnight camping area”
would fall within the
Visitor Accommodation Use Class.
21020 Tasman Highway, Chain of Lagoons.
PID 7808862
Land area: 4.478 hectares
Residential
Residential Use Class
Subject Site
31040 Tasman Highway, Chain of Lagoons
PID 1437589
Land Area: 8.872 hectares
Residential / Visitor Accommodation
Approved Residential and Visitor Accommodation Use Classes with respect to
existing dwelling onsite (DA139-2017)
10. The Property is adjacent to the north of the residence at 21074 Tasman
Highway (House D), to the east the Tasman Sea, to the south,
the residence at
21036 Tasman Highway (House B) and to the west, 21020 Tasman Highway, including
a residence (House C).
The Development Standards
11. The Property is contained within the Environmental Living Zone of the
Break O’Day Interim Planning Scheme 2013 (the Scheme).
12. It is agreed between the parties, and the Tribunal accepts, that while
various Codes in the Scheme apply to issues raised by the
Proposal, including
access, car parking, native vegetation, coastal height reference, signs and
onsite water management, none of
those matters are the subject of any issues
arising in this appeal.
13. Further, although the use and development relies on 11 Performance
Criteria within the Scheme, and noting the Use Standards for
accommodation (Planning Directive No. 6) is in substitution for all visitor
accommodation use standards in the Environmental
Living Zone, it has been agreed
between the planning experts, and the Tribunal accepts, that all Performance
Criteria are satisfied,
other than Visitor Accommodation (Planning Directive No.
6) P1 and Clause 14.4.1 of the Scheme, which provide as follows:
Planning Directive No. 6 – Exemption and Standards for Visitor
Accommodation in Planning Schemes
That Visitor Accommodation:
(a) is compatible with the character and use of the area;
(b) does not cause an unreasonable loss of residential amenity; and
(c) does not impact the safety and efficiency of local roads or rights of
Acceptable Solution
Performance Criteria
Visitor Accommodation must:
(a) accommodate guests in existing habitable buildings; and
(b) have a gross floor area of not more than 200m2 per lot.
Visitor Accommodation must be compatible with the character and use of the
area and not cause an unreasonable loss of residential
amenity, having regard
(a) the privacy of adjoining properties;
(b) any likely increase in noise to adjoining properties;
(c) the scale of the use and its compatibility with the surrounding
character and uses within the area;
(d) retaining the primary residential function of an area;
(e) the impact on the safety and efficiency of the local road network;
(f) any impact on the owners and users rights of way.
Clause 14.4.1 – Building Design & Siting
To ensure that the design and siting of buildings responds appropriately to
the landscape and natural values of the site, causes minimal
disturbance to the
environment and provide solar access and privacy for residents.
Acceptable Solution
Performance Criteria
No more than 4 hectares or 20% of the site, whichever is the lesser, is
used for development.
Site coverage and the proportion of the site used for development has
size of the site; and
need for driveways; and
management of natural hazards or environmental qualities of the site;
constraints imposed by existing development or the features of the site;
site coverage of adjacent properties; and
effect of the visual bulk of the building and whether it respects the landscape
character; and
capacity of the site to absorb runoff; and
landscape character of the area and the need to remove vegetation to accommodate
development; and
consistency
with the local area objectives, if any.
14. The evidence before the Tribunal comprised:
For the Appellant
Blowfield, town planner; and
Mr Noel Leary,
land surveyor.
For Council:
Ms Deb Szekely,
town planner.
For the Second Respondent:
Ms Chloe Lyne,
town planner; and
Butler, land surveyor.
Compliance with Planning Directive No. 6 – Exemption and Standards
for Visitor Accommodation P1
15. PD6 applies to the proposal as the proposal incorporates “visitor
accommodation” use as defined by PD6 clause 3.1
16. Clause 3.1(a) describes the visitor accommodation use class as:
“use of land for providing short or medium term accommodation, for
persons away from their normal place of residence, on a commercial
otherwise available to the general public at no cost. Examples include a
backpacker’s hostel, bed and breakfast establishment,
camping and caravan
park, holiday cabin, holiday unit, motel, overnight camping area, residential
hotel and serviced apartment”
17. It is common ground that the proposal does not comply with clause 3.1(e)
A1 and must therefore meet P1. P1 requires that the
visitor accommodation use
must be compatible with the character and use of the area
visitor accommodation must not cause an unreasonable loss of residential amenity
having regard to those matters set out in
P1(a) to (f).
Is the Proposal Compatible with the Character and Use of the Area?
18. Whether the property is “compatible with the use and character of
the area” requires the proposal to be “in
harmony or broad
correspondence with” the character and use of the
19. In the decision of Brett J in
Clarence City Council v
his Honour said:
“...the plain meaning of “compatible” is consistent with
it being aspirational and conceptual. The determination
of compatibility
requires an overall assessment of how two things relate to each other, and is
concerned with the ultimate result.
It suggests a need for a qualitative
comparison and
assessment.”
20. Adopting the approach taken by the Tribunal in
S Cai v Launceston City
Council & TRC Multi Property Pty
in assessing what
should comprise the area, for the purpose of considering compliance with P1, the
area should be sufficiently large
to enable an assessment of the prevailing
characteristics and should include the subject site.
21. The “Character” of an area encompasses the qualities that are
distinctive and give identity to the
22. The Tribunal accepts that the area should comprise at least the 500m
radius identified as appropriate by Ms Szekely and Ms Blowfield
but probably
should encompass a larger area, noting however, that any extension of the 500m
radius up to approximately 2km
not in the Tribunal’s view alter or dilute the character of the area in
any meaningful way.
23. The evidence established and the Tribunal accepts that the character of
the area comprises its coastal location with clusters
of residential development
“interspersed with areas of cleared or partially cleared agricultural
, alongside the Tasman
Highway. The existing residential dwellings and associated development are
visible in the coastal location
and from neighbouring lots.
24. The Tribunal accepts Ms Lyne’s evidence that the character of an
area can evolve over time. The Tribunal accepts that the
site of the proposal
once predominately pastoral/agricultural land has been the subject of
“extensive natural regeneration
... coupled with plantings that the
proponents [the Second Respondents] have undertaken,” is causing that
character to evolve
to a more natural coastal environment.
25. With respect to “use” of the area, the evidence established
that in addition to the residential uses there are existing
lawful visitor
accommodation uses on a number of the contiguous allotments including the site
itself. The property immediately south
of the site (House B) has an approved
visitor accommodation use with that use identified in the permit conditions as
allowing use
of “the main structure with 4 bedrooms for holiday rental and
use of the adjacent “Pavilion/Storage” building for
holiday related
activities such as yoga retreats, weddings, parties etc.” An overnight
camping area exists at the Little Beach
Conservation Area south east of the site
and within the 500m radius.
Further, visitor accommodation use is also an existing approved use on the site
of the proposal.
26. Amenity is defined in the Scheme as set out in the Break O’Day
Scheme Clause 4.1.3.
“means, in relation to a locality, place or building, any quality,
condition or factor that makes or contributes to making the
locality, place or
building harmonious, pleasant and enjoyable.”
27. P1 specifically refers to “unreasonable loss of residential
amenity”. Clearly P1 contemplates some loss of residential
amenity to be
acceptable. A loss that is “immoderate or
exorbitant”
unreasonable.
28. The correct assessment of whether there has been an unreasonable loss of
amenity requires firstly the identification of the existing
residential amenity
of the area, secondly whether any loss of that existing amenity arises as a
result of the proposal and thirdly,
if so, whether that loss identified is
unreasonable. The assessment must be an objective one.
29. In undertaking that assessment under P1 the Tribunal’s task is to
consider each of the elements set out in (a) to (f) of
P1 and to give each
element due weight in assessing compliance as important considerations in
reaching a decision
Existing Residential Amenity of the Area
30. Ms Szekely considered the existing residential amenity to be
“development on larger lots that are bordered within or within
easy access
to Coastal Reserve to the east and the views associated with regenerating
natural vegetation and coastal scenic values”.
Her evidence was that the
assets providing the greatest amenity are the regenerating natural environment
and the proximity of the
Coastal Reserve, including Little Beach and the Tasman
Sea. The amenity is further enhanced by the properties with access removed
the Tasman Highway and utilising an internal road reserve.
31. Ms Lyne for the Second Respondent identified the existing residential
amenity of the area as informed by P1 (a) to (f) and how
that amenity may be
impacted by the proposed visitor accommodation. Ms Blowfield for the Appellant
in her consideration of the existing
amenity said:
“In very low density areas, more typical of non-urban areas such as
the subject Environmental Living Zone Area where lots are
measured in hectares
than square metres, the factors which significantly contribute to the enjoyment
of the locality or place are
more likely to be from the lack of visible or
auditory intrusion from neighbouring properties, the relative isolation, with a
and amenity much more related to environmental qualities of the land
and the more background noises of nature.”
32. Ms Blowfield did concede that an element of the character of the area was
its coastal location and expansive sea views. While
the Tribunal accepts that
the non-urban elements of the Environmental Living Zone contribute to its
character, the evidence established
that visible intrusion from neighbouring
property was already present in the area and traffic noise from the Tasman
Highway was readily
apparent from the site and the neighbouring properties.
Noise from campers at Little Beach was also referred to. The Tribunal prefers
the description of the character of the area as identified by Ms Szekely and Ms
Lyne. Ms Blowfield’s evidence was limited to
elements which in the
Tribunal’s view are to a degree already impacted.
33. On that basis she concludes that P1 of PD6 is not compatible with the
character and use of the area and will also impact upon
the residential amenity
of the area. In essence the basis of that conclusion relates to non-compliance
with P1(a)(b) and (c).
Compliance with P1 (a), (b) and (c)
P1(a) the Privacy of Adjoining Properties
34. Ms Blowfield’s evidence was that privacy impacts from the proposal
have the “potential” to occur primarily for
the immediate adjoining
properties identified as properties B, C & D on figure 1 which is reproduced
35. Ms Blowfield’s evidence was:
“5.1.4 Based on the topography of the foreshore, the lack of walkway
connection to Little Beach Conservation Area and the large
size of the
surrounding private lots, it is considered that the area at the moment provides
a level of seclusion typical of such
a low density area, where either neighbours
or the public are likely to be present only occasionally and most often at a
5.1.5 The application will introduce an additional visitor population to
the subject site of in excess of 30 people who it would be
expected will during
their visit, have some exploration of the property and surrounds.
5.1.6 The Standard Operating Procedures document details the intention for
part of the subject site to be ‘private’ for
owner’s residence
and implies that visitors will also be managed in a way which protects
neighbouring privacy. In relation
to the neighbour to the north there are no
fences or markers which would identify the extent of the property that a guest
could identify.
5.1.10...it is still likely that guests will make their way in some way to
the beach via the reserved road or the foreshore route,
and therefore
significantly increase the level of use and activity relatively close to
existing neighbouring dwellings.”
36. While Ms Blowfield accepted that it would be reasonable for occasional
public activity such as access to the foreshore and surrounding
areas of Little
Beach, in her opinion the number of visitors proposed to be
accommodated
by the proposal was
likely to increase the level of activity “significantly beyond that
usually present in the area”.
37. Ms Szekely for Council considered privacy impacts with respect to each
adjoining property. In relation to House B her evidence
was that the dwelling
on that property was located to the south of the proposal site and was sited
approximately 213m to the southernmost
component (pod) and approximately 130m to
the existing approved dwelling on the proposal site. Her evidence was:
“The dwelling to the south is far removed from the proposed
development with orientation of the same taking advantage of ocean
views to the
east. Existing vegetation currently screens towards the direction of the
proposed glamping with minimal to no visibility
of the proposed pods. The
existing dwelling on the development site is visible from the southern dwelling
and it is noted that the
resident of this southern property has commenced
extensive plantings to obscure the view of the neighbouring
38. With respect to House D, Ms Szekely’s evidence was that the
dwelling located on Property D is situated prominent to the
outcrop of coast
line and sits on approximately the same contour line as the proposed pods. Her
evidence was that the dwelling was
located approximately 223m from the nearest
proposed pod and that there is an existing vegetated line along the boundary
over time further contribute to screen the proposed development south.
Her evidence considered the landscape plan proposed. In her
opinion the plan
demonstrates the view corridor from the northern dwelling across the
development site and the location of mature vegetation limiting
the view of the
development site. The view corridor demonstrates it will be limited to the two
southern most pods and existing dwelling.
East of the pods vegetation will
continue to regenerate and further limit the visibility of the pods from the
northern adjoining
39. With respect to House C, Ms Szekely’ s identified that the dwelling
on that property sits between the 30m and 20m contour
line and is located
further south that the proposed development. While she accepts that the
proposed development is likely to be
visible from the residential use looking
north east (particularly the rammed earth store, amenities building and glamping
there is existing vegetation that will afford a measure of
. Her evidence was that additional screening is required to
ensure privacy is fully considered. In her opinion the submitted landscape
identifies existing plantings along the road reserve which upon maturity will
afford added privacy and screening with respect
to the dwelling on House C, with
additional planting proposed further addressing privacy.
40. She concludes with respect to the adjoining residential uses on B and D
that there will be a negligible impact on privacy. With
respect to House C her
evidence was that
“any impacts to privacy and residential amenity [will
be] addressed through enhanced landscaping as detailed in condition 11
[landscaping plan condition]
. Her opinion was that
“compliance
with condition 11 will contribute to ensuring the development will not cause an
unreasonable loss of amenity.”
41. Ms Lyne’s evidence was in much the same terms. With respect to
House D her evidence was that House D is orientated towards
the coast line and
only has one highlight window. Only its garage on the southern façade
looks across the subject site with
only the accommodation pods being visible
from the property, but separated by 223m of coastal scrubland to the adjoining
She identifies the existing numerous mature trees adjacent to the
dwelling both on the proposal site and House D. Her opinion was
that visitors
to the proposed accommodation pods will only have small glimpses of the
adjoining dwelling and due to the distances
involved, will not be able to
visually make out what the occupants are doing.
42. With respect to House C, her evidence was that the proposed glamping
tents are potentially the most visible. However, Ms Lyne’s
evidence was
“depending where you are on the subject site in the area of the
glamping tents and car park, you can only catch glimpses of
the dwelling on
21020 Tasman Hwy
due to existing large mature
vegetation.”
Ms Lyne in her evidence referred to the site plan
reproduced above at paragraph 8 which identifies “
extensive plantings
between the glamping area and the neighbouring dwelling which as they mature
would fully conceal the properties
from one another from any vantage
.” Ms Lyne’s evidence was, consistent with the Tribunal
observation on inspection, that the Second Respondents have
undertaken more
plantings than shown on the site plan and the updated landscape plan. She
referred to a detailed schedule of plantings
provided by the Second Respondent
which shows 1044 trees and shrubs have been planted at the site over the past 3
43. With respect to glimpses of the dwelling on House C from the glamping
tent area, Ms Lyne’s evidence was that the occupants
of the communal
spaces such as the bathrooms and dining/lounge area, will not be visible from
outside the property boundary due to
both the existing and proposed screening
vegetation. She identified the distance between the dwelling on House C and the
to be approximately 233m which in her opinion means that
movement and activities of persons on either property will not be
discernible.”
She concluded that the siting of the existing various
aspects of the proposal together with the extensive planting and low profile
scale of the development means that privacy between the site and the adjoining
“will continue to be maintained to the level it is
currently.”
44. The Tribunal undertook a view of the proposal site, adjoining properties,
the Little Beach Conservation area and the foreshore
in accordance with the
request made by the parties and generally to assist the Tribunal in reaching the
correct and preferable decision.
The Tribunal’s observations were largely
consistent with the evidence of Ms Lyne and Ms Szekely.
45. In relation to issues of privacy the Tribunal, as a result of its view of
the site and surrounds, makes the following observations:
respect to the visibility to House C (the Constanza house) along the reserve
road, the Tribunal accepts that the house is visible
in two glimpses and a more
open area half way along this section of the reserve road as you walk along it.
In the Tribunal’s
view, most of this view is screened by shrubs on the
site of House C property itself. Further screening could be achieved with
strategically
placed shrubs on the House C property.
earth mound identified by the evidence has been landscaped and would create some
screening of the parking area from the reserve
road and House C. There is no
clear view of House C from the car park of the proposal.
from the view of the top most portion of the tents from House C there will be an
existing shrub area which will enable appropriate
screening for privacy for both
the tents, their occupants and House C. The path down to the dam area from the
earth rammed building
past the tents already has some lighting installed which
appears to be low impact. Although some glow may be visible over the shrubs
night the surface of the pathway itself is not visible from House C. The shower
and toilet block is located in a dense bush area
and House C cannot be seen from
these elements. House C cannot be seen from the rammed earth building either
indoors or on the verandah
Tribunal accepts that the pods will be more prominent in the landscape than the
tents or the group building as you walk down the
access road. However, they are
orientated to look towards the sea. They have small screened decks on the
northern side front end
of the adjacent car parking space. These decks are
screened from the pathway but otherwise open. Partial screening of the pod
is achieved by the surrounding bushland. The Tribunal notes that the
pods are proposed to be painted a dark colour and have a matte
respect to the pre-fabricated shed on the opposite side of the road from the
pods, this will be visible from the pathway but
not from elsewhere on the site
or from House C. As it is a shed of common rural residential form and given the
proposed condition
associated with colour and finish, its impact from a
visibility point of view is not considered unreasonable. With respect to the
main dam area, the proposed landscaping of blue gums and she-oaks would screen
this area from House C which at this time only has
a partial view and is at such
a distance that vision into House C is not possible during the day.
site is not visible from the Richmond House (north of House D) or its
site is visible from House D (the Bosman house) where there is a clear view of
the existing house as well as the site for the
pods and the shed. These are
visible from the front entry and patio as you turn around and look behind you on
entering the house.
The main element of the view from this position is the
Bosman house itself and the sea to the right and behind you. This view is
obstructed or diminished by the development which is to the south of this vista.
The pods will be partially visible from a dining
room window and living room
window, however, these are secondary views while the main view is still out to
sea in the opposite direction.
The pods will be viewed against existing bushland
as they do not rise above the tree line or slope. They will not be visually
of obstructive. While the pods will be visible from the surrounding
garden areas of House D, given the considerable distance between
the properties,
no privacy issues in the Tribunal’s view will result that could constitute
an unreasonable impact upon residential
the Bosman property has no fencing separating it from the subject site, and as
the bushland may be traversable (to a local who
has knowledge of terrain across
a gully but likely to be a daunting prospect for a visitor) a condition of
approval which requires
the display of an aerial view map in the group building
which identifies the limits of the subject site, surrounding private land
public land and includes a statement that visitors are to keep to the subject
site and Crown Land only, may assist to provide
additional privacy to adjoining
respect to the coastal area in front of House D (Bosman house) this is Crown
reserve and can, and probably is, traversed by members
of the public with access
from Little Beach. House D is not visible from these rock shelves but is visible
if you climb to the top
rock level.
proposal and the adjoining properties are not visible from Little Beach. While
it is possible that the noise from Little Beach
could travel up to House C, on
the day of the Tribunal’s inspection the camping area was vacant. The site
is more open and
flat and the sound of the sea and road on the subject site was
far more evident than on Little Beach.
46. The Tribunal is satisfied the proposal is compatible with the character
and use of the area and will not cause an unreasonable
loss of residential
amenity having regard to the privacy of adjoining properties. No unreasonable
loss of residential amenity will
arise. The distance between the proposal and
adjoining residences, screening, both existing and proposed will limit any
the evidence of Ms Szekely and Ms Lyne in that regard.
47. Privacy to neighbouring residences would, however, in the
Tribunal’s view be enhanced by a condition in the terms identified
paragraph 45(h) above. Such a condition is appropriate and within power and
should be included in any permit that may issue with
respect to the proposal.
P1(b) Likely increase in Noise to Adjoining Properties
48. Ms Szekely did not undertake an assessment of the likely noise impact on
adjoining properties as a result of the proposal as she
considered that such an
evaluation was outside her area of expertise. She confirmed however that in
undertaking her assessment of
compliance with P1(b) in preparation of
Council’s Planning Report with respect to the proposal she took into
account the report
from Seam Environmental dated the 7
of September
2020. That report was prepared by Mr Jamie Wood. Ms Szekely’s evidence
was that she had verbal discussions with
Mr Wood on the 7
September 2020 where he confirmed that the proposal was considered in his
concluding statement on page 3 of that report. On page
3 Mr Woods’
opinion was as follows:
“I am of the opinion that the proposed tourism development is not
likely to pose a significant risk to neighbouring dwelling
owners from noise
emanating from the development. It is more likely the traffic noise will impact
neighbours and future visitors
to the site. However, such impacts are
considered acceptable to the common person.”
49. Ms Blowfield’s evidence was that P1(b) does not relate to a
consideration of environmental harm which is what is being considered
Wood. Rather, P1(b) relates to the “
likely increase in noise to
adjoining properties
” as a result of the proposal. Her evidence is
that the noise impacts from the development are more likely to be from the
areas related to the dining/lounge/reception area including the
outdoor kitchen deck areas which would be utilised by visitors to
the site up to
11.30pm at night.
50. No standards related to noise apply to the proposal under the Scheme.
References to provisions that exist in other Planning Schemes
are not relevant
to the proposal.
51. Ms Blowfield’s evidence was as follows:
“5.1.30 The application is designed around the central hub of
activity which is comprised of the dining/lounge/reception building
and glamping
area, with this hub aimed at catering to all of the onsite visitors.
5.1.31 With an excess of 30 people potentially gathering nightly the
application encourages this interaction between guests and therefore
contributes
to the likelihood of the noise and activity being an impact on surrounding
properties.
52. Ms Blowfield considered that the combined effect of the proposal will
impact on the quiet enjoyment of the amenity of the surrounding
residential
properties and will result in a significant loss of residential amenity for the
existing surrounding neighbouring properties.
53. Ms Lyne, while accepting that she is not an acoustic expert, considered
that given the relatively large scale of the property
and the small scale of the
proposal and taking into account the significant setbacks of the accommodation
and communal areas to the
adjoining properties she did not believe that noise
impacts would be in issue. Her evidence was that while there may be the
muffled voices on a clear day”
and surrounds experience low level background noise from traffic on the Tasman
Highway and considerable ocean noise would
ordinarily be present. In that
respect the Tribunal notes the traffic noise from the Tasman Highway and ocean
noise was by far the
predominant noise present during the time the Tribunal
undertook a view. Ms Lyne’s evidence was as follows:
“Music is only to be played within the communal eating and lounge
area and the nature of this building being constructed of
rammed earth means
that it has excellent sound attenuating properties and noise would at best be
only heard in the immediate surrounds
if doors and windows are open and not on
adjoining properties.
The Glamping tents are assumed to not have any sound attenuating
properties. However, the following points are considered relevant
assessment of the likely noise and its impact upon the amenity of adjoining
neighbours:
• Five of the tents will be able to accommodate up to 3 persons
whilst the remaining three are for couples only.
• No children under the age of 15 years will be catered for on
• they are separated from the nearest dwelling (Costanza) by
approximately 250 metres;
• the tent sites are clustered together such that the proximity to
other guests is considered likely to reduce the noise from
users through
reciprocity between occupants;
• the site is to be actively managed with either the owner or
manager present onsite to manage the noise and behaviour of guests;
• Alcohol will be served from the Barn Kitchen and Dining area in
accordance with Responsible Service of Alcohol requirements.
Any guest who
exceeds limits will be cautioned.
• The site is designed to be a relaxing, high end retreat and not a
party destination. All guests will be inducted upon arrival
as to the location
of all facilities and amenities, areas that area accessible and expectation
around noise, music and consumption
of alcohol.”
54. Ms Lyne concluded that while the area is generally quiet with the
dominant noise being from traffic on the highway and the sound
of the ocean, it
is anticipated that the proposal will introduce additional noise sources into
the area with some impact to neighbouring
amenity. In her opinion, however, that
impact would not constitute an unreasonable loss of residential amenity.
55. The Tribunal prefers the evidence of Ms Lyne and Ms Szekely. There being
no applicable standard regarding noise limits and no
expert evidence with
respect to noise outputs from the proposal, the Tribunal is satisfied that given
the existing noise and the
distances between the proposal and adjoining
properties, no unreasonable loss of amenity is required.
P1(c) The scale of the use and its compatibility with the surrounding
character and uses within area
56. Ms Szekely adopted a 500m radius from the proposal site for the purposes
of an assessment under P1(c). Her evidence was that:
“6.1.22 The scale of the proposed development, in terms of
development area is dissimilar to the surrounding lots, however the
size of the
lot and the distance of the use and development to adjoining residential uses,
is extensive. The existing and proposed
landscaping, through its ability to
screen the scale of the proposed development ensures the use (visitor
accommodation) continues
to be compatible with the surrounding character and
uses within the area.”
57. Her evidence was that the dwelling on House D is approximately 223m to
the closest aspect of the development and that view lines
from this dwelling are
limited to parts of the proposal south of the second pod only, in effect
reducing the scale of the development
as experienced from the north. With
respect to House C, Ms Szekely’s opinion is that while the dwelling in
House C is potentially
the greatest impacted, changes to the landscape plan
address the scale of the development by providing additional screening from
viewpoint. Ms Szekely’s evidence was that any traffic associated with the
proposal will not impact on House C due to the
location of the entrance to the
proposal site being located further south resulting in there being no
requirement for visitors to
drive further towards the access to House C. Her
evidence was that the dwelling on House C is approximately 309m to the nearest
and 225m to the nearest glamping tent. Her opinion was that the combination
of both existing and proposed vegetative screening results
in the two sites
being able to exist or occur together without problems or conflict and on that
basis she concludes they are compatible.
58. With respect to the dwelling on House B, Ms Szekely evidence is that it
will already be largely screened from the proposal with
the existing house only
being visible. As the dwelling is at the southernmost end of the reserve road
House B will not be impacted
by any traffic as its access is located further
59. Ms Lyne’s opinion is that the scale of the development is
relatively small compared to the size of the property which she
“very conservatively” as 12% of the site. She identifies the
proposal as well spread out across the central
area of the site leaving a large
200m plus vegetated buffer between the development and the dwellings to the
north east (House D)
and south west (House C). She described the accommodation
pods as having “a low building profile (5.4 metres max) and being
screened by surrounding vegetation. Her opinion that the glamping tents will
barely be visible above existing vegetation. Her
evidence was that as the new
bathroom building as a height of 4.4 metres and the new store 6 metres are
within the allowable height
of 7 metres under the environmental living zone
standards and will be finished in muted colours and tones to blend with the
surrounding
bush landscapes. With respect to the scale and the use, her evidence
The scale of the use itself within these development
forms is small in size and low level in its intensity. The proposal includes
pods with typically with 2 occupants and 8 tents each typically each with 2
occupants. This is a typical maximum occupancy of 24
people. Occupancy may on
occasions exceed 24 if a party requests an additional single bed in a tent or
pod. The maximum occupancy
is noted to be 32 people based upon the limitations
upon the intended waste water treatment system.
The present proposal is a moderate scale, neither
small nor large however in consideration of the site area upon which it is
and the manner in which it will operate, the scale may be considered to
be relatively small or modest, albeit larger than the scale
of the surrounding
single dwelling uses.
60. She concludes that the development is of a scale that is capable of
co-existing with the surrounding residential development without
impacting on
the enjoyment of the residents of adjoining properties.
61. The Tribunal agrees and prefers Ms Lyne’s and Ms Szekely’s
evidence in that regard.
62. Ms Blowfield did not specifically consider P1(d), (e) and (f) in her
63. Although P1 (d), (e) and (f) are not issues raised in this appeal the
Tribunal is satisfied that the evidence of Ms Szekely and
Ms Lyne that
establishes that having regard to those elements, P1 is met.
Ground B1 – Compliance with Clause 14.4.1 – Building Design
64. There was a dispute between the parties with respect to whether the
proposal complied with the acceptable solution – Clause
14.4.1 A1. Ms
Szekely did not accept that the proposal met the acceptable solution but her
evidence identifies that in her opinion
compliance with P1 is demonstrated. Ms
Lyne defers to the evidence of Mr Butler, Surveyor, as to the satisfaction of
acceptable solution,
but in any event, accepts that compliance with the
performance criteria is demonstrated.
65. Ms Blowfield does not accept that either the acceptable solution or the
performance criteria is met.
Compliance with Clause 14.4.1 A1
66. Clause 14.4.1 A1 provides that no more than 4 hectares or 20% of the
site, whichever is the lesser, is used for development. What
constitutes
“area used for development” is not defined by the Scheme. The
definitions of “development” and
“works” as defined in
the Land Use Planning & Approvals Act 1993 (LUPAA) applies to the
67. Development includes:
(a) the construction, exterior alteration or exterior decoration of a
building; and
(b) the demolition or removal of a
building or works; and
(c) the construction or carrying out of
(d) the subdivision or consolidation of
land, including buildings or airspace; and
(e) the placing or relocation of a
building or works on land; and
(f) the construction or putting up for
display of signs or hoardings –
but does not include any development of a class or description, including
a class or description mentioned in
prescribed by the regulations for the purposes of this
definition;
68. Works is defined in LUPAA as:
“includes any change to the natural or existing condition or
topography of land including the removal, destruction or lopping
of trees and
the removal of vegetation or topsoil, but does not include forest practices, as
defined in the
Practices Act 1985
, carried out in State
69. Surveyors Mr Butler and Mr Leary gave expert evidence with respect to the
calculation of the area that comprises that “used
for development”.
If the area used for development is 1.756ha (being 20% of the site) or less, A1
70. Ms Blowfield’s opinion was that A1 was not met by the proposal. Her
evidence was that the area of development should include
areas of cleared
vegetation around the access area to meet the requirements of Bushfire Prone
Areas. She included in her “used
for development” area that area
between the tents, the area between irrigation beds, the area of earthed mound
beside the carpark
and the additional access width she calculated was required
to meet the requirements for Bushfire Prone Areas. Her calculations are
in her table at 2.4.1 of her response
reproduced below:
Lyne undertook a similar exercise in calculating the development area and
identified the total development area of 11,262m²
being 12.82% of the site.
She subsequently relied on Mr Butler’s calculation of “development
area”. Mr Butler was
engaged by the Second Respondent to undertake a
survey to identify with precision the development area. His evidence was that
development area comprised 1.689ha and included in his calculation;
existing and proposed development areas, such as house,
sheds/barns, roads, walkways, carport, passing bays, water tanks, car parks,
tents, shower block, pods, and bushfire areas. Some bushfire areas that are
already naturally clear of vegetation are not included.”
72. Mr Butler’s calculation of the development area is that it
`comprises approximately 19.23% of the site.
73. Mr Leary for the Appellant also undertook a similar calculation with a
similar result but his evidence was that if, in accordance
with the opinion of
Ms Blowfield, the development area included the area between the tents in the
tent section of the proposal and
the area between the Elgin beds (waste water
beds) the development area would be 1.938ha comprising 22% of the total site
74. Ms Szekely preferred the calculation of Mr Leary that incorporated the
area between the tents and irrigation beds, the area of
earth mound beside the
car park, and the additional access width. She accepted that the total area of
development comprised 23.26%
of the site and therefore did not meet the
acceptable solution.
75. The Tribunal prefers the evidence of Ms Lyne and Mr Butler and accepts
the submissions of the Second Respondent regarding area
to be excluded. Although
some changes to the calculations were the subject of cross-examination, the
Tribunal accepts that the area
around the dam for the regeneration of
vegetation, the undisturbed area between the irrigation beds and the areas
between the tents
do not comprise areas for development as contemplated by A1
and should be excluded from the calculation of the area “used for
development”. In the Tribunal’s view such works fall either within
the scope of Clause 6.3.2 of the Scheme or not works
incorporated in the
proposal. Clause 14.4.1 A1 is met.
76. However, even if the Tribunal is wrong as to that and that the area used
for development is greater than 20% of the site, the
Tribunal finds for the
reasons that follow that Clause 14.4.1 P1 of the Scheme is met by the proposal.
Compliance with Clause 14.4.1 P1
77. Clause 14.4.1 P1 requires that site coverage and the proportion of the
site used for development have regard to those matters
set out in (a) to (i)
thereof. The Grounds of Appeal only take issue with respect to P1(a), (c), (e)
78. The size of the site is 8.782ha. Both Ms Lyne and Ms Szekely accept that
the site is a relatively large site and that the proposal
has a minimal
footprint, well set back from property boundaries and adjacent dwellings. Ms
Szekely’s evidence is that the development
has been sited to ensure site
coverage and proximity from boundaries respond to the surrounding uses and
landscape character.
79. Ms Blowfield’s evidence is that the area of the site used for
development is scattered across the site but she does not
specifically identify
why this aspect of the proposal fails to have regard to P1(a).
80. With respect to P1(c) which requires that the site coverage and the
proportion of the site used for development has regard to
the management of
natural hazards of environmental qualities of the site, Ms Blowfield’s
evidence focusses on bushfire as a
natural hazard. She identifies that as the
proposal includes accommodation, buildings compliant with hazard management
minimum requirements
to meet the relevant Australian Standard would be required.
As noted by her, however, there are no relevant standards applicable
Planning Scheme’s Bushfire Prone Area Codes but any Building Permit
process may impose such requirements. Ms Lyne
points out that the development
application incorporated bushfire hazard assessment report and management plan
and in her opinion
all reasonable steps have been taken at this stage to
identify areas that need to be cleared for bushfire protection purposes. The
contents of that report and management plan were not challenged by any evidence.
There was no other evidence or expert evidence before
the Tribunal with respect
to bushfire management.
81. Ms Blowfield in her evidence with respect to P1(e) identified the site
coverage of the proposal as 1.25ha. She undertook a comparative
site coverage
analysis. She produced a table setting out the site coverage of adjacent
properties which is reproduced below:
82. She concludes that the comparative analysis identifies the application as
having a footprint of roof buildings double that of
any other properties within
the area and while the calculated site cover is “within the range of other
properties described
in the table, it is more than double the average site
83. Ms Szekely’s evidence is similar to that of Ms Blowfield, however,
in her opinion the comparative analysis demonstrates
there is a significant
variation in site coverage and land area across the sites is considered. She
opines that the site coverage
of the proposal sits comfortably within that
84. Ms Lyne accepts that the proposed site coverage is double that of any of
the surrounding lots, in her opinion, it is still very
low, being 1.25% and
“enables achievement of the objective of the clause in that roofed
developments will sit within the existing
landscape and maintain privacy for
visitors to the site and occupants of the adjoining dwellings.”
85. Clause 14.4.1 P1(h) provides the site coverage and the proportions of
site used for development have regard to the landscape character
of the area and
the need to remove vegetation to accommodate development. Ms Blowfield’s
evidence was that the significant
footprint of the proposal is contrary to the
character of the other private properties in the surrounding area. Her evidence
that “the type of accommodation proposed encourages guests to gather
for meals etc and relies on facilities provided in the
Dining/Lounge/Reception
with the associated outdoor kitchen and seating area as well as the nearby
Bathhouse structure result in
a scale of building and format of development
unlike the typical isolated single dwelling of the surrounding area.”. Ms
identifies the site as “previously utilised for grazing
purposes” and as “denuded of vegetation”. Her evidence
that since then the site has been developed to incorporate a dwelling,
outbuildings and a dam the site has been managed for natural
and assisted
regeneration and weed control. Her evidence was that the proposal will require
the removal of some regenerated native
vegetation but that the program for
regeneration (natural and assisted and weed control) continues on the remainder
of the site and
would be managed through a landscape plan. Her evidence was as
86. Ms Lyne’s evidence was that the vegetation required to be removed,
being identified in the plans for the proposal did not
require broad scale
clearing of vegetation. Her evidence was that the Second Respondents had already
undertaken significant revegetation
of the site “with in excess of 1000
species of plants over the past three years”. Her evidence was that
“a combination
of careful micro siting of the development aspects with the
existing and proposed revegetation on site means that the overall landscape
character will not be significantly altered as a result of
development”.
87. The Tribunal is not persuaded that site coverage and the proportion of
the site used for development fails to have regard to the
landscape character of
the area or the removal of vegetation required. The landscape character will not
be altered to any material
degree by the proposal’s site coverage and
removal of vegetation will be minimal and more than balanced out by the
revegetation
so far undertaken and proposed. The Tribunal prefers the evidence
of Ms Lyne and Ms Szekely in that regard.
88. The Tribunal prefers the evidence of Ms Lyne and Ms Szekely with respect
to an assessment of compliance with P1. Giving each of
the factors set out in
P1due weight and regard, and in particular having regard to P1(a), (c), (e) and
(h) called up by Ground B2,
the Tribunal is satisfied the proposal complies with
Clause 14.4.1 P1.
Grounds B2, B3 and B4 – Permit conditions
89. There is agreement by the Council and Second Respondent that conditions
proposed to be included in any permit for the proposal
should adopt the wording
of those conditions identified by Ms Blowfield referred to in her evidence
regarding Grounds B2 and B4.
90. In relation to Grounds B2 and B4, Ms Blowfield’s evidence was that
compliance with the standards identified in those grounds
would be satisfied if
the following conditions relating to external finishes and landscaping were
External Finishes Condition
“Plans detailing the external colours and materials are to be
submitted to the satisfaction of Council’s General Manager,
which are the
same shades and tones of the surrounding landscape and vegetation, prior to the
commencement of works. The proposed
“surfmist” colorbond gable is
not approved and a different colour finished is required consistent with this
condition.”
Landscaping Condition
“The following landscaping conditions apply to the development and
to be established and maintained at all times:
landscaping on site generally in accordance with the approved landscape plan.
The objective of the landscape treatment is
to ensure that the development is
not visually intrusive by screening and softening buildings, glamping tents,
driveways and car
parking areas. Substantial establishment of landscaping must
be evidential within the first twelve (12) months of commencement of
outer edge of landscaping when viewed from a south and south west perspective,
must achieve a height of 3m and a width such that
the transparency of the use
and development is no greater than 25%.
Details of provenance of plantings, confirming that seeds and rootstock are
sourced from within the site or municipal area, must
be supplied to
91. The Tribunal is satisfied that those
conditions are appropriate and within power and should be included in any permit
issue with respect to this proposal. It is noted that the Second
Respondent agrees to the imposition of these conditions.
92. Appeal ground B3 asserts non-compliance with Clause 14.4.1 A10/P10. While
Ms Blowfield indicates that B3 would not be proceeded
with, she nevertheless
observed that in her opinion the imposition of a condition in the following term
was appropriate:
93. The Tribunal does not agree. The Tribunal accepts the submission of the
Council and the Second Respondent that proposed condition
3 which provides:
“Outdoor lighting, where provided, must be located, designed and
baffled to ensure that no direct light is emitted outside the
boundaries of the
and Clause 5 (e) of the proposed standard operating procedure which forms
part of the proposal, adequately address the compliance
requirements of P14.4.1
Conclusion:
94. Grounds A and B1 of the appeal are not made out. To the extent that
Ground B3 remains a ground, it is likewise not made out. The
imposition of
conditions as proposed by Ms Blowfield to address greater compliance with those
standards identified in Grounds B2
and B4, are appropriate and within power and
will be incorporated into permit conditions with respect to the proposal. A
minor amendment
to Condition 1 is also included in draft conditions. This
amendment is not controversial and should be incorporated into the permit
conditions provided by Council. The conditions of the permit should also
incorporate a new condition as contemplated in paragraph
45(h) hereof. Subject
to the imposition of the conditions referred to the Tribunal is satisfied that
the proposal complies with the
requirements of the scheme and makes the
following orders:
the permit granted by Council for DA 060-2000 dated 25 September 2020 be varied
as follows:
amending conditions 10 and 11 as set out above;
amending condition 1 by identifying the Standard Operating Procedure document as
“Standard Operating Procedure (abridged)
prepared by Lynne Wilton dated
01/12/2020;
adding condition 25 to the permit as follows:
An aerial view map of the site and surrounding public and private land
incorporating the adjoining properties and Little Beach Conservation
which identifies the boundaries of the site and Crown Land must be displayed in
the group building at all times and shall
include a statement that visitors are
to keep to the site and Crown Land.
is directed to issue a permit incorporating the conditions set out above as per
Annexure A hereto.
95. The Tribunal will entertain any application
for an order for costs in this appeal if made to the Tribunal in writing with
submissions within the next 21 days. If requested, the Tribunal may
reconvene to hear any evidence in respect of any matter bearing
upon an order
for costs. In the absence of any such application for an order for costs, the
order of the Tribunal is that each
party bear its own costs.
Planning Permit DA 060-20
21040 Tasman Highway, Chain of Lagoons
Title Reference
Proposed Development
Visitor Accommodation - 4 Pods, 8 Glamping Tents, Shed &
Visitor Accommodation
Environmental Living
After due consideration of the application received and Pursuant to Section
Land Use Planning & Approvals Act 1993
O’Day Interim Planning Scheme 2013
that the application for
ACCOMMODATION – FOUR (4) PODS, EIGHT (8) GLAMPING TENTS, SHED AND
on land situated at
21040 TASMAN HIGHWAY, CHAIN OF LAGOONS
described in Certificate of Title 42626/1 be
subject to the
following plans, documents and conditions:
1. Undertake development in accordance with the approved plans and/or
documents. These plans and/or documents will form part of
the approval, unless
otherwise amended by conditions of this approval.
Approved Plans
Plan / Document Name
Prepared By
Aerial Photography Site Plan
Gillian van der Schans
Site Plan Vegetation areas existing and
Gillian van der Schans
Aerial photograph vegetation areas existing
and proposed
Gillian van der Schans
Existing Rammed Earth Store Plan
Gillian van der Schans
Tent Plan Elevation and Image
Gillian van der Schans
Pre-fabricated Shed Elevations and Floor
TNG Engineering
Pre-fabricated Shed Dimensions
TNG Engineering
Gillian van der Schans
Barn Elevations
Gillian van der Schans
Barn Sections
Gillian van der Schans
Gillian van der Schans
Bathrooms Plan & Elevations
Gillian van der Schans
Gillian van der Schans
Plan & Elevations Accommodation Pods
Gillian van der Schans
ECOtas Report 21040 Tasman Highway Chain
ECOtas, Mark Wapstra
Attenuation Impact at
SEAM Environmental
Highway Chain of Lagoons
Jamie Wood Principal
Bushfire Hazard Assessment Report and
Bushfire Hazard Management Plan
Geo-Environmental Assessment
G. McDonald
Standard Operating Procedures (Abridged)
Lynne Wilton
Traffic Impact Assessment
Keith Midson
Midson Traffic Pty Ltd
2. The use is not to cause an environmental nuisance to the owners or
occupiers of land in the surrounding area by reason of noise,
dust or other
pollutants emanating from the site.
3. Outdoor lighting, where provided, must be located, designed and baffled
to ensure that no direct light is emitted outside the
boundaries of the
4. Car parking spaces must be provided on-site prior to the commencement of
the use. Each space, including disabled parking,
must be clearly marked
and used solely for parking purposes.
5. No works are to be undertaken, including changes in the topography of
the site or the removal, destruction or lopping of trees
other than in
accordance with the approved plans, without the consent of Council.
Adequate steps must be taken to prevent the
damage and/or removal of any other
vegetation during any works.
6. Screen all loading / unloading facilities, refuse storage and other
outdoor storage facilities on the site from direct view from
any adjoining road
or public space.
7. The approved sign must be located wholly within the boundaries of the
lot and maintained in good repair and in a clean, tidy
and safe condition at all
8. Suitable garbage storage facilities must be provided onsite and screened
from view from outside the boundaries of the lot.
9. Suitable site management measures must be taken during the stages of
construction and at access points to prevent damage to native
vegetation to be
retained and areas undergoing regeneration.
10. Plans detailing the external colours and materials are to be submitted to
the satisfaction of Council’s General Manager,
which are the same shades
and tones of the surrounding landscape and vegetation, prior to the commencement
of works. The proposed
“surfmist” colorbond gable is not approved
and a different colour finished is required consistent with this condition.
11. The following landscaping conditions apply to the development and to be
established and maintained at all times:
landscaping on site generally in accordance with the approved landscape plan.
The objective of the landscape treatment is
to ensure that the development is
not visually intrusive by screening and softening buildings, glamping tents,
driveways and car
parking areas. Substantial establishment of landscaping must
be evidential within the first twelve (12) months of commencement of
outer edge of landscaping when viewed from a south and south west perspective,
must achieve a height of 3m and a width such that
the transparency of the use
and development is no greater than 25%.
Details of provenance of plantings, confirming that seeds and rootstock are
sourced from within the site or municipal area, must
be supplied to
12. Ensure the extent of all development on site is
contained within the approved development footprint, unless variations are
in writing by Council.
13. Clearing of native vegetation must be limited to that which is necessary
for the development.
14. Chip, shred or tub grind cleared native vegetation and spread as mulch or
dispose of at an authorised waste facility. Any hollows
observed in cleared
vegetation must be salvaged and installed as nest boxes in trees within the
15. Locate any stockpiles of construction and landscaping materials and other
site debris clear of drainage lines and clear of any
position from which it
could be washed onto any roadway, drain, wetland or watercourse.
16. Existing vegetation to be retained on the subject land must not
be damaged, removed, destroyed or lopped without the
written consent of the
General Manager. Delineate areas where vegetation is proposed to be retained
with exclusion fencing or similar
barriers and devices to prevent accidental
felling and in accordance with
Australian Standard 4970
Protection of Trees on Development Sites to Protect Existing
17. Implement the requirements and recommendations of the approved Bushfire
Management Plan prepared by Rebecca Green and Associates, Version 2
and dated 8
September 2020.
18. Carry out the development to ensure that adjoining properties,
reserves and roads are protected from ponding or nuisance
from stormwater as
a result of any works undertaken.
19. Provide an all-weather accessible pavement to the unsealed car parking
area in accordance with the approved plans and documents
of development. Areas
set aside for the parking of vehicles together with the aisles and access lanes
must be paved with crushed
rock or gravel of adequate thickness as necessary to
prevent the formation of potholes and depressions according to the nature of
subgrade and vehicles which will use the areas. The areas must be constructed,
drained and maintained in a condition suitable
for use by two wheel drive
vehicles to the satisfaction of the General Manager. The car parking area is
to be constructed and maintained
to avoid dust or noise impacts and include
suitable drainage and water quality treatment so as to prevent any loss of
the neighbourhood.
20. Ensure vehicular access is limited to the vehicle entry points on the
approved plans.
21. The approved standard operating procedures document must detail rules and
matters such as emergency responses, minimum acceptable
behaviour, acceptable
hours for machinery use, no ‘pets’ policy, access to Little Beach
through identified public access
areas and made available to all guests. This
document must also provide advice and assistance to guests on the natural values
the area and how they may avoid impacting such values including the use of
designated pathways.
22. Prior to the commencement of construction / works, adequate vehicle wash
down facilities must be provided on the site and no vehicle
must leave the site
until mud and other debris is first hosed from the wheels.
23. Prior to the commencement of construction/works, measures must be in
place to prevent the escape of soil and sediments beyond
site boundaries.
24. On-site wastewater management and infrastructure is to be constructed and
maintained in accordance with the approved report prepared
by Geo-Environmental
Solutions Pty Ltd Site Assessment and dated June 2020. Visitor numbers are not
to exceed the wastewater loading
specifications contained within the report (32
25. An aerial view map of the site and surrounding public and private land
incorporating the adjoining properties and Little Beach
Conservation area, and
which identifies the boundaries of the site and Crown Land must be displayed in
the group building at all
times and shall include a statement that visitors are
to keep to the site and Crown Land.
development which may impact on Aboriginal cultural heritage is subject to the
Aboriginal Relics Act 1975
. If Aboriginal relics are uncovered during
works then an Aboriginal site survey is required to determine the level of
the appropriate mitigation procedures.
The introduction
of non-native plant species and plant species not of local provenance should be
avoided and environmental weeds
regularly monitored and targeted for
associated with construction works are not to be performed outside the
permissible time frames listed:
Mon-Friday 7 am to 6
Saturday 9 am to 6 pm
Sunday and public holidays 10 am to 6 pm
Be advised that
in accordance with the
Building Act 2016
assessment for building approval
cannot commence until such time as Council is provided with full Building Design
Plans and Specifications
prepared by an accredited designer.
Advice to Applicant
Section 53(5)
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
this permit lapses if the use or development in respect of which this permit
was granted, is not substantially commenced 2 years from
the date of
Section 53(5A)
(5B) the Planning Authority may grant a further
two extensions of the permit upon application (fees apply). Under
Section 53(5C)
the request to extend a permit must be made no later than 6 months from the date
on which the permit lapsed and if the extension
is granted, the permit is to be
taken as not lapsed.
Should you wish to appeal against any of the conditions imposed by Council, a
notice of appeal may be lodged by you to the Resource
Management & Planning
Appeal Tribunal, pursuant to Section 61(4) of the
Land Use Planning &
Approvals Act 1993
. Any appeal should be lodged within fourteen (14) days of
receipt of this notice and until the expiry of this period
you lodge an appeal, then this approval will not take effect until the
determination or abandonment of the appeal.
You are advised that the Resource Management & Planning Appeals Tribunal
under its powers may grant a permit or refuse a permit.
Should a permit be
refused by the Tribunal, then you may not apply for the same development for a
period of two years from the date
of the Tribunal decision.
Further to the above, any other approvals which may be required from other
authorities for the proposed use or development should
be granted, and any fees
paid, prior to this planning approval taking
Council Delegate:
Development Services Coordinator
Permit No: DA 060-20
R & P Jacobson v
Central Coast Council
[2020] TASRMPAT 21
[2021] TASSC
[2019] TASRMPAT
As per Ms Lyne’s
As per the evidence of
This however, is part
of a Passive Recreation Use
A & N McCulloch
v Glamorgan Spring Bay Council & Ors
[2019] TASRMPAT 30
Hexa Pacific Pty Ltd
v Hobart City Council & Ors
[2020] TASRMPAT 1
Likely to be in excess
Clause 4.1.3 of the
Scheme and Section 3 of
1 March 2021
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (47.4 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (1.23 MB)
Plain text (ASCII) (71.5 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter