URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASHPT/2020/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:16:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Satyendranath Keenoo v Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia [2020] TASHPT 3 (3 July 2020)
[2020] TASHPT 3
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL
Satyendranath Keenoo v Nursing & Midwifery Board of
[2020] TASHPT 3
KEENOO, Satyendranath
NURSING & MIDWIFERY BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
17 June 2020 and by written submissions
DELIVERED ON:
3 July 2020
DECISION OF:
Chairperson Clues
CATCHWORDS:
Application to extend time to review a decision to impose
conditions on registration – delay – fairly arguable case –
reasonable belief – prejudice.
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
2009 (Qld);
Sections 178 and 3.
Health Practitioner Tribunal Act (Tas) 2010; Sections 21 and 26.
Hunter Valley Developments Pty Ltd v Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment
[1984] FCA 176
(1984) 58 ALR 305
Knight v Smith
[1975] TASStRp 6
[1975] TASSR 83
Popovski v The Dental Board of Australia
[2018] VCAT 73
South Regional Health Authority v Taylor
(1996) 186 CLR 541
DETERMINATION:
1. That the application seeking an order to stay the
operation of the decision of the respondent (to impose conditions on the
applicant’s
registration dated 27 September 2019) be dismissed.
2. That the application to file the appeal out of time be
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
Solicitors:
: N. Davidson
N Messel (Australian Health Practitioner Regulation
[2020] TASHPT 3
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
1. On 27 September 2019, the Nursing & Midwifery Board of
Australia (the Board) determined to impose conditions (the decision)
registration of Satyendranath Keenoo (the applicant), pursuant to s178(2) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
2009 (Qld) (the National Law). The
National Law has been accepted by the Tasmanian Parliament and applies as law in
this State pursuant
to s4 of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(Tasmania) Act 2010.
2. The decision follows the Board’s investigation
into allegations made against the applicant regarding inappropriate
communication
and behaviour exhibited towards female residents and work
colleagues on Saturday 11 and Sunday 12 November 2018 (the conduct).
Australian Nursing & Midwifery Federation, Tasmania Branch (ANMF) submitted
a “Notice of Certain Events” document
signed by the applicant to the
Board on 21 December 2018 (the notification).
4. On 3 January 2019, the Board
considered the notification and decided to refer the matter for investigation
under s160 of the National
5. Yvonne Baldwin of the Australian Health
Practitioner Regulation Agency (AHPRA) commenced an investigation into the
notification.
6. In a letter dated 18 June 2019 the applicant was invited to
provide the Board with the following by 5 July 2019:
(a) a written response to the issues being
investigated;
(b) any additional information he believed to be relevant and
would like the Board to consider;
(c) a copy of his curriculum
7. At a Board meeting on 15 August 2019 the Board considered
the results of the investigation and formed a reasonable belief under
s178(1)(a)(i) of the National Law that the way the applicant practises the
health profession and his professional conduct is, or
may be, unsatisfactory,
and it decided to propose to take action under s178(2)(c) of the National Law by
imposing conditions on his
registration.
8. On 16 August 2019, the Board gave
notice to the applicant via the ANMF, who had been assisting the applicant
during the investigation
that it proposed to impose conditions on his
registration.
9. The letter of 16 August 2019 set out (inter alia) the
decision, the reasons for the decision, the information considered by the
what the applicant needed to do (including seek legal advice if he wished to),
what his next steps were and where he could
obtain more information.
the letter of 16 August 2019 the applicant was advised that he had the
opportunity to make a written or verbal submission to
the Board. He was advised
that the Board must consider that submissions before deciding whether it would
take the proposed action.
The letter states:
Board does not always take action that it has proposed to take. It will
carefully consider any submissions that you make
and then Board
will decide what to do next.”
11. The applicant did respond by letter dated 30 August 2019.
In that letter he says:
“...it seems that I
need to address certain issues of my practice and reflect and work according to
nursing standards.”
He further states:
“I am quite happy to
work with the Board in relation to this matter as I have always done in the
12. By letter dated 27 September 2019 the Board advised the
applicant that it would impose conditions on his registration in the same
as the proposed conditions (the decision). That letter states under the heading
“Appeal Rights” that the decision
is appellable and that if he
wished to appeal he must apply to the Health Practitioners Tribunal (Tas) within
28 days after being
given notice of the decision. The contact details of the
Tribunal were provided and the AHPRA investigator’s details were
13. On 14 October 2019 the applicant contacted a lawyer, Dr Davidson. Dr
Davidson agreed to see him on 15 October 2019. The applicant
consulted Dr
Davidson, within the 28 day time period.
14. On 23 December 2019 a letter was
sent by Dr Davidson to the Health Practitioners Tribunal (Tas) (the Tribunal)
advising that the
applicant sought to appeal the decision. It was not until 26
February 2020 that the applicant made a formal application to the Tribunal
review of the decision (the appeal).
15. Section 21(3) of the Health Practitioner Tribunal Act (Tas)
2010 (HPT Act) states that:
with the approval of the Tribunal, an application may only be made under
subsection (2) in relation to a decision referred
to in s199(1) of the National
Law within 28 days after –
(a) the decision is made; or
(b) reasons for the decision are given to a person under the National Law
whichever is the later.”
16. Section 21(3) permits the Tribunal to extend the time for
the applicant to make his appeal. There is no description of any of
the factors
or matters which might pertain to the granting of a longer period, and it may
generally be assumed that the Tribunal
has a wide and unfettered discretion to
extend the time (see Khan v Medical Counsel of NSW
[2016] NSWCATOD 88
17. The applicant seeks approval of the Tribunal to extend the time
within which to review a decision of the Board to impose conditions
registration.
18. The reasons for the Board’s decision were given to
the applicant on or about 27 September 2019. Pursuant to s21(3) the
had 28 days to file the appeal. That time expired on 25 October 2019. The
appeal was officially filed on 26 February 2020.
The Evidence
support of his application to extend time, the applicant read into evidence two
affidavits. The first dated 12 March 2020
(A1) and the second dated 23 March
2020 (A2). The applicant gave oral evidence to supplement the material
contained in his affidavits.
The applicant was cross-examined.
20. The Board
read into evidence the affidavit of Yvonne Baldwin (YB) sworn on 12 June 2020
(R1). YB was not cross-examined.
21. Upon the basis of the material
contained in the affidavits, the oral evidence and the letter dated 18 June 2019
(A3) tendered
in evidence by the applicant, I make the following findings of
22. The applicant saw his legal advisor (Dr Davidson) on 15 October
2020 (within time). As to precisely what instructions the applicant
Davidson, or what advice Dr Davidson gave to the applicant, is unclear. The
applicant’s evidence is that Dr Davidson
advised that he was able to
represent him (A2, p2) and that it was likely he had “an arguable
case”. (A2, p3)
23. It seems that there was no further contact between
Dr Davidson and the applicant until 23 December 2019 when Dr Davidson advised
the applicant that the appeal had been filed. This was not the case. On 23
December 2020, Dr Davidson sent a letter to the Tribunal
(R1, YB16). The actual
filing of the appeal did not occur until 26 February 2020 (R1, YB16).
relation to the filing of the appeal, the applicant’s evidence is:
at 23 December, I had been informed by Dr Davidson that my case had been
officially filed. I had briefed a barrister about
it and knew that he was
preparing the detailed appeals brief as expeditiously as possible. I was aware
that the December to February
period was a time in which legal professionals
often take annual leave and that Dr Davidson in fact took leave during this time
that, as well as working on my case, he had other professional and study
commitments that he was attending to. I understand that,
in fact, the first
court sittings of the legal year were not until 3 February 2020. I contacted Dr
Davidson from time to time over
this period to encourage him to complete the
full brief and it was in fact submitted on 26 February 2020, along with the
filing fee.”
Consideration
25. In an application to extend time I am required to consider
the following:
(a) the length of the delay;
(b) the reason for the
(c) whether the applicant has a fairly arguable case;
extent of any prejudice suffered by the
26. In the case of Hunter Valley Developments Pty Ltd v
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment
[1984] FCA 176
(1984) 58 ALR 305
, Wilcox J stated at
310-311 that:
“Although the section
does not, in terms, place any onus of proof upon an applicant for extension, an
application has to be
made. Special circumstances need not be shown, but the
Court will not grant the application unless positively satisfied that it
proper to do so. The ‘prescribed period’ of 28 days is not to be
ignored (Ralkon v Aboriginal Development Commission
[1982] FCA 153
(1982) 43 ALR 535
Indeed it is the prima facie rule that proceedings commenced outside that period
will not be entertained (Lucic v Nolan
[1982] FCA 217
(1982) 45 ALR 411
(a) The Length of the Delay
27. 28 days is not a long period of time. However, the
applicant did seek legal advice from Dr Davidson on 15 October 2019 which
within time and before the time expired on 25 October 2019.
28. No action was
taken until 23 December 2019 when Dr Davidson sent a letter to the Tribunal and
no appeal was filed until 26 February
2020 which was some 134 days after the
applicant saw Dr Davidson. In the circumstances of this matter the delay is
(b) The Reason for the Delay
29. The delay remains largely unexplained. The applicant states
that after he received the decision dated 27 September 2019:
was not able to work and this caused me a great deal anxiety which impeded
greatly my ability to think straight and to seek
the legal advice I needed.
Moreover, in the following week I had bereavement issues that were ongoing with
me. My mother and aunt
passed away during the same period. Furthermore, I was
never informed that I could seek legal representation in this case. Despite
of this, I ended up speaking to a lawyer and eventually filing my appeal on 23
December 2019.”
30. In A2, the applicant’s explanation is different. He
says that after he received the decision 27 September 2019 he was:
“...not able to work
and this caused me a great deal of anxiety which impeded greatly my ability to
think straight and to seek
the legal advice that I needed. In my opinion, the
28 day statutory appeal period which is provided after the formal decision by
the Nursing Board is insufficient.”
31. The applicant further states in A2 that after he received
the decision:
• It had an emotional impact on him.
it very stressful.
• It limited his ability to work and earn
• It caused stress on his wife and daughter.
needed adequate time to understand the decision, what his options might be and
to contact a legal advisor.
• He did contact a legal advisor, Dr
Davidson, within time, on 14 October 2019 and saw him on 15 October 2019 but it
reasonable to expect Dr Davidson to submit “a carefully
articulated legal appeal” before the time expired.
• His mother
passed away on 6 June 2019.
• His aunt passed away on 16 October
• He was unable to travel to Mauritius for the funerals. As a
result he took “an extra amount of time to emotionally
come to terms with
this”. (A2, p3)
• As at 23 December 2019 he was advised by Dr
Davidson that his “case had been officially filed”. (A2,
• Between 23 December 2019 and 26 February 2020 he contacted Dr
Davidson “from time to time over this period to encourage
him to complete
the full brief and it was in fact submitted on 26 February 2020, along with the
filing fee”. (A2, p4)
32. There are clear inconsistencies between the information in
the applicant’s two affidavits (A1 and A2) and they do not provide
adequate explanation for the delay.
33. The evidence of the applicant is that
• Received the decision on or around 27 September
• Was aware of the 28 day time limit to appeal the decision which
expired towards the end of October 2019.
• Was aware of his right to
seek legal advice.
• Did seek legal advice within time, on 15 October
• Was told by Dr Davidson that he would represent him and that he
had an arguable case.
• Did not follow up Dr Davidson prior to 23
December 2019 to ensure that the appeal had been filed within time.
34. Whilst I accept that the applicant’s mother and aunt
passed away on 6 June 2019 and 16 October 2019 respectively, this did
prevent the applicant from seeking legal advice from Dr Davidson on 15 October
2019. There is simply no explanation as to why
Dr Davidson failed to file the
appeal within time.
35. The applicant states in A2 that it was not reasonable
to expect his legal advisor “to be able to submit a carefully articulated
legal appeal within what was only a 2 week period remaining.” A carefully
articulated legal appeal was not required. A one
page application form together
with a filing fee was all that was initially required to file the appeal within
36. Further, the applicant states in A2 that as 23 December 2019 he
“had been informed by Dr Davidson that my case had been
filed”. It had not been. He says; “I was aware that the December
to February period was a time in which
legal professionals often take annual
leave and that Dr Davidson in fact took leave during this time and that, as well
on my case, he had other professional and study commitments that he
was attending to.” No evidence was given in relation to
the annual leave
taken by Dr Davidson in that period or his professional and study commitments
during that period. The applicant
states “I understand that, in fact, the
first court sittings of the legal year were not until 3 February 2020”.
basis of that understanding is not explained. It is not accurate with
respect to the sittings or operation of the Tribunal.
37. The delays on the
part of the applicant and Dr Davidson are not adequately explained.
Knight v Smith
[1975] TASStRp 6
[1975] TASSR 83
, Neasey J said:
Judge has to consider the explanation for the delay. The delay may be due or
partly due to the solicitor’s default.
If it is, the degree to which it
is just and reasonable to hold the litigant personally responsible, and the
extent to which such
responsibility if any should affect the ultimate question
whether a positive case for extending time has been made out, must be carefully
considered and weighed along with all other relevant
circumstances.”
39. In this case, the applicant’s solicitor was guilty of
delay but the applicant was not blameless. Having sought legal advice
time, the applicant made no enquiry until outside the limitation period as to
whether his appeal had been filed. This is
not a case where the applicant was
expressly assured by his legal advisor that necessary steps were being taken.
Whilst the solicitor’s
delay remains unexplained, a reasonable person in
the position of the applicant would have made an earlier enquiry.
(c) Fairly Arguable Case
40. In a meritorious case a solicitor’s failure to
institute proceedings within time is not of negligible weight in determining
whether to grant the applicant an extension of time. However, the Board submits
that the applicant’s case in this matter has
no merit and that he does not
satisfy the test of a “fairly arguable” case.
41. In support of
the argument that the applicant’s case is not fairly arguable, the Board
submits that the applicant would
need to establish, pursuant to s178(1) that
there was no basis for a reasonable belief that the applicant’s conduct
the decision of the Board.
42. In Popovski v The Dental Board of
[2018] VCAT 73
, the Tribunal set out the basis of action pursuant to
s178 of the National Law. At paragraphs [26] – [33] of that case, the
Tribunal set out the following:
[26] The Tribunal adopts
the submissions made by the Board’s Counsel which succinctly summarize
relevant case law and the appropriate
approach to be taken by the Tribunal to
the application of s 178 of the National Law.
[27] To establish a basis for action under s 178, the Board does not need to
prove that the practitioner behaved in a way that constitutes
unprofessional
conduct or professional misconduct. Rather, the Tribunal must itself form a
reasonable belief that the practitioner’s
professional conduct is, or may
be, unsatisfactory.
[28] The concept of ‘reasonable belief’ has been considered in
the context of decisions under s 156 of the National Law.
Certain principles
have been identified which provide guidance to the Tribunal in taking any action
under s 178(2):
(a) The reasonable belief is a jurisdictional fact; in other words, a
precondition for the taking of any action;
(b) Belief is the inclination of the mind towards assenting to, rather than
rejecting, a proposition. The grounds which can reasonably
induce that
inclination of mind may, depending on the circumstances, leave something to
conjecture; and
(c) In forming the reasonable belief, the facts about the practitioner which
give rise to a concern about conduct do not have to be
proven on the balance of
probabilities but there must be proven objective circumstances sufficient to
justify the belief.
[29] Accordingly, the Tribunal should proceed to:
(a) Identify the objective circumstances that indicate a basis for concern
(b) Consider whether those objective circumstances are sufficient to support
a belief that the practitioner’s practice is or
unsatisfactory.
[30] ‘Reasonable belief’ is an objective test. Once the Board has
established that there is sufficient relevant material
to form the belief, the
persuasive burden or onus then shifts to the Applicant to establish that there
are in fact no or insufficient
grounds for the belief.
[31] The term ‘is or may be’ is also to be given its natural
meaning; the Tribunal need not form a reasonable belief that
the conduct is
unsatisfactory but merely that it may be.
[32] If the Tribunal forms such a reasonable belief, it must then consider
whether it is appropriate to take action under s 178(2),
such as by placing
conditions on the practitioner’s registration. Such restrictions may be
placed on a practitioner’s
registration if necessary to ensure that health
services are provided safely and are of an appropriate quality, as contemplated
section 3(3)(c) of the National Law.
[33] The Tribunal acknowledges that the imposition of conditions under s 178,
which is all that is sought by the Board in this case,
may only be imposed where
a Board has decided not to take action to refer a practitioner to the Tribunal
or to take other kinds of
regulatory action. Accordingly, ss 178 and 179 permit
the Board to take limited action, such as by issuing cautions, accepting
undertakings
or imposing conditions.”
43. The objective of the National Law is to provide for the
protection of the public (s3). The power to impose conditions upon a
practitioner’s registration does not require proof beyond reasonable
doubt. It does not require proof on the balance
of probabilities. It requires
“a reasonable belief” as to the relevant conduct.
relevant conduct occurred whilst the applicant was employed by Nurseline and was
working for Uniting Agewell Nursing Home.
It was identified in the letter to the
applicant dated 16 August 2019 providing him with notice of proposed action (R1,
YB5, pp 2-3)
and the letter dated 27 September 2019 providing him with notice of
the Board’s decision to take action (R1, YB7, p2). The
relevant conduct
was identified as follows:
was alleged that on 10 November 2018 during handover, Mr Keenoo commented that a
female colleague ‘likes pricks’.
The female staff present thought
the statement was of a sexual nature and it made them feel
uncomfortable.
the same shift on 10 November 2018, an enrolled nurse had forgotten her
telephone. Mr Keenoo walked towards the nurse with
his hands held out at chest
height and said ‘I need to pat you down looking for your phone’.
The nurse said Mr Keenoo’s
‘sexual banter’ and actions made
her feel uncomfortable.
in the shift, Mr Keenoo asked the same nurse to apply medicated cream to a
female resident’s buttocks and then stayed
in the resident’s room.
The resident’s underwear got caught on her hips when the nurse was helping
her remove them,
and the resident commented that she would never make a
stripper. Mr Keenoo replied ‘What about a pole dancer?’ and his
comment made the nurse feel uncomfortable on the resident’s
11 November 2018, Mr Keenoo was seen leaving the room of a female resident. The
resident was visibly upset and was heard to shout
‘Get out of my
room’ and she told the nurse that she did not want ‘Him’ (i.e.
Mr Keenoo) in there. When
the nurse asked Mr Keenoo what had happened, he did
not answer and due to the resident’s cognitive impairment she was unable
45. In reaching its decision, the Board had regard to the
• The applicant’s denial of some of the allegations
His submission that other allegations had been misunderstood or misinterpreted
and that there were certain comments attributed to him that he could not recall
making (R1, YB7, p3).
• The applicant’s resignation from Uniting
Agewell (R1, YB7, p3).
• Complaints made to Nurseline about his
professional performance and conduct together with requests that he not be sent
for further shifts (R1, YB7, p4).
• The applicant’s “long history of conduct
and performance issues arising in his employment, and such concerns predate
first becoming a registered nurse on 6 January 2009.” J (R1, YB7,
• The common themes evident in his history and in particular his
conduct surrounding patients, residents of aged care facilities,
colleagues and in particular those who are subordinate to him (R1, YB7, p3).
• The applicant’s failure to alter his conduct despite being
counselled about it by previous employers (R1, YB7, p4).
applicant’s response to the Board’s notice of proposed action that
he was “happy to work with the Board
in relation to this matter.”
• The serious nature of the conduct (R1, YB7,
• The primary role of the Board to protect the public (R1, YB7,
46. The information that the Board had regard to shows that
there were objective circumstances supporting a basis for concern about
applicant’s conduct and it provided justification for a finding of a
“reasonable belief” that the applicant’s
conduct is, or may
be, unsatisfactory.
47. As a result of the Board forming a “reasonable
belief” with respect to the applicant’s conduct, it decided to
impose conditions on the applicant’s registration. In substance, the
conditions require the applicant to:
(a) Undertake a program for not less than 20 hours, over 6
months, of further education in relation to appropriate professional behaviours
and communication.
(b) Not to practice as a nurse in charge or be the sole
registered nurse on a shift.
48. The education condition was reviewable on 27 March 2020.
The remaining conditions are reviewable on 27 September 2020.
applicant’s evidence was that he had not participated in any employment
since the conditions were imposed upon his registration.
50. The applicant
accepted that he could have completed the education component of the conditions
over the last 6 months. He provided
no explanation as to why he had not done
51. The applicant also accepted that the conditions did not prevent him
from working as a registered nurse. His evidence was that
he was no longer
working for Nurseline because of the conditions imposed and that he had
unsuccessfully applied for between five
and ten jobs since then. His evidence
was that whilst the conditions initially appeared reasonable, in the job market
no-one wants
take responsibility for “writing reports” on
52. In relation to the issue of whether the applicant has a fairly
arguable case, submissions were made on behalf of the applicant
by his legal
advisor in a letter dated 26 February 2020 filed in support of the appeal. The
submissions reveal a misunderstanding
of the application of s178 of the National
Law. As previously stated all the Board needs to establish pursuant to s178 is
is sufficient objective material to enable it to form a
“reasonable belief” and once that has been done it has the power
impose conditions.
53. It was submitted on behalf of the applicant that his
“due process rights” had been breached including:
(a) Failing to prove the allegations against the applicant
“beyond reasonable doubt”.
(b) Failing to afford the applicant a
“right to silence”.
(c) Failing to advise the applicant of his
right to seek legal representation.
(d) Taking into account irrelevant
considerations, namely the applicant’s prior history of action taken for
his failure to meet
professional standards.
(e) Not taking into account the
applicant’s explanations.
(f) Insufficient evidence to constitute
sexual harassment
54. A review of a decision is not a criminal proceeding. The
standard of proof to be applied is not “beyond reasonable doubt”.
The applicant’s “right to silence” is not applicable. In any
event the applicant has not been charged with nor
has he made any admissions to
criminal behaviour.
55. With respect to the applicant’s right to legal
representation, he was advised by the Board in its notice advising the applicant
of its proposed action dated 16 August 2019 (R1, YB5) that prior to the proposed
conditions being imposed he could make written or
verbal submissions to the
Board and he could contact an independent legal advisor to provide support and
assistance during the submissions
56. The Board is entitled to take
into account the applicant’s prior conduct as a relevant consideration to
the finding of a
“reasonable belief”, especially when that conduct
is of a similar nature to that referred to in the notification to the
does not amount to being punished twice for the same issues. As stated in the
respondent’s written submissions,
a lack of history might weigh against
the Board taking action under s178 whereas a long history would compel the
Board’s decision
to take action.
57. Contrary to the applicant’s
submission the Board did take into account the applicant’s explanations
for the allegations
referred to in the notification. In its decision the Board
stated that it “had regard to the submission Mr Keenoo provided
Agewell, in which he denied some of the allegations and in relation to other
allegations, said his comments had been misunderstood
or misinterpreted. Mr
Keenoo also submitted that there were certain comments attributed to him that he
could not recall making.”
(see R1, YB7, p3).
58. Finally, the
submission that the applicant’s conduct may not constitute “sexual
harassment” is not relevant
to the Board’s right to take action
pursuant to s178.
59. Having found that none of the applicant’s
submissions were relevant to the application by the Board of s178 I conclude
the applicant has failed to establish a fairly arguable case against the
D. Prejudice Suffered by the Respondent
60. The respondent does not claim any specific prejudice but
suggests general prejudice on the basis that allowing the appeal will
the relevant witnesses (nearly 2 years after the relevant
61. The case of Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v
(1996) 186 CLR 541
is authority for the position that although specific
prejudice cannot be identified, that does not mean that no prejudice has been
suffered. McHugh J. stated at 551 and following: “Prejudice may exist
without the parties or anybody else realising that exists.
As the United States
Supreme Court pointed out in Barker v Wingo (972)
[1972] USSC 146
at 532, ‘what
has been forgotten can rarely be shown’. So, it must often happen that
important, perhaps decisive, evidence
has disappeared without anybody now
‘knowing’ that it ever existed. Similarly it must often happen that
time will diminish
the significance of a known fact or circumstance because its
relationship to the cause of action is no longer as apparent as it was
cause of action arose.”
Determination
62. Having weighed and balanced the issues relating to delay,
whether there is a “fairly arguable” case and prejudice,
persuaded that the justice of this case requires an extension of
63. The applicant has no presumptive right to an order in his favour.
He bears the legal onus of proof to show that the justice of
the case requires
that the discretion should be exercised in his favour. In the present case, the
applicant has failed to discharge
that onus. Consequently, the application to
extend time will be dismissed.
A Final Matter
64. Pursuant to
Health Practitioners Tribunal Act
the applicant made an application requesting an order be made staying the
operation of the decision to which this appeal relates.
Section 26(1)
states that subject to the Tribunal making an order for a stay, the operation of
the decision is not affected and action can be taken
to implement the
66. It was submitted on behalf of the applicant that “the
decision to impose conditions on Mr Keenoo’s registration cannot
considered final given the existence of this appeal against that decision. In
the absence of a final decision, pending the ruling
on this appeal, it is
submitted that the imposition of conditions on the registration of Mr Keenoo has
no legal justification.”
67. This submission is misconceived and is
rejected. Therefore, the application for a stay is not granted.
relation to the conditions imposed I note that the option remains open to the
applicant to comply with the condition relating
to education and then have his
conditions reviewed by the Board from 27 September 2020. It is up to the
applicant as to whether
he wishes to exercise that option or not.
Conclusion and Orders
69. I make the following orders:
(a) That the application seeking an order to stay the
operation of the decision of the respondent (to impose conditions on the
applicant’s
registration dated 27 September 2019) be
(b) That the application to file the appeal out of time be
A. M. CLUES
CHAIRPERSON
Jackson v NSW Land and
Housing Corporation
[2014] NSWCOTAP 22 at [22].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (188 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter