URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASWRCT/2021/36.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:23:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
University of Tasmania v G. [2021] TASWRCT 36 (12 October 2021)
[2021] TASWRCT 36
WORKERS REHABILITATION AND COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
University of Tasmania v G.
[2021] TASWRCT
UNIVERSITY OF TASMANIA
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
20 September 2021
DELIVERED ON:
12 October 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Commissioner Wilkins
CATCHWORDS:
Entitlement to compensation – whether reasonably
arguable case
St Helens Oysters Pty Ltd v Coatsworth
[2007] TASSC 90
Lamont v MRD Supermarkets Pty Ltd
[2016] TASSC 15
Vos Constructions
and Joinery Pty Ltd v Norton-Smith
[2016] TASSC 38
Bradshaw v Tasmanian
[2020] TASSC 2
Work Cover Corporation of South Australia v
[1995] SASR 245
State Transit Authority of New South Wales v
Fritzi Chemler
[2017] NSWCA 249
Wiegand v Comcare Australia
Commonwealth Bank of Australia v Reeve
[2012] FCAFC 21
Friends School Inc. v Edmiston
[2014] TASSC 68
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
DETERMINATION:
A reasonably arguable case exists
REPRESENTATION:
Solicitors:
Simmons Wolfhagen
Page Seager Lawyers
[2021] TASWRCT 36
Commissioner Wilkins
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. The worker made a claim for workers compensation on 19 July
2021, in relation to a condition provisionally diagnosed as an adjustment
disorder with anxiety. In the claim form, the worker said her condition had
first been noticed in May 2020 and had been deteriorating
up until 22 June 2021.
In the claim form she described that her condition had occurred under
circumstances detailed as:
and reporting of colleague’s serious misconduct, leading to severe
anxiety, distress at work due to continued
work with this individual and
uncertainty of investigation outcome and feeling unsafe and
2. The claim was supported by an initial workers compensation
medical certificate dated 6 July 2021, which contained the provisional
diagnosis. The certifying general practitioner outlined that the worker had
stated her condition to be caused by an incident which
had occurred on 12
February 2020 under the following circumstances:
“Discovery and reporting of colleague
misconduct, leading to severe anxiety, distress at work, due to continued work
individual”.
3. The certificate also provided as relevant comment:
“Work has become unsafe and intolerable due
to perceived undermining and bullying from colleague, and ongoing interaction
this colleague”.
4. The worker was certified to be incapacitated for work from 6
July 2021 until 20 July 2021, and the certifying GP expressed the
view that the
worker had been incapacitated since 22 June 2021.
5. The employer elected to
dispute liability to pay compensation for the claim, and referred its dispute to
the Tribunal in accordance
with s81A of the Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1988 (“the Act”) on 1 September 2021.
bases of the dispute put forward by the employer were:
(a) That if the worker is suffering from an injury which is
a disease, her employment did not contribute to a substantial degree,
was not the major or most significant factor as required under s25(1)(b) of the
(b) The worker has not suffered an injury (not being a disease) arising
out of or in the course of her employment as required by s25(1)(a)
(c) Further, or in the alternative, the worker has not suffered an
injury which is a recurrence, aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation
deterioration of any pre-existing injury or disease where the employment was the
major or most significant contributing factor
to that recurrence, aggravation,
acceleration, exacerbation or deterioration.
(d) Further, or in the
alternative, the worker is not entitled to compensation because she is suffering
from a disease which is an
illness of the mind or disorder of the mind which
arises substantially from reasonable administrative action taken in a reasonable
manner by an employer in connection with her employment, in accordance with
s25(1A)(c).
(e) Further or in the alternative, if the worker is claiming that
she has become stressed because of a failure of the employer to
address bullying
complaints in respect of the identified work colleague’s behaviour, then
the employer says the worker is suffering
from an illness of the mind or a
disorder of the mind which arises substantially from the failure of the employer
to take action
to discipline or counsel a worker as per s25(1A)(a), there being
reasonable grounds for not taking the action.
7. The worker concedes that the employer has demonstrated it
has a reasonably arguable case to dispute the claim for compensation
(b) and (c) set out above – that is, the worker concedes that she has
suffered neither an injury simpliciter, nor
an aggravation (or the like) of a
pre-existing injury or disease within the extended definition of
“injury” in s3 of
the Act, in compensable
circumstances.
8. However, the worker argues that the employer does not have
a reasonably arguable case to dispute the claim on the other bases of
put forward.
9. The Tribunal must determine whether the employer has, on the
evidence filed in support of the s81A referral, demonstrated that
reasonably arguable case to dispute the worker’s claim for compensation on
the grounds of dispute put forward in the
referral and set out at 4(a), (d) and
Section 81A – what is a “reasonably arguable
10. It is generally recognised that Evans J in St Helens
Oysters Pty Ltd v Coatsworth
[2007] TASSC 90
set out the test to determine
whether an employer has demonstrated it has a reasonably arguable case, as
case will not be reasonably arguable unless the case itself is reasonable in the
sense that there is a reasonable prospect
of the claim being rejected following
a final hearing......The very notion of a “reasonably arguable
case”, like the
very notion of a “prima facie case”, precludes
a final determination of a disputed question of fact......On the face
reasonably arguable case will exist concerning the liability of an employer to
pay a worker if it is reasonably arguable
on the material available in relation
to the claim or identified deficiencies or weaknesses in the claim that,
following a contested
hearing it may be rejected.”
11. The onus is on the employer to establish that a reasonably
arguable case
question of whether an employer has demonstrated it has a reasonably arguable
case does not require that an employer’s
case in relation to liability
“be strong or compelling, but the case that the claim may ultimately be
rejected must be reasonably
considering the burden that rests upon the employer where it has made a s81A
referral, Estcourt J in Bradshaw v Tasmanian
[2020] TASSC 2
, accepting
the submission by counsel for the employer, observed “what the employer is
required to prove is not that there is
no liability under s25 of the Act, but
only that there exists, on the evidentiary material the employer relies upon in
the s81A proceedings,
a reasonable chance that the worker will be unable to
discharge the onus of proof that will ultimately rest with the worker by virtue
of the Act..........on a final hearing of the worker’s
The employer’s evidence
14. In support of the dispute, the employer relied upon three
statements.
15. The first statement is that of Professor James Vickers,
dated 26 August 2021. Professor Vickers is the Director of the Wicking
Research and Education Centre (WDREC), which is part of the University of
Tasmania (the University). Professor Vickers
says in his statement that he is
the line manager of Dr Doherty, to whom the worker reports. He goes on to say
in his statement
am aware that in February 2020 [the worker] raised a concern through Ms Caroline
Gray (Ms Gray), the Business Unit Manager
of the WDREC.
8 Whilst technically Ms Gray reports to the Executive Director Operations
of the College, she has a position relationship with my
9 [The worker’s] concern was that [Mr P.], the Senior Manager of
a-Learning and IT at WDREC was using an online learning management
system that
he had developed for the WDREC to host educational content for a charity
organisation with which he was involved.
10 The first concern was that [Mr P.] may have been using WDREC's
intellectual property, the second concern was that the charity's
online learning
management system looked very much like the ones that the WDREC were offering in
respect of dementia.
11 [The worker] never made a formal complaint in respect of [Mr
P.’s] behaviour but brought it to Ms Gray's attention who in
turn informed
me given the position relationships with our roles.
12 As there had never been a formal complaint, an informal investigation
into the matter proceeded.
13 The informal investigation involved various University
departments
14 It was a relatively grey area because of the way the different IT
arrangements can be interpreted. It was established that [Mr
P.] had used
content which was publicly available and had unified it to create an online
learning management experience.
15 It appears that anyone could take a lot of publicly available code and
construct something very similar.
16 The issue also looked at [Mr P.’s] role, as WDREC were paying him
to create those links.
17 [Mr P.] in the course of the investigation also conceded that the
charity's site had a very similar public look and feel as to
the offerings from
WDREC which could confuse the public. As such, he withdrew the courses that the
charity was offering and re-made
them on a free hosting platform.
18 It was important that WDREC knew where it stood in terms of what
intellectual property that it owned but also that there were no
courses being
offered that looked very similar to those offered by the WDREC which may have
confused the public. In saying that,
there was also the balance of being aware
that [Mr P.] had developed something in his own time for a charity.
19 This matter was dealt with informally as directed by the Head of
School's approach in relation to similar matters.
20 It was determined that some of [Mr P.’s] behaviour had been
somewhat contrary to his employment contract and those matters
were dealt with.
He had every opportunity throughout the course of the investigation to discuss
the matter, raise any concerns and
provide information and material relevant to
the investigation.
21 At no time was the issue of who had raised the complaint discussed. The
content that [Mr P.] had made was out in the public for
all to see, it could
have been anyone.
22 I am not aware of [the worker] ever being mentioned in the course of
the investigation or proceedings, it simply wasn't relevant
to do so, nor were
the matters in hand relevant to her role.
23 The investigation reached a conclusion.
24 [The worker] was not advised of this conclusion or any findings for or
against [Mr P.] as they were not relevant to her as another
staff member, and to
do so would have been inappropriate.
25 If [the worker] had made a formal complaint against [Mr P.], or had the
matters been of a more personal nature, rather than the
flagging of a WDREC as a
whole issue, then matters may have been dealt with differently.
26 As it stands the investigation was completed informally with reference
to natural justice in a fair manner. [Mr P.] was not advised
that it was [the
worker] who had flagged the concern in the first instance and [the worker] was
not made aware of the outcome of
the investigation.
27 As the Director I consider that the investigation and the manner in
which it was handled was reasonable and was conducted in a
reasonable manner by
all parties concerned.
28 I understand as part of [the worker’s] workers compensation claim
she has alleged that [Mr P.] is now bullying and harassing
her and acting in an
intimidating manner. [The worker] has never made a formal complaint in respect
of any behaviour by [Mr P.],
as I get notified of these as Director.
29 If a formal complaint had been received, then action would have been
taken in the normal course.”
16. The employer also relied upon a statement by Ms Patty King,
who is the Injury Prevention and Rehabilitation Specialist with the
Her statement sets out the following:
“6 [The worker] is employed by the
University in the Wicking Dementia Research and Education Centre as a Project
Manager for
Online Education.
7 I spoke with [the worker] regarding her workers compensation claim on 12
July 2021 over the telephone to get a better understanding
of what her claim was
8 [The worker] advised me that in February 2020 she had identified a
serious misconduct matter relating to plagiarism/coding theft
and breach of the
University's copyright by a colleague, [Mr P.]
9 [The worker] said that an investigation had occurred and that the
allegations that she had made were substantiated. She said
she did not know
what disciplinary action was taken by the University; however, [Mr P.] had
remained in his normal role.
10 [The worker] advised that she was certain that [Mr P.] was aware that
it was her actions that had resulted in an investigation
and his subsequent
disciplinary actions.
11 [The worker] said that since this occurred, she felt that the workplace
was not a safe or supportive environment and described
the last 18 months as
12 I asked [the worker] what had created the traumatic environment. [the
worker] said that [Mr P.] was very subtle and insidious in
his undermining and
bullying of her and that there was no tangible evidence or witnesses.
13 [The worker] said that [Mr P.] would smirk or stifle laughter during
meetings where no senior staff was present. [the worker] described
P.’s] behaviour as obstructive and disruptive.
14 [the worker] told me that she had not reported this behaviour to [Mr
P.’s] supervisor, as she felt that her role demanded
that she deal with
the issues as best that she could, without reporting it. She was concerned that
reporting it could lead to enhanced
behavioural issues towards her from [Mr
15 [The worker] advised me that she did not feel safe working with [Mr P.]
and that her expectation was to not to have to work with
17. Finally, the employer relied upon a statement of [Mr P]
dated 18 August 2021. He says that he is making the statement in relation
the worker’s claim, and he understands that the worker is asserting that
he has bullied, harassed or intimidated her.
“6 By way of background, I am employed by
the University as the Manager of Digital Futures I have been in this role since
approximately
the beginning of August 2021.
7 Prior to this, from February 2017, I was employed by the University as
the Manager of Online Learning and Systems Reporting. This
was effectively the
same role that I now hold, but I reported to a different line manager.
8 I was [the worker’s] supervisor in 2017, when she was employed as
a Project Officer. During this period, we interacted
on a regular basis, and I
assisted her in gaining a promotion into a Project Management role. I was not
made aware of any issues
between us during this period.
9 [The worker] continues to hold the role of Project Manager but has not
reported to me as her supervisor for approximately two
10 [The worker] has been on leave for around four to five months of this
year, which I understand is due to the ill health of one
of her family
11 I have seen [the worker] four to five times in the last six months.
All of these occasions have been with other people present.
12 Our department has one recurring meeting per fortnight, and this is
usually the only occasion I see [the worker]. There are usually
people present at this meeting.
13 Where there is communication between [the worker] and myself online,
such as on Teams, there are always a number of other staff
members present in
14 I have always been polite and professional towards [the
15 I have not bullied [the worker] or acted in a way that may be perceived
as bullying, harassment or intimidating. I deny any allegations
16 I have never seen or heard anybody else in the workplace bullying [the
worker] or acting in a way that I would interpret to be
harassing or
intimidating behaviour.
17 I am unable to explain why [the worker] has made these
allegations.”
The employer’s argument
18. In respect of the first ground of dispute, which is not
conceded by the worker, the employer says there is no doubt that the injury
which the worker has claimed compensation is a disease, but there is a factual
dispute in relation to the matters that the worker
has identified as causative
of her condition, which the employer says are:
• the discovery and reporting of the colleague’s
misconduct (as per the claim form and the initial certificate);
• continued work with the colleague (as per the claim form), whom the
worker perceived engaged in undermining and bullying behaviour
towards her (as
per the initial certificate) ; and
• uncertainty of the investigation
outcome (as per the claim form).
19. On that basis, it is submitted that the cause of the
worker’s psychological condition is multifactorial, and no single
factor is elevated above any other as being the major or most
significant cause. If the existence of even one of those identified
factors is found to be the subject of a factual dispute between the parties, the
employer says there must be a reasonably
arguable case to dispute the
20. The employer says that the evidence it has put forward to the
Tribunal calls into question the factual basis of the worker’s
the employer has evidence that those facts did not occur as alleged by the
worker, the disease which the worker has suffered
could not be one to which the
employment was the major or most substantial contributing factor. In
particular, counsel for the employer
points to Mr P.’s statement where he
asserts he has seen the worker only four to five times over the previous six
months, always
with other people present, or, if on-line, with a number of other
staff members present in the on-line chat. Mr P. also specifically
denies that
he has bullied the worker or acted in a way that may be perceived as bullying,
harassing or intimidating.
21. Counsel for the employer submits that the
factual dispute in relation to that issue alone is a sufficient basis for the
to be satisfied that the employer has established that it has a
reasonably arguable case to resist the worker’s assertion
employment was the major or most significant contributing factor to that
22. Further, or in the alternative, the employer calls upon some
of the ‘defences’ available to an employer under s25(1A)
23. The employer points to that part of the worker’s claim for
compensation which refers to “uncertainty of investigation
The employer says that, as per Professor Vickers’ statement, the worker
had not made any formal complaint,
and the behaviour she complained of was
therefore dealt with informally. It’s the employer’s position that
in the circumstances had no lawful entitlement to know the outcome of
the investigation undertaken following her informal complaint.
It was submitted
that the way the employer dealt with the informal complaint, including the fact
that it did not advise the worker
of the outcome, could fall within the meaning
of “administrative action” as contemplated by Doyle CJ in Work Cover
Corporation
of South Australia v Summers
[1995] SASR 245 (Summers)
, where His
Honour noted:
expression ‘administrative action’ is probably intended to apply to
decisions or actions by the employer which
are in some way related to the
workings or functionings of the workplace.....”
24. Finally, the last ground of dispute raised by the employer
is that, if the worker says that her condition has been caused by a
the employer to address bullying complaints about Mr P, the employer says that
amounts to a failure to take action in
accordance with s25(1A)(d) where there
were reasonable grounds for not taking that action, the reasonable grounds being
worker had not made any formal complaint against Mr P.
The worker’s position
25. On behalf of the worker, it was submitted that the
principal cause of injury, as evidenced by the claim and the initial medical
certificate, was the ‘discovery and reporting of serious misconduct of a
work colleague’, which occurred in February
2020 (the date referred to in
the initial certificate). In relation to the conduct of Mr P., it was submitted
that the statements
of Ms King and Professor Vickers confirmed that the
worker’s complaint about Mr P.’s conduct had been substantiated,
least to a degree, in that it was described as “somewhat contrary to his
employment contract”.
26. On this basis, it is submitted, the employer
does not deny that which the worker says caused her to become unwell –
is, the discovery and reporting of a colleague’s
misconduct.
27. The worker’s position is that Mr P.’s denial that
he engaged in bullying, harassment or intimidation of the worker
is irrelevant,
because the worker has not claimed that such behaviour caused her psychological
28. In relation to the ground of dispute that raises s25(1A)(c),
and by which the employer says the failure to advise the worker of
disciplinary
action taken in relation to Mr P. amounted to reasonable administrative action,
counsel for the worker referred to the
tests for what amounts to
“administrative action” set out in Summers and, more recently,
Commonwealth Bank of Australia
[2012] FCAFC 21 (Reeve)
29. Although
the test in Summers is wider than the test in Reeve, it was submitted that the
actions that the employer refers to in
this case satisfy neither test in
relation to the scope of “administrative action” within the meaning
of s25(1A)(c).
30. In addition, it was submitted that there is no causal
connection between the actions of the employer, in failing to advise the
the injury arose much earlier than the failure
to advise the worker about the
disciplinary action regarding Mr P.
31. In relation to both grounds of
dispute that rely upon s25(1A), the worker says that neither administrative
action (s25(1A)(c))
nor the failure to take action to discipline or counsel
(s25(1A)(d)) are actions that relate to the worker, but only to Mr P. Counsel
for the worker referred to Friends School Inc. v Edmiston
[2014] TASSC 68
being authority for the proposition that the provisions of s25(1A) do not
preclude payment of compensation where the reasonable
management actions in
question relate to the conduct of a worker who is not the worker whose
entitlement to compensation is impugned.
Section 25(1)(b) – is there a factual dispute?
32. I accept the employer’s argument that, on the face of
the claim and the initial medical certificate, the cause of the worker’s
diagnosed adjustment disorder is not confined to ‘discovery and reporting
of colleague misconduct’. I accept that, in
combination, the claim form
and the initial certificate additionally raise the worker’s ongoing
interactions with Mr P. since
that time as having been causative, particularly
those actions that the worker perceived as “undermining and
33. In relation to the issue of the worker’s
perceptions about Mr P.’s behaviour towards her, both counsel referred to
the decision of State Transit Authority of New South Wales v Fritzi Chemler
[2017] NSWCA 249 (Chemler)
34. In Chemler, the worker claimed to have been
subjected to racial harassment and vilification in his employment over many
because he was Jewish, and English was not his first language. There was a
dispute about whether his psychological injury had been
wholly or predominantly
caused by the employer’s disciplinary action. On appeal, issues were
raised in relation to the comments
of the Acting Deputy President of the Workers
Compensation Commission regarding the worker’s ‘perceptions’
subjected to harassment and victimisation that caused the
worker’s psychological injury.
35. The NSW Court of Appeal unanimously
dismissed the appeal. Basten JA, in relation to the question of the
worker’s perception
of events in the workplace, observed at paragraph
must be an aspect of the employment which constitutes “a substantial
contributing factor to the injury” for
compensation to be payable...To
focus on the concept of “perception” may obscure the real issue.
Although the arbitrator
said that he accepted the statements from witnesses who
denied that they had heard anybody refer to the Respondent in a derogatory
fashion because of his race or religion, he nevertheless accepted that “in
this workplace, racial slurs and comments were made,
particularly in relation to
the Jewish religion, and the respondent’s witnesses accept that”....
In so far as his findings
constituted a rejection of the need for an intention
to harass, there was no error of law. Nor is it necessary to determine whether
the Respondent’s response was a misperception as to the intention or
attitudes of his fellow workers. In contrast to discrimination
law, the proper
focus in this context is the consequence of conduct on the claimant and not,
even in a limited sense, the motivation,
intention or other mental state of the
co-worker or supervisor... If conduct which actually occurred in the workplace
was perceived
as creating an offensive or hostile working environment, and a
cognizable injury followed, it was open to the Commission to conclude
causation was established.”
36. Counsel for the worker additionally referred to Wiegand v
Comcare Australia
[2002] FCA 1464
, at paragraph 31, where Von Doussa J, on
appeal from the Administrative Appeals Tribunal stated:
“In my opinion it was open on the evidence
for the Tribunal to hold that one or more of the incidents or states of affairs
Wiegand raised
complaint in the course of his evidence contributed in a material degree to an
aggravation of the depressive disorder
suffered by Mr Wiegand. For that to
be the case there is no requirement at law that the interpretation placed on the
incident or
state of affairs by the employee, or the employee's perception of
it, is one which passes some qualitative test based on an objective
reasonableness. If the incident or state of affairs actually occurred, and
created a perception in the mind of the employee
(whether reasonable or
unreasonable in the thinking of others) and the perception contributed in a
material degree to an aggravation
of the employee's ailment, the requirements of
the definition of disease are fulfilled”
37. In both of the above cases, the manner in which the worker
perceived certain work related events or actions was considered only
after there
had been findings that the ‘conduct’, ‘incident’ or
‘state of affairs’ in question
had actually occurred.
this instance, Mr P. has denied that he has engaged in any behaviour or conduct
towards the worker that could be perceived
as bullying, harassing or
intimidating. He had further stated that he has had limited contact with the
worker, and always in the
presence of other staff.
39. Before questions could
be answered in relation to whether Mr P.’s conduct actually amounted to
bullying or harassment of
the worker, or was conduct from which the
worker’s perceptions of bullying or harassment arose, it would first be
for the Tribunal to make findings of fact in relation to the
existence, nature and extent of that conduct. That could only be done
arbitrated hearing.
40. As Evans J noted in St Helens Oysters Pty Ltd v
“It is notorious that the genesis for conditions such as stress,
anxiety and depression may be multifaceted. The causes may
be many and varied
and it can be very difficult to identify the most significant causative factor.
In the context of litigation,
a final determination as to the existence of such
a condition and the causative role of any factor, almost invariably turns upon
the adjudicator's assessment of the veracity and reliability of the
complainant.”
No doubt, in this case, the veracity and reliability of Mr P.
would ultimately be the subject of adjudicative assessment also.
41. Bearing
in mind the formulation of Estcourt J in Bradshaw v Tasmanian Networks (supra)
set out at paragraph 13 above, I am satisfied
that the employer has demonstrated
that if Mr P’s statement was to be accepted as evidence at a final
hearing, at least some
of the factual basis upon which the worker’s claim
relies would be undermined, and there is a reasonable chance that she would
be able to satisfy the onus upon her to establish liability under
42. Accordingly, the employer has demonstrated that it has a
reasonably arguable case to dispute liability to pay compensation for
worker’s claim, in relation to this ground of dispute.
S25(1A)(c) – does the employer have a reasonably arguable
43. The employer’s dispute in this regard relies upon the
proposition that the failure to advise the worker of the outcome of
investigation about Mr P. amounted to reasonable administrative action –
that is, it was inappropriate to advise the worker,
because the she had not made
a formal complaint in relation to Mr P.’s activities that were the subject
of the investigation.
44. Although I accept that the investigation undertaken
by the employer in relation to Mr P.’s activities may well have amounted
to “administrative action” , particularly as contemplated by
Summers, I have significant reservations about whether that
action could be said
to be administrative action in connection with the worker’s employment.
45. Blow CJ in Friends School Inc. v Edmiston (supra) considered whether
“reasonable action”, or “reasonable administrative
action” under s25(1A) of the Act meant action that applied only to the
worker who had made the claim for compensation, or could
be extended to include
other workers. He concluded:
my view s 25(1A) is ambiguous. It does not make clear whether or not it
precludes the payment of compensation to a worker
other than the worker who has
been the subject of the reasonable action with which it is concerned. Having
regard to the mischief
towards which the subsection was directed, and the
consequences that would flow if an interpretation favourable to employers were
adopted, it is clear that it must be interpreted as precluding the payment of
compensation only to a worker who has been the subject
of the reasonable action
to which it refers.”
46. I do not think the employer has demonstrated that it has a
reasonably arguable case that s25(1A)(c) would be available to the
employer to
enable it to resist liability to pay compensation to the worker if the claim was
to proceed to a final hearing.
S25(1A)(e) – failure to address bullying complaints
– a reasonably arguable case?
47. The employer’s argument is that its failure to
address complaints about Mr P’s alleged bullying conduct towards the
worker amounts to failure to take action where there are reasonable grounds for
not taking that action. Those reasonable grounds
are that the worker made no
such complaints.
48. Of itself, it would be difficult to argue with the
proposition that an employer’s failure to deal with a complaint amounted
to reasonable action, where a complaint had not been made.
49. However, there
is nothing in the claim or certification to suggest that the worker’s
injury is alleged to have arisen from
any failure of the employer to address
bullying complaints, and there is no suggestion that any complaints were made.
50. There is no basis for this ground of dispute. The employer has not
demonstrated that it has a reasonably arguable case.
Determination
51. I am satisfied that the employer has demonstrated it has a
reasonably arguable case on the first basis of dispute which remains
in issue. I
therefore determine that a reasonably arguable case exists concerning the
liability of the employer to pay compensation
in accordance, and there will be
orders in accordance with s81A(3)(c) and (d) of the Act.
COMMISSIONER
See, for example,
MRD Supermarkets Pty Ltd
[2016] TASSC
Pearce J in
Constructions and Joinery Pty Ltd v Norton-Smith
[2016] TASSC 38
paragraph 5
At paragraph 14
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (153 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter