URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASHPT/2021/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Medical Board of Australia v Dr Kate Elizabeth Schilling [2021] TASHPT 2 (24 April 2021)
[2021] TASHPT 2
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL
Medical Board of Australia v Dr Kate Elizabeth Schilling
[2021] TASHPT 2
MEDICAL BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
SCHILLING, Kate Elizabeth
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
On the papers
DELIVERED ON:
26 April 2021
DECISION OF:
Chairperson A. Clues
CATCHWORDS:
Medical practitioner – boundary transgressions
– professional misconduct – reprimand – conditions on
registration
ss 5,193 and 196(2)
Health Practitioner Regulations National Law
ss21 and 30(2) Health
Practitioner Tribunal Act
Medical Board of Australia v McGrath (Review and Regulation)
[2014] VCAT 641
Medical Board of Australia v Holten (Review and
Regulation)
[2019] VCAT 837
Medical Board of Australia v Xie (Review and
Regulation)
[2019] VCAT 924
DETERMINATION: 1) The respondent is guilty of professional
misconduct as defined by s5 of the National Law with respect to the admitted
allegations and particulars.
2) In respect of that misconduct:
(a) The respondent is reprimanded as provided by s196(2)(a)
of the National Law.
(b) The following conditions are imposed on the
respondent’s registration for review after a period of 12 months from the
of this determination:
(i) that she must not attend patients in their
the National Law; and
(ii) that she must be supervised by another
registered health practitioner when practising as a medical practitioner
pursuant to s196(2)(b)(ii)
of the National Law.
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Australian Health
Practitioner Regulation Agency
Respondent:
Page Seager
[2021] TASHPT 2
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. This is a referral made by the Medical Board Australia
(“the applicant”) to the Tribunal pursuant to s193 of the Health
Practitioner Regulations National Law 2009 (“the national law”) and
s21 of the Health Practitioner Tribunal Act 2010,
with respect to the conduct of
the respondent which it asserts amounts to professional misconduct.
applicant asserts that between 2013 and 2017, whilst practicing as a medical
practitioner in Tasmania, the respondent transgressed
professional boundaries
that should, and ordinarily do, exist between a medical practitioner and a
patient (“the patient”).
Agreed facts
3. The applicant received notification in relation to this
matter on 5 June 2017. The notifier was:
• concerned that the respondent was administering opiates
“outside guidelines” to the patient.
• unsure of the nature
of the relationship between the respondent and the patient.
4. The applicant took immediate action by imposing conditions
regarding supervision and non-clinical contact against the respondent
basis of the alleged performance and conduct.
5. The respondent gave
immediate and appropriate undertakings to the applicant. The respondent
voluntarily ceased working from the
time the notification was made (on 5 June
2017) until all the education activities she was required to undertake as part
of the immediate
action, were completed. She did not resume working until 29
October 2018, a period of almost 17 months.
6. The applicant investigated the
notification and subsequently referred the matter to this Tribunal on 21
September 2018.
7. There were two directions hearings on 19 December 2018
and 4 March 2019.
8. On 19 December 2018. A non-publication order was made
in the following terms:
pursuant to s30(2)(b) of the Health Practitioner Tribunal Act 2010, there is a
prohibition on the reporting or other disclosure
of the name of the patient who
is the subject of the application and any information that may reveal his
9. On 4 March 2019, the Tribunal was advised that the parties
were liaising with each other and were hopeful that they might be able
parties the matter was adjourned sine die
with liberty granted to either party
10. Ultimately, on 23 December 2020 a joint submission as to the
facts and orders sought by the parties was filed with the Tribunal.
considered the matter I was satisfied that it could be dealt with on the
Referral to the Tribunal
11. The original application to the Tribunal contained a number
of allegations against the respondent. After abandoning some of those
allegations, the particulars that are the subject of this determination are as
respondent:
(a) Entered into, and maintained, an inappropriate
relationship with the patient which breached professional boundaries
(i) referring to and treating the patient as her son – telling him
she loved him and referring to him as “darling”;
(ii) renting her
house to the patient; and
(iii) paying for the patient to travel to her horse
stud in Queensland and agreeing to employ him.
(b) Communicated with the
patient about non clinical matters via email and text
(c) Communicated with the patient about his medication and
prescriptions by text message and email.
(d) Did not refer the patient to an
addiction specialist and/or pain management specialist at an earlier point in
time to obtain specialist
input and oversight in relation to his narcotic
medication regimen.
(e) Prescribed medication to the patient on multiple
occasions – including Schedule 8 narcotics – without examining
12. Apart from allegation (d) above the particulars were
conceded by the respondent as part of the joint submission to the Tribunal.
The Joint Submission
13. The joint submission also included additional information
that is relevant in relation to both the respondent’s conduct
and factors
that may be taken into account as potentially mitigatory in nature.
The Patient
14. The patient is currently 38 years of age (DOB 18/9/1982).
A report from Dr John Loudon (Registered Psychiatric Nurse), case manager/court
liaison officer dated 5 August 2016 provides the following brief personal
resides by himself on a property which he owns in[...]. He is in
receipt of a disability support pension for severe Post Traumatic
Disorder (PTSD) which occurred as a result of repeated severe abuse as a
[The patient]
was a ward of the state and lived in many different foster and
institutional homes throughout his childhood
He suffered the most
dreadful physical and psychological damage during the course of his
childhood/adolescence.
(Information obtained from Justice Porter
“Comments on passing sentence” April 1, 2010).
As a result of abuse, he has endured surgery in order to correct his injuries
and still has further surgery planned in order to give
him some relief from his
constant pain.
[The patient]
was born in Wyalla, South Australia. He was abandoned by his
15 year old mother. After release from being a ward of the state he
without structure, care, guidance or education. He describes himself as
“always being alone”.
[The patient]
has had some relationships in the past and fathered three
children from those relationships. The children are living with their
respective mothers on the mainland.
[The patient]
did not attend any formal school except for Year 7 for two
weeks at one time. Despite this, he has managed to obtain the skills
and writing and says that he manages “ok”.
[The patient]
spent a short time in the Ashley Youth Detention Centre in
The Commencement of the Doctor/Patient Relationship
15. The patient’s medical records reveal that the patient
has a complex personal, medical, psychiatric and psycho-social history
Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), Anxiety Disorder, Moderate Panic
Disorder, disc herniation (C5/6), lumbar back pain,
spinal canal stenosis,
asthma, emphysema and a bronchial polyp. He takes a number of medications for
these various conditions.
16. The respondent first saw the patient at the
clinic where she was working as a locum on 24 September 2013. The patient had
a patient of that clinic since approximately July 2012.
17. When the
respondent first saw the patient he was very anxious and felt he was losing
touch with reality. He advised he lived
on a property out of town, his thoughts
were racing, he had different personalities and did not know which one to use in
the doctor/patient
relationship. He was very suspicious and refused to see a
psychiatrist for a diagnosis of his problem. The respondent prescribed
and advised him to return later that day for a further assessment. He did
return and was much calmer.
18. The clinic was located in remote area of
Tasmania there were no facilities suitable to provide counselling for the
severe PTSD.
19. The respondent had discussions with the
local police officer and was told that the patient responded well to
20. The patient had limited insight into his condition but
“asked for help”. The respondent found that the patient did
to kindness and became more compliant. The respondent saw the patient’s
compliance as having a dual benefit being:
(a) The safety of staff at the clinic and the community
house that the patient would visit on a regular and at least weekly basis.
well as the safety of the community and law enforcement officers, pharmacists
and nursing staff.
(b) The safety and wellbeing of the patient.
21. This is how the doctor/patient relationship commenced.
However, in the respondent’s attempt to gain the patient’s
compliance she made some serious errors of judgment and committed boundary
transgressions.
The Specific Allegations
Allegation 1
22. That the respondent entered into, and maintained, an
inappropriate relationship with the patient which breached professional
(i) Referring to and treating the patient as her son –
telling him she loved him and referring to him as
(ii) Renting her house to the patient;
(iii) Paying for the patient to travel to her horse stud in Queensland
and agreeing to employ him.
Submissions
23. The patient initially referred to the
respondent as “Maam” and then he requested that the respondent allow
call her “Mum” because it would make him feel better and more
relaxed as he did not trust doctors. The respondent agreed
to this. She
recognises now that this was wrong but at the time she did not appreciate the
magnitude of her error. By agreeing
to the request, the respondent tied herself
to a future unprofessional interaction that would be difficult and potentially
more destructive,
than an initial refusal, to extricate herself from.
respondent’s intuitive response to the patient’s request to call her
“Mum” was that it was not appropriate.
However, she agreed to the
patient calling her “Mum” as she believed that this communication
style would enable her
to meet the patient on his level and establish a working
relationship. The respondent did not regard the relationship as one akin
mother and son. Her purpose was purely to gain trust and co-operation in an
adult whose emotional maturity was, in the respondent’s
view, akin to a
primary school aged child.
25. At the time, the respondent viewed her
agreement to allow the patient to call her “Mum” as benign given the
immature emotional development and the significant age
difference between her and the patient. She has subsequently realised that
decision was not benign.
26. The relationship was not one where the
respondent sought to take advantage of the patient. This is to be distinguished
from violations
where the clinician takes advantage of the patient’s
vulnerability for their own benefit, therefore diminishing or destroying
therapeutic relationship.
27. There was no personal gain for the
respondent. The respondent maintains that she told the patient she loved him
and referred
to him as “darling” in an attempt to build a
relationship of trust that reflected a role of care giver. The respondent
realises that using this language left her open to misinterpretation by others
and therefore she should not have used it. The
respondent acknowledges that she
made a mistake and crossed a professional boundary.
28. The respondent admits
that she rented her house to the patient. The patient had challenges
maintaining housing. The respondent
offered rental accommodation to the patient
on commercial and arm’s length terms including a tenancy agreement.
29. In hindsight, the respondent recognises that this was inappropriate
given her professional relationship with the patient. At
the time she was
concerned that the gains in trust and treatment that had been made would be
eroded if the patient returned to living
in his car.
30. The respondent was
not motivated by financial gain. Her decision to rent premises to the patient
was based on his significant
history of homelessness and unfavourable rental
history, with previous damage caused to properties he had rented, thereby
his prospect of finding rental accommodation in a limited market.
31. Once the tenancy agreement was entered into, its continuation was
required due to legal rights that vested in the patient.
32. The respondent
admits that she paid for the patient to travel to her horse stud in Queensland
and she agreed to employ him.
33. The patient asked the respondent if he
could work for her on her stud farm in Queensland. The respondent agreed to
this and agreed
to pay him $20 per hour to work on the farm. When the patient
arrived at the farm he did not want to do any work. The respondent
the agreement when she realised the patient did not intend to comply with it.
34. The respondent recognises that these actions were completely
inappropriate and is highly embarrassed about them.
Allegation 2
35. That the respondent communicated with the patient about
non-clinical matters via email and text message.
Submissions
36. The respondent admits she communicated with the patient
communication crossed professional boundaries.
37. The respondent’s
decision to do this was an attempt to continue the working relationship she had
formed with the patient
based on trust and to continue to build rapport with
him. Again she recognises now and admits that it was misguided.
respondent acknowledges that this method of communication should only be used in
rare situations when absolutely necessary
and should be limited to clinical
Allegation 3
39. That the respondent communicated with the patient about his
medication and prescriptions by text message and email.
Submissions
40. The respondent acknowledges she communicated with the
patient about his medication and prescriptions by text message and email.
respondent adopted this communication style and method in order to meet the
patient on his level. The respondent says she did
not initiate communication
with the patient, rather the patient raised concerns about his medication and
prescriptions using these
methods and the respondent responded to his
41. In hindsight the respondent admits this method of communication
was not appropriate.
Allegation 4
42. That the respondent did not refer the patient to an
addiction specialist and/or pain management specialist at an earlier point
time to obtain specialist input and oversight in relation to his narcotic
medication regimen.
Submissions
43. The respondent does not admit this allegation.
patient initially consulted the respondent on 24 September 2013 at the clinic.
At this time, the respondent suggested to
the patient that a referral to a
psychiatrist would be useful. The patient refused to see a psychiatrist.
45. In June 2014 the respondent arranged for the patient to undergo an
urgent psychiatric assessment and treatment by a psychiatric
team. The papers
include a report from Dr Faisal dated 30 June 2014 in which he states that the
admitted in psychiatric unit in [hospital] on 08-06-14 as an involuntary patient
after having a psychotic episode (due
to paradoxical effect of high dose of
benzodiazepines). He settled rapidly and was transferred to [...] on 10-06-14
from where he
was finally discharged back home on 11-06-14. Myself and case
manager...went to see him for review on 25 June 2014 and met him at
GP clinic in
[hospital] in the presence of his GP [the respondent]. Patient was not happy to
see us and said he did not want to
attend mental health services. He said that
he was not happy with the treatment given to him in [hospital] and he was very
interview and said that he only wanted his GP, [the respondent]
to treat him as
he trusts her only. He could not be engaged in any further
conversation.”
46. The respondent saw the patient on various occasions between
24 September 2013 and 21 October 2014. During this period, the patient
illicit drug use and the respondent did not detect alcohol or illicit drug use.
During this period, the respondent was working
as locum. The patient saw other
doctors and they did not detect any substance abuse.
47. The first time the
respondent became aware of the patient’s complex history of abuse
including sexual abuse as a child,
as well as his history of alcohol and drug
abuse, including participation in alcohol and drug rehabilitation at the age of
when she received a report in 2016 prepared by Dr Walton (psychiatrist)
for the Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania dated 28 January
respondent’s locum contract at the relevant clinic expired at the end of
October 2014. At that time, the permanent
GP for the clinic, Dr Kumar, took
over the patient’s care. In March 2015 Dr Kumar referred the patient to a
pain specialist,
Dr Francis, and sought advice regarding the patient’s
opioid medications. However, Dr Francis refused to treat the patient
was on the waiting list for a surgical option.
49. The papers contain a
report from Dr Francis dated 16 March 2015. In that report he says that he was
unable to assist the patient
with Persistent Pain Service for two reasons;
first, “We do not see people for the purpose of providing authorisations
pharmaceutical services. It is a pointless exercise. The person who is
most likely to be in the same position to be able to say
it is a good idea or
not is the GP.” Secondly, the patient “is on a waiting list for a
surgical option. We do not see
people within the Unit in these circumstances.
We find they do not engage with our model of care.”
50. In early May
2015, the patient was no longer able to attend the clinics close to his
residence due to a breakdown in the relationship
with the incumbent doctors.
The patient requested that his care be transferred to the respondent who worked
at the time at another
clinic some distance from the patient’s residence.
51. Prior to accepting the patient’s care at the new clinic, the
respondent had a discussion with the patient about being assessed
pain specialist, Dr Gassin, who visited the new clinic once a month. Although
Dr Gassin is a private pain specialist,
he was willing to bulk bill the patient.
The patient agreed to the referral and made an appointment with Dr Gassin on 7
The patient failed to attend his appointment with Dr
52. It was common for the patient not to attend appointments. He had
difficulty motivating himself to go to the appointments at the
53. During the relevant period, the patient was referred by the
respondent and other doctors to the following specialists:
(a) Psychologist, Dr Leon Van Der Linde, on 11 November
(b) Quitline on 4 December 2013;
(c) Respiratory Physician, Dr
Timothy Young, on 2 January 2014;
(d) Orthopaedic Surgeon, Mr Scott Fletcher,
on 21 February 2014;
(e) Orthopaedic Surgeon, Dr David Edis, on 21 February
(f) Adult Mental Health Services Burnie, 26 June
(g) Neurosurgical Specialist Clinic at the Royal Hobart Hospital on 8
December 2014;
(h) Psychiatrist, Dr Philip Reid, on 8 December
(i) Pain Management Physician, Dr Michael Jackson, on 29 January
(j) Dr Francis, Persistent Pain Service at the Royal Hobart Hospital,
on 11 February 2015;
(k) Pain Specialist, Dr Gassin, on 12 May
(l) Dr Francis, Persistent Pain Service at the Royal Hobart Hospital,
on 24 November 2016; and
(m) Neurosurgery Department at Royal Hobart
Hospital, on 28 November 2016.
Allegation 5
54. That the respondent prescribed medication to the patient on
multiple occasions – including Schedule 8 narcotics –
examining him.
Submissions
55. The respondent acknowledges that she prescribed medication
to the patient on multiple occasions without examining him. During
of September 2013 to the end of October 2014, the respondent had 43
consultations with the patient at which time she prescribed
medications
including Targin and Diazepam. On three occasions, the respondent issued
prescriptions for those medications because
the patient failed to attend the
surgery and the pharmacy required the prescriptions to order the medication. On
each occasion the
respondent communicated with the patient by phone and email.
Due to the fact that the patient was impulsive and disorganised, he
was on daily
pick up for his medication and later on weekly blister packs in order to avoid
accidental loss or overdose.
Response to the Notification
56. The respondent gave immediate and appropriate undertakings
to the applicant. The respondent voluntarily ceased working from the
notification was made on 5 June 2017 until the required education plan was
completed. She did not work for a period of
17 months. She resumed working on
29 October 2018.
57. The respondent complied with the schedule of conditions
imposed by the applicant.
58. The papers contain a report dated 14 September
2017 prepared by Dr McIntosh in relation to the education plan undertaken by the
respondent subsequent to the notification.
59. The respondent participated in
the education plan from 6 July 2017 until 11 September 2017.
report, Dr McIntosh notes that as a result of the education plan that the
respondent participated in she gained:
(a) A clear understanding of the nuances and complexities of
professional boundaries.
(b) Insights and awareness about the three major
influences that operate in boundary transgression – the intrapersonal,
interpersonal
and systemic.
(c) A better understanding as to the motivations
which were influencing her at the time.
(d) A number of strategies that she
can use to assist in maintaining boundaries in the future and to identify
potential “red
(e) Knowledge of the support and resources
she can access to assist in keeping her practice safe in terms of
boundaries.
(f) Strategies that she can integrate into her practice to stay
mindful about the complexities of professional boundaries especially
communities with limited service support such as health, police and
61. The respondent also completed for her own interest further
education on:
• Ethical decision making.
• Working with
clients diagnosed with borderline personality disorder.
62. Dr McIntosh reports that the respondent met the education
plan objectives and further that the respondent’s responses to
internet tool on professional boundaries, in her two face to face sessions and
in her reflective essay make it clear that she
has read and understands the
Medical Board of Australia
Code of Conduct 2014/Sexual
Boundary Guidelines for Doctors 2011
63. Further, according to the joint submission in addition to
the education plan referred to above the respondent has also undertaken
attended the following:
(a) The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners
(RACGP) training program on:
(i) Communication Skills in General
(ii) Mental Health Skills Training with Focus on Youth Mental
(iii) Mental Health Care in General Practice;
(iv) Unit 522
Addictions;
(v) Unit 533 Mental Health.
(b) Effective Communication module
via her indemnity insurer.
(c) Webinar on prescribing principles and
(d) Webinar on prescribing perils for drugs of
dependence.
(e) Learning modules on:
(i) Medical records and
documentation;
(ii) Communication strategies for challenging
(f) Managing Boundaries in Patients with Mental Health
(g) Open Disclosure.
The Proposed Orders
64. Based on the admitted allegations and particulars the
parties jointly invited the Tribunal to make the following orders:
the respondent’s conduct amounts to professional misconduct.
the respondent be reprimanded.
3) That conditions be imposed on the
respondent’s registration, namely that she must not attend patients at
their homes and
that she must be supervised by another registered health
practitioner when practising as a medical practitioner.
65. Whilst agreement
between the parties as to the appropriate orders is relevant, it remains the
Tribunal’s role to make its
own determination as to the level of the
conduct and the appropriate sanctions (Medical Board of Australia v McGrath
(Review and
Regulation)
[2014] VCAT 641
The Respondent’s Conduct
66. Section 5 of the National Law defines professional
misconduct of a health practitioner to include:
“(a) unprofessional
conduct by the practitioner that amounts to conduct that is substantially below
the standard reasonably
expected of a registered health practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience; and
(b) more than one instance of unprofessional conduct that, when considered
together, amounts to conduct that is substantially below
the standard reasonably
expected of a registered health practitioner of an equivalent level of training
or experience; and
(c) conduct of the practitioner, whether occurring in connection with the
practice of the health practitioner’s profession or
not, that is
inconsistent with the practitioner being a fit and proper person to hold
registration in the profession.”
67. As indicated, the respondent has agreed that her conduct
was professional misconduct within the meaning of the National Law. The
this matter indicate that the concession made by the respondent was
appropriate.
68. The facts indicate that the patient had a high level of
psychiatric vulnerability. It is clear from the respondent’s admitted
conduct that she did not have the necessary level of skill, expertise, insight,
self-awareness, self-reflection and support systems
to manage the doctor/patient
relationship between herself and the patient.
69. The respondent transgressed
professional boundaries in her communication and contact with the patient. She
did not see clearly
where the boundaries were in the doctor/patient
relationship.
70. The respondent did not recognise the risks associated with
dealing with a vulnerable patient who had significant psychological
she did not recognise her own limitations in managing the relationship. It
seems likely that unless the conduct was notified
to AHPRA she would have
continued her conduct despite the fact that it transgressed an appropriate
doctor/patient relationship.
71. As a result, I find that the
respondent’s conduct constituted professional misconduct.
What orders
should follow a finding of professional misconduct?
72. In the case of
Medical Board of Australia v Holten (Review and Regulation)
[2019] VCAT 837
– [25] the Tribunal held:
The applicable principles are well-established from the cases. The primary
purpose of determinations is to protect the
public not to punish the
practitioner. That primary purpose, together with protection of the reputation
of the medical profession
in the eyes of the public, is achieved by ensuring
that proper ethical and professional standards are maintained.
[22] As the Tribunal observed in Honey v Medical
Practitioners Board of Victoria (Occupational and Business Regulation)
[2007] VCAT 526:
‘It is of prime importance in assessing the appropriate sanction that
we bear in mind that the purpose of the determination
is not to punish ... Our
aim must be to protect the public, and we achieve that aim by imposing sanctions
aimed at regulating professional
performance of the particular individual under
consideration and also by way of general deterrence to the profession as a
[23] With that protective focus in mind, the Tribunal considers a range of
factors in making orders including:
whether there
is a need for specific deterrence (deterring the particular practitioner from
re-offending) including:
insight into what occurred;
contrition or remorse about what occurred;
a history of
offending conduct as opposed to a one-off departure from otherwise high
standards of conduct; or
other matters
indicating either that a particular sanction is required to deter the
practitioner from re-offending or, conversely,
that rehabilitation has taken
whether there
is a need for general deterrence (deterring others from engaging in similar
from the time the investigation started to the end of the Tribunal
evidence of
character and contribution to the community; and
potentially mitigating factors such as medical or psychological evidence,
personal or family circumstances.
[24] General deterrence requires consideration of
whether there is a need to signal to other members of the profession that
consequences will follow such conduct, and thereby deter them from the
same conduct, in the interests of maintaining professional
standards and public
confidence in the profession.
[25] In assessing the importance of general deterrence, the Tribunal looks at
the nature and seriousness of the conduct and the risk
of harm if the conduct
were engaged in by others.”
Applying the Principles to the Facts in this case
73. There is no evidence that the patient suffered any harm
because of the respondent’s conduct.
74. The respondent voluntarily
stopped working from the time the notification was made until she completed all
of the education activities
the applicant required her to undertake. The
respondent did not work for a period of some 17 months.
75. The respondent
gave immediate and appropriate undertakings to the applicant and she complied
with the schedule of conditions imposed
upon her by the applicant.
respondent has willingly undertaken education to improve her practice and
ethical standards. In fact, she undertook more
education than was required of
her by the applicant.
77. There were no notifications prior to or after this
matter. The respondent must live with the consequences of this
notification.
78. On the facts of this case I take the view that through the
further education undertaken by the respondent since the notification
has the necessary skills to continue to practice as a medical practitioner and
she is unlikely to reoffend. She now has
insight into what occurred. She is
embarrassed by her conduct and she has no history of similar conduct.
Therefore, on the facts
of this case the need for specific deterrence is not a
significant factor. However, general deterrence is.
79. With respect to
general deterrence, I consider that a reprimand is appropriate. A reprimand is
a signal to other medical practitioners
that this type of conduct is not
acceptable.
80. As stated in the case of Medical Board of Australia v Xie
(Review and Regulation)
[2019] VCAT 924
is well understood that a reprimand is not a trivial determination. A sanction
of this form does not trivialise a lapse
in professional standards. For a
professional person it has the potential for serious adverse implications. It
tells the public,
patients and other practitioners that the standards expected
of a practitioner have not been met and that the practitioner has been
81. Whilst I consider the prospect of the respondent repeating
the conduct is low, it is appropriate that conditions be imposed on
registration to ensure that she receives the appropriate level of supervision
with respect to professional boundaries and to
ensure that she receives the
appropriate level of support and guidance to ensure that she does not place
herself in a similar situation
that she found herself in with the
82. The orders proposed by the parties, and which I am prepared
to make, inclusive of a review period as required by s196(3), are
appropriate
taking into account the respondent’s conduct and the paramount purpose of
the National Law to protect the public
and the reputation of the medical
profession. For the reasons outlined above, the Tribunal determines as
1) The respondent is guilty of professional misconduct as defined by
s5 of the National Law with respect to the admitted allegations
particulars.
2) In respect of that misconduct:
(a) The respondent is reprimanded as provided by s196(2)(a)
of the National Law.
(b) The following conditions are imposed on the
respondent’s registration for review after a period of 12 months from the
of this determination:
(i) that she must not attend patients in their
the National Law; and
(ii) that she must be supervised by another
registered health practitioner when practising as a medical practitioner
pursuant to s196(2)(b)(ii)
of the National Law.
83. The wording of the conditions referred to in paragraph (b)
above are set out in the schedule annexed to this determination.
CHAIRPERSON
1. The practitioner must not consult with patients in their
residential aged care facilities.
2. Within 21 days of the notice of
imposition of these conditions, the practitioner must provide to AHPRA, on the
approved form (HP7),
acknowledgement that AHPRA may:
(a) Seek reports from the Director of Medical Services,
Director of Nursing, Senior Practice Manager, Senior Manager, Senior Partner,
Proprietor, Owner, or equivalent (the senior person) at each place of practice
on at least a quarterly basis or as otherwise required.
(b) Request and
access from the senior person at each place of practice copies of rosters, pay
slips, or the equivalent.
(c) Have contact with and access information from,
where relevant, Medicare, private health insurers and/or practice billing
3. Within 21 days of the notice of the imposition of these
conditions the practitioner must provide to AHPRA, on the approved form
acknowledgement from the senior person at each place of practise that they are
aware AHPRA will seek reports from them.
4. The practitioner must be
supervised by another registered health practitioner (the supervisor) when
practising as a medical practitioner.
For the purposes of this condition,
‘supervised' is defined as:
The practitioner must consult with the
supervisor who is usually physically present in the workplace and available to
observe and
discuss the management of patients and/or performance of the
Practitioner when necessary and otherwise at weekly intervals.
5. Within 21
days of the notice of imposition of this condition, the practitioner must, on
the approved form (HPN10), nominate a primary
supervisor and at least one
alternate supervisor to be approved by AHPRA in consultation with the Chair of
the Board. The practitioner
must ensure that each nomination is accompanied by
an acknowledgement, on the approved form (HPNA10), from each nominated
that they are willing to undertake the role of supervisor and are
aware that AHPRA will seek reports from them.
6. In the event that no
approved supervisor is willing or able to provide the supervision required the
practitioner must cease practice
immediately and must not resume practice until
a new supervisor has been nominated by the practitioner and approved by AHPRA in
consultation
with the Chair of the Board.
7. Within 21 days of the notice of
the imposition of these conditions, the practitioner is to provide to AHPRA, on
the approved form
(HP10) acknowledgement that AHPRA may:
(a) obtain information from relevant authorities (such as
but not limited to Medicare)
(b) obtain information and/or a report from the
senior person at each place of place of practice on a quarterly basis,
(c) obtain a report from the approved supervisor on a quarterly
8. Within 21 days of the notice of the imposition of these
conditions, the practitioner is to provide to AHPRA, on the approved form
(HPS10), acknowledgement from the senior person at each place of practice that
AHPRA may seek reports from them.
9. Within 21 days’ notice of the
imposition of these conditions the practitioner must provide to AHPRA, on the
approved form
(HPC), the contact details of a senior person, such as the
Director of Medical Services, Director of Nursing, Senior Practice Manager,
Senior Manager, Senior Partner, Proprietor, Owner, or equivalent (the senior
person) at each a current place of practice. In providing
this form, the
practitioner acknowledges that:
(a) AHPRA will contact the senior person and provide them
with a copy of the conditions on the practitioner’s registration or
confirm that the senior person has received a copy of the conditions from the
practitioner, and
(b) The practitioner will be required to provide the same
(i) within seven days of the commencement of practice at each and
every subsequent place of practice, and
(ii) within seven days of each and
every notice of any subsequent alteration of these conditions.
10. All costs associated with compliance with the conditions on
their registration are at the practitioner’s own expense.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (226 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter