URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASADT/2019/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:11:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
David Cawthorn and Paraquad Association of Tasmania Incorporated v Citta Hobart Pty Ltd and Parliament Square Hobart Landowner Pty Ltd [2019] TASADT 10 (28 November 2019)
[2019] TASADT 10
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
David Cawthorn and Paraquad Association of Tasmania
Incorporated v Citta Hobart Pty Ltd and Parliament Square Hobart Landowner Pty
[2019] TASADT 10
CAWTHORN, David
PARAQUAD ASSOCIATION OF TASMANIA INCORPORATED
CITTA HOBART PTY LTD
PARLIAMENT SQUARE HOBART LANDOWNER PTY LTD
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
29 May 2019
DELIVERED ON:
28 November 2019
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Tribunal Member Kate Cuthbertson
Tribunal Member
Robert Winter
CATCHWORDS:
Anti-Discrimination Act
Discrimination Act
1999 (Cth), s13;
Constitution
Burns v Corbett
(2018) 92 ALJR 423;
Attorney-General (NSW) v
[2018] NSWCA 254
Re Adams and The Tax Agents Board
[1976] AATA 1
Hume v Palmer
[1926] HCA 50
(1926) 38 CLR 441
Dickson v The Queen
(2010) 241 CLR 491
Anne Black v Owners Corporation POSSD39033E
Burgundy Royale Investments Pty Ltd v Westpac Banking
Corporation
(1987) 18 FCR 212
Sunol v Collier
(2012) NSWCA 14
LNC Industries Ltd v BMW (Australia) Ltd
[1983] HCA 31
(1983) 151 CLR 575
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v. Edensor Nominees Pty
[2001] 204 CLR 559;
Qantas v Lustig
[2015] FCA 253
[2015] 228 FCR 148
Commonwealth v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal
[2008] FCAFC 104
[2008] 169 FCR 85.
DETERMINATION
Pursuant to
Anti-Discrimination
the complaints made by the first and second complainants as
against all respondents are dismissed.
REPRESENTATION:
Complainants:
Respondents:
Solicitors:
Complainants:
Hobart Community Legal
Respondents:
Page Seager Lawyers
[2019] TASADT 10
INTRODUCTION
1. This is the Tribunal’s Decision in relation to the
respondents’ application of 22 May 2019, that the complainants’
complaint be dismissed for want of jurisdiction. The respondents claim that the
Anti-Discrimination Tribunal (the Tribunal) has no
determine the matter as the complaint and/or the defence to the complaint
invokes federal jurisdiction.
The respondents submit that the Tribunal is not
vested with and therefore cannot exercise such jurisdiction.
reasons that follow, the Tribunal upholds the respondents’ application and
dismisses the first and second complainants’
complaint pursuant to
s.99(2)(b) of the Anti-Discrimination Act 1998 (“the Act”) against
all respondents on the ground
that, in the circumstances, it would be just and
appropriate to do so.
3. By a complaint dated 19 December 2016 to Equal Opportunity
Tasmania (“EOT”), the complainants alleged that the first
had directly and indirectly discriminated against them pursuant to ss.14 and 15
of the Act. The complaint concerns a development
known as Parliament Square
located on a site bounded by Salamanca Place, Davey Street and Murray Street.
The entrance to the site
at the North-East corner from Murray Street as
currently designed and proposed to be constructed by the respondents provides
by way of stairs. There is another proposed access about 36.5 metres
further up Murray Street from the North-East corner. That entrance,
referred to
as the Arch by the complainants, provides level access to the site.
essence of the complaint is that members of the community with spinal cord
injuries, including the first complainant, who are
reliant on using wheelchairs
for mobility are unable to utilise the North-East access as they are unable to
climb stairs. They are
required to utilise the access through the Arch which
requires that they navigate the Murray Street slope or use another access some
150 metres away on Salamanca Place. This is said to amount to direct
discrimination, that is less favourable treatment, on the basis
of disability in
connection with the provision of facilities, goods and services. The allegation
of indirect discrimination alleges
that the requirement that access to the
North-East corner be by way of stairs amounts to a condition, requirement or
practice that
has the effect of disadvantaging the first complainant and other
members of the class of people that share his disability.
5. The second
complainant’s complaint was made as a representative complaint pursuant to
s.82 of the Act. The complainants seek
orders that, inter alia, the respondents
provide access at the North East corner for persons with a mobility disability
accessible lifts and associated level access from the street to the
lift, or ramp access from Murray street to the plaza of Parliament
6. On 18 December 2018, an order was made by consent pursuant to
s.81(2) of the Act joining the second respondent as a party to the
7. Several directions conferences were held pursuant to s.80 of the Act to
ready the matter for inquiry. In accordance with directions
made by the
Tribunal, points of claim and points of defence were filed by the parties to
assist in clarifying the issues in dispute.
The final versions of these were
filed by the complainants on 5 February 2019 and by the respondents on 21
February 2019.
8. The parties also filed lists of documents and witnesses
they intended to rely upon during the inquiry. Expert reports and statutory
declarations have also been filed by the parties.
9. On 2 April 2019, a final
directions conference was held prior to the inquiry which was listed for four
days commencing from 29
May 2019. At that time, the Tribunal heard and
determined an application made by the complainants for an order pursuant to s.97
the Act requiring the production of documents by the respondents. All parties
indicated that the inquiry would be ready to proceed
on 29 May 2019.
letter from the respondents’ solicitors dated 22 May 2019, the
complainants and the Tribunal were advised that at the
commencement of the
inquiry on 29 May 2019, the respondents would be submitting the complaint be
dismissed because it invoked federal
vested with, or exercise federal jurisdiction.
11. As foreshadowed in the
respondents’ solicitors’ letter of 22 May 2019, written submissions
were filed with the Tribunal,
and served upon the complainants on 23 May
12. On 28 May 2019, the day before the commencement of the inquiry, the
complainants’ solicitors filed with the Tribunal, and
served upon the
respondents’ solicitors, written “jurisdictional
submissions”.
13. The inquiry commenced before the Tribunal on the
morning of 29 May 2019 as scheduled. The complainants opened their case and then
submissions were received from all parties in respect of the jurisdictional
question. The complainants also submitted that if the
complaint were dismissed
that the Tribunal ought make an order in their favour for “costs thrown
away” pursuant to s.99A
of the Act on the basis that the respondents had
raised the jurisdictional issue at a late stage which caused them to incur
unnecessary
14. The Tribunal adjourned the inquiry and reserved its
decision on the jurisdictional question. It was agreed that the costs argument
would be dealt with following the determination of the respondents’
application.
15. On 5 June 2019, the complainants’ solicitors filed and
served “supplementary jurisdictional submissions”. The
respondents’ solicitors objected to the Tribunal’s receipt of and
consideration of these submissions on the basis that
there had been no request
for or direction or order made at the adjournment of the inquiry for the
provision of further submissions.
16. Exercising the powers available to it
pursuant to the Act, the Tribunal directed that the complainants’
“supplementary
to the respondents. The Tribunal also set a timetable for the respondents
provide any responding submissions. Responding submissions were filed and
served by the respondents on 17 June 2019.
POINTS OF CLAIM AND DEFENCE
17. The complaint concerns a significant development known as
Parliament Square which incorporates public open space, retail and office
and an hotel. The essence of the complaint is that one of the main entrances,
referred to as the North East corner, does not
provide disability access. Anyone
who is unable to navigate stairs will have to use one of the other entrances.
The complainants
suggest the other entrances are less convenient for a variety
of reasons not relevant to this decision.
18. In respect of the complaint of
indirect discrimination, it is said that this has the effect of disadvantaging
the first complainant
and members of the class of people with spinal cord
injuries reliant on the use of wheelchairs for mobility. It is also said that
the requirement that the North East corner of the site be accessed by way of
stairs is unreasonable in the circumstances. One of
the particulars of
unreasonableness states that the provision of access at the North East corner of
Parliament Square by way of stairs
without a lift or accessible ramp is not
compliant with the Building Code of Australia.
19. The respondents in their
defence state that the development is being constructed in accordance with
planning permits issued by
the Sullivans Cove Waterfront Authority and approved
and amended pursuant to Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993 (LUPAA). They
also assert that the relevant works comply with the National Construction Code
(Building Code of Australia) 2016 (the Building Code
or NCC) and the Disability
(Access to Premises – Buildings) Standards (DSP).
20. Importantly with
respect to this application, at para. 21A, the respondents relevantly
(a) The works and any design for the works comprising the
North East Stair comply with Law:
(i) pursuant to s.11 the (sic) of the
Building Act 2016
(BA), all building work must comply with, and be certified by a building
surveyor as compliant with, the NCC;
(ii) pursuant to
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
(Cth) (DDA), the Minister may formulate
disability standards, and if a person complies with such disability standards
then no complaint
of discrimination can be established;
(iii) the DSP are
standards formulated under
of the DDA;
(iv) compliance with the NCC and
the DSP is achieved by demonstrating compliance with either of the deemed to
satisfy solutions (DTS)
or the Performance Solutions contained in the NCC and
(v) the NCC and DSP contain the same substantive requirements in
terms of both the DTS provisions and Performance Solutions
provisions;
(vi) the provision of access to Parliament Square complies with
the DTS provisions of both NCC and the DSP for access to buildings:
DTS require that access must be provided from the main points of a pedestrian
entry, not from every point of entry.
(2) The main points of entry to Parliament Square will
be from the Archway and the Salamanca Place Entrance.
(3) The North East Stairs are not a main entry, or an
entry from an allotment boundary.
(4) The Respondent will rely upon expert evidence and
the Building Permit.
(vii) further and in the alternative, access to Parliament
Square complies with the NCC and DSP Performance Solutions for access to
(1) compliance with the
Performance Requirements and Performance Solutions of the NCC and DSP requires
that access ways are at appropriate
locations; and
(2) the area of the North East Stairs is not an
appropriate location for an accessway because of the gradient and cross fall of
Murray Street footpath and of Parliament Lane that would be required to be
traversed are unsafe and should not be used by people
with a wheelchair or
mobility aid;
(3) the respondent will rely upon expert evidence and
the relevant Building Permit.
(viii) as the access to Parliament Square complies with the NCC
and the DSP, the access provided is not “unreasonable in the
circumstances”.
(b) The DDA and DSP provide a scheme:
(i) to ensure that dignified, equitable, cost-effective and
reasonably achievable access to buildings, and facilities and services
buildings, is provided for people with a disability; and
(ii) to give
certainty to building certifiers, building developers and building managers
that, if access to buildings is provided
in accordance with the DSP, the
provision of that access, to the extent covered by the DSP, will not be unlawful
under the Act; and
(iii) that pursuant to s 32 of the DDA provides that it is
unlawful to contravene a standard in the DSP.
(c) Accordingly, by complying with the DSP, there can be no
discrimination under the ADA; and
(d) If there is inconsistency between the
ADA and the DDA, then, to the extent of the inconsistency, the ADA is invalid
pursuant to
s 109 of the Australian
Constitution
(e) In the alternative, in
the premises of 21A(a) (ii), (iii), (vii) and (b) (iii), the provision of an
access way at the North East
Stairs would be unlawful pursuant to
21. In asserting their compliance with the Building Code and
the DSP, the respondents not only expressly deny the allegations of
unreasonableness,
but rely on s.34 of the DDA which provides that the provisions
prohibiting discriminatory conduct under that act do not apply to
acts done in
accordance with the DSP. They refer to s.109 of the Australian
Constitution
say that to the extent that the DDA and the Act are inconsistent, the Act is
invalid and no relevant discrimination can be said
respondents do not indicate in their points of defence the basis upon which the
DDA potentially applies to the subject matter
of the complaint. As both
respondents are private companies, it may be that ss.12(9) and (10) of the DDA
are invoked on the basis
that the subject matter of the complaint relates to
discrimination by a trading corporation formed within the limits of the
Commonwealth
and takes place in the course of the trading activities of the
trading corporation.
MATTERS UPON WHICH THE PARTIES AGREE
23. In addressing the Tribunal, the parties were not in dispute
in respect of the following propositions relating to the determination
respondents’ application:
(a) the Tribunal is not a “court of a State”
within the meaning of
Constitution
. This has been
authoritatively determined by the Full Court of the Federal Court in
Commonwealth v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal
[2008] FCAFC 104
(2008) 169 FCR 85
per Kenny J at
(b) a State adjudicative body that is not a State court cannot be
conferred with and cannot exercise federal jurisdiction: Burns v
Corbett [2018]
HCA 15 (Burns) per Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ at [2]-[3], [43], [49]-[50],
(c) in the course of performing its duty to determine the complaint,
the Tribunal is obliged to consider the extent of its own jurisdiction
it cannot judicially pronounce on those limits: Attorney-General New South Wales
[2018] NSWCA 254 (Gatsby)
per Leeming J at [281] referring to Re Adams
and the Tax Agents’ Board
[1976] AATA 1
(1976) 12 ALR 239
per Brennan J at 242;
(d) a determination as to whether the Act is inconsistent with the DDA
inevitably involves an exercise of federal jurisdiction as
it involves an
interpretation of the meaning of the word “inconsistent” in
Constitution
and a determination of the effect of that interpretation on the
provisions of the DDA and the Act: see Hume v Palmer
[1926] HCA 50
(1926) 38 CLR 441
CJ at 446, Isaacs J at 451 and Starke J at 461-462.
24. Each of these propositions are accepted by the Tribunal as
properly reflecting the law as it relates to the subject matter of
application.
THE RESPONDENTS’ SUBMISSIONS
25. Having raised the issue of potential inconsistency between
the Act and the DDA, particularly in the context of the availability
defence under s.34 of the latter, the respondents submit that the determination
of their answer to the complaint requires the
exercise of federal jurisdiction.
Further, once federal jurisdiction is invoked, they submit that the jurisdiction
in respect of
the entirety of the complaint is “wholly” federal,
regardless of whether other parts of the matter may otherwise arise
under State
law: Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Edensor Nominees Pty Ltd
(2001) 204 CLR 559 per Gleeson CJ, Gaudron
and Gummow JJ at [7] and Qantas v
[2015] FCA 253
(2015) 228 FCR 148 (Lustig)
per Perry J at [82].
26 In considering the extent of its jurisdiction, the
respondents submit that the Tribunal is not entitled to assess the merits of
federal issues raised, but is restricted to considering whether they are
“not merely colourable”: Lustig at [91].
It is not necessary for the
Tribunal to be persuaded that the federal issue or issues will succeed.
Nevertheless, they submit that
if the Tribunal had jurisdiction, they would
argue that a direct inconsistency between the Act and the DDA arises as s.34 of
latter operates to “leave open an ‘area of liberty’, which
a State law ‘should not close up’”.
The absence of a positive
defence as provided for by s.34 of the DDA gives rise to a risk that the Act
proscribes conduct that “has
been ‘left untouched’ by a
Commonwealth law” and “will ‘alter, impair or detract’
from the operation
of the federal law, giving rise to a direct inconsistency for
the purpose of
Constitution
: Dickson v The Queen
(2010) 241 CLR 491
per French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Heydon, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ at [22] and
[25]. Alternatively, they argue that an indirect inconsistency
arises as the
combined effect of
(3A) of the DDA is that the DDA is intended to
cover the field and be the only law in relation to disability standards.
26. In considering whether the federal matters raised by the
respondents are colourable, they submit that the focus of the Tribunal
whether they have been raised for the improper purpose of fabricating federal
untenable: Lustig at
[88]-[101]. The respondents submit they have consistently raised the federal
defences with the complainants,
including prior to the first complainant lodging
the complaint with EOT. Further, they say the federal defences are not
merely as a consequence of the respondents not seeking to resolve the
issue in a Chapter III court by, for example, seeking orders
in the nature of
prerogative relief. There is, they say, no onus on the respondents to do so.
Further, they submit that the very
fact there is dispute between the parties
regarding the strength of the federal defences relied upon by the respondents
illustrates
that the Tribunal’s resolution of the matter would involve the
exercise of federal judicial power.
27. In the circumstances, the
respondents submit that the only course open to the Tribunal in the
circumstances is to dismiss the
complaint for want of jurisdiction as any
determination of it necessarily involves an exercise of federal judicial
THE COMPLAINANTS’ SUBMISSIONS
28. The complainants reject the respondents’
characterisation of the effect of
of the DDA. They argue that on the proper
construction of
, the Act is capable of operating concurrently, or
alongside, the DDA. They submit the concurrent operation of the DDA and Act is
facilitated by s.13(4) of the DDA as it provides that where a complainant has
commenced a complaint or proceedings under a discrimination
law of a State or
Territory, they are not entitled to make a complaint or institute a proceeding
alleging a breach of the DDA. They
argue that s.13(3A) does not operate to oust
the operation of State discrimination laws in respect of matters covered by a
standard. Instead, they argue that the section operates to give the
Minister the option whether State discrimination laws are excluded,
affected or
allowed to operate concurrently with the disability standards: Anne Black v
Owners Corporation OC1-POS539033E
[2018] VCAT 185
. In this case,
they submit that no election to exclude or affect the Act or like legislation
has been made and it can therefore operate
fully. Finally the DSP are
incorporated into the Building Code which in turn is incorporated into Tasmanian
law by operation of the
Building Act 2016
. As a consequence, it is not open to
conclude that the Act is inconsistent with the DDA.
29. The complainants
agree that if a question of federal jurisdiction is to be pursued, that it must
be raised in a court of competent
30. The complainants further assert that the DSP are limited to
access to a “building” as defined in clause 2.1 of the
standard. It
does not apply to access to “premises” more broadly or to aspects of
the claim relating to the provision
of goods, services, or facilities. As such,
even on the respondents’ argument, aspects of the complaint are not
the DSP and do not fall foul of the inconsistency argument. As a
consequence, they say that the Tribunal must exercise its jurisdiction
determine the complaint.
31. Finally, they rely on their allegation that the
respondents have not complied with the DSP and therefore no question of
inconsistency
32. Having acknowledged that the Tribunal cannot
exercise federal jurisdiction but is required to form an opinion as to the
of its own authority, the complainants appear to argue that this requires
the Tribunal to nevertheless conduct the inquiry into the
complaint. If,
following the inquiry and in light of any opinion formed by the Tribunal
regarding the jurisdictional issue, the complaint
is upheld or dismissed, the
unsuccessful party can seek a remedy elsewhere either by way of appeal or orders
in the nature of prerogative
relief. They rely on Sunol v Collier [201] NSWCA 14
as authority for this proposition.
THE RESPONDENTS’ REPLY
33. The respondents submit that the Tribunal cannot proceed to
determine the complaint as to do so would necessarily involve an exercise
federal jurisdiction. Even consideration of the complainants’
of the case, for
example, whether the DSP has been complied with and an interpretation of the
standard, which also involves an exercise
of federal jurisdiction. Further, to
conduct an inquiry without exercising federal judicial power would necessarily
involve depriving
the respondents of the opportunity of having their federal
defences considered. They submit the only option available to the Tribunal
those circumstances is to dismiss the complaint.
DETERMINATION
34. There is no question that the Tribunal is obliged to
consider the extent of its own jurisdiction: Gatsby per Leeming JA at [281].
Constitution
provides that the judicial power of the
Commonwealth shall be vested in the High Court, in such other federal courts as
the Parliament
creates, and in such other courts as the Parliament invests with
federal jurisdiction: Burns per Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ at
Constitution
establish the original jurisdiction of the High
Court, including at
Constitution
or involving its interpretation”.
Constitution
exhaustively sets out the bodies that may be vested with Federal
adjudicative authority. For relevant purposes this includes “any
of a State”:
The High Court’s decision in Burns has
decisively determined that a State body, or agency, that is not a State court
be conferred with, nor exercise such authority: see [49]-[50] and
37. A matter arises under federal law in the following relevant
circumstances:
(a) where “the right or duty in question in the matter
owes its existence to federal law or depends upon federal law for its
enforcement, whether or not the determination of the controversy involves the
interpretation (or validity) of the law”: LNC
Industries Ltd v BMW
(Australia) Ltd
[1983] HCA 31
(1983) 151 CLR 575
per Gibbs CJ, Mason, Wilson, Brennan, Deane
and Dawson JJ at 581;
(b) where “the source of a defence which asserts
that the defendant is immune from the liability or obligation alleged against
him is a law of the Commonwealth”: LNC Industries at 581.
38. Once a federal defence is invoked, the determination of the
whole of the matter involves the exercise of federal adjudicative
“unless there is some completely disparate claim constituting in substance
a separate proceeding”: Lustig at
[82]. This remains the case regardless
of whether the federal claim is disclaimed or rejected or the adjudicative
authority finds
the federal claim unnecessary to determine: Lustig at [83].
39. Federal jurisdiction or federal power in the context of Chapter III of
Constitution
“is concerned with the exercise of adjudicative authority
for the purpose of ‘quelling controversies about legal rights
obligations through ascertainment of facts, application of law and exercise,
where appropriate, of judicial discretion’”:
Burns at [21]. The
function of the Tribunal in conducting an inquiry and determining a complaint
clearly involves the exercise of
adjudicative authority.
40. In this case,
the defendants have raised a federal matter by way of defence to the complaint
that relies on
Constitution
and allegations of inconsistency
between certain provisions of the DDA and the Act. They also seek to rely on
what they say amounts
to a positive defence available pursuant to s.34 of the
DDA. In our opinion, federal jurisdiction is clearly invoked and if the
Tribunal were to proceed to determine the complaint, it would be purporting to
exercise federal judicial power. Consideration of
the matters raised by the
respondents requires the interpretation of
Constitution
consideration of its application in the context of the DDA and the Act, whether
and the extent to which the DDA and the DSP applies
to the subject matter of the
complaint and the standards have been complied with. Further, the Tribunal would
then need to consider
how that compliance or failure to comply affects the
operation of certain provisions of the DDA and the Act.
41. As noted above,
it has been authoritatively determined that the Tribunal is not a “court
of the State” within the
Constitution
Commonwealth v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal
[2008] 165 FCR 85
consequence of the above is that it is our opinion that the Tribunal cannot be
vested with or exercise Federal jurisdiction.
42. It only remains for
Tribunal consider whether the federal issues raised by the respondents are not
merely colourable: Lustig at
[87]. A federal claim will be colourable if it is
made for the improper purpose of fabricating jurisdiction: Burgundy Royale
Investments
Pty Ltd v Westpac Banking Corporation
(1987) 18 FCR 212
CJ, Morling and Beaumont JJ at 219. Whether a claim is tenable will be relevant
to the question of whether it is colourable
but it is not determinative, except
in circumstances where it is so untenable and would have been so to those who
propounded it:
Lustig at [88]. The merits of the federal issues raised by the
respondents are not otherwise relevant.
43. In our opinion, the federal
matters raised by the respondents are not colourable. The Building Code which
incorporates the DSP
are invoked by the complainants. They say the respondents
have failed to comply and have cited that failure as a particular of
unreasonableness
in their claim relating to indirect discrimination. The
relevance of the standard cannot be disputed. The respondents are defending
complaint on the basis that they have complied, and that their compliance
constitutes a complete defence pursuant to the DDA.
The constitutional issue
this raises is not one that on any view can be said to have been invoked to
fabricate jurisdiction and avoid
the operation of the Act. Federal jurisdiction
is enlivened regardless of the merits of the arguments raised by the
respondents.
Any attempt to assess those merits would necessarily involve an
exercise of federal adjudicative authority which has not been conferred
Tribunal. That the respondents have not sought to take action in a court of
competent jurisdiction to determine the federal
issues or to prevent Equal
Opportunity Tasmania or the Tribunal from dealing with the matter may be
unfortunate, but does not affect
our opinion regarding the question of
colourability.
44. The Respondents assert that they have consistently raised
the federal defences with the complainants, both prior to the first
complainant
lodging his initial complaint and in their points of defence.
45. It follows
that the Tribunal, having considered the extent of its jurisdiction, is of the
opinion that the subject matter of the
complaint comprises a federal matter and
that it therefore cannot proceed to hear and determine the complaint as it is
not conferred
with federal judicial power.
46. The respondents submit that
the complaint should be dismissed in those circumstances. There is some argument
that by dismissing
the complaint, the Tribunal would be exercising federal
judicial power. Alternatively, the Tribunal might consider adjourning the
sine die. This would be unsatisfactory. .Section 99(2)(b) of the Act gives the
Tribunal power to dismiss a complaint at “any
time” if to do so
would be just and appropriate. In the circumstances, and in light of the opinion
we have formed as to the
extent of our jurisdiction, it is appropriate to
dismiss the complaint.
1. That pursuant to
Anti-Discrimination Act
, the complaint made by the first complainant dated 19 December 2016 be
dismissed as against all respondents.
2. That pursuant to
s. 99(2)(b)
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
, the second complainant’s complaint be
dismissed as against all respondents.
3. That within 21 days of the date of
this decision, the complainants make, file and serve upon the respondents and
the Tribunal written
submissions in support of their application of 29 May 2019,
pursuant to
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
, for the respondents to
pay the complainants costs thrown away as a consequence of the adjournment of
the inquiry hearing on 29 May
4. That within 21 Days of the
respondents’ receipt of the complainants’ written submissions in
relation to its costs application,
the respondents make file and serve upon the
complainants and the Tribunal, their written submissions in response to the
complainants’
costs application submissions.
5. That the hearing of the
complainants’ costs application be listed on a date, on notice to the
parties, not before 6 January
6. That there be liberty to apply to all
CUTHBERTSON R. WINTER
TRIBUNAL MEMBER TRIBUNAL MEMBER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (229 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter