URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMACT/2018/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kennedy v Motor Accidents Insurance Board [2018] TASMACT 1 (1 February 2018)
[2018] TASMACT 1
MOTOR ACCIDENTS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
ALISON DEE KENNEDY V MOTOR ACCIDENTS INSURANCE
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
23 November 2017
DELIVERED ON:
1 February 2018
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Tribunal Member Wilkins
CATCHWORDS:
Statutory compensation in respect of motor vehicle
accidents – jurisdiction of Tribunal – production of documents
Motor Accidents (Liabilities and Compensation) Act
Commissions of Inquiry Act
Stephen Brook v Motor Accidents
Insurance Board
[2017] TASMACT 2
DETERMINATION:
That the documents sought by the applicant be produced
to the Tribunal within fourteen days.
REPRESENTATION:
Ms. C Schokman
Respondent:
Ms. L McCallum
Solicitors:
Ogilvie Jennings
Respondent:
Page Seager
[2018] TASMACT 1
Tribunal Member Wilkins
INTRODUCTION
1. The applicant filed a reference to the Motor Accidents
Compensation Tribunal pursuant to
Motor Accidents (Liabilities and
Compensation) Act 1973
(“the Act”), indicating that she was
aggrieved by the failure of the respondent to make any payments by way of
benefit in respect of a motor vehicle accident occurring on the 27
April 2010. The reference was dated 13 September 2016.
2. The respondent, by
letter of the 8 September 2016 directed towards the applicant, had indicated
that the it was in receipt of
medical advice that physiotherapy treatment and
medications were no longer required as a result of the injuries sustained in the
relevant motor vehicle accident. The respondent was therefore not prepared to
attend to payment of the costs of physiotherapy or
medications for which the
applicant had forwarded invoices and receipts to the respondent. This was the
background to the applicant
making her reference to the Tribunal.
support of her reference the applicant provided to the solicitors for the
respondent medical reports from Dr Gregory White,
Consultant Psychiatrist and a
proof of evidence from Clinical Associate Professor Mark Slatyer. The report
and proof of evidence
were provided to the solicitors for the respondent on the
2 March 2017. The respondent’s solicitors were instructed by the
respondent to obtain medical evidence in response to the applicant’s
medical evidence.
4. A report from Dr Michael Evenhuis, Consultant
Psychiatrist dated 3 April 2017 and a report from Dr Dilip Kapur, Specialist
Medicine Physician, were filed in the Tribunal on the 27 April 2017 on
behalf of the respondent. I infer the same materials were
provided to the
applicant’s solicitors at or about the same time.
5. The applicant by
letter to the Tribunal dated 7 November 2017 sought that the referral be listed
before the Tribunal for directions
to enable the applicant to pursue an order
that the respondent deliver to the applicant’s solicitor the following
a. Report of Dr Kapur dated 4 February 2016
b. Report from Dr
Boyce, Neurologist from 2016
c. Report from Mr James Drury, Neuropsychologist
The Tribunal’s Jurisdiction
6. The Motor Accidents Compensation Tribunal is established by
Motor Accidents (Liabilities and Compensation) Act 1973
of the Act, is vested with certain powers that are provided in
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995
Section 22(1)(b)
Commissions of
Inquiry Act
gives a Commission power to require production of documents.
7. Chairperson Webster has previously considered the power of this Tribunal
in regard to the production of documents, and I adopt
his observation in Stephen
Brook v Motor Accidents Insurance Board [2017] TASMACT 2 at paragraph 13 as
Given the functions and power of a Commission pursuant to [The
Commissions of Enquiry Act 1995], I infer that it was, at the very
intention of Parliament, to provide this Tribunal with similar powers to obtain
all relevant information it required in
order to determine a referral which it
is obliged, is a matter of law, to determine. However, in proceeding in this
manner it is
accepted the Tribunal is bound to ensure procedural fairness to the
parties which must mean by inference the ability to permit the
practitioners for
the applicant to inspect the documents the subject of the amended application so
long as the respondent has no
lawful claim of privilege. This position is
consistent with authority which suggests that Tribunals have implied powers
which, subject
to statutory limits, permit the exercise of powers that are
incidental and necessary to the exercise of express powers: Tasmanian
& Sewage Corporation v Resource Management & Planning Appeal Tribunal
[2013] TASSC 5
at paragraph 55.
Basis of the Application
8. In support of the application for production of the
documents, counsel for the applicant referred to and relied upon a number of
items of correspondence from the respondent to the applicant.
9. Firstly,
correspondence from the respondent to the applicant dated 8 January 2016, which
advised “We note we are currently
funding treatment which includes
physiotherapy with Mr Phillip Dore at Kinetic Physiotherapy, consultations with
Associate Professor
Mark Slayter and Dr Caroline Schwerkolt Clinical
Psychologist along with associated prescribed medications.
In an effort to
further understand your symptoms and to assist both you and the MAIB in relation
to your treatment regime, the MAIB
have arranged appointments with a Pain
Management specialist and Neurologist as follows;”
Thereafter,
details of appointments arranged with Dr Kapur and Associate Professor Peter
Boyce, Neurologist, were provided. The
applicant was asked to confirm that she
was able to attend the appointments.
10. Secondly, correspondence dated 5
April 2016 from the respondent to the applicant, which indicated “We
confirm receipt of
the report from Dr Geoffrey Boyce, Consultant Neurologist,
who has recommended an opinion from an independent neuropsychologist to
with treatment recommendations”. Details of an appointment with a
neuropsychologist, Dr James Drury, were then provided.
( I note that this letter
refers to a report from Dr Geoffrey Boyce, whereas the applicant had originally
been asked to attend Associate
Professor Peter Boyce for assessment. I assume
these people are one and the same, likely Associate Professor Geoffrey Boyce,
there was a typographical error on behalf of the respondent in its
correspondence)
11. Thirdly, correspondence to the applicant from the
respondent dated 1 July 2016 which advised as follows: “As a result of
independent medical examinations you have undergone this year for the MAIB, with
three very senior specialist medical practitioners,
the advice from those
specialists is that you did not suffer any significant injury in the motor
vehicle accident.
The conclusion is that you do not need any ongoing
physiotherapy and in particular that physiotherapy, after 149 sessions of
to date, is no longer required or appropriate. It is understood that
at this point you have been involved in a very long term situation
of treatment
which is no longer now going to be funded by the MAIB.
Although the MAIB is
no longer going to fund the cost of any medical treatment you seek, associated
with this motor vehicle accident,
a decision has been made not to implement that
in respect to physiotherapy until 14 July 2016”.
12. Finally,
correspondence dated 8 September 2016, which I have referred to already, which
“I refer to the above and to our letter of 1 July 2016, wherein
we advised the MAIB is in receipt of medical advice in which
the opinion is
expressed that the physiotherapy treatment and medications you are presently
receiving are no longer required as a
result of the injuries you sustained in
the above motor accident.
Therefore, the MAIB is unable to attend to the
payment of any physiotherapy treatment or medications from 14 July 2016”.
13. On the basis of the correspondence from the respondent, requiring the
applicant to attend for medico legal assessment with three
specialists in the
first half of 2016, counsel for the applicant submitted that it was open to
infer that these three specialists
were the ones referred to in the
respondent’s letter to the applicant of 1 July 2016. Counsel advised me
that the applicant
had not attended any other medical appointments at the
request of the respondent.
14. Counsel for the applicant referred me to the
medical reports that had been provided in support of the applicant’s
to the Tribunal.
15. Briefly, Dr White had diagnosed the applicant
as suffering from significant symptoms of a chronic post-traumatic stress
precipitated by the motor vehicle accident in question. He was of the
view that she required a combination of psychiatric and psychological
treatments, including medication. Associate Professor Slatyer identified the
applicant as suffering from cognitive deficits from
a brain injury, and
psychiatric/psychological symptoms of anxiety, depression and post traumatic
distress disorder, together with
pain. Associate Prof Slatyer was of the view
that the applicant’s condition resulted directly from the motor vehicle
Associate Professor Slatyer recommended that the applicant required
treatment from himself and from her general practitioner, as
well as episodic
physiotherapy and psychiatric/psychological treatment.
16. Counsel for the
applicant submitted that the medications that were the subject of the
respondent’s determination were medications
relevant to treatment of the
conditions identified in the medical reports relied upon by the applicant. She
further submitted that
Assoc. Professor Slatyer raised issues about a head
injury, and the reports which had been obtained by the respondent from Associate
Professor Boyce and Dr Drury were potentially relevant to that issue.
counsel for the respondent advised the Tribunal that she was in the process of
preparing a proof of evidence for Dr Kapur,
which would incorporate Dr
Kapur’s opinion as expressed in his initial report of 4 February 2016. She
anticipated providing
the signed proof of evidence to the solicitors for the
18. Counsel for the respondent submitted that the reports of Dr
Drury and Associate Professor Boyce related to the question of whether
applicant had suffered any psychological or psychiatric condition, and as such
were not relevant to the referral before the
Tribunal which was only in
relation to the need for physiotherapy and medications.
Consideration
19. The Tribunal has the power to require production or any
document which it considers to be relevant and, subject to any lawful
privilege, to permit inspection of such document
20. Dealing first with the
report of Dr Kapur of the 4 February 2016, that original report is referenced by
Dr Kapur in his subsequent
report of 31 March 2017. Dr Kapur, in response to
virtually every question asked of him in the subsequent report, refers back to
the opinion contained in his earlier report. The earlier report of the 4
February 2016 is clearly relevant to a complete understanding
Kapur’s opinion, and no doubt covers matters that are not included in his
supplementary report, including for example
the history he took from the
applicant. Simply in terms of providing a complete understanding of Dr
Kapur’s opinion, and the
views expressed in his report of the 31 March
2017, which is relied upon by the respondent, I consider Dr Kapur’s report
the 4 February 2016 to be relevant to the issues brought before the Tribunal
in this referral.
21. In relation to the reports of Dr Drury and Associate
Professor Boyce, the respondent advised the applicant by letter of the 8
September 2016 that medical advice (referred to in the respondent’s letter
of the 1 July 2016) expressed the opinion that physiotherapy
treatment and
medications she was presently receiving were no longer required as a result of
the injury she sustained in the subject
motor accident. Those medical opinions
were referred to in the earlier letter of 1 July 2016 as having been obtained
very senior specialist medical practitioners that had examined the
applicant in 2016. I accept the applicant’s submission
that the inference
can be drawn that the three very senior specialist medical practitioners who had
independently examined the worker
were, indeed, Associate Professor Boyce, Dr
Drury, and Dr Kapur. Their opinions and advice have been said to have formed
of the respondent’s determination not to pay for physiotherapy
and medication, and it is difficult to see how the reports forming
the basis of
the respondent’s decision could not be relevant to the referral which is
presently before the Tribunal. On the
basis of the materials tendered by
counsel for the applicant, and having heard the parties, I am satisfied that the
reports of Associate
Professor Boyce and Dr Drury, prepared as a result of
independent medical examinations on 7 March 2016 and 10 May 2016 respectively
are likely to be relevant to Tribunal’s inquiry in relation to this
22. The power of the Tribunal does not extend to order of delivery
by the respondent of reports to the applicant, but I am satisfied
appropriate to require production to the Tribunal of the documents sought by
the applicant. There will be an order accordingly.
No claim of privilege has been made in relation to any of the
documents in question, but I direct that if any such claim is to be
respondent do so at the time that the documents are produced as ordered.
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (151 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter