URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASHPT/2020/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dr Stuart Lynch v Medical Board of Australia [2020] TASHPT 1 (19 May 2020)
[2020] TASHPT 1
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL
Dr Stuart Lynch, v Medical Board of Australia
MEDICAL BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
17 January 2020
DELIVERED ON:
19 May 2020
DECISION OF:
Deputy Chairperson Wilkins
CATCHWORDS:
Medical Board of Australia – immediate action to
suspend practitioner’s registration - whether sufficient evidence to
a reasonable belief that practitioner posed a serious risk to persons.
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law Act
s155, 156, 199, 202;
Tolman v Tasmanian Board of the Medical Board of
[2018] TASHPT 1
Syme v Medical Board of Australia (Review
& Regulation)
[2016] VCAT 2150
WD v Medical Board of Australia
[2013] QCAT 614
DETERMINATION:
The application for review is granted.
REPRESENTATION:
B McTaggart SC and C
Respondent:
S Taglieri SC
Solicitors:
HWL Ebsworth
Respondent:
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation
[2020] TASHPT 1
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
1. The applicant is a medical practitioner working as a general
practitioner in Tasmania.
2. On 4 November 2019 the applicant, Dr Lynch,
was notified that the Medical Board of Australia had decided to take immediate
under s156 of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (“the
National Law) to suspend his registration from practice.
3. Pursuant to s156
of the National Law, a National Board may (relevantly for the purposes of this
determination) take immediate action
against a health practitioner if the
National Board reasonably believes that –
(i) Because of the practitioner’s conduct, the
practitioner poses a serious risk to persons; and
(ii) It is necessary to
take immediate action to protect public health and safety.
4. If the Board decides that immediate action ought to be
taken, the options available to it are to suspend the practitioner’s
registration, or to impose conditions on the practitioner.
5. Pursuant to
s199(1)(h) of the National Law, Dr Lynch is entitled to appeal the decision of
the Board to suspend his registration.
He has done so. By virtue of
Health Practitioners Tribunal Act 2010
(Tas) an appeal under s191(1) of the
National Law is an application to this Tribunal for a review of the
Board’s decision.
Circumstances leading to the decision
6. In August 2015, AHPRA received a notification about Dr Lynch
which led (after immediate action being taken, and then an investigation)
AHPRA accepting an undertaking from him that restricted his contact with female
patients. That undertaking was in force until
early November 2018, when it was
removed from Dr Lynch’s registration. Whilst that undertaking was in
force, there were two
notifications against Dr Lynch in relation to breaches of
his undertaking.
• The first, in 2016, was in relation to Dr Lynch
speaking to the mother of a minor male patient in an inappropriate manner.
Board noted Dr Lynch’s health condition at the time, and considered that
even though there was a technical breach, Dr
Lynch had acted in good faith with
a view to ensuring compliance with conditions. The Board resolved to take no
further action.
• The second, in 2018, related to a failure by Dr Lynch
to comply with the protocol about the chaperone log, in circumstances
chaperone was present for a consultation, but the consultation was not recorded.
The Board decided to caution Dr Lynch “to
ensure that he complied with all
aspects of the restrictions imposed on his registration” particularly with
the requirement
to complete the chaperone log book for all contact with female
7. Then, in May 2019, AHPRA received two notifications in relation
to Dr Lynch’s conduct (“the AB notifications”).
notifications related to alleged boundary violations with a female patient. The
alleged boundary violations included inappropriate
physical contact, and
inappropriate commentary and conversation. AHPRA wrote to Dr Lynch on 8 July
2019, advising that the Board
proposed to take immediate action to suspend his
registration, and inviting his response. As part of a comprehensive response to
the allegations against him, provided through his solicitors, Dr Lynch proposed
that the Board accept an undertaking from him not
to consult with any female
patients, pending the completion of a full investigation. On 16 July 2019,
AHPRA determined to impose
gender restrictions on Dr Lynch, rather than
suspending his registration.
8. On 17 July 2019 AHPRA advised Dr Lynch,
through his solicitors, that an investigation was to be undertaken into the AB
notifications.
9. By letter to Dr Lynch’s solicitors on 8 October 2019,
AHPRA advised Dr Lynch that as a result of the investigation into the
notifications, the Board had resolved to refer Dr Lynch’s conduct to a
Performance and Professional Standards Panel under
s182 of the National Law.
The gender-based restrictions
10. The restrictions that came into force on 16 July 2019
included that (following the approval of a practice location) Dr Lynch was
to have any contact with female patients, and was to practise only from the
approved practice location.
11. For the purposes of the gender-based
restriction the following definitions (amongst others) were said to
is defined as any role, whether remunerated or not, in which the individual uses
their skills and knowledge as a medical practitioner
in their profession. It is
not restricted to the provision of direct clinical care and includes using the
knowledge and skills of
a medical practitioner in a direct non clinical
relationship with a client, working in management, administration, education,
advisory, regulatory or policy development roles and any other roles
that impact on safe, effective delivery of services in the medical
profession.
is defined as any individual awaiting,
requiring, or receiving the professional services of the practitioner or a
registered health
practitioner within the same place of practice as the
practitioner and any spouse, partner, parent, family member or guardian/carer
this individual.
‘Contact with a patient’
includes consultation,
interview, examination, assessment, prescribing for, advising, or otherwise
treating a patient, whether it
is in person or on a communication device.
Notification - the plaster cast incident
12. Those gender-based restrictions were in place when, on 27
August 2019, AHPRA received a notification from the manager of the medical
practice where Dr Lynch was working. The substance of the notification was that
on 22 August 2019, Dr Lynch had responded to a request
from another practitioner
within the practice to demonstrate the use of a plaster saw on a female patient
to remove an arm cast.
13. Brief correspondence was provided to AHPRA from
the other doctor and the nurse involved in this matter. They confirmed that Dr
Lynch, at the request of the other doctor, demonstrated the use of the plaster
saw and assisted with removing the cast from the female
patient. No other staff
member was available at the time (it was about 8:00am) to demonstrate or assist,
and the patient was keen
to have the cast removed so she could go to
The Board’s proposed action in relation to the plaster
cast incident
14. On 7 October 2019 the Board decided that Dr Lynch had
failed to comply with the gender-based restrictions by having contact with
female patient in the presence of two health practitioners while demonstrating
the use of a plaster saw.
15. Dr Lynch was advised by letter dated 25 October
2019. The Board noted the two historical instances of non-compliance with
regulatory action by the Board relating to boundary violations with
patients, occurred during the period from August 2015 to November
there were gender-based undertakings in place.
16. In relation to the
plaster cast incident, the Board considered Dr Lynch’s professional
conduct in failing to comply with
the gender-based restrictions was
unsatisfactory, and that the two earlier instances of non-compliance, together
with the current
failure to comply with gender-based restrictions indicated a
pattern of non-compliance by Dr Lynch, and a lack of insight and appreciation
him of the seriousness of his conduct and the role of the regulator. The Board
proposed to issue a caution. It advised Dr Lynch
that it was concerned the
occurrence of similar instances of contact with female patients might go
undetected, and considered a caution
to be the minimum regulatory force
necessary to mitigate the risk he posed. The caution was said, if issued, to be
intended to act
as a deterrent to the Dr Lynch in engaging in similar behaviour
in the future.
17. Dr Lynch was invited to make a submission to the Board
before the Board decided whether to take no action, the proposed action
caution) or other action.
18. In between the time that the Board had
reached its decision on 7 October 2019 and written to Dr Lynch on 25 October
2019, AHPRA
received another notification from the manager at the medical centre
where Dr Lynch worked. The notification indicated that Dr Lynch
observed examining the ear of a nurse who worked in the medical centre.
Notification - the ear examination
19. Following the notification from the practice manager, AHPRA
The practice manager advised that on Friday 11 October 2019, the assistant
practice manager observed Dr Lynch looking in the ear
of one of the nurses at
the practice. On Monday 14 October 2019 she raised this with the practice
manager who then investigated
and notified AHPRA. The practice manager advised
AHPRA that the nurse mentioned to Dr Lynch on 11 October 2019 that she was
unwell and he offered to have a look at her. The contact took place in
a treatment room next to the nurses’ station which
was open to observation
by the assistant practice manager as she walked past. The nurse in question was
not historically a patient
of Dr Lynch, nor a patient of the medical centre. Dr
Lynch made no clinical notes in relation to the contact with the nurse.
Action following ear examination notification
20. AHPRA wrote to Dr Lynch through his solicitors on 28
October 2019 with advice that the Board was proposing to take immediate action
to suspend Dr Lynch’s registration. AHPRA referred to the gender-based
restrictions in place and it advised that the Board
had formed a reasonable
belief that because of his conduct, Dr Lynch posed a serious risk to persons
because there were objective
circumstances that supported a reasonable belief
that he had failed to comply with the gender-based restrictions already in
An invitation was extended to Dr Lynch to provide a submission in
relation to the proposed immediate action.
21. A written response was sent to
AHPRA by Dr Lynch’s solicitors on his behalf dated 31 October 2019. In
relation to the ear
examination issue, Dr Lynch provided some more information.
Dr Lynch said that on 11 October 2019 he was examining a male patient’s
wound. The patient was in the treatment room and was lying on the bed. The
wound dressing was being tended to by a registered nurse
together with a student
nurse. Another enrolled nurse was present but not taking part in that process.
Because of the presence
of the student nurse there was some discussion of an
educational nature between Dr Lynch, the registered nurse and the student nurse
in relation to the wound and wound care generally. Dr Lynch had inspected the
wound and was satisfied that it was appropriate for
it to be re-dressed. He was
still chatting and about to leave the treatment room area on his way to another
patient when the registered
nurse, speaking to both he and the student nurse,
said in effect that she had a sore ear. Dr Lynch said that he communicated to
both the registered nurse and the student nurse that he would have a look at it.
He looked inside the registered nurse’s ear
with an otoscope and then
palpated the external ear/jaw whilst demonstrating to the student nurse the
location of the temporomandibular
joint and made some observations the clinical
significance of pain in particular areas. Dr Lynch said he saw the whole
as predicated on the education of the student nurse and consistent with
the spirit of the conversation that had gone before about
22. In relation to both the ear examination issue and the plaster
cast issue, it was submitted there had been a misunderstanding on
Lynch’s part which had resulted in the two breaches. Both had involved
his interaction with other members of staff and
not people who were his
‘patients’ in the everyday meaning of the word. He did not
appreciate that interaction with
professional staff for the purpose of education
and/or assisting them as requested in situations which would not, as a matter of
everyday construction, constitute “contact with a patient”. Dr
Lynch said that there was absolutely no mistake on his
part at the time the
submissions were being made, and he undertook to be diligently vigilant when it
came to those situations in
the future.
23. As a matter of general submission
in relation to the proposed immediate action, it was submitted that Dr Lynch
(and the other
parties to the plaster cast and ear examination events) did not,
at the time that the events occurred, consider them to be violations
protocol which every party knew to be in place. It was submitted that
“wilful disregard requires a deliberate act where
a perpetrator has
knowledge of the risk of injury but even in light of that knowledge proceeds
without regard to the risks. It is
with hindsight and a broad and inclusive
view of the protocol that breach was established”. The Board was asked to
its view that the two events of non-compliance, together with the two
historical breaches, demonstrate a pattern of conduct which
poses a serious risk
to persons and a wilful disregard for the restrictions upon his registration.
The Board was further asked to
reconsider its proposal to suspend Dr
Lynch’s registration in light of the submissions.
The Board’s decision to take immediate action
24. AHPRA advised Dr Lynch on 4 November 2019 that the Board
had decided to take immediate action to suspend his registration. He
was advised
that the Board continued to form a reasonable belief that Dr Lynch posed a
serious risk to persons because there were
objective circumstances that
supported a reasonable belief that Dr Lynch had failed comply with the
restrictions on his registration
– that is, he had contact with female
patients on 22 August 2019 [the plaster cast incident] and 11 October 2019 [the
ear examination].
The identified serious risk arising from his failure to
comply with the restrictions was a risk to all female patients of causing
emotional and/or psychological harm, and/or jeopardising the safe and effective
provision of care of female patients because the
gender-based restriction in
place were inadequate to protect the public.
25. The correspondence from
AHPRA outlined the information that the Board had placed weight upon (in
relation to the two notifications),
and the matters put forward by Dr Lynch in
his submission.
26. The correspondence noted:
Lynch submitted that he did not consider at the time they occurred that the two
incidents were breaches of the restrictions
as he considered that they did not
amount to ‘contact with a patient’ because they involved interaction
with professional
staff for the purposes of education. Dr Lynch submitted that
the two incidents were only considered as breaches when they were reviewed
hindsight and with a broad interpretation of the protocol
The Board considered that the restrictions currently imposed on Dr
Lynch’s registration were very clearly defined and have been
appropriately
communicated to him in relation to the definitions of ‘patient’,
‘contact’ and ‘female’.
The Board considered that for
Dr Lynch to suggest that the restrictions can be ‘broadly
interpreted’ indicates that
he is prepared to test the boundaries of the
restrictions, rather than taking steps to ensure that he strictly complies with
restrictions.
The Board considered that Dr Lynch’s failure to comply with the
restrictions imposed on his registration; his submission that
consider his conduct amounted to a breach at the time it occurred; his
suggestion that the restrictions are open to interpretation
subject to the
nature of his interactions with patients or the identity of the patient;
indicates that Dr Lynch has no regard for
the restrictions and therefore the
identified serious risk is not mitigated at this time.
The Board also noted that Dr Lynch did not identify in his submission what
steps he intended to take to ensure his compliance with
the restrictions in
The Board considered that Dr Lynch’s submission did not displace the
Board’s reasonable belief that because of his conduct,
he poses a serious
risk to persons.”
27. In relation to the necessity to take immediate action to
protect public health or safety, AHPRA advised that the Board continued
the view that the two instances of non- compliance with previous regulatory
action (during the period of restrictions between
2015 and 2018), together with
the current failure to comply with gender-based restrictions on two occasions,
indicated a pattern
of non-compliance with restrictions that were imposed on his
registration to mitigate the serious risk of Dr Lynch engaging in boundary
violations with female patients. The correspondence noted that Dr Lynch
“submitted that the historical breaches were minor
and that his conduct
does not demonstrate a pattern of conduct which poses a serious risk to
persons.” The Board considered
that Dr Lynch “appears to minimise
his behaviour and has little insight into the risk posed by his
28. The correspondence from AHPRA went on as follows:
Board continued to consider that Dr Lynch’s failure to comply with the
restrictions imposed on his registration,
on two separate occasions, within
three months of those restrictions being imposed, demonstrates a wilful
disregard for the restrictions.
In particular, the Board noted that on 11
October 2019, Dr Lynch proposed that he see [the registered nurse] to examine
in circumstances where he knew or should have known that this was in
contravention of the gender-based conditions. This conduct
indicates a
significant lack of insight of the risk of harm that his conduct may cause, and
a lack of appreciation of the seriousness
of his conduct, and the role of the
Dr Lynch’s conduct in failing to comply with restrictions currently
imposed on his registration on two separate occasions demonstrates
current conditions are inadequate to address the serious risk identified by the
Board which formed the basis of the Board’s
reasonable belief that it was
necessary to take immediate action and impose conditions on Dr Lynch’s
registration, which will
remain in place.
Where there is objective information that a practitioner has not complied
with conditions imposed on their registration, the Board
considered the
identified serious risk cannot be mitigated by the imposition of further
conditions or restrictions. As such, the
Board formed a reasonable belief that
in all of the above circumstances, the minimum regulatory force appropriate to
address the
identified serious risk is to suspend Dr Lynch’s
registration.”
What happened after the immediate action?
29. On 20 November 2019, AHPRA advised Dr Lynch via letter to
his solicitors that the Board had reconsidered some of its decisions.
repealed the decision to refer the AB notifications to a Performance and
Professional Standards Panel. It had also repealed
its decision to caution him
in relation to the plaster cast incident. Dr Lynch was advised that the AB
notifications, and the two
breaches of conditions (the plaster cast incident and
the ear examination) were to be referred to the Tribunal because the Board
reasonably believed that Dr Lynch had behaved in a way that constituted
professional misconduct.
Grounds of appeal
30. In appealing the decision of the Board to take the
immediate action, as contained in the correspondence from AHPRA dated 4 November
2019, Dr Lynch put forward two grounds of appeal as follows:
respondent’s belief that the facts of the alleged breaches gave rise to or
demonstrated any risk to the public that
the applicant would either breach the
protocol in conducting his own practice, or practice in a manner that sustained
the respondent’s
“serious risk”
reasonably held.
(2) The decision was excessive, being substantially more than what was
required to protect the public.
31. In his appeal, Dr Lynch sought orders including that the
Tribunal, under s202 of the National Law, amend the decision to suspend
registration, or substitute another decision, and order that he be cautioned in
respect of the two alleged breaches, and the
gender-based restrictions upon his
registration be reaffirmed.
Additional evidence
32. Dr Lynch had undergone independent assessment with Dr
Michael Evenhuis, consultant forensic psychiatrist, on 6 May 2015. Dr
report, to Dr Lynch’s solicitors, was put into evidence.
I understand that the report was commissioned at the time that Dr
responding to the notifications that led to gender-based undertakings that were
eventually released in 2018. It was Dr
Evenhuis’ opinion at the time that
Dr Lynch was suffering from a major depressive episode. Dr Evenhuis also
identified traits
suggestive of autism along with obsessional personality traits
and difficulties with self-esteem and emotional regulation. He considered
Dr Lynch’s autistic traits would impact upon his ability to engage in
interpersonal, social and professional relationships.
Dr Evenhuis felt that Dr
Lynch’s ability to function at a high level was a testament to his
intelligence and ability to analyse,
rather than intrinsically being able to
understand social situations.
33. Dr Lynch was also assessed by Dr Philip
Reid, psychiatrist, on 1 October 2018. This assessment was requested by AHPRA,
in response
to Dr Lynch’s request that the gender-based undertakings in
place at that time be lifted. Dr Reid was provided with the report
Evenhuis. Dr Reid’s report, dated 16 October 2018, was put into evidence.
Dr Reid considered that the depressive condition
identified by Dr Evenhuis was
in remission. He agreed that, personality wise, Dr Lynch had some deficits in
his capacity for social
communication, but Dr Reid thought that Dr Lynch had
gained some insight into past behaviour that had caused offence, which had led
to behavioural change. Dr Reid commented that he did not consider Dr Lynch to
pose any risk to a female patient group.
34. I had the benefit of Dr Lynch
giving evidence in these proceedings. It would be fair to say that Dr
Lynch’s demeanour whilst
doing so gave an impression of him being
intelligent and conscientious, but slightly socially awkward, and accorded with
the descriptions
in the reports of Dr Evenhuis and Dr Reid.
35. Dr Lynch
outlined the steps he and the practice he works in had taken to operate within
the gender-based restrictions. I accept
that Dr Lynch has made concerted
efforts to comply with the restrictions. He said he was very happy to not have
to deal with female
36. In cross examination, it was put to Dr
Lynch that he ought to have sought clarification from AHPRA if there was any
doubt about
whether he might be in breach of the conditions on his practise by
engaging in educational treatment or examination of a female patient.
that he had made an attempt to seek clarification from AHPRA about an issue
arising as part of the gender-based restrictions
in September 2019 (at a point
in time between the plaster cast incident and the ear examination incident).
The query he raised was
in relation to receipt of written information from
(female) third parties. He said that he had received no response from AHPRA,
including up until the time that he was giving evidence in the Tribunal.
What is the Tribunal’s role?
37. An appeal under s199 of the National Law to the Tribunal
requires the Tribunal to review the Board’s decision to impose
action. It is neither a hearing de novo, nor an appeal in the strict sense. It
is hybrid where the Tribunal considers
the material before the Board but the
parties have the opportunity to present additional evidence bearing directly on
the Board’s
decision. See Tolman v Tasmanian Board of the Medical Board
of Australia
[2018] TASHPT 1
applying Kozanoglu v Pharmacy Board of Australia
[2012] VSCA 295.
38. This application for a review requires the Tribunal to
determine whether there is sufficient evidence, including the evidence
the Board’s Immediate Action Committee and any additional evidence
appropriately before the Tribunal, to form a reasonable
belief that Dr
Lynch’s conduct posed a serious risk to persons, and that as a consequence
immediate action, in this case, suspension
of Dr Lynch’s registration,
ought to be taken to protect public health and safety.
39. The procedure of
the Tribunal for reviewing decisions of Immediate Action Committees has been the
subject of discussion in a number
of cases, summarised by Syme v Medical Board
of Australia (Review and Regulation)
[2016] VCAT 2150
at paragraph 31:
power to act under s156(1)(a) in enlivened where the Board (or the Tribunal on
review) ‘reasonably believes’
that a registered health
practitioner’s conduct, performance or health poses a serious risk to
persons and it is necessary
to take immediate action to protect public health or
The analysis to be undertaken when looking at the ‘reasonable
belief’ requirement in s156(1)(a) was considered by the
Court of Appeal of
the Supreme Court of Western Australia in Bernadt v Medical Board of Australia
[2013] WASCA 259.
In Bernadt the Court said there were three
components:
the practitioner’s conduct, performance or health (‘the factual
substratum’);
practitioner poses a serious risk to persons (‘the first evaluative
assessment’); and
necessary to take immediate action to protect public health or safety
(‘the second evaluative assessment’).”
40. The facts do not need to be proved on the balance of
probabilities but there must be proven objective circumstances sufficient
justify the belief.
41. In WD v Medical Board of Australia
[2013] QCAT 614
the Tribunal summarised the approach general relevant to the merits of an
Immediate Action Committee decision. The approach taken
by the Queensland Civil
and Administrative Tribunal in that decision has been adopted and endorsed
subsequently by QCAT (Ord v Nursing
and Midwifery Board of Australia
[2014] QCAT
; Chaudry v Medical Board of Australian (No. 2)
[2014] QCAT 288
, and by the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal in MLNO v MBA
[2012] VCAT
42. The approach summarised by QCAT in WD v Medical Board of Australia
was as follows:
• An immediate action order does not entail a detailed
• It requires action on an urgent basis because of the need to
protect public health and safety;
• The taking of immediate action does
not require proof of the conduct; but rather where there is a reasonable belief
registrant poses a serious risk;
• An immediate action order
might be based on material that would not conventionally be considered as
strictly evidentiary in
nature, for example, complaints and
allegations;
• The mere fact and seriousness of the charges, supported
by the untested statements of witnesses, in a particular case, might
sufficient to create the necessary reasonable belief as to the existence of
• The material available should be carefully scrutinised in order
to determine the weight to be attached to it.
• A complaint that is
trivial or misconceived on its face would clearly not be given
• The nature of the allegations will be highly relevant to the
issue of whether the order is justified.
The ‘factual substratum’ in this case
43. The material before me goes much further than mere
complaints or allegations. In this case there is little or no conflict about
the circumstances surrounding the complaints of breaches of the gender-based
restrictions. The evidence given by Dr Lynch about
those surrounding
circumstances, which was essentially not challenged, added some context from his
perspective.
44. Dr Lynch maintained his position, which had been put to the
Board at the time of making submissions in relation to proposed sanction,
on each occasion the conduct in question took place in circumstances where the
education or training of colleagues or students
was uppermost in his mind. He
has not conceded that there has been any breach of the of the gender-based
restrictions, but he has
proposed that, to eliminate any uncertainty, he
confirms that he will make sure that no part of his practice will involve any
of education or training.
45. It was submitted on behalf of the Board
that even if Dr Lynch’s explanation about the circumstances surrounding
notifications was accepted, his conduct would still constitute a breach
of the gender-based conditions upon him, because by Dr Lynch
professional services to the two recipients of those services (the patient with
the plaster cast, and the registered nurse),
they each became his patients. It
was submitted that in relation to each of those people, at the moment each one
became Dr Lynch’s
patient, he was in breach of the conditions.
satisfied that Dr Lynch’s conduct in relation to the plaster cast incident
and the ear examination incident occurred.
The facts of the conduct which were
the subject of the notifications have essentially been conceded by Dr Lynch.
Although it is
clear that the Board has an argument to say that in each case, Dr
Lynch breached the gender-based restrictions that had been placed
upon him, I am
not required to make any final determination in that regard.
47. What I am
required to do is make an assessment as to whether I am satisfied that, in the
light of Dr Lynch’s conduct, I
have a reasonable belief that Dr Lynch
poses a serious risk to persons, and that it is necessary to take immediate
action to protect
public health and safety.
A reasonable belief?
48. On behalf of the Board, it was submitted that Dr
Lynch’s conduct shows wilful or reckless disregard for the conditions on
his registration and/or an inability to recognise what those conditions mean
and/or an inability to comply with those conditions.
It is submitted that Dr
Lynch has a history of non-compliance with restrictive conditions placed upon
his practise, and because
of a pattern of non-compliance where gender-based
restrictions are in place, there is an ongoing risk of serious emotional or
psychological
harm to female patients, necessitating the immediate action that
was taken to suspend his registration..
49. An allegation of a breach of a
gender-based restriction that is in place as a condition of practice is a
serious matter. However,
as a matter of common sense, it does not necessarily
follow that every breach will necessarily lead to a risk of further breaches,
and consequential harm to patients. That much must be assumed by the fact that
the Board originally intended to caution Dr Lynch
in relation to the plaster
cast incident. I infer that at that stage (before the ear examination
notification was made), it was
not considered that the conduct complained could
amount to a serious risk to persons so that immediate action ought to be
contemplated.
50. Dr Lynch’s position in relation to the plaster cast
incident and the ear examination has been set out, that is, he says
at the time
he did not stop to consider whether he was providing professional services to
female patients, and was therefore, on
his understanding at the time, not in
breach of the conditions. Irrespective of whether his argument is ultimately
accepted by the
Tribunal following an arbitrated hearing, Dr Lynch has confirmed
that he will be vigilant in avoiding any situation involving what
otherwise have considered to be education or demonstration.
51. I understand
the argument put forward on behalf of the Board that a history of demonstrated
inability or unwillingness by a practitioner
to comply with restrictions on that
person’s practice would support an argument that there is a likelihood of
future risk.
However, in this case, it is simply too long a bow to draw, to say
that Dr Lynch’s conduct – being his conduct in the
plaster cast
incident notification and the ear examination notification, on a background of
the two instances of non-compliance with
gender-based restrictions in 2016 and
2018 – amounts to a serious risk to a person or persons.
52. Because
the evidence before the Tribunal in relation to the conduct of the Dr Lynch does
not support a reasonable belief that,
as a result of his conduct he poses a
serious risk to persons, it follows that immediate action to suspend his
registration is not
Disposition
53. A decision of the National Board under s156 of the National
Law to suspend a practitioner’s registration is an appellable
under s199(1) of the National Law.
54. Section 159(2) of the National Law
provides that a decision of a National Board to take immediate action in
relation to a registered
health practitioner continues to have effect until the
earlier of a number of things occur, one of which is that the decision is
aside on appeal.
55. After the hearing in relation to an appellable
decision, s202(1) of the National Law provides that the responsible tribunal may
confirm the appellable decision; amend the appellable decision; or substitute
another decision for the appellable decision. Under
s202(2), the responsible
tribunal, in substituting another decision for the appellable decision, has the
same powers as the entity
that made the appellable decision.
56. The powers
of a National Board, in taking immediate action, are set out in s155 of the
National Law. In the context of this case,
“immediate action” means
the suspension, or imposition of a condition on, a health practitioner’s
registration;
or accepting an undertaking from the health practitioner, or
accepting the surrender of the health practitioner’s registration.
57. Because I have determined that the requirements of s156 in relation to
the taking of immediate action have not been complied with,
it is appropriate
for me to set aside the decision of the Board to take immediate action to
suspend Dr Lynch’s registration.
The gender-based restrictions imposed by
the Board as immediate action in July 2019 were not referred to the Tribunal as
this appeal and are not the subject of my determination. Accordingly
they continue to have effect.
58. In referring the Board’s immediate
action decision to suspend his registration to the Tribunal, Dr Lynch also
order for costs. I will hear the parties in that regard if it is
59. I note that at the commencement of these proceedings, the
Board sought orders (which were not opposed) in relation to the publication
identities of certain persons. Those orders were made, and are reflected in the
Tribunal’s orders as a result of this determination.
DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (201 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter