URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASHPT/2020/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Medical Board of Australia v Dr Paul David Thompson [2020] TASHPT 2 (15 June 2020)
[2020] TASHPT 2
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL
Medical Board of Australia v Dr Paul David Thompson
[2020] TASHPT 2
MEDICAL BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
THOMPSON, Dr Paul David
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
20 May 2020 and by written submissions
DELIVERED ON:
15 June 2020
DECISION OF:
Chairperson A. Clues
CATCHWORDS:
Power of the Tribunal to make findings and determinations
for behaviour/conduct that occurred prior to its commencement date on 1
2010 – practitioner registered under corresponding prior Act and currently
registered under National Law- expiration of
savings and transitional
provisions.
Sections 3, 5, 23, 36, 70, 135, 138, 139, 160(1), 193(1), 288, 289;
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law 2009 (Qld);
Health Practitioners Tribunal Act 2010
; Regulation 30 of the
Practitioner Regulation National Law Regulation
(National Law Regulations);
Section 18 of the
Health Practitioners Regulation National Law (Tasmania) Act
Dental Board of Australia v Dr Ho
[2019] VCAT 467
Board of Australia v Abdullah
[2016] VCAT 19
Maxwell v Murphy
Kennedy v Medical Practitioners Board of Victoria
Walton v McBride
[1989] NSWCA 222
Geschke v Del-Monte Home
Furnishes Pty Ltd
[1981] VicRp 80
[1981] VR 856
Kahler v Nurses Registration Board &
(Unreported) NSWSC, 21/2/95, BC9504318.
DETERMINATION:
1. The Board has the power to initiate an investigation
and to determine to refer the conduct of the respondent to the Tribunal for
2. The Tribunal has the power to hear and deal with the conduct of
the respondent under Part 8 of the National Law.
3. The Tribunal has the power to make findings and determinations available
to it under the National Law.
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
Solicitors:
J. Shears (Australian Health Practitioner Regulation
Respondent:
A. Vince (Murdoch Clarke)
[2020] TASHPT 2
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. On 5 March 2020 the Medical Board of Australia (The Board)
referred to the Health Practitioners Tribunal (the Tribunal) pursuant
s193(1)(a)(i) of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law 2009 (Qld) (the
National Law) and s21(1)(a) of the Health Practitioners
Tribunal Act 2010 (the
HPT Act) conduct of the respondent which it asserts amounts to professional
misconduct. The National Law has
been adopted by the Tasmanian Parliament and
applies as a law of this State pursuant to s4 of the Health Practitioner
National Law (Tasmania) Act 2010.
2. Section 193(1) of the
National Law relevantly provides:
National Board must refer a matter about a registered health practitioner or
student to a responsible tribunal if –
(a) for a registered health practitioner, the Board reasonably believes,
based on a notification or for any other reason –
(i) the practitioner has behaved in a way that constitutes professional
misconduct;”
3. On 1 July 2010:
(a) The National Law commenced and the Medical Practitioners
Registration Act 1996 (MPR Act) was repealed.
(b) The former Medical
Complaints Tribunal ceased to exist and was supplanted by the Board established
pursuant to s36 of the National
4. The Board is assisted by the Australian Health Practitioner
Regulation Agency (AHPRA) which was established pursuant to s23 of
the National
Law to provide, among other things, administrative assistance and support to the
National Board and the Board’s
committees in exercising their
5. The notification in relation to the respondent was made after 1
July 2010 but the conduct that the notification refers to occurred
MPR Act was in force and prior to 1 July 2010, when the National Law
6. Prior to 30 June 2015, r30 of the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law Regulation (National Law Regulations) would have
to this case.
7. Regulation 30 provides that:
clause applies if –
(a) the National Agency receives a notification about a registered health
practitioner or student; and
(b) the subject matter of the notification happened while the practitioner or
student was registered in a health profession under
a corresponding prior
(2) Proceedings may be taken under Part 8 of the Law in relation to the
registered health practitioner’s or student’s
behaviour while
registered under the corresponding prior Act as if the person were registered
under the Law by the National Board
established for the health
profession.
(3) However, subregulation (2) applies only to the extent –
(a) a notification about the registered health practitioner’s or
student’s behaviour could have been made under the corresponding
(b) proceedings of that type could have been taken under the corresponding
This clause is a savings and transitional provision. Under section 305 of
the Law it expires on 30 June 2015.”
8. Regulation 30 was a savings and transitional provision which
expired on 30 June 2015. The notification about the respondent’s
the investigation into that conduct and the decision to refer the matter to the
Tribunal were all made after the expiry
of that provision. Therefore, r30 does
not apply to this complaint.
9. The question then becomes does this Tribunal
continue to have jurisdiction to deal with notifications that would have been
with under r30 if it had not expired on 30 June 2015. If the answer to
that question is yes, does the Tribunal have the power to
make findings and
determinations that were available at the time of the conduct under the MPR Act
or does it have the power to make
findings and determinations that are available
to it under the National Law?
10. If r30 had not expired on 30 June 2015 then as a result of
r30(2) and (3), the Board would have had the power to determine to
initiate an
investigation and to determine to refer the conduct to the Tribunal for a
hearing. Pursuant to that regulation the Tribunal
would have had the power to
make findings and determinations that were available at the time of the conduct
under the MPR Act.
11. Under the National Law, the Tribunal has jurisdiction
with respect to allegations arising against a registered health practitioner
conduct while the person was registered under the National law
12. The Tribunal also has jurisdiction with respect to allegations if
a person has engaged in conduct while a registered health practitioner
National Law and the registration has come to an end (s138).
13. Further, the
Tribunal has jurisdiction with respect to allegations if a person has engaged in
conduct while a registered health
practitioner under a corresponding prior Act
and the registration has come to an end, and that person has not registered
National Law (s139).
14. With respect to the respondent,
(a) Engaged in conduct between 7 November 1996 and March
1997 while a registered health practitioner under a corresponding prior Act
(b) Is currently a registered health practitioner under the
National Law.
15. Sections 138 and 139 do not apply to the respondent. Given
the expiration of r30, does the Tribunal have jurisdiction concerning
engaged in by the respondent while he was registered under the MPR Act and is
currently registered under the National Law?
16. In the case of Dental Board
of Australia v Dr Ho
[2019] VCAT 467
, VCAT had to determine whether it had
arising from
conduct he engaged in while he was not registered.
17. In that
case Deputy President Proctor reviewed the relevant legislation. He made the
following relevant comments at [20]-[38]:
The objects of the National Law include, in s 3(2)(a) to provide for the
protection of the public by ensuring that only
health practitioners who are
suitably trained and qualified to practise in a competent and ethical manner are
registered.
[21] Part 8 of the National Law concerns the ‘Health Performance and
Conduct’ of practitioners. It provides for a scheme
for the protection of
the public and the profession, including notification of conduct by registered
practitioners, investigation
of registered practitioners, and taking regulatory
action against a registered practitioner where appropriate.
Text of s 193(1)(a)(i)
[22] Section 193 confers relevant jurisdiction,
relevantly saying:
193 Matters to be referred to responsible tribunal
(1) A National Board must refer a matter about a registered health
practitioner or student to a responsible tribunal if—
(a) for a registered health practitioner, the Board reasonably believes,
based on a notification or for any other reason—
(i) the practitioner has behaved in a way that constitutes professional
misconduct; ...
[23] The word ‘practitioner’ in s 193(1)(a)(i) apparently means
registered health practitioner.
[24] Section 5 of the National Law defines ‘registered health
practitioner’ to relevantly mean an individual who is registered
National Law to practice a health profession.
[25] The words ‘has behaved’ literally reach back to past
behaviour, either while the practitioner was registered or before
question is whether ‘has behaved’ with reference to a
‘registered health practitioner’ is limited
to past behaviour while
a registered health practitioner.
[26] Section 193(1)(a)(i) does not appear to contain any express or implied
limitation that the behaviour the subject of the referral
to VCAT must have
occurred at a time that the practitioner was registered under the National Law.
If the Parliament had intended
such a limitation, it could have easily included
that in the legislation.
[27] That is unsurprising, given that behaviour by a registered health
practitioner, including when the person was unregistered, may
give rise to a
need to act with respect to the practitioner’s registration under Part 8
(see below).
[28] The lack of a limitation to the respective
reach of the words ‘has behaved’ is in the context that the
generally conferred by s 193(1) includes conduct when a person was
not a registered health practitioner.
[29] This is illustrated by s 193(1)(a)(ii). It says a National Board must
refer a matter about a registered health practitioner to
a responsible tribunal
if it reasonably believes:
the practitioner’s registration was improperly obtained because the
practitioner or someone else gave the Board information
of a document that was
false or misleading in a material particular; ...
[30] This must extend to conduct by a registered practitioner, in the process
of obtaining registration, before he or she was registered.
[31] This analysis is reinforced by definition (c) of ‘professional
misconduct’ in s 5 of the National Law:
(c) conduct of the practitioner, whether occurring in connection with the
practice of the health practitioner’s profession or
not, that is
inconsistent with the practitioner being a fit and proper person to hold
registration in the profession.
[32] Meaning (c) includes in its scope conduct, ‘whether occurring in
connection with the practice of the health practitioner’s
profession or
[33] This includes in the definition conduct unconnected to the
practitioner’s profession which may bear on his or her fitness
registration and for this reason may be conduct that requires regulatory action
under Part 8. There is no reason to limit
that ‘unconnected conduct’
to conduct when the person was a registered health practitioner.
[34] Related to this, s 5, in part defines ‘unprofessional
conduct’ of a registered health practitioner to mean:
... professional conduct that is of a lesser standard than that which might
reasonably be expected of the health practitioner by the
public or the
practitioner’s professional peers, and includes—
(a) a contravention by the practitioner of this Law, whether or not the
practitioner has been prosecuted for, or convicted of, an
offence in relation to
the contravention; and ...
(c) the conviction of the practitioner for an offence under another Act, the
nature of which may affect the practitioner’s suitability
to continue to
practise the profession; and
[35] In these and in the other elements of this definition, again there is no
express limit that the conduct must have occurred at
a time that the registered
practitioner was registered under the National Law.
[36] Concerning meaning (a) and contraventions of the National Law, there
appears no reason to exclude from the definition the scenario
of a currently
registered health practitioner’s conduct while unregistered, such as
carrying out ‘restricted dental acts’
in contravention of s 121 of
the National Law, which, separate to issues of professional misconduct and
unprofessional conduct, is
a breach of the National Law and is an
[37] Concerning meaning (c), the inclusion of “the conviction of the
practitioner for an offence under another Act, the nature
of which may affect
the ‘practitioner’s suitability to continue to practice the
profession’, there appears no reason
to exclude conduct while not
registered, leading to conviction which could well be relevant to suitability to
be registered.
[38] For example, a now registered health practitioner may be, while a
registered health practitioner, convicted for historical sex
offending, long
before being registered. It is unlikely Parliament intended that a conviction
with respect to that long-ago conduct
could not constitute unprofessional
18. In the decision of Dental Board of Australia v Dr Ho
(supra) the case of Lewis v Prosthetists and Orthotists Board
[2001] EWCA Civ
was referred to. In that case Lord Justice Waller (with whom Clarke and Laws
LLJ agreed) concluded at [35]:
“Thus it seems to me that simply
pointing to the time at which it is suggested the conduct complained of took
place [before
being registered] cannot lead to the conclusion that the
disciplinary committee has no jurisdiction to consider whether [the health
practitioner] had been guilty of infamous conduct in a professional
Deputy President Proctor held that “The same reasoning
should apply to the National Law.” As a result VCAT had jurisdiction
deal with the complaint against Dr Ho.
19. On behalf of the Board it was
submitted there are no provisions in Part 8 (Divisions 2 to 14) of the National
Law which expressly
limit the Part 8 process to behaviour occurring after the
commencement of the National Law. Section 144 relates to voluntary notification,
it has no temporal limitation. Section 160(1) relates to the grounds upon which
the Board may initiate an investigation, prior behaviour
is not precluded. The
Board submits that the scheme has been set up so that jurisdiction over a
practitioner’s behaviour under
Part 8 arises because of the
practitioner’s current registration under the National Law not because of
the date of the questioned
behaviour or conduct.
20. Sections 138 and 139 are
exceptions to that general observation. Section 138 ensures that practitioners
cannot avoid notifications
and proceedings by deregistering themselves and
enables the Board to consider the appropriate course for protection of the
unhindered by concerns regarding the status of the practitioner’s
registration. Section 139 ensures that action can be taken
against practitioners
who have never been registered under the National Law for behaviour that
occurred whilst they were registered
under a corresponding prior
21. Sections 79 and 135 require the Board to consider prior behaviour.
Section 79 requires the Board to check an applicant’s
criminal history
upon receiving an application for registration. Pursuant to section 135, the
Board has the power to obtain a criminal
history report at any time.
behalf of the Board it is submitted that it would not be consistent with the
context of the above mentioned provisions and
it would not best achieve the
National Law’s object of public protection if Part 8 was read down so as
to apply only to behaviour
of a registered health practitioner after the
commencement of the National Law
Regulation 30
23. The argument urged upon the Tribunal on behalf of the
respondent in relation to r30 is outlined in the respondent’s submissions
dated 22 April 2020 at paragraphs 19 to 25 which state as follows:
“19. Regulation
30 applies to a practitioner who was registered under a corresponding prior Act
and who is registered under
the National Law. That is Dr
to the power granted by s245 of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
Regulations was promulgated.
30(2) provides that proceedings may be taken under Part 8 of the Law in relation
to the registered health practitioner’s...behaviour
while registered under
the corresponding prior Act as if the person were registered under the Law by
the National Board established
for the health profession.
30 creates a statutory fiction whereby Dr Thompson is treated as registered
under the National Law in 1996 (the time of
the relevant behaviour).
that fiction, or a provision such as s139, the behaviour would not be
justiciable under the National Law.
s305 of the National Law r30 expired on 30 June 2015; s305(3) and thereby
removed any express provision for the National Law to
retrospectively affect the
accrued liability of Dr Thompson.
Notification
of the behaviour was not made until after 30 June 2015. The fiction had ceased
to apply. There was no power to deal
notification.”
24. During oral submissions counsel for the respondent stated
that if the Board received notification after 30 June 2015 (when r30
that a registered health practitioner had been convicted of a murder that he or
she committed whilst they were registered
in a health profession under a
corresponding prior Act, there was no jurisdiction for the Board or the Tribunal
to deal with that
notification.
25. If the interpretation urged upon the
Tribunal by the respondent was correct, there would be further anomalous results
(a) The Board would have the power to investigate and refer
a health practitioner who was registered under a corresponding prior Act
registered under the National Law but the Tribunal would have no power to make
findings and determinations in relation to
them (s35(1)(g) and (i)).
Board would have the power to determine to initiate an investigation and to
determine to refer the conduct of a health practitioner
under a corresponding
prior Act but the Tribunal would have no jurisdiction to hear and deal with the
conduct of that practitioner
unless that practitioner was not, and never had
been, registered under the National Law (s139).
26. The case of Dental Board of Australia v Abdullah
dealt with the application of r30. In that case the notification to the
Board was made after 1 July 2010 but the conduct that the
notification referred
to occurred prior to 1 July 2010 when the National Law commenced.
27. In that
case the Tribunal held at [11]:
“Regulation
30 was a savings and transitional provision which expired on 30 June 2015.
Nevertheless, because the notification
investigation of that behaviour and the decision to refer the matter to the
Tribunal was
made prior to the expiry of that provision, we accept that the
matter continues and may be dealt with as if Regulation 30 had not
28. As a result of r30, the notification in that case was taken
to be a notification made under the National Law and to be dealt with
Board and the conduct that took place was to be assessed against the findings
and determinations that could be made under
the corresponding prior
29. Section 18 of the Health Practitioners Regulation National Law
(Tasmania) Act 2010 refers to complaints being dealt with on the
participation
day, 1 July 2010. Section 18 states:
“Complaints
being dealt with on participation day
(1) In this section –
former health practitioner Tribunal
means any of the following:
(a) a disciplinary tribunal within the meaning of the
Pharmacists
Registration Act 2001
Dental Practitioners Registration Act 2001
(b) the Professional Review Tribunal established under the
Nursing Act 1995
(c) the Medical Complaints Tribunal established under the
Practitioners Registration Act 1996
investigating committee
means a committee established under a
former health practitioner registration Act for the purposes of investigating a
(2) Notwithstanding section 289 of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (Tasmania), if before the participation day for
this jurisdiction a
local registration authority had started, but not immediately before that day
completed, dealing with a complaint
profession by the local registration authority –
(a) the complaint is to be dealt with by the National Board for the health
profession; and
(b) the complaint is to continue to be dealt with under the former health
practitioner registration Act under which it was made; and
(c) if, in so dealing with the matter –
(i) under the
Nursing Act 1995
Medical Practitioners Registration Act
, the National Board for the health profession; or
(ii) under the
Pharmacists Registration Act 2001
Dental Practitioners
Registration Act 2001
, an investigating committee established for the complaint
considers that the matter should be referred to a former health practitioner
Tribunal, the responsible tribunal may deal with the
matter as if it were the
former health practitioner Tribunal; and
(d) the responsible tribunal is to deal with the matter under the relevant
former health practitioner registration Act under which
the complaint was made
and may make any decision that the former health practitioner Tribunal could
(3) Notwithstanding subsection (2) , if before the participation day for this
started, but not
immediately before that day completed, hearing a complaint referred to it by a
local registration authority, that
Tribunal may continue to deal with the matter
under the relevant former health practitioner registration Act under which the
30. The clause notes in relation to the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (Tasmania) Bill 2010 provides the following explanation
in relation to that section:
“The clause deals with
complaints that have been made to a Tasmanian registration authority before the
National scheme commences
in Tasmania.
It provides that where a local registration authority has started (but not
finished) dealing with a complaint prior to the participation
date, then the
complaint becomes a complaint made to the National Board.
It provides that the National Board is to continue to deal with the complaint
under the Tasmanian legislation, as if that legislation
had not been
It provides that if a matter needs to be referred to a Tribunal under the
Pharmacists Registration Act 2001
Dental Practitioners Registration Act
Nursing Act 1995
Medical Practitioners Registration Act 1996
then the responsible tribunal defined in clause 6 of this Bill, is to deal with
the complaint and has all of the powers that a tribunal
under a local
registration Act would have had.
If a complaint had already been referred to a tribunal under the
Pharmacists
Registration Act 2001
Dental Practitioners Registration Act 2001
Nursing Act 1995
Medical Practitioners Registration Act 1996
prior to the
commencement of the National scheme then that tribunal may continue to hear the
matter and may do so under the repealed
Note that the National Law provides that if a complaint had been lodged, but
not started to be dealt with by a local registration
authority, then the
complaint is taken to be made to the National Agency and will be dealt with
under the National Law.”
31. The last paragraph in those clause notes relates to s288 of
the National Law which states:
“288 Complaints and
notifications made but not being dealt with on participation day
(1) This section applies if, immediately before the participation day for a
participating jurisdiction, a local registration authority
for the jurisdiction
had received but not started dealing with a complaint or notification about a
person registered in a health
profession by the authority.
(2) From the participation day, the complaint or notification is taken to be
a notification made under this Law to the National Agency.
(3) This section does not apply to a co-regulatory
[Note: Tasmania is not a co-regulatory jurisdiction]
32. Pursuant to s288 of the National Law and as explained in
the clause notes of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (Tasmania)
Bill 2010, any complaints or notifications that had been received before the
participation day (1 July 2010) by a local registration
authority, but that
authority had not started dealing with them, were to be dealt with under the
National Law.
Retrospective Application of the National Law
33. Counsel for the respondent refers to and relies upon the
principle of statutory construction by which an Act is presumed not to
retrospectively, unless there is a clear intention in the legislation to the
contrary (Maxwell v Murphy
(1957) CLR 261
34. In the decision of
Kennedy v Medical Practitioners Board of Victoria
[2008] VSC 507
Kaye J dealt
with the issue of the retrospective application of the relevant Act and said at
would require a clear expression of statutory intention to permit the 1994 Act
to be construed, so as to apply to the
plaintiff’s conduct in 1990 and
1991, the standard of ‘unprofessional conduct’ introduced in 1994 by
35. That decision referred to the second reading speech of the
responsible Minister in introduction the relevant amending legislation.
speech, the Minister stated:
“The amendments ensure
that the law that will be applied by the Boards will be the law that applied at
the time of the incident
being inquired into. This is not retrospective
legislation.”
36. Contrary to this, during debate in the House of Assembly,
concerning the relevant Bills relating to the introduction of National
Tasmania, the Minister for Health, Ms O’Byrne, made the following comments
in relation to the application of the National
Law (see Hansard, 24 June
“...if we are looking
at a process that commences after 1 July, notifications relating to a pre-1 July
complaint or a post-1
July complaint that are received after 1 July by the
National Agency and referred to the relevant National Board, if the National
Board then determines it can refer it for formal action it will then be dealt
with by the responsible tribunal...the National Law
will then apply and the
decision will be enforced by the National
37. In that explanation, the Minister expressly accepts that
the National Law could be applied to a ‘pre-1 July complaint’.
supports an argument that the National Law applies after the expiration of the
savings and transitional provisions including
r30. The Minister did not
expressly disavow any intention that the National Law could not apply to pre-1
July 2010 conduct.
38. What happens now that r30 has expired? The Board
submits that there are two available interpretations: first the Tribunal should
continue to hear complaints for prior behaviour applying the prior corresponding
Act; or secondly the Tribunal should apply the National
Law to the prior
“Either way, no accrued right, privilege, obligation or
liability could be affected. This is so because either the same rights
existed under the prior corresponding Act remain or the National Law has affixed
the present and future consequences that flow
for past events.” (Paragraph
45 of the respondent’s further submissions.)
39. In relation to this I
find the decision of Walton v McBride
[1989] NSWCA 222
, to be instructive and
persuasive. The question to be determined in that case was whether the
amendments introduced by the
Medical Practitioners Amendment Act 1987
new definition of “professional misconduct” should apply to alleged
activities of Dr McBride prior to 1 October
1987 when the amendments came into
force. In that that decision the New South Wales Court of Appeal
primary submission for Dr McBride...was that it would be contrary to principle
for the Act to be construed to apply a new
and arguably ‘more
stringent’ criterion of ‘professional misconduct’ to conduct
which preceded the amendments
which introduced that
criterion.”
40. The Court was urged by Dr McBride to find that in respect
of the conduct before 1 October 1987:
“...the standard to be
applied by the Tribunal in deciding whether he had been guilty of
‘professional misconduct’
was the standard which at that time
obtained, and not any more stringent standard later adopted. Otherwise, it was
argued, his rights
and liabilities would be affected in a significant way by a
change of the law. The amendments to the Act should not be so construed
should be given meaning which was prospective only and therefore avoided the
attachment of new legal consequences of facts or
events which occurred before
the commencement of the amendments. Reliance was placed upon Maxwell v Murphy
(1957) CLR 261
, 267; Fisher v Hebburn Limited
[1960] HCA 80
(1960) 105 CLR 188
Geraldton Building Co Pty Ltd v May
[1906] ArgusLawRp 58
(1977) 13 ALR
41. This submission was rejected by the Court of Appeal for a
number of reasons.
42. First, the Court acknowledged that whilst the
determination of professional misconduct can have serious consequences for a
practitioner, that is not the purpose of the Act. The purpose is to
protect the public.
“It is that objective which must determine, where
there is ambiguity, the construction to be given to the Act. It may be arguable
that a construction should not be adopted which would have serious and
deleterious consequences for a person affected, if some other
construction is
available. However, this does not necessarily follow if the purpose of the
statute is the protection of the public
from medical practitioners, found by the
current standard, to be properly the subject of one of the many orders that can
under the Act.” [15]
43. The Court noted in that case the new
legislation provided the Tribunal with a wide range of orders and sanctions (as
is the case
with the National Law).
“This wide range of provisions has
been enacted for a purpose. It is to enable the Tribunal to fashion an order
appropriate
to the facts found including, where relevant, where the subject
matter of the complaint relates to alleged ‘professional
misconduct’.
It would be curious if, despite a need for the above
supervisory arrangements designed for the protection of the public, Parliament
were to countenance the continued practice of a person in need of such
attention, simply because to so order would amount, as it
is said, to the
retrospective operation of a new standard. The wide range of orders available
to the Tribunal emphasises the fact
that the Act is designed for the protection
of the public.” [15]
44. Secondly, the Court held:
cases draw a distinction which is pertinent to the present case. It is the
distinction between legislation which has
a retrospective operation and
legislation which affixes present and future consequences to past events.
Particularly in cases where
present fitness to enjoy professional or trade
privileges are concerned, it is not at all unusual, for amendments adopting more
standards to apply to past conduct occurring before such standards were
45. The Court of Appeal refers to a number of cases in support
of this finding including Geschke v Del-Monte Home Furnishes Pty Ltd
[1981] VicRp 80
In that case Gobbo J at page 860 stated:
“...the presumption
against retrospective operation does not direct itself to legislation which
merely uses past acts as a foundation
for future action. In one sense such
legislation may appear to attach new consequences to past acts but I am of the
opinion that
the type of consequence envisaged in the judgment in Maxwell v
[1957] HCA 7
(1957) 96 CLR 261
was one where, for example, a new disability was
created that prevented further enjoyment of an existing or accrued right. In no
meaningful sense was the trader here the holder of an accrued right to trade
without risk of future restraint based on past conduct...I
am of the opinion
therefore that the principle against retrospective operation of a statute has no
application to the present case.”
46. The Court applied these observations to the
characterisation of the conduct of Dr McBride. The Court noted that
‘professional
misconduct’ had always been wrongful in the case of a
registered medical practitioner. “All that the successive statutory
amendments have done has been to give new and arguably differing content to the
meaning of the expression.”[18]
47. Thirdly, the Court held:
Act must be given full force and effect according to its terms. It provides
respect of complaints made that a
registered medical practitioner has been guilty of professional
misconduct...That phrase is defined
in the Act. Accordingly, on its face, the
Act applies in respect of complaints now made and requires the Tribunal to
determine those
complaints by reference to the current definition. To disturb
the ordinary interpretation of the Act, Dr McBride must invoke a presumption
against ‘retrospective operation’.”
48. The Court found that the presumption was inappropriate
where the legislation evinces a contrary intention.
49. As outlined above
there are a number of indications in the National Law that evince a contrary
intention. One of these is set
out in s288. Pursuant to that section as from
the participating day, 1 July 2010, any complaint or notification received but
started was taken to be a notification made under the National Law. When
the legislation was introduced into Parliament the explanatory
notes” relating to the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(Tasmania) Bill 2010 provided the following
explanation that is relevant to this
that the National Law provides that if a complaint had been lodged, but not
started to be dealt with by a local registration
authority, then the complaint
is taken to be made to the National Agency and will be dealt with under the
National Law.:
50. As in the case of Walton v McBride (supra) this can be used
as an indicator that Parliament envisaged that the new provisions,
definitions
and sanctions set out in the National Law should be applied in respect of
complaints or notifications that had been received
but not started prior to 1
51. As the Court pointed out in the case of Walton v McBride
(supra) it would be curious if complaints or notifications that had been
received but not started prior to 1 July 2010 were to be dealt with under the
National Law but a complaint or notification not yet
lodged was not to be dealt
with under the National Law.
52. I accept that there is a difference between
the legislation considered in Walton v McBride (supra) and the National Law.
legislation the Court was dealing with in Walton v McBride (supra) provided
that all matters before the Investigating Committee not
completed when the
amendments came into force were to be dealt with under the new legislation.
Under the National Law there are two
separate transitional provisions:
(a) Complaints and notifications received but not started as
at 1 July 2010 (s288 of the National Law applies).
(b) Complaints and
notifications that have been started to be dealt with but not completed as at 1
July 2010 (s289, slightly varied
by s18(2) of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (Tasmania) Act 2010, the prior existing law applies).
53. Section 288 of the National Law was not varied by s18(2) of
the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (Tasmania) Act 2010
and is still
persuasive when applying the reasoning in the decision of Walton v McBride
(supra). I accept the applicant’s submission
that the historical existence
of the now expired r30 is not sufficient to displace the reasoning in Walton v
McBride (supra).
54. Fourthly, counsel for the respondent urges a finding
that due to the fact that r30 has now expired, the respondent practitioner
cannot be made the subject of a complaint to be determined by this
55. The respondent argues that the expiration of r30 removes any
basis for the Tribunal to deal with any complaint about health practitioners
are currently registered under the National Law with respect to conduct that
occurred whilst they were registered under a corresponding
56. Adopting the reasoning of the Court of Appeal in Walton v McBride
(supra) at [21] the respondent’s position is rejected
on the following
• The purpose of the National Law is the protection of
the public.
• Such an amnesty is not to be attributed to Parliament.
It is not clearly stated in the legislation. It was not expressed
Minister introducing the legislation.
• The National Law should not be
interpreted in such a way for it to strike at the achievement of the obvious
57. Finally, I find that the saving provisions in Schedule 7,
Part 6, s34 of the National Law do not preserve the operation of the
repealed MPR Act. I once again agree with the reasoning in Walton v McBride
(supra) that this creates “a lacuna in respect
of complaints not pending
but relating to pre-amendment conduct. Such a gap in the legislation is not to
be imputed to Parliament.
It can be avoided entirely if the Act is interpreted
as operating in its terms, attaching its consequences for the protection of
public to the conduct of the registered medical practitioner concerned, whether
that conduct occurred before or after the amendments.
There is no difficulty in
so construing the Act. To do so is consistent with the achievement of its
objects. It is consonant with
long established legal authority dealing with
analogous statutory provisions.” [21].
58. The reasoning in Walton v
McBride (supra) was adopted and applied in the case of Kahler v Nurses
Registration Board & Anor
(Unreported) NSWSC, 21/2/95, BC9504318. In that
case Spender AJ, accepted the argument that the Nurses Act in that case affixed
present and future consequences to past events. He held that “the rules
of substance and of procedure under the Nurses Act
apply to the present
case.” [14].
59. For the a foregoing reasons I determine that:
(a) The Board had the power to initiate an investigation and
to determine to refer the conduct of the respondent to the Tribunal for
(b) The Tribunal has the power to hear and deal with the conduct of
the respondent under Part 8 of the National Law.
(c) The Tribunal has the
power to make findings and determinations available to it under the National
A. M. CLUES
CHAIRPERSON
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (216 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter