URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASRPDComm/2009/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:20:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Clarence Planning Scheme 2007 Amendment A-2008/29 [2009] TASRPDComm 23 (27 May 2009)
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Land Use Planning and Approvals
Resource Planning and Development
Commission Act 1997
Decision and Reasons for Decision
PLANNING SCHEME
Draft Amendment
Draft Permit
SD - 2008/83
The applications are to:
Amend the plans to rezone land from Rural and Landscape and Skyline
Conservation to Residential, Local Business, Recreation and Low
Residential for properties at 25 Brogo Way Clarendon Vale and 260 Acton Drive
Amend the development plan overlay sheet to show the development plan
overlay area applying to 25 Brogo Way Clarendon Vale and 260
Acton Drive
Incorporate a Clarence Heights Development plan.
Grant a permit for the staged subdivision of land within the area of
the development plan.
In accordance with its decision dated 19 January 2009 and in exercise of
the power conferred upon it by s.8 of the
Resource Planning and Development
Commission Act 1997
, the Resource Planning and Development Commission
delegated to Mr R Nolan and Commissioner S Hogue jointly and
powers and functions under
sections 40
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
in relation to Draft
Amendment A-2008/29 and Permit Number SD-2008/83 to the Clarence Planning Scheme
connection with the exercise of those powers in performance of those functions,
its powers under Part 3 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Date and Place of Hearing
Tuesday, 7 April 2009 at Hearing Room 1, Resource
Planning and Development Commission, 4
Macquarie Street, Hobart commencing at 10am.
Representations
Representations were received from the
R O’Keefe on behalf of Tangara Recreational Trails Inc.
J Crispin on behalf of Derwent Estuary Program
W Andrew on behalf of Tranmere-Clarence Plains Land and Coastcare
A late representation was received
K McFarlane for Clarence Tracks and Trails Committee
Attendance at the Hearing
Mr D Ford represented Clarence City Council.
Mr S McElwaine of Counsel on behalf of Fenshaw Pty Ltd who called evidence from
Ms I Duckett, Mr T Peters, Mr A North, Mr A von Kruzenstierna
and Mr P Gee.
With Mr S Chedid and Miss S Chedid in attendance.
Representors
Mrs W Andrew
Mr B Andrew
Issues raised in Representations
Representations sought:
Provision of public access over tracks on proposed lots to allow access to a
proposed Meehan Range track.
Clarification of permit conditions and appropriate nomenclature.
Revised permit conditions on water sensitive urban design (WSUD) to require
specific reductions for stormwater runoff pollutants.
Also on record for the report under
Land Use Planning and
Approvals Act 1993
(LUPAA) was advice from the Tasmania Fire Service (TFS)
Hobart Region District Officer (24 October 2008) that the proposal is endorsed
in principle, subject to compliance with TFS recommendations and clarification
on a number of points, including but not restricted
− ongoing maintenance of proposed fire trails;
− review of protective features of each stage before work commences on
that stage; and
− an acceptable water supply provided to each stage.
Council’s response to the representations
of LUPAA report considered the representations in the
context of the draft amendment and permit and recommended the
For the draft amendment Council recommended that the nomenclature for the
outline development plan should be changed to ‘Clarence
Heights Planning
On the permit Council recommended revised conditions concerning:
− stormwater management measures to protect water quality;
− construction fencing; and
− access for fire fighting purposes and recreational trails.
Commission’s assessment of the draft amendment
The Draft Amendment
The draft amendment comprises:
amendment to the plans to rezone portion of the subject land from Rural and
Landscape & Skyline Conservation to Residential,
Low Density Residential,
Local Business and Recreation.
amendment to the Development Plan Overlay (DPO) to show the major portion of the
subject land to be subject to a development plan.
amendment to the ordinance to identify the development plan as DPO9
Heights Development Plan (June 2008.
development plan as an incorporated document.
As an incorporated document, the development plan is to become part of the
planning scheme but resides outside the scheme as is the
case for the other,
previously approved, development plans specified in clause
Site and locality
The subject land consists of 2 lots in common ownership
situated in the suburbs of Clarendon Vale and Rokeby, with a combined area
219.52 Ha, as detailed below:
25 Brogo Way, Clarendon Vale
Fenshaw Pty Ltd. (15/18 shares)
Benjamin Chedid (1/18 share)
Benard Chedid (1/18 share)
260 Acton Drive, Rokeby
Rachelle Chedid (1/18 share)
The 2 titles define the site for the draft amendment and permit application.
The site is located at the foothills of the Meehan
Range and is characterised by
moderate slopes of 1 in 10 or 5 degrees at the lower or western part of the site
to steep slopes of
1 in 1.7 or 30
degrees in the upper
parts of the site. The land rises from the 60 m AHD at the western boundary
towards Guy Fawkes Hill (356m AHD)
and Mt. Rumney (377m AHD) to the north and
Acton Hill (257m AHD) and the ridge of the Meehan Range to the east. The site
by a series of gullies and watercourses that drain to Stokell Creek
to the west.
Access to the site is from Brogo Way and Bulla Drive, Clarendon Vale to the west
and Acton Drive by means of a shared rights-of-carriageway
to the east.
The site is zoned Rural and Landscape & Skyline Conservation and is
extensively subject to the Vegetation Management Overlay.
The surrounding land is zoned Rural, Landscape & Skyline Conservation,
Residential or Low Density Residential.
The site is vacant and used and developed for improved pasture and grazing and
native open forest. Evidence is that the land is
class 5 and 6 in accordance
with the class definitions and methodology adopted by the Land Capability
Classification System. The
surrounding land is generally used for agriculture
or is undeveloped, with adjoining residential use and development at Clarendon
Vale to the southwest.
Approximately 24ha of the site is open forest. The property supports habitat
for a significant number of endangered flora and fauna
The site adjoins Clarendon Vale. The settlement strategy for Clarence is
of the planning scheme. By amendment A2008-34 the
settlement strategies seek to favour the Tranmere, Droughty Point, Rokeby and
Clarendon Vale areas as the primary sources of new residential development in
the future. This description of areas does not specifically
boundaries. The site is partly within Clarendon Vale and extends in to Rokeby
as defined by suburb boundaries.
To further clarify the strategy the area covered by the urban part of the draft
amendment was incorporated in the urban growth boundary
by planning scheme
amendment A2008-34. Development of the site subject to this application is
within the capabilities of infrastructure
through Applicant provided higher
level reservoir and trunk sewer extension. The site is to be accessed from
Clarendon Vale through
road connections at Brogo Way and Bulla Drive that were
provided for the interconnectivity for adjoining land when Clarendon Vale
first developed.
Submissions described the road network and advised that the network can safely
manage the increase in traffic from the current application
subdivisions proposed for the area. The proposed subdivision of the site
provides for a main north-south collector road
that in time will provide for
connectivity to land to the south and for the eventual road network and urban
settlement of Rokeby,
Clarendon Vale and Oakdowns as a consolidated Rokeby
valley settlement. Conditions on the permit require the upgrading of Bulla
Drive to a major collector road standard and Brogo Way to a minor collector road
standard. In addition, and in response to the increased
traffic pressure on
off-site roads including intersections with South Arm Highway, an equivalent
tenements road levy for the upgrading
of collector roads has been agreed between
Applicant, Council and the Department of Infrastructure Energy and Resources and
proposed as a condition on the permit.
It was submitted that development of the site will contribute to reducing the
perceived and actual isolation of Clarendon Vale settlement
particularly when
the land to the south is also developed. The Social Impact Study (Community
Focus June 2006) prepared for the
Applicant refers to improvements to a range of
services from an increase in population and change in the population
Part of the site is impacted by Transend Network’s transmission lines and
a transition structure from over head to underground
reticulation. The
transmission lines have resulted in the proposed residential zoning being
separated from the current Clarendon
Vale settlement by recreation and local
business zoning. The transmission lines easement represents a 40m wide corridor
south western boundary.
Plan amendment
The zone amendments are from Rural and Landscape and Skyline Conservation to
Residential, Low Density Residential and Local Business
with Landscape and
Skyline Conservation zoning retained for the northern and eastern parts on the
site. The Low Density Residential
zone provides for a density transition area
by restricting the upper limit of residential development to the lower slopes of
Meehan Range. Although the development plan provides for lots in the
Landscape and Skyline Conservation zone, building envelopes
for houses are
confined to the Low Density Residential zone on the lower
Recreation zoning defines the larger areas for conservation management and
public open space that in part incorporates areas defined
as having significance
in terms of biological sensitivity.
The Local Business zoning allows for a range of activities to be established
that may or may not duplicate that already provided
in the Local Business zone
in the Clarendon Vale settlement. The area for Local Business zoning is
dissected by a watercourse that
is zoned Recreation and the zone is partly
affected by the transmission line easement.
The proposed plan amendment principally allows for residential use and
development with specific land features defined by Recreation
zoning. The Local
Business zone provides an area for various uses supporting the residential
component. The plan amendment is an
appropriate extension to the suburbs of
Clarendon Vale and Rokeby that is supported by Council’s approved
settlement strategy
and should be approved as certified.
Amendment to the development plan overlay
This part of the draft amendment is to define the area to which the development
plan applies. The development plan, as certified,
applies to the entire site
except relatively small portions excluded in the north and west of the site
within the proposed balance
lot as defined on the permit. The portions to be
excluded include land shown as ‘very low’ and ‘moderate
significance’
and ‘highly significant’ on the biological
sensitivity mapping.
Ms Duckett, for the Applicant, submitted the area excluded from the development
plan was appropriate because of the low biological
sensitivity significance and
that inclusion on the development plan would unnecessarily restrict future use
of the land.
The boundaries of the development plan are defined by titles except for the
areas excluded which are apparently defined by an eagles
nest exclusion zone and
partly an area of low biological significance. In essence, the areas are not
well defined. The development
plan places the included area within the skyline
precinct, north sub-precinct. Appropriately this sub-precinct prohibits further
subdivision and is defined as a vegetation off-set area. The whole site should
be included in the development plan and benefit from
its provisions. Therefore,
the development plan overlay should be modified to cover the whole
Ordinance amendment for the outline development plan
This part of the draft amendment is simply to identify the development plan as
DPO9 Clarence Heights Development Plan 2008. The
ordinance clause 7.12 provides
for a development plan overlay with the purpose to:
‘provide for use or development which is generally in accordance with an
approved development plan.’
Clause 7.12.2 states:
‘the provisions of the development plans override any other development or
use standard of the scheme to be extent of any inconsistency.
They may also
allow for the status of a use to be changed irrespective of an underlining
This part of the draft amendment to include reference to the development plan
for Clarence Heights should be approved subject to
the modification to insert
the date of the development plan when incorporated into the planning
Clarence Heights Development Plan #
This part of the draft amendment comprises the development plan that is to be
incorporated under clause 7.12.3 of the planning scheme.
The principal changes
to the underlying zones as brought in by the development plan
− The setting of precincts predominately to match zone boundaries.
− An urban precinct (Residential and Local Business zoning) with
subdivision minimum lot sizes set at the standard for the
residential zone. The
development plan makes no additional standards for the Local Business zone.
− A transition precinct (Low Density Residential zone and the lower parts
of the Landscape and Skyline Conservation zone) with
subdivision minimum lot
size set at 750m
in contrast to the low density
residential zone of 1500m
− A skyline precinct – east sub-precinct (Landscape and Skyline
Conservation zone) with a minimum lot size of 3ha in
contrast to the underlining
zone standard of 20ha.
− A skyline precinct – north sub-precinct. No subdivision allowed
compared to the 20 hectares minimum lot for the underlying
− The remaining precinct is open space with sub-precincts, blue gum
conservation area, rock plate conservation area, parkways
and community facility
areas. The open space precinct is descriptive and does not contain standards
and consequently the standards
of the underlining recreation zone prevail.
The development plan adds certain design provisions and directions on matters
such as road alignment, streetscape planting, ecological
values and sequential
development. Overall the development plan allows some increase in density over
the underlying zones.
The development plan allows smaller lots in the skyline precinct compared to
standards in the Landscape and Skyline Conservation
zone, however, this should
not be significant in terms of visual impact because building envelopes are
confined to the transition
precinct. When considered in conjunction with the
permit, the lot density overall is less than required by the Landscape and
Conservation zone due to the retained large balance lot. This density
for the non-urban parts of the site should be maintained through
modifications
to the development plan. Currently the development plan uses terms, in
reference to subdivision, as ‘not being
permitted’ for skyline north
sub-precinct and the skyline east sub-precinct has a minimum lot of 3ha.
Modifications to the
development plan are necessary to remove future confusion
of terms and eliminate the prospect of additional lots through a provision
prohibits further subdivision except for a minor boundary
Subject to the above modification the development plan should be approved as an
incorporated document.
Other planning scheme provisions
The vegetation management overlay applies to most of the site. The VMO requires
a discretionary permit to remove, destroy or lop
any native vegetation. Because
of the exemptions to the application of the VMO provisions it is not possible to
assess the extent
of discretionary approvals that may be required. However it
is noted that where a permit has been granted that specifies vegetation
management requirements no further permit is required (clause
7.1.2(b)(iv)).
Commission’s consideration of the permit
The permit provides for subdivision of the site in 9
stages with lots in the Residential zone varying in size from
to over 1000m
approximately 50 lots (some lots in 2 zones) in the Low Density Residential
zone, 5 large lots (approximately 3ha to 20ha) and a
balance lot of
approximately 102ha in the Landscape and Skyline Conservation zone. In addition
there are public open space lots,
a public facility development site in the
Residential zone and second public facility site in the Local Business
The permit provides for subdivision of the site into lots consistent with the
zoning and the development plan. The permit conditions
require modification
following the assessment of Council’s recommendations and assessment at
the hearing. The principal modifications
required are to conditions 32 and 33.
Condition 32 is to set targets for a reduction of stormwater pollution as
recommended by the
Derwent Estuary Program. Condition 33 is to delete an
Applicant contribution for a water connection to each lot as the work is to
undertaken by the Applicant.
Application of State Policies
State Coastal Policy 1996
The site is not within the coastal zone as defined in the
Interim State Policy on the Protection of Agricultural Land 2008
The subject land is classified as Class 5 and above agricultural land. The land
has not been identified as being important for agricultural
uses and existing
agriculture uses to the south are fettered by the adjoining urban settlement
diminishing the agriculture value
of that land. The applications are assessed
as being prepared in accordance with the
Interim State Policy on the
Protection of Agricultural Land 2008
State Policy on Water Quality Management 1997
The conditions on the permit should ensure that waste water and stormwater can
be managed in accordance with the Policy. The amendment
is assessed as being
prepared in accordance with the
State Policy on Water Quality Management
National Environmental Protection Measures
The NEPMs are not applicable to the applications.
Schedule 1 objectives
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
(a) to promote the sustainable development of natural and physical resources
and the maintenance of ecological processes and genetic
The proposed residential zones and landscape and skyline conservation zone
respond to the natural and physical resources of the area.
The intent of the
Landscape and Skyline Conservation zone is preserved through the development
plan provisions to retain the overall
density of the zone and to prohibit
further subdivision of the balance lot. The maintenance of ecological processes
and genetic
diversity is retained through Recreation and Landscape and Skyline
Conservation zoning.
(b) to provide for the fair, orderly and sustainable use and development of
air, land and water.
Residential zoning and staging of development provides for an orderly approach
to the development of the site. The rezoning provides
for an extension of the
Clarendon Vale settlement providing for the eventual integration of the separate
settlement nodes in the
Rokeby valley. The use and development of the site is
assessed as fair, orderly and sustainable.
(c) to encourage public involvement in resource management and
The draft amendment has been through the formal public processes required by
LUPAA. In addition representors were appreciative
of the Applicant’s
approach to consultation.
(d) to facilitate economic development in accordance with the objectives set
out in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) above.
The draft amendment will facilitate economic development consistent with the
preceding objectives.
(e) to promote the sharing of responsibility for resource management and
planning between the different spheres of Government, the
community and industry
in the State.
Development allowed by the draft amendment will involve the sharing of
responsibility by government, community groups and industry.
(a) to require sound strategic planning and
co-ordinated action by State and Local government.
The Rokeby area displays a disjointed and isolated mix of residential and
non-urban development where roads and spaces do not readily
interconnect.
Development of this site and subsequent residential development for adjoining
land will improve the interconnection
of settlements. Infrastructure provision
is either within current capacities or can be achieved through extensions to the
networks that can be brought to the site.
(b) to establish a system of planning instruments to be the principal way of
setting objectives, policies and controls for the use,
development and
protection of land.
The draft amendment furthers this objective.
(c ) to ensure that the effects on the environment are considered and provide
for explicit consideration of social and economic effects
when decisions are
made about the use and development of land.
The documentation for the amendment demonstrates that the effects on the
environment are considered. Overall the social and economic
effects are
anticipated to be positive for the Clarendon Vale and Rokeby
communities.
(d.) to require land use and development planning and policy to be easily
integrated with environmental, social, economic conservation
and resource
management policies at state, regional and municipal levels.
The draft amendment is assessed as furthering this objective.
(e) to provide for the consolidation of approvals for land use or development
and related matters, and to co-ordinate planning approvals
with related
The proposal is for a combined planning scheme amendment and permit application
consistent with this objective.
(f) to secure a pleasant, efficient and safe working, living and recreational
environment for all Tasmanians and visitors to Tasmania.
The development is assessed as furthering this objective.
(g) to conserve those buildings, areas or other places which are of
scientific, aesthetic, architectural or historical interest, or
otherwise of
special cultural value.
The site has natural areas that are to be protected by zoning and the
development standards.
(h) to protect public infrastructure and other assets and enable the orderly
provision and co-ordination of public utilities and other
facilities for the
benefit of the community.
The development will protect electricity infrastructure and the staging of
development contribute to the orderly provision of public
infrastructure.
(i) to provide a planning framework which fully considers land
capability.
The land capability of the site is assessed as suitable for the proposed uses.
Conclusion on the draft amendment
The draft amendment, through the proposed outline development plan, provides a
comprehensive response to the site. With the development
the site will provide
for the further consolidation of settlements in the Rokeby valley and improved
infrastructure provision consistent
with Council’s approved settlement
strategy. The draft amendment should be approved with
modifications.
Conclusion on the permit
The permit provides for the subdivision development for part of the site, the
retention of a large balance lot and provision of public
open space and other
land in the recreation zone. The permit should be confirmed with modifications
to the conditions.
Pursuant to
Section 41(ab)
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
the Commission modifies the draft amendment as set out in Annexure A and
gives its approval to the draft amendment as modified pursuant
to Section 42 of
Pursuant to
Section 43H
(1)(b)(ii) of the
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act
the Commission modifies the permit as set out in Annexure
Robin Nolan
Sandra Hogue
Resource Planning and development Commission
27 May 2009
Attachments:
Annexure A comprising:
The plan amendment for zones.
The modified plan amendment to the development plan overlay.
The amendment to clause 7.12.3.
The modified Clarence Heights Development Plan.
Resource Planning and Development Commission
LAND USE PLANNING AND APPROVALS ACT 1993
Development No: A-2008/29
Description: 361 lot subdivision
Address: 25 Brogo Way & 260 Acton Drive, Acton Park
This permit is granted, subject to the following conditions:
General Conditions:
use or development must only be undertaken in accordance with ‘Proposed
Subdivision Clarence Heights–Master Plan (as
amended 16 July 2007),
‘Proposed Subdivision Clarence Heights–Staging Plan (as amended 16
July 2007), the Applicant’s
supporting documents submitted with the
application and the permit conditions and must not be altered without the
written consent
of Council.
to the commencement of any works related to Stage 7, the screen planting on the
east-west ridge of the balance lot (in Stage
2) is to have reached a height of
15m and be consistent with the requirements of the Landscape Master Plan (Lesley
Gulson, October
2006), to the satisfaction of Council’s Manager Integrated
Assessment.
Final Plan of Survey and Schedule of Easements must include suitable easements
for lots A, B, C, D, E, 101-107, 901 and the balance
appropriate;
to and maintenance of the fire tracks;
access though lot E to Acton Drive for the purposes of creating a recreational
trail providing for walking, cycling and horse
access along the eastern boundary of lots B-E to Acton Drive for the purposes of
creating a recreational skyline trail providing
for walking, cycling and horse
to the satisfaction of Council’s Manager Integrated
Assessment.
Applicant and the Council must enter into an Agreement pursuant to
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
that the owners of lots A, B C D
E and 101 – 107 and 901 and the balance lot on the plan of survey covenant
and agree with
the Council to actively manage the site to provide Building
Protection Zones generally in accordance with the Bushfire Planning Group
(2005): Guidelines for development in bushfire prone areas of Tasmania, Tasmania
Fire Service, Hobart and any advice of the Tasmanian
Fire Service.
Applicant must include suitable covenants in the Schedule of Easements for each
stage with respect to:
installation of
water efficient fittings and 13,000L minimum water storage tanks as part of all
residential
development.
Those lots of
less than 2500m2 and more than 120m from the nearest fire hydrant are to be
provided with a minimum of 10,000 litres
of water storage dedicated for fire
fighting purposes. Those lots equal to or greater than
and more than 120m from the nearest fire hydrant
are to be provided with a minimum of 20,000 litres of water storage dedicated
fire fighting purposes. In both circumstances this storage may be provided
as part of the domestic storage or as separate storage.
Final Plan of Survey and Schedule of Easements for each stage must not include
covenants or other controls on the titles to the
lots created by the subdivision
where they are in conflict with any provisions of, or seek to prohibit any use
provided for within,
the relevant Planning Scheme applying to the site.
Final Plan and Schedule of Easements for Lot A, B, C, D, E, 106, 107, 901, 909
– 912, 918 – 922, 928, 945, 849 –
852 and 826 – 833 must
describe a building envelope consistent with the Master Plan (as amended 16 July
2007) outside of which
no building is to be constructed.
Applicant must ensure that the works associated with excavations, road
construction and other activities associated with the development
are only to be
undertaken between the following hours:
Monday - Friday 7.00am to 6.00pm
Saturday 9.00am to 6.00pm
Sunday and public holidays 10.00am to 6.00pm
Applicant must ensure that no works are to be undertaken, including changes in
the topography of the site or the removal, destruction
or lopping of trees other
than in accordance with the approved plans, without the consent of Council.
Adequate steps must be taken
to prevent the damage and/or removal of any other
vegetation during any works.
Applicant must ensure that machinery involved in the construction of the
subdivision must be thoroughly cleaned in order to reduce
the spread of weeds
and fungi prior to entry/exit of the site.
Applicant must ensure that the Final Plan and accompanying Schedule of Easements
for each stage describe all existing easements
and any additional easements
Applicant must consult with Transend regarding the location, design and
construction of roads in the vicinity of the transmission
line easements to
ensure that adequate safety and ground clearances are maintained, and that the
integrity of the towers and their
footings is not compromised.
Applicant must consult with Transend regarding proposed uses and developments
within the easement, and where necessary seek Transend’s
prior written
approval for those uses and developments, to ensure public safety, protect
Transend’s infrastructure and maintain
the reliability of the electricity
Applicant must ensure that Transend’s ability to access the existing
easement and the structures within the easement for
on-going maintenance and
operation requirements is not compromised.
Applicant must ensure that service conduits to accommodate water, electricity
and telecommunications are sized to accommodate
additional service installations
without disrupting roads. Conduits shall be of adequate size to provide shared
services aligned
to common boundaries of alternate lots (eg 1 conduit serves 2
Applicant must ensure that any agreements made pursuant to
Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
are prepared on a blank instrument form
and bind the current owner and his or her successors in title. All agreements
must be registered
with the Recorder of Titles in accordance with
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
at no cost to the
Council Property Conditions:
Applicant must ensure that any lots described as ‘public open
space’, ‘public access way’, ‘park
‘road’, ‘to be acquired by the Highway Authority’ or
other land designated to become public land
on the Final Plan of Survey of each
stage must be transferred to the Council for a nominal sum of $1.00 and must be
accompanied by
a Memorandum of Transfer to the Clarence City Council, all
documentation in relation to discharges of any Mortgages, withdrawal of
and all other relevant registrable dealings. This transfer must be executed by
the vendor, identifying the lot(s) to be
transferred and the Applicant is
responsible for all Land Titles Office fees and charges and duty in relation to
the document.
The Applicant remains responsible for ensuring that
any Land Titles Office requisitions are effectively resolved and the Applicant
must meet the costs of such requisitions.
Engineering Conditions:
1 and 3 are to be redesigned by the Applicant to the satisfaction of
Council’s Group Manager Asset Management, so that
‘Sports and Recreation POS lot’ form part of Stage 3.
Applicant must submit engineering designs, prepared by a suitably qualified
person, for:
public open
space lot design including access, fencing, signage and facilities, fire track
design and road design (including line
road stormwater
reticulation;
stormwater drainage
and must show the extent of any
vegetation removal proposed for these works and be designed in conjunction with
any landscaping plan
requirement. Such designs must be submitted to and
approved by Council’s Group Manager Asset Management before the
development
begins and must clearly describe what works are being undertaken for
each approved stage of the development.
accordance with Council’s adopted fee schedule, a fee of 1% of the
contract fee or certified construction cost will be charged
for the approval of
these plans and is payable by the Applicant upon their lodgement. A
‘start of works’ permit must
be obtained prior to the commencement
of any works.
the Final Plan of Survey to be sealed prior to the completion of the works or
the expiry of the ‘on-maintenance’ period
for any stage a bond must
be paid by the Applicant and an agreement entered into in accordance with
Council Policy. Please note
that the bond for the ‘on-maintenance’
period is 5% the cost of the construction.
for all stages shown on the design plans must be commenced within 2 years of the
date of their approval or the engineering designs
will be required to be
resubmitted.
‘Off-set’ plantings are to occur in proposed public open space or
road lots unless approved by Council’s Group
Manager Asset Management.
construction, including line marking, concrete kerbs, gutters and footpaths with
bitumen roads, must be carried out by the
Applicant to the requirements of
Council’s Local Highways Standard Requirements By-Law. Pavement designs
must be based upon
laboratory soaked CBR values. Line marking must be in
thermoplastic material.
new roads must join with existing road construction in a smooth and continuous
fashion and extend to the boundaries of the balance
existing portion of Brogo Way must be reconstructed by the Applicant to minor
collector standard and the existing portion of Bulla
Drive must be constructed
to major collector standard, as defined by Council’s Local Highways
Standard Requirements - By-law
1 of 2004. The north-south road link must be
constructed by the Applicant to the standard of Major Collector per Council's
An integrated cycleway and footpath network shall be incorporated into
the design and construction of the road network and subdivision
layout to the
satisfaction of Council’s Group Manager Asset Management.
roads shall be of a suitable width to allow a typical service vehicle to enter,
turn and exit in a forward direction; T or Y shaped
turning heads may be
acceptable to Council’s Group Manager Asset Management in exceptional
circumstances.
lot must be provided with a minimum 3.0m wide constructed and sealed access from
the road carriageway to the property boundary
in accordance with Standard
Drawing MSD1-07 (copy available from Council). This access must be inspected by
Council’s Clerk
of Works prior to sealing or pouring new concrete.
lots with combined right-of-way accesses must be provided with a 5.5m wide
sealed access from the road carriageway to the property
boundary in accordance
with Standard Drawing MSD1-07 (copy available from Council). A 5.5m wide sealed
driveway must also be constructed
over the remaining length of the right-of-way.
This access must be inspected by Council’s Clerk of Works prior to sealing
pouring new concrete.
lot must be provided with a sewerage connection. An extension to
Council’s sewer main may be required at the Applicant’s
Sewage is to be delivered to the Rokeby Waste Water Treatment Plant by a new
gravity main, to Council’s existing
trunk sewer. The Applicant is to bear
the cost of this work. Reticulation design shall include verification that all
reticulation is of sufficient capacity to accept the proposed
reticulation is to be designed in accordance with the requirements of
Council’s Local Highways Standard Requirement
- By-Law 1 of 2004.
Stormwater retention facilities are to incorporate Water Sensitive Urban Design
principles and designed to ensure
no downstream disadvantage through increased
rate of run-off, details of which are to be provided prior to construction and
the satisfaction of Council’s Group Manager Asset Management.
Stormwater connections to each lot are to be provided to the
satisfaction of
Council’s Group Manager Asset Management.
Prior to commencement of any works, overland flow paths and run-off
handling systems shall be identified and designed for 1 in 100
year events to
the satisfaction of Council’s Group Manager Asset Management. These
systems shall ensure that no concentrated
flow or overflow from street drainage
and stormwater reticulation is directed across or through proposed lots (unless
dedicated as
an overland flow path with easements in favour of Council). Those
details and designs shall ensure that downstream run-off quality
and quantity is
either consistent with or an improvement over pre-development parameters.
Designs shall include verification of downstream system capacity and detail
of any augmentations that might be required.
Applicant is to design a stormwater system that incorporates measures to protect
water quality. The design is to demonstrate
that pollutant loads from the
development are reduced by 45% for total nitrogen 45% of total phosphorous and
80% for total suspended
solids. Alternatively, the Applicant is to demonstrate
that stormwater generated from the subdivision will not adversely affect
quality in receiving waters to the satisfaction of Council’s Group Manager
Asset Management.
Applicant must provide a 20mm diameter standard water connection to the boundary
of each lot. A fee of $80 per water meter will
also be required. Council will
install the meter at the time of construction of the dwelling. Connections to
existing mains must
be carried out by Council at the owner’s expense. A
request must be submitted and payment received before the work will be
water supply, storage and reticulation system shall be designed and constructed
to ensure adequate water supply is available to
all proposed lots and high level
reservoirs. As a minimum, these service standards shall be consistent with
Council's Headworks
Applicant is to provide high level storage at locations and of a volume approved
by Council’s Group Manager Asset Management.
The volume shall be not less
than that required to service those lots above the service limit of Council
storages as determined
by the Headworks Plan and other relevant design
accordance with the Headworks Levy Policy, the following headworks charge is
applicable in relation to each of the additional lot/s
created by the
Water supply (Equivalent Tenements) $1,654.51
Sewerage (Equivalent Tenements) $2,395.31
Roads (Equivalent Tenements) 1,618.21
(Note: The calculated additional demand for respective infrastructure is
shown in brackets).
The amount of
headworks charge applicable to this development shall be indexed quarterly by
CPI (All Groups Index) Hobart, effective
from the Permit date until the date of
payment of the headworks charge to Council.
charges must be paid prior to sealing of any ‘staged’ final plan
based on the stages approved in this permit
commensurate with the number of
additional lots created in each such stage as detailed on the
‘staged’ final plan.
In accordance with the Council’s Headworks Levy Policy and
relevant provisions of Council’s Policy for Bonding Development
Bonds and/or
security can be accepted for the headworks charges in the event that early issue
of titles is sought by the Applicant.
Any headworks
charges bonded are to be paid on the completion of the subdivision
infrastructure works, or where the works have been
approved to be carried out in
stages, then on the completion of each approved stage of the subdivision.
erosion and sedimentation control plan, in accordance with the
Regional Soil and Water Management Code of Practice
, must be submitted and
approved by Council’s Group Manager Asset Management prior to the
commencement of works.
services, including electrical reticulation for street lighting, must be
underground and within the road reserve or covered by
a suitable easement.
Applicant must ensure that electrical and telecommunications services are
provided to each lot in accordance with the requirements
of the responsible
authority and the satisfaction of Council’s Group Manager Asset
Management.
existing services on the land must be contained within a single lot. For any
services extending beyond the property boundary,
a suitable easement must be
created on the affected titles and the service replaced in PVC or copper type A
Applicant must, at their expense, repair any Council services (eg pipes, drains)
and any road, crossover, footpath or other Council
infrastructure that is
damaged as a result of any works carried out by the Applicant, or their
contractors or agents pursuant to
this permit. These repairs are to be in
accordance with any directions given by the Council’s Group Manager Asset
Management.
If the Applicant does not undertake the required repair works within the
timeframe specified by Council, the Council may arrange
for the works to be
carried out at the Applicant’s expense.
Applicant must submit a weed management plan identifying methods to control
weeds and the spread of soil based pathogens to Council’s
Group Manager
Asset Management for approval prior to the commencement of works and must be
undertaken prior to completion of each
stage of subdivision.
The plan may include manual removal of larger plants and or chemical control as
recommended by the Department of Primary Industries,
Environment.
Applicant must ensure all accesses to the balance lot from roadways and public
spaces are suitably controlled to restrict access
from private vehicles
(including trail bikes). Such arrangements must cater for authorised and
emergency vehicles, details of which
must be submitted to and approved by
Council’s Group Manager Asset Management.
Perimeter access controls to each lot shall be suitably designed by the
Applicant to reflect the proposed use of the lot and to address
nuisances/hazards likely to exist at each location (eg trail bikes). Details
shall be approved by Council’s Group Manager
Asset Management prior to
construction/installation.
The Applicant must ensure that suitable barriers are erected during the
construction of the development to ensure native vegetation
is not damaged
during construction works.
Access is to be provided to the balance lot and each undeveloped stage for
fire fighting purposes and is to be constructed and maintained
by the Applicant
to the satisfaction of Council’s Group Manager Asset Management. In this
context Council will have regard
to any recommendations of the Tasmania Fire
Environmental Health Conditions:
Applicant must ensure that water quality analysis is undertaken prior to the
commencement of works on and during construction
of each stage and prior to the
sealing of titles. The monitoring is to be performed and analysed by a suitably
qualified person,
at the expense of the Applicant. The analysis and results are
to be to the satisfaction of Council’s Senior Environmental
Landscaping Conditions:
landscape plan must be submitted to and approved by Council’s Manager
Integrated Assessment prior to the commencement of works
for each stage. The
plan must be to scale and show:
existing trees
and those to be removed;
driveways, paths, buildings, carparking, retaining walls and fencing;
any proposed
rearrangement of ground levels;
proposed plantings including botanical names, and the height and spread of
canopy at maturity; and
estimated cost
of the landscaping works.
The landscaping works must be completed or a suitable bond paid, prior to the
sealing of the final plan for each stage.
The following advice is also provided:
Permit will lapse after 2 years from the date on which it is granted unless the
use or development has been substantially commenced.
Upon request, under
Section 53(5A)
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
Council may grant
a single extension of time for a further 2 years. This request must be made in
writing and prior to the expiry
of the initial 2 year period.
is a planning permit only. A Building Application must be submitted and a
Permit issued before the use/development may commence.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (229 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter