URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCCA/2024/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kay v Tasmania [2024] TASCCA 13 (12 November 2024)
[2024] TASCCA 13
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (COURT OF CRIMINAL
Kay v Tasmania
[2024] TASCCA
: KAY, Joshua William
DELIVERED ON:
27 November
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
12 November
JUDGMENT OF:
Pearce J, Marshall AJ, Porter AJ
Criminal Law – Appeal and New Trial – Appeal against sentence
– Grounds for interference – Sentence manifestly
excessive or
inadequate – Trafficking in methylamphetamine – In possession of
112.9 grams intending to sell most –
Imprisonment for 2 years and 6 months
with non-parole period of 1 year and 3 months not manifestly excessive.
Upston v Tasmania
[2018] TASCCA 4
30 Tas R 262
Aust Dig Criminal Law
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Director of
Public Prosecutions
Judgment Number:
[2024] TASCCA 13
paragraphs:
Serial No 2551/2024
File No 13/2024
JOSHUA WILLIAM KAY v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
MARSHALL AJ
27 November 2024
Order of the Court:
1 Appeal dismissed.
Serial No 2551/2024
File No 13/2024
JOSHUA WILLIAM KAY v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
27 NOVEMBER 2024
appellant pleaded guilty to two counts of trafficking in a controlled substance
contrary to the
Misuse of Drugs Act
On 26 August 2024 he
was sentenced by Martin AJ to imprisonment for two years and six months with
eligibility to apply for parole
after having served half of that term. This is
an appeal against that sentence. The sole ground is that the sentence is
8 March 2023 the police executed a search warrant at the appellant's home in
suburban Hobart. They found two safes in his bedroom.
In one safe there were six
snap lock bags containing a total of 112.9 grams of crystalline
methylamphetamine, one snap lock bag containing
191 N, N-dimethylpentylone
tablets with a total weight of 93.9 grams and $1,235 in cash. Three of the bags
of methylamphetamine each
contained about one ounce of the drug, approximately
27 grams, a quantity commonly purchased to on-sell to street level users. N,
N-dimethylpentylone is a synthetic cathinone closely related to amphetamine,
methylamphetamine and MDMA, used for its psychostimulant
and hallucinogenic
effects. In the other safe was $3,000 in cash in three $1,000 bundles secured
with cable ties. The sentencing
judge found, after hearing some evidence, that
the cash was proceeds of the appellant's drug sales. Two digital scales and
snap lock bags were found nearby.
appellant was sentenced on the basis that he possessed the methylamphetamine
with the intention of selling it. Depending on the
quantities in which it was
sold it could have returned between $56,400 and $112,900. The sentencing judge
accepted that the appellant
would have used some of the drug himself. In
contrast, the appellant trafficked in N, N-dimethylpentylone by guarding and
it in the belief that another person intended to sell it. It had a
potential sale value of $4,750.
the time of the search the appellant was aged 34. He was 35 when sentenced. His
personal circumstances were outlined by his counsel
and in a pre-sentence report
provided by an officer of the court mandated drug diversion program. He
experienced a difficult childhood.
His parents separated when he was young, and
he was exposed to drug abuse within the home. He had held some employment
through his
adult life and maintained a reasonable relationship with his mother
and sister. He had three children from previous relationships.
However he had a
longstanding serious problem with poly-substance abuse dating back to his
teenage years and, as an adult, an extensive
history of related offending. On 20
December 2012 he was made subject to probation for 12 months and ordered to
perform 91 hours
of community service for possessing and using a controlled drug
and multiple drug related driving offences. On 9 May 2013 he was
selling a specified substance without authorisation and given a wholly suspended
one month term for possessing a controlled
drug. On 12 January 2017 he was fined
for possession of a controlled drug as well as for offences involving possession
of a dangerous
article and a prohibited firearm. On 14 August 2017 he was
sentenced to a three month term, wholly suspended, for possession of a
controlled drug and five drug related driving offences. On 21 September 2017 he
was ordered to perform 70 hours of community service
for burglary and stealing.
The following day, 22 September 2017, the appellant was sentenced to
imprisonment for three months, wholly
suspended, for offences including multiple
counts of possession and use of a controlled drug, possessing an instrument
to commit a crime and evading police. The association between drug
abuse and the appellant's continued offending is made clear when,
on 27 August
2019, he was sentenced to imprisonment for a total term of seven months
backdated to 29 January 2019, but released on
the day of sentence subject to a
drug treatment order with a custodial part of 12 months. The various offences
for which he was sentenced
included multiple counts of dishonesty, breaches of
bail, possession of a controlled drug, resisting police, driving offences and,
significantly, selling a controlled drug.
drug treatment order made on 27 August 2019 was completed on 21 January 2021,
but it subsequently became apparent that the appellant
had committed further
offences while subject to the order. On 27 April 2023 he was sentenced to terms
of imprisonment totalling 16
months, each of which was wholly suspended for two
years. The offences for which he was sentenced included two counts of selling
controlled drug, buprenorphine, on 7 March 2020, while the drug treatment order
was in force. The sentences also related to continued
offending after completion
of the order: possession of a controlled drug and driving while an illicit drug
was present in oral fluid
on 9 June 2021 and multiple counts of trespass on 19
February 2023.
10 January 2024 the appellant appeared before a magistrate to be sentenced for
more offences, some committed before and some after
the crime which is the
subject of this appeal. The offences for which he was to be sentenced included
possessing a controlled drug
and possessing a restricted substance on 6 January
2023. They also included possessing a controlled drug and possessing a
substance on 13 March 2023, possessing a controlled drug and driving
with an illicit drug in oral fluid on 17 March 2023, possessing
a controlled
drug and driving with an illicit drug in oral fluid on 13 April 2023. The
magistrate decided to defer sentence. The
appellant next appeared on 17 April
2024 to be sentenced for a different offence, causing grievous bodily harm by
negligent driving
on 1 July 2022. He was given a four month wholly suspended
sentence. The matters subject to the deferred sentence returned to Court
June 2024. Apart from being made subject to a three month wholly suspended term
no other order was made.
rather lengthy summary makes clear the nature and extent of the appellant's
record for drug related offending. He had many prior
convictions for possession
and use and drug related dishonesty and driving offences, and some prior
convictions for selling, although
none for trafficking. He had been made subject
to many suspended terms of imprisonment, and although he had been made subject
a drug treatment order which was completed, his drug use continued during and
following the order. He sold illicit drugs while subject
to the order. The
pre-sentence report which assessed the appellant's eligibility and suitability
for a further drug treatment order
also addressed the possibility of a home
detention order and recommended against it. The report expressed strong concerns
appellant's ability to remain abstinent from illicit substances given
his history of use and continued use of methylamphetamine.
behalf of the appellant the sentencing judge was given a report from a
consultant psychiatrist, Dr Ross Kirkman, addressed to
the appellant's general
practitioner. The report refers to a diagnosis of ADHD, GAD and SAD. Although
those latter two terms were
not explained in the report, they seem to refer to
generalised adjustment disorder and substance abuse disorder. Dr Kirkman
therapeutic medication. It was not suggested to the trial judge that
the report had any relevance to sentence beyond addressing the
prospect of the
appellant's rehabilitation. His Honour was also informed that the appellant had
"self-detoxified" and commenced the
Salvation Army Day Program on 26 September
2023. By the date of the report on 8 April 2024, he had attended 18 sessions and
"insight into his substance abuse and its impact on his life..."
for the appellant urged the sentencing judge to make a drug treatment order. The
submission was rejected. A drug treatment
order, made under
Sentencing Act
(Tas), is a sentencing option which places emphasis
on the rehabilitation of the offender in preference to other sentencing
such as general deterrence and retribution:
[2017] TASSC 23
, referred to with approval by Martin AJ, with
whom Marshall AJ and Porter AJ agreed, in
Bell v Tasmania
33 Tas R 95
. As will be explained, for trafficking,
although the personal circumstances of the appellant and the prospect of his
rehabilitation
remained relevant sentencing considerations, they were of lesser
importance:
Director of Public Prosecutions v Swan
[2016] TASCCA 9
. It is not contended that the sentencing judge erred by declining to
make a drug treatment order and imposing a sentence of actual
imprisonment. On
this appeal, the appellant argues that it is the length of the term which was
imposed which makes the sentence manifestly
excessive because of the following
principal factors:
the appellant
pleaded guilty;
there was some
co-operation with the police on the day of the search. He had opened both safes
when requested to do so;
there was no
other evidence of the level of trafficking beyond the "presence of a trafficable
quantity of drugs" on the day of the
the trafficking
"had all of the hallmarks of a small individual who was afflicted by addiction
selling to fund his own habit";
the appellant
was not to profit from the N, N-dimethylpentylone which was held for someone
despite the
appellant's long history of substance abuse he remained motivated to address his
addiction and there remained a prospect
of rehabilitation.
reliance was placed by counsel for the appellant on the last of these factors,
the prospects of the appellant's rehabilitation.
Following his apprehension he
had taken it upon himself to address his addiction by abstinence and engagement
with a rehabilitation
service. Some signs were positive. In sentencing since
then, magistrates had been persuaded to order community based sentencing options
to facilitate continuation of the rehabilitation. It was submitted that if a
substantial term of actual imprisonment was imposed
then all of the effort
"invested" in achieving reform would be put at risk.
Upston v Tasmania
[2018] TASCCA 4
30 Tas R 262
, Porter AJ,
with whom Blow CJ and I agreed, discussed many of the matters of principle to be
applied when considering sentences for
drug trafficking. His Honour referred to
and applied statements made in this Court in a number of earlier appeals
concerning sentences
for trafficking:
Sweetman v Tasmania
28 Tas R 325
Stebbins v Tasmania
[2016] TASCCA
25 Tas R 421
Director of Public Prosecutions v Swan
Deakin v Tasmania
[2016] TASCCA 19
Le v Tasmania
The principles restated by Porter AJ in
have direct
application to this case. At [15]-[16], his Honour said:
no doubt, as counsel for the respondent emphasised, that the crime of
trafficking in a controlled substance is one that,
ordinarily at least, should
attract harsh punishment. Factors of general deterrence and denunciation are the
predominant sentencing
considerations. As this Court has recognised, these
considerations may become more acute where the controlled substance involved
methylamphetamine, particularly in its crystalline form colloquially known as
'ice'. This is primarily because of its pernicious
nature, the prevalence of its
use, and the great harm – direct and indirect – that it causes in
the community.
As has also been discussed by this Court, because of the wide range of
conduct that may be involved in the crime of trafficking, and
the wide variation
in criminality, there is no meaningful discernible sentencing range for the
crime." (Citations removed)
addressing what was to be made of sentences imposed in other cases, his Honour
continued at [22]:
"Bearing in mind what I have already said about
the use of this type of information, I should say something in general about
sentences for trafficking. A review of all sentences in the last few
years for that crime, particularly involving amphetamine and
methylamphetamine,
reveals an increase in the upper end of the range. That can be accounted for by
escalations in the level of criminal
activity in particular cases, thus
requiring proportionate responses. It is also explained by the Court's response
to the increased
prevalence in the trade in, and use of those drugs. Courts are
entitled in such circumstances to give factors of general deterrence
denunciation greater weight than they might have been afforded in the past:
v Downie and Dandy
[1998] 2 VR 517
at 520-522;
Braslin and Cowen v
[2010] TASCCA 1
for the appellant referred, in general terms, to the sentencing data provided on
the Sentencing Advisory Council website
for sentences for single and multiple
counts of trafficking between 2001 and 2014. That data is now somewhat aged but,
more importantly,
it provides very limited assistance when, because of the wide
variation in the circumstances which may constitute the crime, no sentencing
range can be deduced. It was further submitted that following a conviction for
trafficking, a sentence of actual imprisonment is
not "a given." So much may be
readily accepted. However it gets the appellant nowhere on an appeal on this
ground. I would accept
that it was open for the sentencing judge to adopt a more
lenient approach. The appellant pleaded guilty and had no prior convictions
trafficking. His crime was motivated at least to some extent by addiction, and
it was thus open to regard his criminality as
less than that of the person who
had offended purely for commercial gain:
Upston v Tasmania
at [27] citing
at [102], [110];
[2007] VSCA 196
[2008] VSCA 84
, 18 VR 434 at
. The amount of cash
in his possession was not large compared to some cases.
I am quite unpersuaded that the sentence imposed by his Honour was manifestly
excessive. To succeed on that ground the appellant
must establish that the
sentence was so harsh as to fall outside the range open to the sentencing judge
in the proper exercise of
his broad sentencing discretion. Despite the
considerable emphasis placed on the prospects of the appellant's rehabilitation,
has been repeatedly been made clear by this Court and by many other
sentencing and appeal courts that, for drug trafficking, deterrence,
and denunciation, with the primary aim of protection of the public, are the
dominant sentencing considerations. In
Director of Public Prosecutions v
[2020] TASCCA 10
, Brett J, like Porter AJ in
noted the recent increase in sentences for serious cases of trafficking and saw
it as an "appropriate incremental response to the
prevalence of the crime and
the developing perception and acknowledgment of the harm which drugs are causing
to the community." The
need for sentences to reflect the damage to society done
by the sale of illicit drugs for profit has been recognised for a long time:
for example
[1979] FCA 32
(1979) 46 FLR 386.
However, courts in this
State and elsewhere are facing what seems to be an ever increasing burden of
cases involving violence and
dishonesty significantly contributed to by the use
of and trade in methylamphetamine. Methylamphetamine is a drug which is
particularly
prevalent. Its use causes grave damage to the health of users and
its trade causes great harm, both directly and indirectly, to the
Bell v Tasmania
(above) per Martin AJ at [19]. Traffickers foster and
encourage addiction in others. As counsel for the respondent correctly
the drug carries the risk of encouraging further criminal activity to
fund addictions as well as contributing to reported and unreported
violence. The
appellant possessed a substantial quantity of methylamphetamine most of which
was intended for sale at considerable
value. Given the quantity and value of the
methylamphetamine in his possession there must have been a significant element
of financial
gain in his offending, even if his involvement with drugs
originated from his addiction. The cash in his possession was evidence
previous drug sales. Despite the absence of a prior conviction for trafficking
he had previously sold illicit drugs. The many
courts which had dealt with the
appellant's drug related offending over the years had extended him lenience by
imposition of wholly
suspended sentences and a drug treatment order, none of
which resulted in reform or sufficiently deterred him from this crime.
sentencing judge's comments on passing sentence included these
"Mr Kay, your counsel has urged me to give you another
chance by making a drug treatment order. She has emphasised your past success
and your continued efforts for rehabilitation notwithstanding relapses from time
to time. In particular, she has emphasised your
attempts to de-toxify and your
work with the Bridge Programme. However, Mr Kay, there are limits to the
circumstances in which such
orders are appropriate. First, your criminal
offending on this occasion was not minor. It was well removed from the simple
of a controlled drug. You engaged in the next step up. You trafficked
in this insidious drug, which causes misery throughout our
community, and in an
associated drug. Your trafficking in methylamphetamine was not a minor example
of this crime. As I have said,
no doubt you were helping to fund your own
addiction, but your trafficking possesses the hallmarks going beyond the odd
means of funding your addiction. You were well organised and well
equipped to traffic in a significant manner. The potential return
methylamphetamine was significant.
...Both general and personal deterrence are highly significant factors in
sentencing you, as are denunciation and punishment reflecting
community concern arising from trafficking in methylamphetamine. It causes
widespread misery, as I am sure you are aware.
Ultimately, the primary concern
is the protection of the public and I am satisfied that in order to achieve this
purpose, it is necessary
to impose a sentence of imprisonment. I regard the
alternative as inappropriate."
short, I agree with the sentencing judge. His Honour's approach to sentence did
not result in imposition of a term of imprisonment
of such length that it was
manifestly excessive and eligibility for parole was allowed within the shortest
possible time:
Sentencing Act
I would dismiss the appeal.
JOSHUA WILLIAM KAY v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
27 November 2024
This matter is a sentencing appeal. On 26 August 2024, Martin AJ sentenced the
appellant to a term of imprisonment of two years
and six months, with a
non-parole period of 15 months. The appellant claims that the sentence is
manifestly excessive.
On 3 June 2024, the appellant pleaded guilty to two counts of trafficking in a
controlled substance, contrary to
Misuse of Drugs Act
. The particulars of the first offence are that on or about 8 March
2023, at West Moonah, the appellant trafficked in methylamphetamine.
particulars of the second crime are that on or about 8 March 2023, at West
Moonah, the appellant trafficked in N-dimethylpentylone.
In his comments on passing sentence, the sentencing judge said that the
appellant was engaged in the business of selling methylamphetamine.
"The drug was packaged in a form commonly used when selling;
you were equipped with two sets of scales and empty bags; there were
there were bundles of cash totalling $4,250, $3,000 of which was in three
bundles, each of twenty $50 notes, and each
secured with a zip tie. These are
all the hallmarks of somebody who was engaged in selling methylamphetamine."
In addition to methylamphetamine, police discovered N-dimethylpentylone at the
appellant's premises, in the form of pink tablets.
There were 191 pink tablets
of that substance, weighing 93.9 grams. Under the
Misuse of Drugs Act
trafficable quantity of that substance is 25 grams or 20 tablets. The appellant
intended to consume some of the methylamphetamine
for his own use, but intended
to sell the bulk of it. The value of that drug, in the quantity possessed by
the appellant on the
day the police executed their search warrant, was in the
range of $56,500 to $112,900. The other drug was possessed with the intention
of selling it to another person, who intended to on-sell it. Its value was, in
total, about $4,775.
During the police search at his premises, the appellant was co-operative and
produced a key to open a safe. He also entered a code
into another safe to
allow police access. The police attendance at the appellant's premises occurred
on 8 March 2023 in relation
to a drug related search warrant.
The sentencing judge considered the offences not to be at the lowest end of the
scale of seriousness. He said they had occurred
against a background of the
appellant's "constant involvement" with methylamphetamine.
The appellant was subject to drug related probation orders in 2012, 2013 and
2017. From August 2019 to January 2021, he was part
of the Court Mandated Drug
Diversion Programme, having been placed on a Drug Treatment Order on 27 August
2019. He relapsed by offending
in March 2020, but graduated from the programme
in January 2021.
Between January 2021 and March 2023, the appellant began again to use large
quantities of methylamphetamine on a daily basis. The
appellant attempted
detoxification in early 2024 and has been engaged with the Bridge
Before the sentencing judge, the appellant's counsel submitted that another
Drug Treatment Order should be made, given that the
appellant had attempted
rehabilitation and had engaged with the Bridge Programme.
The sentencing judge rejected that submission, noting that trafficking was
involved in the offending and not the mere possession
of unlawful drugs. His
Honour said that the appellant was "well organised and well equipped to traffic
in a significant manner"
and that "the potential return from the
methylamphetamine was significant."
The sentencing judge also referred to the appellant's significant criminal
record. He considered that general specific deterrence,
denunciation and just
punishment "reflecting the grave community concerns arising from trafficking in
methylamphetamine" made it
necessary for him to impose a sentence of
imprisonment.
His Honour imposed a global, single penalty for the two offences. He noted
that, but for the guilty pleas, he would have imposed
a head sentence of three
years' imprisonment.
The appellant was in his mid-30's at the time of the offending and was not a
youthful offender.
The appellant's counsel submitted that there was no evidence of trafficking
beyond the presence of a trafficable quantity of drugs.
So much is beside the
point. The appellant trafficked in a trafficable quantity of drugs and pleaded
guilty to doing so, and was
sentenced on that basis.
The appellant's counsel also submitted that:
"The trafficking had
all the hallmarks of a small individual, who is afflicted by addictions, selling
drugs to fund his own habit."
This overstates the situation. It was accepted before the sentencing judge
that the appellant consumed part of what was available
for him to sell, but as
the sentencing judge pointed out, given the value of the methylamphetamine found
at the appellant's premises,
his operation, although not at the most
sophisticated level, was not unsophisticated.
The appellant's counsel also stated that the alleged trafficking related to one
day. However, that is because that was the day
on which the police discovered
the trafficking operation. Nothing turns on that.
Counsel for the appellant raised the importance of the appellant's attempts to
rehabilitate himself prior to sentencing. The sentencing
judge did take that
into account, as well as relapses of the appellant during the course of that
rehabilitation. In written submissions,
counsel for the appellant said
"The sentence imposed is objectively high and seemed to
reflect the Court's belief that the appellant was in the business of drug
trafficking."
The fact was the appellant was in that business, albeit not at a high scale,
nor at a low scale.
To succeed on this appeal, the appellant must show that the sentence imposed
was unreasonable or unjust. It must be established
that it was so manifestly
wrong that it could only be the result of some undefinable error in the exercise
of the judicial discretion;
Bresnehan v The Queen
[1992] TASSC 55
(1992) 1 Tas R 234
As Kirby J (with whom Gummow and Gaudron JJ agreed) said in
Dinsdale v The
[2000] HCA 54
(2000) 202 CLR 321
"The necessity to show error
in such a case is fully accepted by courts deciding appeals against sentence.
...Because the imposition
of a sentence involves the exercise of judgment and a
valuation upon which minds can differ, it bears close similarities to the making
of a discretionary decision. Like such a decision, if properly imposed, a
sentence will not be disturbed on appeal merely because
the appellate court
would have reached a different result had the responsibility of sentencing
belonged to it. As in the case of
appellant review of a discretionary decision,
a break is imposed upon undue appellant disturbance of primary decisions (and
unwarranted
appeals seeking that relief) by the necessity to identify an error
that justifies and authorises appellant intervention."
A wide variety of circumstances may be covered by offences contrary to
Misuse of Drugs Act
There is no general tariff. However, community
concern about the insidious effect of the drug methylamphetamine has led, over
to higher sentences for that offending; see
Upston v State of Tasmania
[2018] TASCCA 4
(2018) 30 Tas R 262
per Porter AJ.
The sentence imposed in this matter was not unjust or unreasonable. It did not
involve an error in the exercise of the sentencing
discretion of the sentencing
judge. The drugs found by the police in executing their search warrant were not
insignificant. As
the sentencing judge noted, the trafficking had "hallmarks"
of going beyond the odd sale to fund personal use.
The sentencing judge was entitled to take into account the appellant's poor
criminal record, especially with respect to relevant
like offending, as well as
previous opportunities given to him in prior sentencing orders to engage in
rehabilitation rather than
be sentenced to imprisonment. Put simply, the
appellant had run out of chances to avoid incarceration given the mid-range
in this matter. General and specific deterrence supported the
sentence imposed by the sentencing judge, as did the community concern
prevalence of methylamphetamine and the harm it is doing in the community.
As the sentence was not manifestly excessive, the appeal should be
JOSHUA WILLIAM KAY v TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
27 NOVEMBER 2024
I agree with Pearce J.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (178 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter