URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASRPDComm/2009/28.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:20:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Glamorgan Spring Bay Planning Scheme 1994 Amendment 05/04 [2009] TASRPDComm 28 (30 June 2009)
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Land Use Planning and Approvals
Resource Planning and Development
Commission Act 1997
Decision and Reasons for Decision
GLAMORGAN-SPRING
PLANNING SCHEME
Draft Amendment 05/04
Draft Permit 04/04020
The applications are to:
Insert clause 7.4 Development plan No. 4 Swanwick Golf Course
Residential Estate to apply over the provisions for Open Space zoning
identified as proposed Lot 1 off Hazards View Road, Coles Bay.
Grant a permit for a 1 lot subdivision from the golf course title at
Swanwick Road Coles Bay.
In accordance with its decision dated 30 March 2009 and in exercise of the power
conferred upon it by s.8 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission
, the Resource Planning and Development Commission delegated to Mr R
Nolan and Commissioner S Hogue jointly and severally:
powers and functions under
sections 40
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
in relation to Draft
Amendment 05/04 and Permit Number SU04020 to the Glamorgan Spring Bay Planning
Scheme 1994; and
connection with the exercise of those powers in performance of those functions,
its powers under Part 3 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Date and Place of Hearing
Tuesday, 21 April to Thursday 23
April 2009 at Hearing Room 1, Resource Planning and Development Commission,
Floor, 144 Macquarie Street,
Draft amendment 01/06 to rezone adjoining land to Village was a concurrent
application. As the representors and issues were largely
common to both
applications, the hearings were held concurrently.
Representations
Representations were received from the following:
Ms Angela Higgins
Mr C Woodfield (later C Bell) for Tasmanian Conservation Trust
Mr J Hunter
Mr & Mrs A & M Morgan
Mr & Mrs P & J Godfrey
Mr Luke Henry-Middleton for Department of Infrastructure, Energy and
Ms A Brammall
Mr T Brammall
Mr & Mrs K & D Nunn
Ms J Longden for Freycinet Golf Club Inc.
H Preston and K Paterson
Mrs J Watkins
Mr A J Gooding
Mr J W Snooks
Mr K Dean for Freycinet Golf Club Inc.
Mr G Peltzer
Mr A R Campbell
Mr R Heather
Mr A Coltier
Mr C Mason White, Ms M Robertson, Ms H Jessup and Mr S
Ms J Hutchinson
Ms S Underwood
Ms K Barker
Mr & Mrs M & M King
Mr & Mrs C & J von Bibra for Dunsinane Pty Ltd
Ms R Morgan
Mr B Williams
Mr C G Beecroft
R Alexander
K Alexander
Mr G O’Neill
Mr J Hawson
Mr J Faulkner
Mr B Leighton
Mr G Leighton
Mr R Wilkie
Ms B Ferrall
L Dransfield
Mrs & Mrs T & A Howell
Appearances at the hearing
Mr R Higgins represented Glamorgan Spring Bay Council.
Ms I Duckett on behalf of Federal Hotels and Resorts and in turn on behalf of
Freycinet Golf Club Inc. who called evidence from Mr
R Scott, Dr JP Cumming and
Dr P Barker.
Representors
Ms J Feehely of Counsel represented Ms S Underwood and Ms K Barker with Ms S
Underwood in attendance.
Mr G Peltzer
Issues raised in Representations
Of the representations received, 27 were in favour of the proposal. These
representations referred to the Freycinet Golf Club’s
ability to develop
the community asset and ensure its availability for future
generations.
The representations objecting to the draft amendment claimed:
− Adverse impact on the character of the locality.
− Lack of supporting infrastructure.
− Adverse impact from waste water and stormwater on surface and ground
− Vagueness of the proposal without clarity of the number of dwellings and
− Prospect of a new commercial zone through available discretionary uses,
motel, miscellaneous and tourist operation.
− Traffic impacts from residential use and potential commercial use of the
− Impacts on coastal environment and loss of remnant vegetation and
threatened species.
− Inconsistent with intent and objectives of the Open Space zone.
− The golf course was part of public open space contributions from earlier
subdivision.
− Residential development would be incompatible with the operation of the
golf course putting the future of the golf course
Council’s response to the representations
In regard to the draft amendment, Council’s response to the
representations was to resolve to advise the Resource Planning
and Development
Commission that in its opinion the amendment be modified as follows:
The critical review of development categories and associated use
status to accord with the intent of the Development Plan.
The formatting of text to reflect that adopted by the planning
The critical review of statements, terminology and controls in the
draft DP and associated text to provide a greater level of certainty
and control
over the scale, form and location of future development.
In regard to the permit, Council resolved to advise the Resource Planning and
Development Commission that in its opinion the conditions
on the permit should
be modified. The recommended modifications principally concerned arrangements
for the management of stormwater
and bushfire.
Commission’s assessment of the draft
The draft amendment was certified and permit approved
in February 2007. The certified document comprised the development plan and
associated plan of ‘proposed 1 lot subdivision’. Development in
accordance with the combined draft amendment and permit
was dependent on the
provision of a wastewater treatment plant for Coles Bay that was itself
dependent on the development of a resort
by the Federal Group at Coles Bay. It
was proposed that the golf course accept the treated effluent from the plant.
Subsequently
the proposal for sewerage reticulation emanating from the Federal
Group resort was abandoned.
The need to revise the arrangements for the disposal of waste water and the
recommendations following Council’s s.39 review
of representations led to
a revised development plan that was provided for the Commission’s
consideration and circulated to
the representors prior to the hearing. A final
revision of the development plan was generated during the hearing of
representations.
Site and locality
The subject site is part of land occupied and developed
as a golf course by the Freycinet Golf Club Inc. The draft amendment is to
provide for residential use and development on a 1.94ha portion of the 30.36ha
Golf Club title.
The application
The draft amendment is to set provisions in the planning scheme for use and
development for a range of uses on part of the Freycinet
golf course that is
zoned open space. Justification for the planning scheme provisions was
contained in reports that accompanied
the application for certification of the
draft amendment and later submissions.
The principal proposition in the application was stated as:
‘The subject area has been identified as land that is surplus to the needs
of the golf course. An appropriately designed and
managed development would
enhance the amenity and value of the golf course, as well as complement the
existing residential settlement.
It is considered that housing can be
accommodated within this area without compromising the ongoing use of the golf
course, and
hence, the scheme’s objective for open space
The area to which the development plan is to apply was described as degraded,
eroded and not integrated into the golf course, serves
no specific purpose and
is redundant.
Applicable zoning
The application was submitted as a development plan under section 4.20.2 of the
planning scheme. The application referred to ‘
rezone the area
identified in appendix F to the Village zone
’. Appendix F appears as
a subdivision plan superimposed over an aerial photo. The plan does not provide
adequate definition
of the area for rezoning and could be interpreted to be the
whole of the golf course site.
However, as events unfolded the certified document did not include rezoning to
Village and the application of the development plan
provisions to lot 1 is
sufficiently clear. However, the certified plan defined as lot 1 lacks clarity
at the scale at which it was
Village zoning for lot 1 was canvassed at the hearing with differing views
expressed which do not need analysis as a change of zoning
would be considered
to be beyond a modification to the certified draft amendment.
The development plan
The draft amendment proposes
to insert clause 7.4 ‘Development Plan No. 4 Swanwick Golf Course
Residential Estate’ to
apply to land zoned Open Space. The surrounding
land use is residential with Village zoning, Open Space zoning (that is proposed
for Village zoning through draft amendment 01/06) and rural zoning.
The intent of the development plan as certified is
To allow for residential development in a golf course setting, whilst
observing the primary functions of the course. The site contains
remnant native
vegetation disturbance of which should be minimised
The draft plan as certified is to apply to the extent of any inconsistency to
the underlying Open Space zoning and sets provisions
for land use, subdivision,
consolidation of development, access, open space, vegetation, visual amenity,
parking and domestic infrastructure,
building form and colour and
As stated above, following the need to review the arrangements for disposal of
waste water and to address issues raised by Council
in response to
representations, the applicant submitted a revised development plan prior to the
Commission hearing with a final revision
tabled at the hearing.
The revised documents were similar in content but elaborated on the provisions.
The intent was replaced with a desired future character
statement as
The purpose of this development plan is to facilitate residential
development within a golf course setting, whilst preserving the
primary function
of the golf course. The site contains remnant native vegetation, disturbance of
which should be minimised. The
visual impact of housing development should be
minimised, taking particular care to avoid development which would be prominent
viewed from Coles Bay Road
The versions of the development plan under the various headings describe the
intended use and development of the site but lacked
specific development
standards consequently the various documents lacked certainty. On the certified
document standards were confined
to a provision for no further subdivision and a
maximum building height of 8m. On the final revised development plan submitted
the hearing an additional standard was included to set a maximum number of
dwelling units of 15.
In terms of land use, the use classification and qualifications were revised in
the later documents. For example the final revision
deleted motel and tourist
accommodation as available use classes. The availability of these use classes
had led to representations
claiming the possible development of a
‘commercial zone’ on the site.
The final version introduced an additional instrument in the form of a master
plan by containing an additional provision stated as:
‘Any development or works on the site subject to the prior approval of,
and compliance with an overall master plan of the site,
which must contain
access, building envelopes and landscape plan, in accordance with this
The draft amendment is styled as a development plan to replace the provisions of
the Open Space zone. The development plan, as certified
and revised, does
little to prescribe the actual use and development of the site which should be
its purpose with some assurance
that the intent/desired future character is in
fact achieved. Instead these details are deferred to a master plan for the
level of detail. The master plan would be subject to an undefined
prior approval process. Therefore, the development plan does
not provide the
certainty of development implied by the development plan
The intent/desired future character statement of the development plan includes a
statement about minimising native vegetation disturbance.
The botanical survey
and fauna habitat assessment (North Barker September 2003) identified two rare
plant species listed under the
Threatened Species Protection Act 1993
‘the proposed village development as currently presented will probably
result in the loss or disturbance to plants or habitat
of the vulnerable plant
Desmodium gunnii
’. (It is noted that this plant is
recorded on land immediately adjoining the boundary of the land to which the
development
plan applies.)
‘The stand of
Eucalyptus ovata
is subject to a moratorium against
clearing under the Forest Practices Act as a swift parrot foraging habitat is
also classed as
vulnerable land under the Act.’
A series of recommendations sought ‘the retention of some of the higher
conservation values on the property’ and to define
the approvals required
under other Acts.
At the hearing Dr Barker submitted that, to avoid bird strike, approval could be
sought for the removal of the
Eucalyptus ovata
and consideration of
offset planting. This submission led to Ms Duckett proposing the removal of the
ovata and replacement with
other suitable native vegetation as a provision in
the development plan.
The final version of the development plan states:
‘Where possible, development is to be restricted to areas of existing
disturbance. No threatened flora is to be disturbed
or damaged. Native
providence species are to be used for revegetation and landscaping where
possible. Not withstanding the provision
of clause 6.92 of the planning scheme,
prior to any development occurring on the site, the existing stand of
Eucalyptus Ovata
shall be removed, and replaced with other suitable
native vegetation.
All vegetation removal, revegetation, and landscape planting is to be shown on a
landscape plan forming part of the master plan for
Despite an intent/desired future character to minimise vegetation disturbance,
following an identified prospect of conflict between
bird strike against
buildings, there was a proposal to remove an existing stand of
. In essence the ability to achieve the intended use and development
in accordance with the intent/desired future character for the
area has not been
demonstrated.
The Road Needs Study (Tony Peters 2004) concluded:
‘the traffic impacts of the proposed residential village development
subdivision and the golf course were factored into the
Coroolinda Pty Ltd
subdivision proposal and no adverse impacts were
identified’
Nothing further arises from road matters. The critical upgrading of the road
junctions with Coles Bay Road are required under the
permit for draft amendment
01/06 for the adjoining land.
Other issues
The supplementary material provided for the Commission’s hearing examined
matters concerning settlement strategy, demographic
trends and examples of
residential golf courses in other places. Nothing particularly arises from this
The supplementary material included a fire management plan that in respect to
wild fires stated:
‘the site is considered to be within a bushfire prone area and wild fires
can be expected to periodically occur that will affect
The provision of a building protection zone and a fuel modified buffer zone to
minimise the fuel load within close proximity to buildings
and other assets was
examined. The consultants that prepared the fire plan advised allowing the golf
course to act as the fuel modified
buffer zone and a cleared buffer of 3m width
of external walls of any structure to act as minimum building protection zone
remove any large over hanging trees.
The fire management plan refers to retaining the amenity of the golf course, the
bushland character and minimising the visual impact
of the development from the
surrounding areas. The ability to maintain a fire safe environment and to
achieve the amenity as described
has not been demonstrated for the potential
number of dwellings defined for the site.
The geotechnical waste water assessment (JP Cumming undated) found the risk of
land instability and inundation of flooding was low
and therefore acceptable.
The proposed waste water assessment was based on the residential lots and future
club house being serviced
by a small decentralised waste water treatment plant
located on the course close to the residential zone. Treated effluent would
combined with the effluent from the Hazards View Drive treatment plants to be
subsequently reticulated for irrigation of the golf
course. The waste water
calculations were based on ‘approximately 15 new residential lots’.
The material provided sufficiently
demonstrates the suitability of the site in
respect to the management of stormwater and disposal of waste
An Aboriginal heritage survey (R Sainty 2004) found no aboriginal sites within
the survey area. However a further review of the
report suggests the survey
site is not the subject lot with the statement made that the area had been used
for farming and all native
vegetation had been removed, the ground was covered
by thick grass rendering ground visibility poor.
Mr Scott described the position of the Freycinet golf club
submitting:
− The golf club is a community based facility that caters for locals and
− The club cannot survive without a club house.
− A club house can’t be built without a major injection of
− The previous club house was lost in a fire.
− The subdivision will provide the necessary capital.
− The club house will offer the ability to generate additional
The position of the golf club in attempting to establish a firm financial
position and funds for a club house is noted however this
is secondary to the
sustainable development of the site.
Drafting of some aspects of the development plan will create uncertainty for the
future permit assessment process by using phrases
‘buildings do not become the dominant element in the landscape’.
‘Any development within the discretionary building zone or exceeding two
storeys in height but provide a visual impact assessment
that demonstrates the
development will not be visibly prominent when viewed from any public
‘Detailing the building should be simple at a general level and well
articulated at a more detailed level.’
The inclusion of such statements, lack of clarity of the boundaries of the
discretionary building zone and few measurable standards
do not aid in providing
certainty through the development plan.
In addition, there are unresolved matters relevant to the ability to achieve the
intent or desired future character of the development
− The boundaries for permitted building zones and discretionary building
zones as the basis for the classification of use and
development, lack clarity.
The plan constituting Appendix F in the application and the certified plan (with
details barely visible)
noted ‘possible building sites’ and
‘discretionary building zine’ (sic) and was a scale that the
would be difficult to determine.
− No assessment of requirements for the manoeuvring of vehicles and
location of car parking on the site, water storage and
other requirements and
the additional areas to be cleared of vegetation to satisfy these
requirements.
− No maximum floor area of buildings and definition of area to limit
ground disturbance.
− No acknowledgement of requirements for ancillary structures,
outbuildings, clotheslines etc. (The schedule defines prohibited
development as ‘use or development not specifically defined as exempt,
permitted or discretionary within the schedule’.
This contrasts to
another place in the planning scheme where exemptions appear for sheds etc less
and planting untied to any particular zone).
− The means of protecting the golf course interests with subsequent
development of lot 1 if conflicts between the uses occur.
− The actual number of dwellings on the site is deferred to the master
The draft amended is deficient in structure and content and has not demonstrated
that the intent/desired future character statement
can be achieved.
Commission’s assessment of the permit
The s.43A process grants a conditional permit for the
subdivision of one lot of 1.94ha. The lot provides the site for the range of
uses and developments intended under the development plan which is central to
the draft amendment. As concluded below because the
draft amendment is rejected
so must the permit be refused.
Application of State Policies
State Coastal Policy 1996
The site is within the coastal zone as defined in the Policy. The application
assessed as being prepared in accordance with the
State Policy primarily because
it meets the requirements of:
2.4.2. Urban and residential development in the coastal zone will be based
on existing towns and townships. Compact and contained
planned urban and
residential development will be encouraged in order to avoid ribbon development
and unrelated cluster developments
along the coast.
Interim State Policy on the Protection of Agricultural Land 2008
The land is not agricultural land as defined in the Policy. The application is
assessed as being prepared in accordance with the
Interim State Policy on the
Protection of Agricultural Land 2008
State Policy on Water Quality Management 1997
The proposed arrangements for stormwater management and waste water disposal
should ensure use or development in accordance with
the Policy. The amendment
is assessed as being prepared in accordance with the
State Policy on Water
Quality Management 1997
National Environmental Protection Measures
The NEPMs are not applicable to the applications.
Schedule 1 objectives
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
(a) to promote the sustainable development of natural and physical resources
and the maintenance of ecological processes and genetic
The draft amendment has not demonstrated that this objective has been furthered.
The maintenance of ecological processes and genetic
diversity are matters
applicable to the site.
(b) to provide for the fair, orderly and sustainable use and development of
air, land and water.
The draft amendment has not demonstrated that the proposals for the site are
fair, orderly and sustainable use and development.
(c) to encourage public involvement in resource management and
The draft amendment has been through the formal public processes required by
(d) to facilitate economic development in accordance with the objectives set
out in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) above.
The draft amendment does not facilitate economic development consistent with
the preceding objectives.
(e) to promote the sharing of responsibility for resource management and
planning between the different spheres of Government, the
community and industry
in the State.
The deficiencies and unresolved issues of the development plan do not assist in
furthering this objective.
objectives are
not furthered in terms of establishing a system of planning instruments to be
the principal way of setting objectives,
policies and controls for the use,
development and protection of land and that demonstrates the intended use or
development secures
a pleasant, efficient and safe working, living and
recreational environment.
Conclusion on the draft amendment
The draft amendment seeks to make particular provisions for residential use and
development on part of the golf course. The draft
amendment is deficient in
structure and content and has not demonstrated that the intent/desired future
character statement of the
amendment can be achieved. The draft amendment
should be rejected.
Conclusion on the permit
As the draft amendment is rejected the permit is refused.
The Commission rejects the draft amendment pursuant to
Section 41(b)
Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
) and refuses the permit.
Pursuant to
Section 43H
(1)(b)(i) of the
Planning and Approvals Act 1993
the Commission refuses the
Robin Nolan
Sandra Hogue
Resource Planning and development Commission
30 June 2009
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (174 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter