URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFC/2025/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:14:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Aviation Consolidated Holdings Pty Ltd v McMullen [2025] TASFC 6 (23 July 2025)
[2025] TASFC 6
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (FULL
Aviation Consolidated Holdings Pty Ltd v
[2025] TASFC 6
: AVIATION CONSOLIDATED
HOLDINGS PTY LTD
McMULLEN, Tony (in his capacity as General Manager of
Glenorchy City Council)
APPEALED FROM:
Consolidated Holdings Pty Ltd v McMullen
[2023] TASSC 18
23 July 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Shanahan CJ, Cuthbertson J, Porter
Magistrates – Appeal and review – Tasmania – Motion to
review – Other matters – Appellant found guilty
of failing to comply
with building order – Where magistrate's findings based on documentary
evidence – Motion to review
dismissed by primary judge – Magistrate
could reasonably have relied on the documents – Findings of the magistrate
open – A magistrate acting reasonably could have found the
complaint proved – Primary judge not shown to have been in
dismissing motion to review.
Aust Dig Magistrates
Legislation:
Building Act
Cases cited:
He Kaw Teh v R
157 CLR 523
Hindrum v Lane
[2014] TASFC 5
Jones v Bonde
[2021] TASSC 35
Kent v Gunns Limited
[2009] [30]
[2009] TASSC 30
Nilsson v McDonald
[2009] TASSC 66
19 Tas R 173
[2009] TASSC 43
19 Tas R 21
Robinson v Chatters
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Simmons Wolfhagen Lawyers
[2025] TASFC 6
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 6/2025
File No 1695/2023
AVIATION CONSOLIDATED HOLDINGS PTY LTD v TONY
(in his capacity as General Manager of Glenorchy City
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
SHANAHAN CJ
CUTHBERTSON J
23 July 2025
of the Court:
Appeal dismissed.
Serial No 6/2025
File No 1695/2023
AVIATION CONSOLIDATED HOLDINGS PTY LTD v TONY
(in his capacity as General Manager of Glenorchy City
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
SHANAHAN CJ
23 July 2025
I have had the opportunity to read the draft judgment of Porter AJ. There is
nothing I wish to add. I would dismiss the appeal
for the reasons given by his
Honour and join in the orders he proposes.
File No 1695/2023
AVIATION CONSOLIDATED HOLDINGS PTY LTD v TONY
(in his capacity as General Manager of Glenorchy City
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
CUTHBERTSON J
23 July 2025
I have read a draft of the decision of Porter AJ and I agree that the
appellant's appeal should be dismissed for the reasons stated
I wish to add something further about the argument concerning the statement of
facts and contentions in the Resource Management
and Planning Appeal Tribunal
(RMPAT) appeal. The appellant asserts that because the statement of facts and
contentions was not in
evidence, it was impossible for the Chief Magistrate to
make findings about whether the appellant complied with the agreement as
remedial work. As Porter AJ has noted, the evidence is not capable of supporting
an inference that anything other than an
extension of time in which to comply
with the building order was agreed.
No attempt was made by the appellant to explain how any such agreement as to
remedial work (if it existed) was relevant to the offence
with which it was
charged. In my view, it was not relevant in light of the way in which the
appellant ran its case. It is necessary
to consider the relevant provisions of
Building Act 2016
(the Act) to explain why that is so.
The appellant was issued with a building notice by the permit authority (the
Glenorchy City Council) pursuant to s 237(2) of the
Act on 5 October 2020 which
referred to "Unapproved building work (fill) carried out without a building
permit or other valid authorisation".
The notice required the appellant to show
cause within two days why it should not immediately cease work on site and
remove the unapproved
building work (fill) in accordance with the Act. The
appellant responded on 7 October 2020 confirming works had stopped. Mr Ters,
behalf of the appellant, stated he did not "believe I should be required to
remove the fill. I should be given the opportunity
to gain approval rather than
demolish". He also indicated he awaited "confirmation of the withdrawal" of the
building notice.
On 30 October 2020, and in light of the appellant's failure to gain approval
for the unauthorised fill placed on site, the building
order was issued pursuant
to s 247 of the Act. This provision concerns building work performed in
contravention of the Act where
the permit authority does not revoke a building
notice in respect of that building work. A building order under s 247 of the Act
is to require the owner, at the owner's choice, to demolish the building work or
building or to complete any remaining building work
in accordance with the Act.
These were the options set out in the building order.
The building works in this case were permit building works. The Act requires
that permit building works be conducted in accordance
with a valid building
permit issued in respect of the work: see s 148(1). The permit, in this case,
included a condition "As per
Certificate of Likely Compliance No 17.0049". That
certificate was attached to the permit and bears a stamp indicating it was one
of the documents relevant to the permit. An application for a building permit is
required to be accompanied by a certificate of likely
compliance that is in
force in respect of the proposed permit building work: s 139(2)(b)(i). The
certificate of likely compliance
in this instance was prepared by a building
surveyor, Jessica Critchley. It notes that a number of documents and matters
into account for the purposes of s 138 of the Act when considering
the appellant's application for the certificate of likely compliance.
documents included the plans relied upon by the respondent to identify where the
appellant was permitted to introduce fill
to the site. The certificate of
likely compliance also imposed a condition requiring "The engineer to confirm
the controlled fill
has been placed and compacted in accordance with the
approved plans and acceptable practice methods".
A person may, however, perform permit building work that varies from the
building permit if the work is performed in accordance
with the written approval
of the relevant building surveyor and the approval has been obtained before
performing the building work
that varies from the permit: s 148(2) of the Act.
There was no evidence before the Chief Magistrate to suggest s 148(2) of the Act
was engaged.
Section 246(8) of the Act
creates the offence with which the appellant
was charged. It provides that a person served with a building order must comply
the order. Section 246(9) of the Act
provides that a person may not
be found guilty of an offence under the Act in respect of work performed in
accordance with a building
order. The appellant has never suggested the building
order in this case was issued otherwise than in accordance with the requirements
of the Act.
Ultimately, the building order required the appellant to demolish the
non-compliant works, which in this case required the removal
of the unauthorised
fill, or complete the building works in accordance with the permit. In either
case, the permit was determinative
of where fill was permitted to be introduced
onto the site unless the permit was varied in accordance with the terms of s
of the Act. As I have already noted, no such variation had been obtained
by the appellant.
Section 246(8) is a strict liability offence; no guilty knowledge or intent is
required to be proved. Consequently, a defendant
may avoid criminal
responsibility if they act under an honest and reasonable mistake as to the
existence of facts, which, if true,
would have made their conduct innocent:
He Kaw Teh v R
[1985] HCA 43
157 CLR 523.
I can detect no
suggestion in the appellant's arguments before the Chief Magistrate, Marshall AJ
or this Court that such a ground
of exculpation arose in this case. If the
appellant sought to rely on honest and reasonable mistake, it would have been
to first satisfy an evidentiary onus to raise the ground of
exculpation. Then, and only then, would the prosecution bear the legal
proving beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant did not have such an honest
and reasonable but mistaken belief: see
Hindrum v Lane
[2014] TASFC 5
per Tennent J; at [70] per Pearce J. In this case, there was no
evidence sufficient to raise the issue. As Porter AJ has outlined,
cross-examination of Mr Jeffes did not adduce any evidence that the Facts and
Contentions filed with RMPAT described the unapproved
fill or fill batter.
Consequently, it was not necessary for the Chief Magistrate to make findings as
to the appellant's compliance
or otherwise with any matters addressed in the
Facts and Contentions filed with RMPAT.
File No 1695/2023
AVIATION CONSOLIDATED HOLDINGS PTY LTD v TONY
(in his capacity as General Manager of Glenorchy City
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
23 July 2025
Introduction
The appellant was charged on the complaint of the respondent with failing to
comply with a building order in breach of
Building Act
. That order was dated 30 October 2020 with a breach alleged to be a
continuing one from 22 January 2021. The complaint concerned
a quantity of soil
or "fill"; more particularly, whether a quantity of fill was where it ought not
to have been pursuant to a building
permit issued to the appellant for the
construction of a residence at 10 McGill Rise, Glenorchy.
16 December 2022, Chief Magistrate Geason found the complaint proved. The
appellant moved to review that order on the ground that
it was not open to the
magistrate, acting reasonably, to find the charge proved beyond reasonable
doubt. On 22 June 2023, Marshall
AJ dismissed the motion. This is an appeal
from that order of dismissal. For the following reasons, I would dismiss this
The following facts are uncontentious. The appellant was issued a building
permit by the Glenorchy City Council for the construction
of a single dwelling
on the site. The slope of the block of the land was downwards from the road
frontage towards the rear boundary,
closely beyond which was a residence in a
cutting in the bank, 12 McGill Rise. The evidence showed that the fall down the
the front of the appellant's block to the rear was about six metres.
The permit allowed fill to be placed in a particular location
for a pad for a
concrete slab. The drawings for the residence in evidence allowed for a garage
at the front of the residence to
be erected on the slab, with the slab extending
to support a dining room and part of a lounge room behind the garage. Beyond
a floating floor was to be constructed, supported by three rows of four
piers. Various plans and drawings were in evidence before
the magistrate. In
broad and non-technical terms, the fill, including the pad batter, was not to
extend very much beyond the rear
edge of the slab.
The apparent existence of unauthorised fill was first observed in January 2020,
but discussions with George Ters, on behalf of the
appellant, took place in
relation to him applying for a variation to the building permit. That
application was made but ultimately
not approved due to a failure to submit
required information. On 5 October 2020, Dylan Jeffes, the co-ordinator of
Building and Plumbing
Services at the Council, inspected the site and then
issued to the appellant a building notice requiring it to show cause within
days why specified work should not be carried out. That specified work was to
stop work and remove unapproved fill. An accompanying
letter referred to an
embankment at the rear of the property. On 7 October 2020 Mr Ters emailed the
Council and advised that the
work had stopped, but that he did not believe that
he should be required to remove the fill; he should instead be given the
opportunity
to gain approval, "rather than demolish".
As the fill was not removed, the Council, issued the building order. That
provided the option of removing the unapproved fill and
converting the site back
to its natural contours within seven days or completing the remaining building
work in accordance with the
Building Act
within 28 days. The order stated
that compliance was required unless the specified timeframes were "formally
extended by agreement
in writing from the Permit Authority"; in this case, the
Council. (It is common ground that this requirement is not derived from
Building Act
, but nothing turns on this.) In response to the building
order, in December 2020 the appellant took the matter to the then Resource
Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal. Ultimately, an agreement was reached
between the parties, and the appeal was withdrawn.
The agreement related to an
extension of time to 21 January 2020 to comply with the building order.
Mr Jeffes later went to the site on a number of occasions to check if the fill
had been removed. He took a series of photographs
on 21 January, 5 February, 2
March and 10 May 2021. All of these were in evidence before the magistrate. Mr
Jeffes' evidence was
that when he saw the site on 5 February 2021, a portion of
the fill that had been seen in September 2020 appeared to have been removed,
there was a layer of fill of unknown depth, spread across the site. Things
remained in that state up to and including the visit
This appeal
As reflected in the ground in the notice to review, at first instance the
appellant was required to establish that the magistrate
could not reasonably
have come to the conclusion that the complaint was proved beyond reasonable
doubt. Such motions to review do
not involve a rehearing. This is a rehearing
of the motion to review with the need to show error by the primary judge, so the
of this Court is the same. The law about all of this has been made
abundantly clear over many years: see more recently for instance:
[2009] TASSC 43
19 Tas R 21
per Crawford CJ (with whom Blow
J and I agreed);
Nilsson v McDonald
[2009] TASSC 66
19 Tas R 173
per Blow J (with whom Crawford CJ agreed);
Kent v Gunns Limited
[2009] TASSC 30
18 Tas R 454
Robinson v Chatters
[2010] TASSC 66
Jones v Bonde
[2021] TASSC 35
There were three issues that were raised by the appellant as to whether the
magistrate could be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt.
They were repeated
before Marshall AJ and again in this Court.
The permitted
location of the fill
first is that it could not be ascertained where precisely it was that the
appellant was not permitted to locate fill on the site.
It was, and is, argued
that the drawings did not purport to exhaustively show where fill could be
located, and where the limits
of the approved area fill were. The magistrate
dealt with this argument by saying that the drawings detailed a concrete slab to
part of the dwelling, that the permit allowed fill to be used as the
foundation for the slab, and the fill as observed by Mr Jeffes
and apparent from
the photographs, "is located over the site and not contained to supporting the
concrete slab." The primary judge
at [10] said that the respondent's contrary
submission was assisted by building specification plans themselves, and there
was evidence
which enabled the magistrate to find as she did; the magistrate
could not be said to have acted unreasonably in coming to that view.
In his evidence, Mr Jeffes described the location of the authorised fill by
reference to a plan in a set of plans and drawings.
These were the one exhibit:
Ex P1; in this Court, Appeal Book Volume 1 at 45-65. The plan referred to by Mr
Jeffes was "C1" at p
60. He said that the limits of the permitted fill were
between the lines marked RL (reduced level) 112 and RL 115. Those lines and
area depicted by reference to the outline of the proposed dwelling are quite
clear. Mr Jeffes, who has a "Certificate IV" in
Residential Drafting and a
Diploma in Residential and Commercial Design, was not cross-examined on this
counsel for the respondent carefully explained in this appeal, the plans and
drawing clearly show the location of the permitted
fill. In particular, by
reference to drawings F03 and
in Ex P1, App Bk Vol 1 pp 49, 57, it was
demonstrated that the foot of the pad batter, therefore the approved fill, did
to a point 1800mm beyond the edge of the slab, and certainly not as
far as 2700mm. Looked at from the opposite direction of the rear
boundary, no
fill was approved within a distance of 10.75 metres from that rear boundary. The
location of authorised fill, of necessity,
created an absence of authority for
it to be put anywhere else. The magistrate could more than reasonably have come
to the view that
the plans sufficiently established where the fill was to be
located, and the primary judge's conclusion was correct.
there any unauthorised fill on site?
The second point argued is that there was no reliable evidence there was any
unauthorised fill on the site after 21 January 2021.
This depends on Mr Jeffes'
evidence in the hearing and the photographs he took. Mr Jeffes' evidence was
that on 21 January 2021,
he went to the site and saw what was described as a
"large fill embankment". He took photographs of that embankment; they were Ex
in the hearing before the magistrate: App Bk 1, pp 66, 67.
he went back on 5 February 2021, he said there was still some fill material
remaining. He could also see some plumbing work
that indicated "
the location
of some of the (inaudible) fixtures within the proposed dwelling.
" The large
embankment had been removed but there was fill generally in the same location,
but it had been dispersed. He gave the
evidence I earlier noted; that there was
still a layer of unknown depth across the area of the site. He said there was no
growing there, and it was distinguishable from the portion of
vegetation at the top of the cut between the two properties. He said
remaining fill was of a lighter colour and of a finer consistency with rocks
placed around the perimeter. The materials consisted
right up to the area where
the plumbing work was visible.
reference to photographs, Ex P6 – App Bk 1, pp 81 to 94, taken that day,
Mr Jeffes identified the fill sitting above the
cut in the block at the rear,
below which sits the residence at number 12 McGill Rise. When he returned on the
later occasions, nothing
seemed to have changed.
In cross-examination, Mr Jeffes agreed that in his experience "soil experts"
were able to classify soil types, including "fill soil".
He said he did not
have any expertise in the classification of fill soil. He was taken to his
evidence in which he described light
coloured soil which did not have vegetation
in it, and was asked whether he accepted he was not qualified to express an
opinion whether
such material was fill or not. He answered, "
I, okay, yeah,
yes, I – I guess I agree.
appellant argues that Mr Jeffes appropriately conceded that he was not able to
give such an opinion, and it would have been irrational
to proceed on the basis
that light coloured soil on the site was necessarily fill. It was further
argued as part of this contention,
that there was no evidence that the site from
21 January 2021, did not adhere to the natural contours of the land and the
of the natural ground line, as depicted in the drawings.
magistrate referred to the Oxford English Dictionary definition of "fill" as
"material, typically loose or compacted, which fills
a space, especially in
building or engineering work." The Macquarie Dictionary definition is "a mass
of earth, stones etc, used
to fill a hollow". There is no argument about
is clear to me that the Exhibit P6 photographs shows what Mr Jeffes described.
The bank is covered with what appears to be a gravelly
colour than that which is apparent in the face of the cut at the rear of 12
McGill Rise. It was reasonably
open for the magistrate to have found that what
Mr Jeffes described was fill. The lighter soil is very similar to that which can
be seen within the large embankment, which he observed and photographed earlier.
There is a large mass of what appears to be light
soil within the centre of that
embankment, down to the apparent ground level. Further, in my view it can safely
be inferred from
Mr Jeffes' evidence and the photographs (Ex P6) and the plans
(Ex P1) that the plumbing is at the rear of the proposed construction
where the fill pad was supposed to end, thus marking the line of the fill at the
top of the bank.
It was also reasonably open, as the primary judge concluded, for the magistrate
to find that this fill did not adhere to the contours
of the land. Mr Jeffes'
opinion is borne out by an examination of the photographs, particularly those in
Ex P6. The edge of the
driveway to No 12 McGill Rise is plainly at the level of
the land at that point. Bearing in mind that interpretation of photographs
should be approached with caution, in my opinion the photographs show that the
land slopes down and away from that point along the
rear boundary of No 10
McGill Rise. This is in part demonstrated by the line of vegetation in that the
top of the cut is marked by
there is a slope along the length of the rear of number 10 down and away from
the driveway of No 12 is also confirmed by the
contour lines shown on Ex P1,
and C1; App Bk Vol 1 pp 46 and 60 respectively. In my view the
photographs are capable of being taken to show that the fill was relatively
uniform across the bank in the vertical plane, indicating an increasing depth of
fill across the slope.
The statement of facts & contentions
in the RMPAT appeal
The final aspect of the appellant's argument relates to the agreement reached
in the appeal from the building order, resulting in
the withdrawal of that
appeal. It is said to be "fatal to the prosecution case that the statement of
facts and contentions document
was not in evidence." Nor, it should be said, was
there any evidence at all of what it contained. This argument can be quickly
Mr Jeffes' evidence about this was as follows:
So do you accept
that the resolution of the Appeal Tribunal proceedings did something that
neither the Building Notice nor the Building
Order did, which was describe the
unapproved fill or the fill batter, as defined in a statement of facts and
contentions?......I
don't have an answer unfortunately. I'd have to refer to
the statement of facts and contentions.
Do you accept that it referred to a document?.....Oh, yes, yes, I
And as a result, the parties agreed, the appeal was withdrawn
.....correct
A little later in the cross-examination, the following exchange occurred:
But I'll suggest to you that by the 22
January 2021, the
fill as described in the statement of facts and contentions contained in the
Appeal Tribunal file had been removed.
Do you accept that?......I don't, I
There is no rational basis to infer that anything other than what is in the
statement is that which is described as the large embankment
shown in the
photographs Ex P 2, Ap Bk Vol pages 66 and 67. In any event, the evidence was
that the agreement reached was one to
extend the period of time for compliance
with the building order. Whatever fill may have been identified in the Facts and
Contentions
had not, according to Mr Jeffes' uncontradicted evidence, been
removed by the agreed date. There was no proper basis for rejecting
Disposition
For those reasons, the appellant has not shown that the primary judge was wrong
in dismissing the motion to review and I would dismiss
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (134 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter