URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASGAB/2021/40.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
KNL (Request for Emergency Guardianship) [2021] TASGAB 40 (27 August 2021)
KNL (Request for Emergency Guardianship)
[2021] TASGAB 40
HEARING DATE(S):
25 August 2021
DATE OF ORDERS:
25 August 2021
DATE OF STATEMENT OF REASONS:
27 August 2021
Ms V Jones, Member
APPLICATION
Emergency Guardianship Order
CATCHWORDS:
Emergency Guardian request – urgency – restrictive practice in
aged care – lowering of bed – legislative changes
operative from 1
July 2021 - disability and capacity – no medical evidence
LEGISLATION CITED:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Aged Care Act 1997
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication
STATEMENT OF REASONS
1. On 25 August 2021, the Guardianship and
Administration Board (‘the Board’) dismissed a Request for an
Emergency Guardianship
Order for KL.
2. KL is an 80 year old lady who lives in [the aged care facility], a
residential aged care facility operated by Uniting AgeWell in
3. The Applicant is KL’s husband, SL (‘the Applicant’).
4. On its own motion the Board has published this Statement of Reasons.
Legislation
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1995
(‘the Act’) gives the Board the
power to make orders if urgent circumstances exist, providing the Board is
there may be grounds for making an order.
(1) Where the Board considers it proper to do so by
reason of urgency, the Board may in respect of a represented person make any
or give any direction considered appropriate in the
circumstances.
(2) Where the Board considers it proper to do so, by
reason of urgency, the Board may, in respect of a person who is not a
represented
person but in respect of whom the Board considers that there may be
grounds for making a guardianship order or an administration
order make an order
appointing –
(a) the Public Guardian as his or her guardian;
(b) the Public Trustee as administrator of his or her estate
and in either case the Board may make any order or give any
direction considered appropriate in the circumstances.
(4) In the exercise of its powers under this section
(a) the Board is not required to give notice to any person or to
hold a hearing before making an order but the Board must make such
inquiries or
investigations as the Board may think appropriate; and
(b) the Board may
act on a request made, or information received, by telephone or any other means
that the Board considers appropriate
in the circumstances;
(4A) The powers and functions of the Board under this
section may be exercised and performed by one or 3 members of the Board as may
be determined in each case by the President.
of the Act provides the grounds for making a guardianship order:
(1) If the Board, after a hearing, is satisfied that the
person in respect of whom an application for an order appointing a guardian
an order appointing an administrator is made –
(a) is a person
with a disability; and
(b) is unable by reason of the disability to make
reasonable judgements in respect of all or any matters relating to his or her
or circumstances; and
(c) is in need of a guardian
the Board may make an order appointing a full or limited
guardian in respect of that person and any such order may be subject to such
conditions or restrictions as the Board considers
7. Further,
of the Act sets out the underlying principles of the Act:
A function or power conferred, or duty imposed, by this
Act is to be performed so that –
(a) the means which is the least
restrictive of a person's freedom of decision and action as is possible in the
circumstances is adopted;
(b) the best interests of a person with a
disability or in respect of whom an application is made under this Act are
promoted; and
(c) the wishes of a person with a disability or in respect
of whom an application is made under this Act are, if possible, carried
Evidence and Determination
8. The Request for an Emergency Guardianship Order
was accompanied by:
of Attorney No PA XXXXXX;
Progress Notes;
notes in relation to directed enquiries made by the Board Registry, dated 24 and
26 August 2021.
9. The Request states urgent circumstances exist because KL, who is a
resident of [the aged care facility], a residential aged care
(‘RACF’), needs her bed lowered to the floor to prevent her from
falling out of bed, and there has been a change
in legislation which requires
the approval of the Board by 1 September 2021 for the practice to continue.
10. The Request provides KL needs a guardian because ‘she needs
authority to allow [the RACF] to lower her bed at night to prevent
she does not have this authority she will have to sleep in a bed at normal
height and will be in danger of falling out,
and have a substantial risk of
injury’. The Medical Progress Notes provide evidence of KL having
suffered two falls as a result
of rolling out of bed, one around 10 July 2021,
and the other on 3 August 2021.
11. Inquiries were directed to be made by the Board Registry of the RACF. The
Board was informed KL became a care recipient of the
RACF on 20 June 2021, and
the practice of lowering her bed began ‘within the last couple of
weeks’ because KL had a fall
from her bed, and the doctor agreed it was in
her best interests.
‘change in legislation’ to which the Applicant refers are amendments
Aged Care Act 1997
Quality of Care Principles 2014
(Cth) and relate to the use of restrictive practices in aged care
(‘the Revised Legislation’). The Revised Legislation
took effect
from 1 July 2021, and amongst other things, defines restrictive practices;
details the requirements for the use of restrictive
practices; reinforces the
rights of aged care consumers by ensuring that restrictive practices are only
used as last resort to prevent
harm after best practice behaviour supports have
been considered, applied and documented; and requires the provider as of 1
2021 to have a behaviour support plan in place for each consumer who
has restrictive practices considered, implemented or used as
part of their
The evidence before the
Board establishes KL is an aged care
lowering of KL’s bed
be considered a restrictive practice, in
the form of a mechanical restraint. A mechanical restraint is defined in the
Aged Care Act 1997
as ‘a practice or intervention that is, or
that involves, the use of a device to prevent, restrict or subdue
a consumer’s
movement for the primary purpose of influencing the
consumer’s behaviour’. It does not include the use
of a device for
therapeutic or non-behavioural purposes in
relation to the consumer. The
Aged Care Act 1997
number of requirements for the use of any restrictive practice in relation to an
aged care consumer.
• Restrictive practices must only be used as a last
resort to prevent harm to the consumer or other persons,
and after consideration
of the likely
effect on the consumer.
• An approved health practitioner who has day to day knowledge of
the consumer, has assessed the consumer as posing a risk of
themselves or another person, and has assessed the restrictive practice
as necessary, and these assessments have been documented.
• Best practice alternative behaviour support strategies have been
used, and the consideration and/or use of these strategies
their effect has been documented.
• Restrictive practices must only be used in proportion to the
risk of harm, in the least restrictive form, and for the shortest
period possible.
• The need for, use of, and effectiveness of restrictive practices
must be continually monitored, reviewed and documented. As
part of this,
providers must consider whether an individually appropriate alternative strategy
can be used and the restrictive practice
can be reduced or stopped. In
the case of a restrictive practice that is chemical restraint, providers must
also give information
prescribing practitioner.
• Informed consent for the use of a restrictive practice must be
obtained from the consumer. If the consumer does not have the
capacity to give
that consent, it must be obtained from their restrictive practice substitute
decision-maker. Providers must ensure
that consent has been obtained in
accordance with state and territory requirements and subsequently recorded.
• The use of the restrictive practice must comply with the Charter of
Aged Care Rights and Quality Standards, the requirements
(if any) of the
law of the State or Territory in which the restrictive practice
is used, as well as any relevant provisions of the
consumer’s care
and services plan, or behaviour support plan from 1 September 2021.
14. The evidence before the Board is that the lowering of KL’s bed
began ‘within the last couple of weeks. ’ It
is not known whether
this is now occurring daily.
15. There is no material before the Board upon which a determination could be
made about whether the lowering of KL’s bed is
a restrictive practice or
is for a therapeutic or non-behavioural purpose.
16. It is not clear under what legal authority the lowering of KL’s bed
has occurred to date. The Request mentions a ‘signed
which the Board has not seen. It is unclear whether the ‘signed
a restrictive practice, and if it does,
the legality of such a disclaimer. If a restrictive practice is being used in
relation to
a consumer under the
Aged Care Act 1997
, the legislative
requirements specify informed consent must be obtained from the consumer, that
is, KL. If KL is unable to give
informed consent, then consent must be obtained
from a ‘restrictive practice substitute decision maker’. That a
considers it in KL’s best interests does not amount to consent.
It may be that the lowering of KL’s bed has occurred
pursuant to the
overriding duty of care the RACF provider has to all care recipients, or
pursuant to provisions in the
Aged Care Act 1997
which allows for use of
restrictive practices in the event of an
17. There is no evidence before the Board as to why the Request is now
urgent, given the legislative changes set out above have been
operative from 1
July 2021. Further, it is not clear why an Application for Guardianship has not
been lodged with the Board if indeed
the RACF is using a restrictive practice in
relation to KL and if KL is unable to give informed consent to its use.
18. There is no evidence from the RACF who are providing residential aged
care to KL. In particular, there is no evidence from the
RACF that KL’s
bed is lowered to prevent, restrict or subdue KL’s movement for
the primary purpose of influencing her
behaviour; as a last resort to
prevent harm to her; that an approved health practitioner has assessed KL as
posing a risk to herself
and assessed the restrictive practice
as necessary; and best practice alternative behaviour support strategies
have been used, and
the consideration and/or use of these
strategies and their effect has been documented. These are significant issues
which need appropriate
consideration.
19. There is also no evidence to indicate whether there is a behaviour
support plan for KL albeit the Board notes that it is not a
requirement before 1 September 2021. A behaviour support plan is an important
guide for staff of a RACF regarding the
use of a restrictive practice/s at a
20. A substantive application for Guardianship has not been filed but it may
be the appropriate course for full consideration to be
given to the appointment
of a Guardian for KL.
21. The Board is not satisfied on the evidence before it that urgent
circumstances exist as required by
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Statutory criteria,
22. The Board also considers the statutory criteria
of the Act, that is whether KL may have a disability, and if so,
whether by reason of disability she is unable to make reasonable
judgements in
respect of decisions pertaining to the use of restrictive practices, and whether
there is a need for a guardian.
23. The Request states KL has a disability, namely dementia and
immobility.
24. As noted above, the Medical Progress Notes provide evidence of KL
suffering two falls recently, but no evidence of disability.
25. The Board is not persuaded on the evidence presented that KL may have a
disability as defined by the Act.
26. The Request states KL has limited mental capacity, and until now it has
been sufficient for the RACF to rely on a disclaimer signed
by the Applicant and
the [KL’s] GP.
27. There is no medical evidence before the Board that KL may be unable to
make reasonable judgments about her person or circumstances.
Capacity is
decision specific, and specifically there is no medical evidence before the
Board that KL may be unable to make reasonable
judgments about specific
decisions, such as restrictive practices.
28. The Board is not satisfied that KL may be unable to make reasonable
judgements.
29. As to need for a guardian, if the lowering of KL’s bed is
considered a restrictive practice, and KL is unable to consent
to the practice,
KL may require a Guardian with a power to make decisions as to the use of a
restrictive practice.
30. The Guardianship and Administration Board orders
that the Request for an Emergency Guardianship Order is dismissed.
Australian Government, Aged
Care Quality and Safeguards Commission, Overview of Restrictive Practices,
of restrictive practices (agedcarequality.gov.au)
Quality of Care Principles 2014, s4A
means a person to whom an approved provider
provides, or is to provide, care through an aged care service.
Australian Government, Aged
Care Quality and Safeguards Commission, Overview of Restrictive Practices,
of restrictive practices (agedcarequality.gov.au)
Australian Government, Aged
Care Quality and Safeguards Commission, Overview of Restrictive Practices,
of restrictive practices (agedcarequality.gov.au)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (153 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter