URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASWRCT/2021/26.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:23:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
G. v The State of Tasmania (Department of Health) [2021] TASWRCT 26 (22 July 2021)
[2021] TASWRCT 26
WORKERS REHABILITATION AND COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
G. v The State of Tasmania (Department of Health)
[2021] TASWRCT 26
THE STATE OF TASMANIA (DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH)
REFERENCE NO(S):
W/2020/753 & W/2020/532
HEARING DATE(S):
31 May 2021
DELIVERED ON:
22 July 2021
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Commissioner Wilkins
CATCHWORDS:
Dispute as to whether expenses necessarily incurred as a
result of work related injury – referral to a medical panel –
whether ‘medical questions’
L v Department of Police and Emergency Management
[2006] TASWRCT 45
D v Tasmanian Ports Corporation Pty Ltd
[2015] TASWRCT 14;
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
(3) and (3A),
DETERMINATION:
That a referral to a medical panel not be made.
REPRESENTATION:
Solicitors:
Office of the Solicitor-General
[2021] TASWRCT 26
Commissioner Wilkins
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. This is a determination in relation to a dispute between the
employer and the worker about whether, and if so, what, questions
ought to be
referred to a medical panel in accordance with s49(3)(b) of the Workers
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988 (“the
dispute arises as a result of the employer refusing to pay for a number of
expenses. Those expenses are claimed by the worker
as expenses incurred for
medical services resulting from an injury for which a claim for compensation had
been made by the worker,
and accepted by the employer.
3. The employer says
the claimed expenses are not incurred as a result of the injury which was the
subject of the claim for compensation.
It is the employer’s application
that the Tribunal refer two medical questions to a medical panel, in accordance
with s49(3)(b).
The worker does not agree that reference to a medical panel is
appropriate.
4. On or about 3 March 2016 the worker made a claim for
compensation in relation to a low back injury that occurred in the course
employment. The claim arose from an incident on 26 February 2016 when the worker
bent over to pick up some baby scales from
a low table, and experienced
‘acute lower back pain and back spasm’. The claim was accepted by
the employer and compensation
was paid in accordance with the Act.
November 2017 the employer terminated payments of weekly compensation to the
worker, relying on a medical certificate pursuant
to s86(1)(c) of the Act, which
certified that the worker had wholly or substantially recovered from the injury,
and that her symptoms
and incapacity were no longer as a result of that injury.
The employer also filed a s88 referral at about the same time, seeking
the amount of weekly payments being made to the worker. The worker referred the
termination of weekly payments to the
Tribunal in accordance with s86(4) of the
Act. Both the s86(4) referral and the s88 referral were resolved by agreement
the parties in September 2019. The employer conceded the s86(4)
referral, and the s88 referral was dismissed by consent.
6. In April 2020 the
worker’s solicitors forwarded to the employer a claim for reimbursement of
medical and related expenses
incurred by the worker in relation to her claim for
compensation. By letter to the worker of 13 May 2020, the employer’s Fund
Manager advised that the employer disputed liability to pay the claimed
expenses, on the basis that they were not necessarily incurred
as a result of
the worker’s injury which was the subject of the claim in March 2016.
Further invoices for psychological treatment
were claimed by the worker as
expenses incurred as a result of her injury, and in July 2020 the Fund Manager,
on behalf of the employer,
disputed liability to pay those expenses
7. In relation to both sets of expenses disputed in May 2020 and July
2020 by the employer through its Fund Manager, the worker has
referred the
dispute in relation to payment to the Tribunal in accordance with s77AA(5) of
8. As part of the preliminary stage of the conciliation process in
the Tribunal, the employer sought a recommendation from the conciliator
Tribunal refer a medical question in relation to the s77AA referral to a medical
panel, and proposed that there be two medical
questions which were set out.
Counsel for the worker advised the Registrar that the worker did not concede a
medical panel was appropriate,
and took the view that the questions proposed by
the employer were inappropriate. The application for referral to a medical panel
is now before the Tribunal.
The statutory framework
9. S49 of the Act sets out provisions relating to the
Tribunal’s procedure. Specific to medical panels, s49 provides:
a medical question arises in any proceedings before the Tribunal, the Tribunal
(a) determine the medical question on any medical evidence presented to
the Tribunal; or
(b) refer the medical question, subject to subsection (3A) , to a medical
panel formed under section 50 .
(3A) The Tribunal may only refer a medical question under subsection
(3)(b) if –
(a) there is a conflict of medical opinion presented to the Tribunal on
the question between –
(i) a medical practitioner engaged by the worker; and
(ii) any medical practitioner provided and paid by the employer or
insurer; and
(b) one or more of the parties wishes the proceedings to
(3B) ............
(4) The Tribunal is bound by the determination of a medical panel given in
response to a medical question referred to it under subsection
10. The definition of what is a “medical question”
for the purposes of the Act is defined in s3:
medical question
a question relating to –
(a) the existence, nature or extent of an injury; or
(b) whether an injury is, or is likely to be, permanent or temporary;
(c) a worker's capacity for work or specific work duties; or
(d) the loss, or the degree of loss, of any of the parts or faculties of
the body; or
(e) the permanent loss of the effective use of a part of the body;
(f) the assessment of the degree of permanent impairment, including
whether the impairment is permanent;
(g) a medical service provided or to be provided to a worker for an
injury, including the adequacy, appropriateness or frequency of
11. Division 2 of Part VI of the Act deals with an
employer’s liability to pay compensation for medical and other services,
additional to the employer’s liability for weekly payments of
compensation. An employer who has accepted liability to pay
compensation is
liable to pay as compensation to the worker reasonable expenses necessarily
incurred by the worker as a result of
his or her injury for medical services,
hospital services, nursing services, constant attendance services,
rehabilitation services,
household services, road accident rescue services and
ambulance services. Each of the services referred to are defined in s74 of
12. S77AA of the Act provides, inter alia, that where an employer has
accepted liability to pay compensation the employer, after receiving
a claim for
payment of an expense (including a medical expense) under Division 2 of Part VI
of the Act, must pay the expense or serve
the worker with notice in writing
disputing the expense. S77AA(7) provides that in proceedings before the
Tribunal, the onus of
proving that the worker is not entitled to the payment of
the disputed expense lies on the employer.
What is the basis of the s77AA disputes?
13. The expenses claimed by the worker, and disputed by the
employer under s77AA in May 2020 included costs relating to medical treatment
covering the period July 2017 to September 2019 provided by several medical and
allied health practitioners in the areas of general
practice, rheumatology,
anaesthesia, neurosurgery, physiotherapy and radiology, and particularly lumbar
spine surgery performed by
Mr Andrew Hunn, Neurosurgeon, on 4 October 2018. In
addition, there were pharmaceutical, equipment, imaging, hospital and other
expenses claimed by the worker and disputed by the employer.
14. The expenses
claimed by the worker and disputed by the employer under s77AA in July 2020 were
for psychological treatment covering
the period March to June 2020
15. The employer relies upon the opinions of Dr Gautum Khurana
(Neurosurgeon), Dr Ashish Jonathan (Neurosurgeon) and Dr Katie Daniels
(Radiologist) to dispute the expenses. The worker primarily relies upon the
opinion of Mr Andrew Hunn, Neurosurgeon.
16. None of the reports provided
by the medical specialists in question were tendered in the hearing of the s77AA
referrals, but counsel
for the employer in her written submissions outlined some
extracts from their opinions, and the letter from the Fund Manager to the
in May 2020 referenced some of the content of reports of Dr Khurana and Dr
17. In her submissions, counsel for the employer referred to some
parts of Dr Khurana’s report where it was his opinion that
the work injury
for which the claim for compensation was made was probably a soft tissue strain
to the lumbar region. He referred
to there being no structural evidence of new
pathology post incident, and expressed the view that the worker had
“fairly chronic
and persistent symptoms since the swimming pool incident
of around March 2015. This incident probably converted the underlying disease
process of lumbar spondylosis into a symptomatic state which has persisted
since”. In relation to treatment, counsel for the
employer reported that
Dr Khurana’s opinion was that “any treatments beyond six weeks from
the workplace incident/injury
of 26/2/2016 were not properly required in
relation to the 26/2/2016 injury, but rather the underlying spinal disease
process (pre-existing
and not specifically/structurally aggravated by the
incident of 26/2/2016) and non work related aggravations.”
18. Although
it is not entirely clear from the written submissions on behalf of the employer,
it appears that Dr Jonathon’s
opinion is that the worker had a
pre-existing degenerative disease of the lumbar spine which was exacerbated by
the incident in 2016,
but that exacerbation ceased in June 2016. Again,
although it is not entirely clear, I understand Dr Jonathon’s opinion
treatment needs is that the worker requires no treatment in relation to
the work injury for which the claim for compensation was
made, and the need for
the surgery arose because of the underlying degenerative disease of the lumbar
19. Counsel for the employer indicated that Dr Daniels’ opinion
was that the worker had disc degeneration prior to February
2016, the lumbar
spine MRI in March 2016 showed no evidence of traumatic injury, the findings at
that time were more consistent with
degeneration, and the need for treatment was
due to the pre-existing degenerative condition and not to any injury that
occurred in
February 2016.
20. Mr Hunn’s opinion, as related by counsel
for the employer in her submission, was that the worker had an underlying
degenerative
lumbar spine condition which by February 2016 had not been
“significantly symptomatic”, although an incident had occurred
2015 which had generated some back pain after bending but which had resolved.
Although there was no specific structural change
identified in the MRI scan of
March 2016, it was Mr Hunn’s view was that the incident on 26 February
2016 initiated the symptoms
experienced by the worker, and rendered her
underlying condition symptomatic. Mr Hunn apparently advised the worker’s
that it could be argued that absent the incident, the worker would not
necessarily have been symptomatic at any particular point
after 26 February 2016
and therefore the incident had been important in the genesis of the current and
ongoing symptoms (although
not the only genesis).
21. Apparently in September
2016 Mr Hunn advised the worker’s general practitioner that he suspected
an internal disc disruption,
and I also understand from the employer’s
submissions that it is accepted that Mr Hunn’s view is that the surgery
he undertook was required as a result of the incident on 26 February
The employer’s position
22. The employer concedes that the spinal operation performed
by Mr Hunn in October 2016 on the worker was a reasonable expense necessarily
incurred by the worker, but does not concede that it was incurred as a result of
the work injury, in accordance with s75(1)(a) of
23. The employer
has also conceded that if a medical panel decides that the spinal surgery
performed by Mr Hunn was a necessary medical
service for the worker as a result
of her injury on 26 February 2016, the employer will concede all the other
expenses claimed which
have been the subject of the s77AA disputes and
24. The employer says that the factors weighing in favour of the
referral to a medical panel include:
• A medical panel will be less formal, and therefore a
less confronting forum for the worker than a hearing
• Referral to a
medical panel will result in a faster and less expensive outcome than an
arbitrated hearing
• The employer is willing to be bound by a medical
panel’s decision
• Because the employer has indicated that it
would concede the other expenses if a medical panel determined the question
the October 2018 spine surgery in the worker’s favour, that would
finalise the matters between the parties.
25. The employer says that the two medical questions that ought
to be referred to a medical panel by the Tribunal are:
(a) What was the injury suffered by the worker on 26
February 2016?
(b) Was the surgery performed by Mr Hunn on 4 October 2018
(described as a L4/5 and L5/S1 disc arthroplasty) a result of that injury
February 2016?
26. The employer says that the first question it proposes is a
medical question within the definition under the Act, because it is
relating to the “existence, nature or extent of an injury” .
27. The employer says that the second question it proposes is a medical
question within the definition under the Act because it is
a question relating
to “a medical service provided......to a worker for an injury, including
the adequacy, appropriateness
or frequency of that
28. Counsel for the employer submits that, because these are
medical questions, a medical panel consisting of medical practitioners,
better placed to resolve the questions than the Tribunal, which is not medically
The worker’s position
29. The worker resists the application for the Tribunal to make
the referral to the medical panel, on the basis that such a referral,
questions the employer wishes to put to the panel ignore the reality that on a
s77A(5) referral, the employer bears the onus
of showing that the expenses in
dispute are not reasonable expenses necessarily incurred by the worker as a
result of her injury.
30. In addition, counsel for the worker submits that
the issues in dispute are not purely medical questions, but questions involving
legal and evidential concepts.
Section 49(3A)
31. As a preliminary issue, the Tribunal may only refer a
medical question to a medical panel where s49(3A) is satisfied, including
requirement that there be a conflict of medical opinion presented to the
Tribunal on the medical question, the conflict being
between medical
practitioners engaged by the parties.
32. Strictly speaking, I have some
reservations about whether a conflict of medical opinion had been presented to
the Tribunal simply
by the submissions made on behalf of the employer about the
contents of various medical reports. The worker’s referrals of
disputed expenses under s77AA(5) contain only the claim form and the respective
dispute letters from the employer’s Fund
Manager, again with selected
extracts that are said to have been taken from some reports.
33. Counsel for
the worker has not taken issue with the matters that have been put to me as
being a reproduction of the respective
medical opinions of the specialists in
question, so I will proceed on the basis that conflicting medical opinion has,
indeed, been
presented to the Tribunal.
34. S49(3A) also provides that there
can only be referral to a medical panel if one or more of the parties wishes the
proceedings
to continue. The ‘proceedings’ in this case are the
worker’s s77AA(5) referrals. Obviously both parties want the
proceedings
to continue.
35. I am satisfied that the requirements of s49(3A) are made
out, and the Tribunal may refer one or more medical questions to a medical
in the s77AA(5) proceedings. The question remains as to whether I ought to
exercise my discretion to do so, but before addressing
that question, I need to
consider whether what is sought to be referred to a medical panel is or are
“medical questions”
Are the questions arising in the proceedings “medical
questions”?
36. What are the questions that have arisen in the proceedings?
The employer accepted the worker’s claim for compensation in
relation to
the incident on 26 February 2016. The claim was for a “lower spine
injury”. The employer now says, as I understand
from the extracts of the
medical reports, that the injury suffered by the worker was a soft tissue
injury, and that injury resolved.
The employer therefore now says that the
worker’s low back condition in 2018, and therefore the need for the lumbar
spine surgery
performed by Mr Hunn, did not result from the injury in February
37. Counsel for the employer sought to distinguish some earlier
decisions of this Tribunal as not being relevant to the present case,
Department of Police and Emergency Management
[2006] TASWRCT 45
Tasmanian Ports Corporation Pty Ltd
[2015] TASWRCT 14.
I think, however, those
cases are precisely on point.
38. In L v Department of Police and Emergency
Management, Chief Commissioner Carey was dealing with the definition of a
question’ as it stood before the amendments to the Act in
2000. At the relevant point in time, a ‘medical question’
defined to include “the nature of an injury suffered by a worker”,
and “the nature or necessity of any treatment
recommended or required to
be undergone by a worker as a result of an injury suffered by a worker”.
The former Chief Commissioner,
in declining to refer questions to a medical
panel, commented,
“...the use of a medical panel in this particular
case to advise on the issue of causation of the current symptoms stretched
the very limit an interpretation of “a medical question”. Even the
issue as to the necessity of challenged medical
treatment requires a
determination on this preliminary issue as to the cause of the symptoms
requiring that treatment”
39. He went on,
“...I am not
persuaded that the major issue which relates to causation of the current
symptoms can be properly categorised as
a medical matter upon which expert
evidence ought be determinative. Apparently both Drs. Whittaker and Gordon
Stewart believe that
the worker did suffer a soft tissue injury in the accident
but her accepted on-going symptoms are, they believe, as a result of some
non compensable condition. It is settled that a determination of whether or not
an incapacity (which would include symptoms
of injury) “results
from” a relevant injury is a question of fact. Expert evidence may
assist but is not determinative
with the task falling to be decided by the
Tribunal of fact. The applicable test was expressed by Kirby P in Kooragang
Ltd – v – Bates
(1994) 35 NSW LR 452
– 464 in the following terms;
“The results of the cases is that
each case where causation is in issue in a workers compensation claim, must be
on its own facts. Whether death or incapacity results from relevant
work injuries is a question of fact. Importation of notions of
approximate cause
by the use of the phrase “results from”, is not now accepted. By the
same token, the mere proof that
certain events occurred which pre-disposed a
worker to subsequent injury or death, will not, of itself, be sufficient to
that such incapacity or death “results from” a work
injury. What is required is a common sense evaluation of the causal
the early cases demonstrate, the mere passage of time between a work incident
and subsequent incapacity or death, is not
determinative of the entitled
compensation. In each case, the question whether the incapacity or death
“results from”
the impinged injury work injury ..., is a question of
fact to be determined on the basis of the evidence, including, where applicable,
expert opinions ...the point will sometimes be reached where the link in the
chain of causation has become so attenuated that, for
legal purposes, it will be
held that the causative connection has been snapped.”.”
observations of Chief Commissioner Carey, that questions of
‘causation’ ought not be categorised as a medical
matter, are
confirmed in D v Tasmanian Ports Corporation Pty Ltd by Commissioner
“The brief summary of the competing medical opinions which I
have set out gives rise to two questions upon the worker’s
reference. The
first is whether he suffers from a neck injury which has resulted from the
incident at work on 15 March 2012. The
second is whether the surgery proposed
...is reasonably necessary for the treatment of that injury... The
worker’s counsel
properly concedes that the first of the two questions
which I have posed does not qualify as a medical question within the Act’s
definition and it is only the second question which can be determined by a
medical panel.”
41. In the present instance, the differences in medical
opinion are similar to the differences in L v Department of Police and Emergency
Management, although the questions that are proposed by the employer are couched
in different terms. Dr Khurana opines that there
was a soft tissue injury
suffered by the worker in February 2016 that resolved. Mr Hunn appears to be of
the opinion that the incident
in February 2016 rendered the worker’s
underlying degenerative condition symptomatic, and I infer he considered that
to have resulted in the need for surgery. Although I understand there
is a consensus that the worker suffered some symptoms of low
back pain as a
result of a ‘swimming pool incident’ in about March 2015, the
opinions of Dr Khurana and Mr Hunn appear,
at least in part, to be based on
conflicting histories about the worker’s symptoms after that time. Dr
Khurana refers to “chronic
and persistent symptoms”. Mr Hunn refers
to “some back pain after bending but this had
resolved...”.
42. It appears that the question of what injury the
worker suffered on 26 February 2016 is likely to require some findings of fact
to resolve the conflict in the history of symptoms. That is not the task of a
medical panel, but of the Tribunal following an arbitrated
question of whether the surgery performed by Mr Hunn in October 2018 was the
result of the injury in February 2016 is really
a question about whether the
symptoms and condition of the worker that led to the surgery resulted from the
injury in 2016. Again,
that would be a matter of assessment by the Tribunal as a
matter of fact and law, including, but not limited to expert medical opinion.
44. On the basis of the above, I do not consider that the questions proposed
by the employer are ‘medical questions’ as
contemplated by the Act
that would, in the circumstances, be appropriate for the Tribunal to refer to a
medical panel. It is not
necessary for me to determine whether there ought to be
an exercise of the Tribunal’s discretion for a referral to a medical
to be made.
45. The employer’s application for referral by the Tribunal
to a medical panel pursuant to s49(3), in relation to the worker’s
s77AA(5) referrals, is dismissed.
COMMISSIONER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (128 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter