URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFC/2023/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:14:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CJ v The Secretary of the Department for Education, Children and Young People [2023] TASFC 5 (13 October 2023)
[2023] TASFC 5
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (FULL COURT)
CJ v The Secretary of the Department for Education,
Children and Young People
[2023] TASFC 5
THE SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT FOR EDUCATION, CHILDREN AND YOUNG
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Pearce J, Geason J, Jago J
Family Law and Child Welfare – Child welfare under State or
Territory jurisdiction and legislation – Children in need
protection – Proceedings related to care and protection –
Applications – Application for revocation of care
and protection order
made – Need to demonstrate change in relevant
circumstances.
Children Young Persons and Their Families Act
Aust Dig Family Law and Child Welfare [508]
Family Law and Child Welfare – Child welfare under State or
Territory jurisdiction and legislation – Custody Appeals –
appeal to Supreme Court from decision of Magistrates Court (Children's
Division) under
Children Young Persons and Their Families Act
– No error or want of jurisdiction demonstrated.
Magistrates Court
(Children's Division) Act 1998
Justices Act 1959
Aust Dig Family Law and Child Welfare
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Director of Public
Prosecutions
Judgment Number:
[2023] TASFC 5
paragraphs:
Serial No 5/2023
File No: 65/2023
CJ v THE SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT FOR EDUCATION,
CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
October 2023
of the Court:
1 Appeal dismissed.
Serial No 5/2023
File No: 65/2023
CJ v THE SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT FOR EDUCATION,
CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
29 October 2021 a magistrate made a care and protection order under the
Children Young Persons and Their Families Act
1997 (the CYP Act) giving
custody of the appellant's daughter to the Secretary of the Department
administering the CYP Act until
the child attained the age of 18 years. On 26
August 2022 the appellant applied for revocation of the order. On 5 September
the magistrate dismissed the appellant's application. An appeal against
that order was dismissed by Estcourt J on 4 November 2022
for reasons published
to the parties only. The appellant now appeals to this Court.
appellant's daughter had been in the care of the Secretary since October 2021
and, the evidence suggests, well before then. It
is apparent from the
transcripts of the proceedings before the magistrate and the primary judge, and
from the appellant's appearance
before this Court, that her principal concern
was her daughter's welfare. The appellant wanted the custody order revoked and
daughter returned to her care. In the courts below she expressed her concern
that her daughter was not being properly treated, her
frustration about what she
perceived as the entrenched oppositional attitude of the Departmental officers
and her inability to have
her concerns properly heard. It is readily apparent
that the same concern and frustration lie behind this appeal. Without endorsing
any of the appellant's views about the actions or attitudes of the Department,
there is no reason to doubt the genuineness of her
concern for her daughter. She
also understands that the best interests of her child must be the paramount
consideration.
the appeal to this Court must be dismissed. As will be explained in the course
of these reasons, the primary judge was correct
to dismiss the appeal from the
magistrate's decision. The legislation required that, before the appellant could
succeed in her application
to revoke the care and protection order which applied
to her daughter, she demonstrate to the magistrate that there had been a
change in circumstances between 29 October 2021, when the order was
made, and the date of the hearing. The learned primary judge
correctly concluded
that the magistrate did not have evidence before her capable of justifying that
conclusion. It was not for the
primary judge to rehear the application. His
Honour did not make any material error, was not unfair and did not lack
impartiality.
the time this appeal was heard, almost a year had elapsed since the proceedings
before the magistrate. Whether the circumstances
of the care of the appellant's
daughter had materially changed since then cannot be determined. For an
application depending on demonstration
of a change of relevant circumstances it
would be pointless to remit that application to the magistrate for re-hearing
a delay. Further evidence would inevitably be required. There is no
impediment to a fresh application to the Children's Division
by the appellant if
the proper grounds for such an application exist. Having read these reasons it
is to be hoped that the appellant
may have a better understanding of what must
be demonstrated before the order she seeks can be made.
legislation
and protection orders are made by the Magistrates Court (Children's Division).
The Magistrates Court (Children's Division) was
established by the
Magistrates Court (Children's Division) Act
(the Children's Division
Act). It is constituted by a magistrate and has jurisdiction to hear and
determine all matters arising from
and under the CYP Act. In performing
functions or exercising powers under the CYP Act, the best interests of the
child must be the
paramount consideration: s 10E. A care and protection order
may be made if, under s 42(3)(a) of the Act, the court is satisfied that
is at risk and that a care and protection order should be made to secure the
care and protection of the child. An order may
one or more
of the orders stated in s 42(4), one of which is that custody of the child be
granted to a person within one of five
specified categories. One of the persons
to whom custody may be granted under that provision is the Secretary. A person
the Secretary) who has custody, or has been granted custody, of a
child under this Act has the right to have, and the responsibility
daily care and control of the child, and has the right to make, and the
responsibility for making, decisions concerning
the daily care and control of
the child: s 6
48 of the Act provides for variation, revocation suspension and end of care and
protection orders. It relevantly
(1) A care and
protection order or an interim care and protection order –
may be varied or revoked by the Court at any time on the
application of the child, the Secretary or a person granted guardianship
custody by the order; and
(ab) may be varied or revoked by the
Court on the application of a former guardian of the child or a person who was
party to the
application for the order, other than a person referred to
in paragraph (a) , if –
(i) circumstances have changed since the
order was made; and
(ii) the application is made with the
leave of the Court; and
(b) ceases to have effect when the child
attains 18 years of age."
any proceedings before the Children's Division, the Court is bound by the rules
of evidence except where it determines otherwise:
s 11(1). In a particular
proceeding the Court may determine that it is not bound by the rules of evidence
if satisfied that it would
not be in the best interests of the child to be bound
by those rules, in which case the Court may inform itself in any way it
appropriate: s 11(2) and (3).
Magistrates Court (Children's Division) Rules
provided, by r 13,
that a proceeding under the Act was to be commenced by application and, by r 17,
that an application was to be
supported by an affidavit showing
the nature of the applicant's claim and the
material facts on which it was based.
against orders made by a magistrate sitting in the Children's Division are
provided for by s 20. Appeals are to the Supreme
Court which is to "proceed as
if the appeal were a notice of motion under
section 107
Justices Act
Justices Act
"(4) The grounds set forth in a notice to review shall
(a) an error or mistake on the part of the
justices on a matter or question of fact alone, or of law alone, or of both fact
(b) that the justices had no jurisdiction to
make the relevant order."
CJ set out the relevant principles to be applied on a
s 107(4)(a)
Phillips v Arnold
[2009] TASSC 43
, requires there to be shown an error or mistake on the part
of the magistrate on a matter or question of fact alone, or of law alone,
both fact and law. A motion to review is not of the nature of an appeal by way
of rehearing and the principles of
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
142 CLR 531
do not apply. On a review of the conclusion of a magistrate based on
the evidence, the question is whether upon the evidence the
magistrate might, as
a reasonable person, have come to the conclusion to which he or she did."
review under
s 107(4)(b)
cannot succeed unless it is established that the
magistrate had no jurisdiction to make the order under review. The jurisdiction
conferred on the magistrate was necessarily conditioned by the requirement that
her Honour observe procedural fairness in the exercise
of that jurisdiction:
Condon v Pompano Pty Ltd
[2013] HCA 7
252 CLR 38.
That requirement
included giving the appellant a proper opportunity to be heard and that her
Honour be and be seen to be independent
and impartial:
Ebner v Official
Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
205 CLR 337.
powers of the Supreme Court on hearing a
review are set out in the
Justices Act
in these terms:
"(2) On the
hearing of a motion to review, the court shall, upon consideration of the
evidence and materials adduced and brought
before the justices and such further
evidence (if any) as it thinks fit, review the order so far as relates to the
ground set forth
in the notice to review, and thereupon may do all or any of the
following things, namely:
(a) dismiss the motion;
(ab) in a case where the court considers that
no substantial miscarriage of justice has occurred even though the cause or
raised by the motion might be decided in favour of the applicant, dismiss
the motion;
(b) confirm, vary, amend, rescind, set aside,
or quash the order reviewed;
(c) remit the cause or matter to the justices by
whom it was dealt with, either with or without any direction in law;
(d) order that the cause or matter be
re-tried by a magistrate;
(e) prohibit the justices concerned, or any
other person, from proceeding or further proceeding in respect of the order;
(f) amend or cause to be amended, on such terms
as are just, any defect or error in any proceedings before the justices;
(g) make all such orders and cause all such
proceedings to be had and taken as the court thinks necessary to secure a final
determination
of the cause or matter on the merits;
exercise, in addition to any other powers conferred by this
section, any power which the court might exercise upon habeas
an order of review under the
Review Act 2000
(i) exercise any power that might have been
exercised by the justices in relation to whose order the motion to review is
The proceedings before the magistrate
order made by the magistrate on 29 October 2021 was in fact a variation of an
existing care and protection order. That application
for variation of the order
was made by a representative of the Secretary. The varied order granted
guardianship of the appellant's
daughter to the Secretary until she attained 18
years of age. It also included an order and a notation which provided for the
on which the appellant may have contact with her daughter.
the appellant was not a person referred to in
, her application for
revocation of the order made on 26 August 2022 was subject to
s 48(1)(ab).
result, the order could only have been varied by the magistrate if the appellant
demonstrated that circumstances had changed
since the order was made,
48(1)(ab)(i)
, and leave was granted under
s 48(ab)(ii).
The application came
before the learned magistrate on 2 September 2022. The appellant was
unrepresented. The Secretary was represented
by a legal practitioner. The
appellant's daughter, who was the subject of the care and protection order, was
separately represented
by a legal practitioner in accordance with an order under
the Children's Division Act, s 15.
Proceedings
between the Secretary and the appellant concerning care of the appellant's
daughter already had a protracted history,
originating years earlier, at least
as early as 2015. The same magistrate made the varied care and protection order
on 29 October
2021. In March 2022 a different application to revoke the order,
made when the applicant was represented by a legal practitioner,
was dismissed
when the legal practitioner withdrew.
are some observations which might be made about the proceedings before the
magistrate on 2 September 2022. The application
was not listed for hearing on
that day. It was brought on at short notice at the request of the legal
practitioner for the Secretary
because, in his words, "it's a mention and I'm
going to ask that it be dismissed." The basis of that submission was the
that the appellant's affidavit accompanying her application did not
identify a change in any relevant circumstance since October
2021 when the care
and protection order was made. The material in the affidavit was confined to
addressing the terms of a document
which had been prepared in 2015.
the normal course, as the Children's Division Rules provide, the applicant's
affidavit should have set out the material facts
on which the application was
based. The Secretary's contention that the application should be dismissed was
based solely on the contents
of the affidavit although it is obvious that the
attitude of the Secretary was influenced by the history of the proceedings. No
was given to the appellant that the Secretary might ask that her
application be dismissed or the basis of that application. She was
unrepresented
and highly emotional about the subject matter. In her application the appellant
had stated that she wished to supplement
the affidavit by "evidence in court."
When the issue was raised by the Secretary there was a prolonged exchange
between those present
but no formal hearing was embarked upon. No real attempt
was made to explain to the appellant the difficulty she faced in words she
capable of understanding. She may not have been in a state of mind to hear what
she did not agree with, but there was some justification
for her perception
that, initially at least, the proceedings involved some unfairness to her. The
appellant reacted rudely and angrily
when she realised what might happen. She
abused the learned magistrate and acted in a highly disrespectful, if not
contemptuous way,
towards her Honour. That was inexcusable and did nothing to
assist her cause.
Notwithstanding
the deficiency in the affidavit supporting the application it was open to the
learned magistrate to invite the appellant
to give evidence relevant to any
change of circumstances, or to allow her an adjournment to cool down, consider
her position, marshal
any evidence she might have had and prepare a further
notwithstanding all of those observations, the proceedings did not miscarry. No
error or absence of jurisdiction within
the terms of s 107(4) is demonstrated.
Once the issue of the requirement to demonstrate a change of circumstances was
magistrate was given some material about the operation of the order
and respectfully and patiently invited the appellant to say more
her daughter's position, albeit not in the form of evidence. The appellant
informed the magistrate that her daughter
had been "subject to ongoing
unnecessary traumatic events whilst under the care of the Department." She was
then asked by the magistrate
to identify what evidence she had for that
proposition but responded only that "you cannot sit there, okay, and dictate how
word this." The magistrate politely pressed the appellant for more
information. The appellant asserted that "[the Departmental officers]
extremely failed their duty of care and other aspects of the law to my child",
and "I applied for new workers several times
throughout this eight-year ordeal.
Nothing." She said that "I have legitimate evidence that my daughter is being
traumatised by these
people." Again pressed by the learned magistrate for
information about details of any relevant change in circumstances the appellant
provided no further information or assistance.
relevant information was provided by the legal practitioner acting as separate
representative. The magistrate was told that
"the last contact visit was in
January 2022." There were then "issues" which took some time to resolve before a
further supervised
visit was scheduled for 4 February 2022 but cancelled by the appellant
she was unwell. Another visit was scheduled for 18 February 2022 but also
cancelled. The separate representative arranged
a conference to "try to get this
matter back on track", including a conference in about August 2022 but the
appellant did not attend
when a different legal practitioner ceased acting for
her. The appellant told the magistrate that this was because "she had
miscommunications
with the lawyer."
Honour dismissed the application at the conclusion of the hearing and published
written reasons on 5 September 2022. In her reasons
for dismissing the
application the learned magistrate referred to the appellant's affidavit sworn
by her on 26 August 2022 and recorded
that the application "re-agitates matters
that go back to 2015", but also that the appellant was unable to refer to any
matters when asked to identify what new or fresh circumstances had
arisen. Although there was no formal hearing, I think the conclusion
inevitable that had the appellant said anything which suggested a real
possibility that a formal hearing or an adjournment might
have produced a
different result, her Honour would have acted accordingly. Because of the
disadvantage the appellant suffered by
being unrepresented, that did not mean
that evidence of a material change of circumstances did not exist. However,
despite the magistrate's
efforts, her Honour was not directed to any fact or
circumstance which was reasonably capable of assisting the appellant. The
was, with respect, conducting a busy court and was entitled to make
efficient use of court resources by not unnecessarily prolonging
unmeritorious
proceedings. There was no unfairness or lack of impartiality.
The appeal to the primary judge
explained, the appeal to the primary judge was to be considered as if it were a
motion to review under the
Justices Act
The grounds of appeal
to the learned primary judge, although not expressed in these terms, asserted
that the magistrate was biased,
misconducted herself and perverted the course of
justice. The grounds went to procedural fairness and could only have justified
s 107(4)(b).
The appeal to the primary judge did not assert any error of fact or law. Had
that assertion been made, his Honour's function would
have been confined to
reviewing circumstances where it could be shown that there was error or mistake
on the part of the magistrate
on a matter of fact or law. Any application to
receive further evidence to establish an error of fact or law must be refused:
Traynor v McCullough
[2011] TASSC 41
(2011) 218 A Crim R 177.
Honour found it unnecessary to address the grounds because he concluded that
there was no evidence before the magistrate capable
of demonstrating the change
of circumstances required by the Act as a pre-condition to revocation of the
care and protection order.
Hence, his Honour concluded, there had been "no
substantial miscarriage of justice for the purpose of
s 110(2)(ab)
Justices Act
learned primary judge did find, however, that "the learned magistrate's conduct
was impeccable and her patience in the face of
the applicant's abuse was
The appeal to this Court
are three grounds of appeal to this Court. In substance, they are
(i) the learned primary judge misinterpreted
s 110(2)(ab)
(ii) no consideration was given to the evidence about the interests of the
appellant's child;
(iii) the learned primary judge was not fair or impartial.
Magistrates Court (Children's Division) Act
that an appeal to the Supreme Court under that Act is to proceed as if the
appeal were a notice of motion under the
Justices Act
, there is no express provision about the nature of an appeal to this Court.
Counsel for the respondent submits that the appeal is
a rehearing in accordance
Supreme Court Rules
, r 657, and the Full Court may exercise
the powers under the
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act
including to review questions of both fact and law. I do not think that is
correct. The function of the primary judge at first instance
was confined to
identification of errors of fact or law or want of jurisdiction. Assuming the
appeal is to be determined as if it
were an appeal against the decision at first
instance on the motion, the appeal is not a rehearing and is confined to error
of law or upon the admission or rejection of evidence":
If it were a rehearing, the function of this Court could not go
beyond the function of the primary judge in any event. Whichever
is the case,
the grounds cannot succeed.
will address the second ground first. It misapprehends the question before the
magistrate and the evidence related to it and the
role of the primary judge.
According to the legislation the magistrate was considering, her Honour, when
considering the application
on 2 September 2021, could not make the order the
appellant applied for unless she was satisfied by evidence that there had been
relevant change in circumstances during the ten months or so since the making of
the order on 21 October 2021. The reason the appellant's
appeal to the primary
judge failed was, as his Honour correctly determined, the absence of such
relevant evidence. It follows that
a complaint that there was no consideration
given by the primary judge to the evidence about the interests of the
appellant's child
must fail because there was no such evidence. It was not open
to his Honour to consider further evidence.
to the third ground, there is no basis for the assertion that the primary judge
was not fair or impartial. Prior to the hearing
of this appeal the appellant
filed two further affidavits upon which she sought to rely, respectively dated
24 November 2022 and
31 March 2023. The second affidavit is not relevant to this
ground. The first affidavit comments on the approach taken by the primary
and argues that he was unfair to her. I have read the entire transcript of the
proceedings before his Honour. Before the hearing
he had read a transcript of
the proceedings before the magistrate and was aware of how the appellant had
then conducted herself.
His Honour would have appreciated that the appellant,
quite understandably, felt strongly about her cause. He took a relatively robust
and matter of fact approach towards the appellant during the hearing of the
primary appeal. He was quite entitled to do so, and nothing
he said or did gave
the slightest indication or hint of a lack of fairness or impartiality. His
Honour was aware of the relatively
narrow scope of the determinative issue and
properly confined the appeal to that question.
first ground asserts that the primary judge misinterpreted
s 110(2)(ab)
Justices Act
. His Honour, in his reasons, said:
need to consider the grounds of appeal asserting bias, misconduct and perverting
the course of justice as even if these
were made out there has been no
substantial miscarriage of justice for the purpose of
s 110(2)(ab)
Justices Act
, given that the only correct decision on the available
evidence was that the application be refused for want of jurisdiction. Thus,
even if the matters raised by the motion might be decided in favour of the
applicant, I would nonetheless dismiss the motion."
my respectful view, there was no need for his Honour to resort to the terms of
110(2)(ab).
He did not form the view that any matter raised by the appeal "might
be decided in favour of the applicant." To the contrary, his
Honour correctly
rejected the appellant's assertions that the magistrate was biased, misconducted
herself and perverted the course
of justice. It follows from the comments I have
already made about the hearing before the magistrate that, although it was open
the learned magistrate to conduct the proceedings in a different way, there
was no basis for contentions of bias, misconduct or perverting
justice. The
magistrate did not act outside her jurisdiction by failing to observe procedural
fairness in the exercise of that jurisdiction.
For completeness I would also
record that I am satisfied that the magistrate made no mistake of fact or law so
as to justify appellate
intervention under the
Justices Act
s 107(4)(a).
The primary judge's conclusion about the grounds of the primary appeal, although
not the foundation of his decision to dismiss the
appeal, was correct and I do
not think that his Honour could properly have found that any ground of that
appeal was made out.
Honour's ultimate conclusion that, regardless of the correctness or otherwise of
the grounds of appeal, there was no evidence
before the magistrate capable of
demonstrating the change of circumstances on which exercise of the power to vary
or revoke the order
under challenge depended was also correct. In those
circumstances his Honour's decision to dismiss the appeal on the basis that "no
substantial miscarriage of justice has occurred" does not justify allowing this
appeal and no material error in the application of
that provision has been
demonstrated.
Further material lodged by the appellant
her affidavit of 31 March 2023 the appellant sought to put before this Court
factual material about her daughter which was not
before the learned magistrate.
The affidavit contains assertions of fact which may or may not support a fresh
application to a magistrate
to revoke or vary the order concerning custody of
her daughter. Some of the affidavit concerns facts prior to the making of the
However the affidavit cannot assist the appellant in this appeal and
cannot be taken into account. The function of this Court in
determining this
appeal has already been explained in these reasons. Whether the grounds of
appeal to this Court are made out is
to be determined on the material before the
magistrate and the record of the proceedings before the primary judge. It is not
to this Court to have regard to further evidence about the interests of the
appellant's child.
Result and orders
the foregoing reasons I would dismiss the
CJ v THE SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT FOR EDUCATION,
CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
13 October 2023
The appellant is desperate to care for her daughter who has been in the custody
of the Secretary for an extended period. Her desperation
has resulted in a high
degree of frustration at what she believes to be the refusal of the Department
for Education, Children and
Young People to engage with her to achieve that
outcome. Having made progress in her personal life, procuring employment and a
within which she can accommodate her daughter, she believes she is ready to
resume her parenting role.
I do not doubt the appellant's sincerity in pursuing the outcome she considers
to be in the best interests of her daughter. Her
desperation has, regrettably,
resulted in inappropriate court room behaviour on occasions, a fact she appears
to acknowledge. In
her appearance before this Court, her behaviour was
respectful.
2 September 2022 the appellant's application filed in March 2022, seeking to
revoke the order placing her daughter in the Secretary's
care, was listed for
mention. Because the affidavit accompanying it failed to identify the requisite
change in circumstances necessary
to engage the Court's jurisdiction, counsel
for the Secretary sought an order dismissing the application. That order was
the magistrate.
I accept that it was open to the Secretary to make that application, and in a
legal sense, technically correct, but I would not
have made it without notice to
the appellant, and without affording her an opportunity to consider it. I
consider too that the proceedings
could have been conducted in a way which
better served to explain to the appellant the reason for the Secretary's
application, identifying
ways in which the deficiencies in the affidavit could
be addressed. It would have been very easy to afford the appellant an
opportunity
to supplement her affidavit by allowing her to give evidence or to
give her an opportunity to prepare a further affidavit. Proceedings
sort, particularly those with a long history, and involving an unrepresented
party, require a careful approach, and one which
recognises the trauma caused by
a parent's separation from a child. The proceedings required a sensitive
approach, not a legalistic
I do not intend to excuse the way in which the appellant conducted herself in
the course of those proceedings, but her reaction
ought not to have come as a
surprise in the circumstances.
The appellant should be encouraged to bring a further application fully
disclosing the changes of circumstance which are relied
upon to support her
claim. That is, the means by which she is able to advance her argument that her
circumstances have changed sufficiently
to sustain a submission in support of
revocation of the current order.
Those observations made, I otherwise agree with Pearce J that in the
circumstances, and having regard to the powers vested in this
Court, the appeal
must be dismissed.
CJ v THE SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT FOR EDUCATION,
CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
13 October 2023
agree with Pearce J.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (214 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter