URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFC/2024/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Blue Derby Wild Inc v Forest Practices Authority (No 2) [2024] TASFC 1 (12 April 2024)
[2024] TASFC 1
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (FULL
Blue Derby Wild Inc v Forest Practices
Authority (No 2)
[2024] TASFC 1
: BLUE DERBY WILD
FOREST PRACTICES AUTHORITY,
SUSTAINABLE TIMBER TASMANIA
ATTORNEY-GENERAL
FCA 3380/2022
12 April 2024
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
April 2023, 26 February 2024
JUDGMENT OF:
Jago J, Martin
Appeal and new trial – Procedure – Tasmania – Other matters
– Unavailability of judge – Where one member
of three member bench
unavailable – Whether remaining members can reconstitute to form Full
Court – Whether reconstitution
is in the interests of justice –
Where delay prejudicial – Reconstitution and delivery of judgment by two
member bench
lawful and appropriate in the interests of justice.
Administrative Law - Judicial Review –Standing to institute proceedings
– Where standing not provided for in legislative
Application of "special interest test" - Whether interest in preservation of the
environment sufficient to support
standing – Appellant fails "special
interest" test and is not a "person aggrieved" – Appeal dismissed.
Statutes – Acts of Parliament – Statutory Powers and Duties
– Exercise of delegation of power conferred by Act –
Validity of
delegation – Procedural fairness - Apprehended bias – Where
requirements for the exercise of delegated power
to be free from apprehended
bias excluded by legislative scheme – Appeal dismissed.
Australian Conservation Foundation v the Commonwealth
, 146 CLR 493
Australian Institute of Marine and Power Engineers v
Secretary, Department of Transport
[1986] FCA 443
(1986) 71 ALR 73
Binginwarri
Friends of the Jack and Albert River Catchment Area Inc v VicForests
Cotogno v Lamb (No 2)
[1985] 3 NSWLR 221
Ding v De Wit
[2024] TASSC 6
Elliott v Harris
(1974) 8 SASR 458
Alcoa of Australia Ltd
[1981] HCA 50
R v Kelly; ex parte
Victorian Chamber of Manufactures
[1953] HCA 30
Ltd v Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs
[1981] FCA 121
(1981) 4 ALD
VicForests v Kinglake Friends of the Forest
[2021] VSCA
Wentworth v Rogers (No 3)
[1986] 6 NSWLR
Legislation
Forest Management Act 2013
Practices Act 1985
Forestry Act 1920
Judicial Review Act
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act
REPRESENTATION
Nekvapil SC, A Aleksov
First Respondent
: P Turner SC, M
Second Respondent:
B McTaggart SC
: P Turner SC, M
Solicitors:
Bleyer Lawyers Pty
First Respondent:
State Ligation Office
Respondent:
Abetz Curtis
Third Respondent
: State Ligation Office
Judgment Number:
[2024] TASFC 1
paragraphs:
Serial No 1/2024
File No FCA 3380/2022
BLUE DERBY WILD INC v FORESTRY PRACTICES AUTHORITY,
SUSTAINABLE TIMBER TASMANIA and ATTORNEY-GENERAL
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
12 April 2024
Orders of the
Serial No 1/2024
File No FCA 3380/2022
BLUE DERBY WILD INC v FORESTRY PRACTICES AUTHORITY,
SUSTAINABLE TIMBER TASMANIA and ATTORNEY-GENERAL
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
12 April 2024
have had the benefit of reading the reasons of Martin AJ. I agree with them and
agree that the appeal should be dismissed.
Serial No 1/2024
File No FCA 3380/2022
BLUE DERBY WILD INC v FORESTRY PRACTICES AUTHORITY,
SUSTAINABLE TIMBER TASMANIA and ATTORNEY-GENERAL
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
Introduction
Forest Practices Authority (the Authority) is the State instrumentality charged
with the administration of the
Forest Practices Act
Pursuant to the Act, the harvesting of timber and the clearing of trees is
unlawful unless authorised by a certified
forest practices plan.
Sustainable
Timber Tasmania (STT) undertook the harvesting of timber pursuant to forest
practices plans certified by delegates of
the Authority. The appellant
challenged the certification of the plans on the basis that the persons who
certified the plans had
not received valid delegations for that purpose or,
alternatively, that their decisions were invalidated by reason of apprehended
J found that the delegations were
. Although his Honour, on one
view, found that apprehended bias was made out, he also found apprehended bias
did not invalidate the
certifications because the requirement that the exercise
of the delegated power to certify be free of apprehended bias was excluded
the legislative scheme. Accordingly, his Honour dismissed the challenge to the
certifications of the plans.
appellant appeals against the dismissal on the sole ground that the learned
trial judge erred in finding that the legislative
scheme excluded the operation
of the principles relating to apprehended bias in respect of the certification
decisions. For the
reasons that follow, I would dismiss the appeal.
Court Reconstituted
is appropriate to explain the history of this appeal.
18 April 2023 the appeal was argued before the Full Court constituted by Geason
J, Jago J and me. Judgment was reserved and had
not been delivered when Geason J
ceased sitting as a Supreme Court judge.
early November 2023, Tasmania police served Geason J with a Family Violence
Order. The Order related to Geason J’s partner.
Subsequently, in relation
to the same complainant, Geason J was charged with Assault and Emotional Abuse.
His Honour was granted
bail, and a Family Violence Order remained in force.
Early in 2024, Geason J was charged in NSW with breaching that order.
8 December 2023, Geason J signed an undertaking to members of the House of
Assembly and the Legislative Council of the Parliament
of Tasmania that until
the resolution of the court proceedings on complaint 11690/23 and the related
Application for a Family Violence
Order 150507/23, his Honour would adhere to an
extant direction that he not sit in respect of any matter, whether in Court or
Chambers, or seek to exercise any of the powers of a judge of the Supreme
Court of Tasmania, except to the extent that the Chief
Justice of the Supreme
Court of Tasmania "might request".
reasons delivered on 1 March 2024, the Chief Justice stated that he considers it
"inappropriate" to make any such request while
charges against Geason J are
is not known when the charges against Geason J will be heard, either in Tasmania
or New South Wales. In both cases, it appears
likely that they will not be heard
and determined for many months.
appellant commenced the proceedings under consideration with an application
filed on 8 April 2022. The application relates to
certification of plans for the
harvesting of timber in areas known as coupes CC105A and CC119A. At the time
the application was
filed, harvesting of coupe CC119A had been completed and
approximately 25% of CC105A had been harvested. Through a combination of
injunctions and undertakings, since April 2022 the second respondent has been
unable to complete harvesting of timber in coupe CC105A.
9 December 2022, the trial judge dismissed the application and delivered written
reasons. The appeal was fully argued on 18 April
2023. As mentioned, judgment
remained reserved at the time that Geason J ceased exercising the jurisdiction
of a Supreme Court judge
in late 2023.
22 February 2024 the appellant filed an interlocutory application seeking an
order that the second respondent be restrained from
undertaking any forest
practices in coupes CC105A or CC119A, except for the purpose of undertaking
restorative or regenerative works.
In other words, the appellant sought an
injunction against the second respondent preventing the second respondent from
the timber remaining on the areas which are the subject of the
certified forest practices plans challenged in these proceedings.
interlocutory application for an injunction was based on the appellant's
understanding that the second respondent was about to
resume harvesting timber
in coupe CC015A. An affidavit filed by the second respondent explained that if
the second respondent is
unable to harvest the remainder of CC105A as planned,
the second respondent will experience difficulty in meeting supply obligations
to various saw mills. If that situation arises, the second respondent will be
required to transport logs from other regions which
the second respondent
estimates would cost between $10,000 and $20,000.
addition, the second respondent explained difficulties associated with complying
with reforestation obligations if harvesting
is delayed. As 25% of coupe CCS105A
has been harvested for approximately two years, that portion of the coupe can be
difficult to
regenerate because it will not burn with sufficient intensity
required to create a quality seed bed by reason of regeneration of
vegetation and loss of fine fuels. Further, if harvesting is delayed, the
respondent believes it will be at significant
risk of not being able to comply
with its obligations for reforestation prior to the expiry date of the forest
practices plan, being
31 August 2025.
is readily apparent that the judgment of the Full Court should be delivered as
soon as is reasonably possible. Significant commercial
interests are at stake
and there is an urgent need for the rights of the parties to be determined by
the Full Court without delay.
receipt of the interlocutory application for an injunction, on 23 February 2024
the Court wrote to the parties advising
that Jago J and I were agreed as to the
outcome of the appeal and were in a position to deliver judgments. The parties
were invited
to provide submissions as to whether they were content for the
Court to deliver its judgment constituted by two members; whether
the parties
would seek to have the Full Court reconstituted with a different third judge and
have the appeal reheard; whether the
newly appointed member of the Court should
determine the appeal on the basis of submissions already made; or whether the
of the Court should remain reserved until the position of Geason J
became clearer.
Court also wrote to Geason Jon 23 February 2024 seeking his advice as to
whether, in the circumstances, he intended to continue
as a member of the Full
Court or otherwise. Geason J has not replied to that correspondence.
appellant's written response was:
"The appellant would be grateful
to receive judgment of the Full Court, constituted for the appeal as soon as
first and third respondents indicated they would be content for the Full Court
to deliver judgment constituted by two members,
but suggested the legal question
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act
allows such
a course in the current circumstances is a "complex question".
26 February 2024 Jago J and I conducted a hearing, during which it became clear
that all parties were uncertain whether the Court,
constituted by only two of
the original three judges, could deliver judgment in the appeal. However, all
parties agreed that the
Court could reconstitute, and reconstitute with only two
judges being Jago J and me. In those circumstances, the Court constituted
Jago J and me ordered that the Full Court be reconstituted for the hearing of
the appeal, and that the reconstituted bench would
comprise Jago J and me.
respondents were content for the reconstituted Court to deal with the matter on
the papers, but the appellant did not consent
to that procedure. The appellant
indicated it sought an opportunity to present additional submissions concerning
the substance of
the appeal. The Court determined that further submissions were
to be supplied in writing and there would be no further oral hearing.
mind the urgency of the matter, particularly in view of the issue of the
interlocutory application for an injunction,
the appellant was given until
Tuesday 5 March 2024 to provide further written submissions in respect of the
substantive appeal, and
the respondents were to reply by the close of business
on Friday 8 March 2024.
second respondent provided an undertaking that, in the meantime, no further
harvesting would occur in the coupes under consideration
until the Court
delivered its decision.
appellant filed written submissions on 5 March 2024 comprised of 24 paragraphs,
20 of which challenged the orders of the Court
that the Court be reconstituted,
and be comprised of Jago J and me. Only one short paragraph raised an
additional point with respect
to the substance of the appeal.
the written submissions of 5 March 2024, the respondents stated:
accept that the appellant did not clearly express opposition to reconstitution
at the mention hearing on 26 February 2023. Without
departing from that
acceptance, we contend that the appellant had insufficient notice of the
proposed order, or time to take advice
and provide instructions, before the
order was made. With the benefit of further time to take advice and provide
instructions, the
appellant objects to the Full Court making the Order it did on
that day, and (more importantly) objects to the Full Court acting
Order in determining the appeal."
reject the contention that the appellant had insufficient notice of the proposed
order. As the recitation of the history demonstrates,
in advance of the hearing
the parties were well aware of the issues to be canvassed, including the
question of reconstitution of
the Court. No application was made to adjourn the
hearing in order to consider any of the issues that arose.
also reject the characterisation of the appellant's position at the hearing on
26 February 2024 as the appellant "not clearly express[ing]
opposition to
reconstitution". The transcript plainly demonstrates otherwise.
the outset of oral submissions on 26 February 2024, counsel for the appellant
submitted that two of three judges who heard the
appeal could not deliver the
judgment of the Court. Asked specifically what the Court should do and whether
it should reconstitute,
counsel for the appellant responded:
seems that would be the only course".
exchanges that followed, counsel for the appellant submitted that it appeared
two or more judges could sit as the Full Court and
"we consider it impolite for
us to be suggesting to the Court whether it should constitute with two or more
judges." Counsel agreed
that pursuant to
Supreme Court Civil
Procedure Act
, two or more judges could constitute the Full Court.
directly whether the Court could reconstitute as two or three judges, counsel
agreed that the Court could do so. Counsel stated:
"I accept that
the Court always has power to constitute or reconstitute itself, but that before
delivering judgment as a Full Court,
procedural fairness would need to be
offered to all parties."
if the Court was to be reconstituted, whether the appellant had any objection to
the Court being reconstituted by Jago J and
me, initially counsel for the
appellant responded that he did not have instructions as to that issue. After
counsel had obtained
instructions, counsel was specifically asked whether the
appellant objected to the Court reconstituting with Jago J and me. Counsel
"No, but if I can put it this way, your Honour, it does
not seem that it is an issue that we'd be entitled to be heard on anyway."
the written submissions filed on 5 March 2024, the appellant contended that the
order reconstituting the Court, and directing
that the reconstituted bench be
Jago J and me, was irregular and should be rescinded. Further, it was submitted
that whether or
not the order was rescinded, the Court as reconstituted is not
authorised by the Act to determine the appeal. The following contentions
"4 In summary, for reasons set out below, the appellant
makes the following submissions (including to avoid any suggestion of waiver,
acquiescence or any other legal doctrine or principle by which the appellant
might lose its right to contest the lawfulness or regularity
of the process
adopted by, and constitution of, the Court, in advance of its determination of
the appeal):
circumstances where the proceeding has been heard and judgment is reserved, the
Full Court as constituted to hear the proceeding
should determine it. The Full
Court as constituted to hear, and which heard, the proceeding comprises Jago and
Geason JJ, and Martin
AJ. There is a mechanism by which Geason J can sit on
matters before the Court (ie with approval of the Chief Justice), and no
explanation
has been proffered as to why this mechanism has not been used.
Further, the order for reconstitution is irregular, having been made
by two only
of the three members that constitute the Full Court allocated to hearing, and
which heard, the appeal.
Appellant's position is that the course described in 4.a is the only regular
course available to the Full Court. Alternatively,
and without in any way
departing from that position, if the Full Court as constituted to hear, and
which has heard, the appeal cannot
determine the appeal (which is not accepted),
the Full Court should be reconstituted as a Court of three
summary, the fundamental contentions advanced by the appellant were underpinned
by the following submissions:
"Geason J is
able to sit, but has declined to do so, subject to approval from the Chief
Justice. This puts his Honour in a different
position from, for example, a judge
who is absent on long service leave or sabbatical."
"The process
adopted for reconstitution of the Court is, in these circumstances, irregular.
The relevant order for reconstitution
purports to be made by an order of the
Full Court that was constituted for this appeal. But the Full Court constituted
for this appeal
... includes Geason J ...".
"The order for
reconstitution was made other than in accordance with Part II" of the Act.
"Section 20 shows that the Full Court, as
constituted, having reserved its
decision, is to give judgment by each of the judges who constituted the Full
Court giving their
opinion. It shows also that reference to 'a Full Court' must
be understood, in context, where a Full Court has been constituted to
determine a proceeding, and has heard argument and reserved judgment, to mean
Full Court so constituted, and not some members only of it."
This view is
reinforced by r 672(6A) of the rules.
Section 15(6) of
the Act is not available as a power to authorise reconstitution by the Full
Court to reduce its membership from 3
to 3 of the judges who heard arguments and
reserved the decision.
"The order for
reconstitution having been pronounced by a judge of the Supreme Court, it is
binding and valid until set aside (even
if made erroneously). The appellant
requests that the order be rescinded, on the basis that it was
irregular...".
"Nothing in Part
V confers jurisdiction or power on one or more individual members of a Full
Court ... to reconstitute the Full Court
so as to exclude one of the members
situation does not fall within the scope of the power described in
Lamb (No 2)
[1985] 3 NSWLR 221
at 223 C-D and other
authorities.
the alternative to its primary position, the appellant submitted that the
a reconstituted bench
comprised of three new judges who have not been previously involved in the
matter. In support of that submissions,
the appellant advanced the following
proposition:
"There is now no way to know the extent to which the
three judges comprising the Full Court conferred after reserving judgment but
before Geason J went on leave or gave the undertaking to Parliament."
response to the appellant's submissions, the second respondent contended that
those submissions "traverse matters beyond the scope
of the relevant directions,
and to the extent that they do so ought to be disregarded." The second
respondent contended that the
appellant did not seek leave to file further
submissions in respect of the Court's power to reconstitute itself, nor as to
the composition
of the bench if reconstitution occurred. The appellant did not
seek an adjournment to take further instructions. In these circumstances,
these submissions fall outside the scope of the directions by the Court, the
second respondent did not respond to them.
third respondent similarly submitted that the appellant's submissions going to
the constitution of the Court are outside the
scope of the Court's directions,
which related to submissions concerning the substance of the appeal, and should
not be entertained.
Authorities
R v Kelly; ex parte Victorian Chamber of Manufactures
[1953] HCA 30
, the High Court was concerned with long running proceedings heard by six
judges in the Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration.
commenced in September 1952 and the hearing continued for 59 days until 30 April
1953. When the matter came on for further
hearing in May 1953, the Chief Judge
announced that he had been informed by Foster J that Foster J had decided he was
unable to continue
to sit on the case by reason of other commitments. The court
determined it could not form the view that Foster J was unable to continue
within the meaning of the relevant legislative provision and, accordingly, the
court was of the view that the remaining five members
of the bench did not
possess jurisdiction to complete the present hearing.
submission was advanced that unless a judge became unable to continue to sit
within the meaning of a particular legislative provision,
apart from statute the
Court was deprived of jurisdiction to continue hearing the case if one or more
of the judges who commenced
the hearing did not remain on the court throughout
the proceedings. It was contended that such a rule applied even if sufficient
judges remained to constitute the court.
rejecting that submission, Williams ACJ said:
"[8] ... I have no
doubt that, apart from statute, a court consisting of more than one judge can
complete a hearing however many judges
leave the court during its progress,
voluntarily or involuntarily, so long as there still remains the minimum number
of judges required
to give the court jurisdiction to adjudicate. ... In my
experience it has been the practice of this court on many occasions to continue
a hearing after a judge has withdrawn still leaving three or more judges on the
Bench, and the reports refer to similar instances
in other courts." (Authorities
J expressed the view that even if Foster J "did not have a valid reason for
withdrawing from the hearing of the prosecutors'
claim", there was "nothing in
law to prevent the remaining judges of the court from continuing the hearing."
His Honour dealt with
the relevant legislative provision which provided that if
a member of the court became "unable to continue to sit or has ceased to
judge", the court constituted by the remaining judges possess jurisdiction to
complete the hearing and make appropriate orders.
Webb J was of the view that
the provision was not intended to be exhaustive of instances in which a court
might continue a hearing
with a reduced number of judges. His Honour held that
the remaining members of the court should have continued after Foster J
J expressed the view that apart from any express or implied statutory provision
to the contrary, "a court reduced in number
during a hearing but still
comprising a quorum may proceed to judgment". Taylor J was of the same view that
the court, as constituted
by the remaining five judges, could lawfully continue
with the hearing. Fullagar J agreed with both Kitto and Taylor JJ.
Elliott v Harris
(1974) 8 SASR 458
, two appeals were part-heard before
Bray CJ and two other judges. Bray CJ went on leave and an order was sought that
the hearings
proceed without further delay. Of necessity, such an order would
require a Full Court differently constituted.
Full Court comprised of three different judges found that if a judge of an
appellate court desists from hearing a case or dies
during the hearing, but a
quorum remains, "then that quorum can continue with the hearing and the decision
of the members of the
quorum will be the decision of the court ...". Later in
the reasons, the following passage included reference to reconstituting
"We are of opinion that where an appeal of reference is
part-heard before the Full Court, but it becomes impossible for all the courts
so constituted to continue the hearing, either at all or without undue delay, it
is competent for the remaining members of the court
to continue with the hearing
providing that there is a quorum of three, or of not less than two if no other
member of the court is
available. If the number of members sitting at the first
hearing is reduced below three, and (as is the fact in this case) at least
other member of the court is available to sit with them at a resumed hearing,
then it is not competent for the remaining members
of the court as originally
constituted to continue sitting unless they are joined by at least one other
judge to bring the number
up to the quorum. In that event, of course, it will be
necessary for the appeal or reference to be argued de novo. And where the
circumstances require an argument de novo, bearing in mind that, however
constituted, the Full Court remains technically the same
court, we see no bar to
the court constituted by different judges from hearing the case when it is
re-argued. In
Wyman v Paterson
[1900] AC 272
, as we have mentioned, the
House arranged for two surviving members to sit at the resumed hearing [with
three other judges]. This
would not doubt be a proper and convenient arrangement
in many cases; but we do not think that this must necessarily be so.
So far as jurisdiction is concerned, when once it is established that a court
may order a case part-heard in these circumstances to
be re-argued before a
court differently constituted (either by the addition or substitution of other
members) in the case of death
or retirement of one of the members of the court
as originally constituted, we see no obstacle to a similar order being made
one of the members of the court as originally constituted is not
available. Whether his unavailability is likely to be of such duration
make the order desirable is a question to be determined in the exercise of the
court's discretion. In our view the court should
not exercise its discretion
unless there is some urgency or a likelihood of some injustice to one of the
parties if the resumption
of the hearing is delayed. In this context it is
proper to remember that justice delayed may be tantamount to justice
Cotogno v Lamb (No 2)
[1985] 3 NSWLR 221
a member of the Court of
Appeal went on leave in August 1985 with the intention of remaining absent until
February 1986. The Court
had heard only a preliminary argument concerning the
amendment of the notice of appeal. Although the respondent did not dispute
power of the court to reconstitute the Court to include a judge of appeal, the
court determined to satisfy itself as to its power
to do so. In a joint
judgment, the court expressed a clear conclusion that an appellate court
possessed power to reconstitute:
"The power to reconstitute an
appellate court cannot be in doubt in the case where that is necessary after a
judge dies, retires or
is incapacitated in the midst of a hearing and before
judgment is delivered. Otherwise by reason of the statutory obligation to
the court with three or more judges ..., the facility of appeal could
be entirely frustrated. Similar considerations apply in circumstances
judge takes extended leave, although internal arrangements of an administrative
kind usually avoid difficulty such as have
now arisen.
The court is satisfied that it has the power to proceed to hear the appeal
afresh, although constituted differently from the Court
which originally
commenced the hearing of the appeal and which proceeded to hear and determine
the appellant's application to amend
the ground of appeal."
is some force in the respondents' submissions that, in view of the appellant's
conduct at the hearing on 26 February 2024,
the appellant should not be
permitted to contest the jurisdiction of the Court to reconstitute and proceed
with a quorum of Jago
J and me. However, it is unnecessary to embark upon
consideration of that issue as, in my view, the appellant's opposition to
reconstitution
with a quorum of Jago J and me fails.
to statutory direction or constraint, as Kirby J noted in
Wentworth v Rogers
[1986] 6 NSWLR 642
at 649, "the guiding principle is the demands of
justice in the particular case". Again subject to statutory provisions, the
must possess inherent powers to meet unexpected exigencies and to ensure
that the interests of justice are met. There is no particular
formula to be
applied as the circumstances vary infinitely.
to statutory direction, when a judge of an appeal court becomes unavailable to
continue with a hearing, or unable to deliver
a judgment, in some circumstances
a full re-hearing before a differently constituted bench might be required. In
others, it would
be appropriate for the remaining members to complete the
hearing and deliver judgment. In between those examples a number of combinations
are possible and appropriate. In addition, the Court possesses the power to
reconstitute, either with or without an additional judge
(subject to quorum
requirements).
the particular circumstances, the interests of justice strongly favour final
determination of the rights of the parties without
delay. All parties have had
the opportunity of presenting full written and oral submissions, and of
supplementing the written submissions
concerning the substance of the appeal.
resolution of the appeal had already been delayed for a significant period. A
re-hearing before a differently constituted Court
would result in further
significant delay. As two members of the Court are agreed as to the
determination of the appeal, there is
no unfairness to any party in those
members delivering the judgment of the Court. If Geason J was available and
reached a different
view, the decision of the majority would prevail as the
decision of the Court.
is clear that the Chief Justice will not invite Geason J to exercise the
have been finally
determined. Bearing in mind that two jurisdictions are involved, final
determination of the charges is unlikely
to occur for many months. Plainly the
interests of justice dictate that the judgment of the Court should be given as
soon as possible.
am minded to the view that Jago J and I, sitting as the original Full Court,
could have lawfully delivered judgment. However, this
issue was not fully
argued. With the encouragement and consent of the parties, the Court comprised
of Jago J and me, ordered that
the Court be reconstituted. In my view, the
orders made were lawful and appropriate in the interests of justice. There is no
reason why the final resolution of the matter should be delayed in the
manner suggested by the appellant.
is no unfairness attached to Jago J and me now delivering judgment. The demands
of justice strongly favour such a course.
the reasons that follow, I deal with the substance of the appeal. These reasons
were prepared and finalised before any issues
arose with respect to Geason J
continuing to exercise the functions of a Supreme Court
Application and Notice of Appeal
application was filed on 8 April
. Relevantly, the appellant
"7 An order under
Judicial Review Act 2000
quash or set aside the purported certification on 6 April 2022, purportedly
pursuant to
Forest Practices Act 1985
, of a forest practices plan in
relation to Coupe CC105A (
new purported certification
of FPP 105A
Alternatively
to 7, an order in the nature of certiorari to quash the new purported
certification of FPP 105A.
8A An order under
Judicial Review Act 2000
to quash or set aside the purported certification on 8
March 2022, purportedly pursuant to
Forest Practices Act 1985
relation to FPP 105A (the
old purported certification of FPP 105A
8B Alternatively to 8A, an order in the nature of certiorari to quash the old
purported certification of FPP105A.
order under
Judicial Review Act 2000
to quash or set aside the
purported certification on 6 April 2022, purportedly pursuant to
Forest Practices Act 1985
on 6 April 2022, of a forest practices plan in
relation to coupe CC119A (
new purported certification
of FPP 119A
Alternatively
to 9, an order in the nature of certiorari to quash the new purported
certification of FPP 119A.
10A An order under
Judicial Review Act 2000
to quash or set aside the purported certification on 18
January 2022 of FPP 119A.
10B Alternatively to 10A, an order in the nature of certiorari to quash the
purported certification on 18 January 2022 of FPP 105A
old purported
certification of FPP 105A
trial judge delivered reasons for his decision on 9 December 2022. The
appellant's amended notice of appeal was filed on 16
February 2023 and contained
the following grounds:
"1 The trial judge erred in holding that the
exercise of the delegated power to certify a forest practices plan under the
Forest Practices Act 1985
) was not conditioned on
observance of the principle of natural justice that the decision maker not be in
a position of apprehended
bias: J [75], [79].
2 His Honour should instead have held that:
(a) the FP Act did not exclude the implication that the exercise of power was so
conditioned: J [75];
(b) the impugned decisions to certify forest practices plans in relation to
coupes CC105A and CC119A (the
impugned decisions
) were affected by
apprehended bias, and were accordingly invalid and liable to be quashed."
essential facts are not in dispute. The Authority is the State instrumentality
responsible for administering the Act. The harvesting
of timber and the
clearing of trees in Tasmania is unlawful unless authorised by a certified
forest practices plan. Application
for certification of a forest practices plan
must be made to the Authority.
Sustainable
Timber Tasmania (STT) is the name used by Forestry Tasmania, a corporation
established under the
Forestry Act
1920 and continued in existence by
subsequent legislation. In 2022 STT undertook the harvesting of timber on two
areas of land in
accordance with two forest practices plans certified by two
persons who, for the purposes of such certification, were delegates of
is no challenge to the decision of the trial judge that the delegations were
valid. In issue are the decisions of each delegate
to certify the forest
practices plans pursuant to which STT undertook the harvesting of timber.
relevant facts concerning the delegations and the rules of the certifiers were
summarised by the trial judge:
"7 The timber harvesting which is the
subject of these proceedings was conducted by STT in reliance on two forest
practices plans,
one dated 18 January 2022 concerning an area of 42.8 ha called
coupe CC119A and another dated 8 March 2022 concerning an area of
37 ha called
coupe CC105A. The plan for coupe CC119A was certified on 18 January 2022 by
Peter Johnstone. At the time he certified
the plan, Mr Johnstone was the
subject of an instrument of delegation from the Authority dated 1 January 2006.
He was also an employee
of STT. The plan for coupe CC105A was certified on 8
March 2022 by Jarrod Burn. At the time he certified the plan Mr Burn was the
subject of an instrument of delegation from the Authority dated 20 December
2013. He was also an employee of STT.
began harvesting trees under both plans. Officers of the applicant, concerned
of the plans and the instruments of delegation. On 31 March 2022, having been
advised to do so in response
to matters raised by representatives of the
applicant, and to resolve doubts which may have existed about the validity of
the original
delegations, the Authority revoked the existing instruments of
delegation and made new instruments of delegation for numerous persons
Mr Johnstone and Mr Burn. The new delegations to Mr Johnstone and Mr Burn are,
in each case, dated 31 March 2022. On 6
April 2022 Mr Johnstone certified the
plan for coupe CC119A again. On 6 April 2022 Mr Burn certified the plan for
coupe CC105A again."
evidence establishes that Mr Johnstone had been employed by STT since 1998. In
his affidavit he described his position as 'Co-ordinator
Harvesting and Sales'.
He did not depose when he was appointed a forest practices officer but stated
that he had 'held authority
to certify forest practices plans since 2006', by
which he was clearly referring to the delegation. He explained that STT
a schedule of coupes intended to be harvested during the following 18
months. Where harvesting of land is proposed, and no certified
forest practices
plan is in place, a delegate is allocated 'in consultation between forest
practices officers and other STT staff,
to review and certify a forest practices
plan for that coupe.' Mr Johnstone's evidence was that, when acting as delegate
Authority to consider an application for certification of a forest
practices plan made by STT, he had challenged, required amendments
refused to certify the contents of the plan on many occasions. He claimed to
have done so without any repercussions on his
employment and had never felt
pressure to make decisions about certification in a particular way. As to coupe
CC119A he said that
in January 2022, he 'saw this coupe on the schedule and
decided that I would review and certify the forest practices plan for that
myself.' Over several days he undertook a review of the contents to ensure that
it complied with the Code and the Act. He
carefully inspected the land and
consulted with other officers including a 'special values planner.'
Mr Johnstone certified the plan, harvesting commenced. He attended coupe CC119A
in his capacity on six separate days during
the course of the period between 19
January 2022 and 28 February 2022, at which time I infer that he observed the
harvesting operations.
When he became aware of the challenge to the validity of
his delegation he was asked by a representative of the Authority, indirectly
through another employee of STT, to recertify the plan in accordance with the
new delegation. Mr Johnstone's evidence was that he
reviewed the plan and,
taking into account his knowledge of the area and what had occurred on the land,
he satisfied himself that
the plan was compliant and should again be
cross-examined by counsel for the applicant, Mr Johnstone agreed that before the
forest practices plan was first certified he
played an active part in its
preparation. He did so in consultation with other members of the 'harvesting
team'. The team included
planners who were specifically responsible for
assessing whether areas proposed for timber harvesting have special natural or
value, such as streamside reserves or flora and fauna habitat. The
plan was submitted to a 'peer review system' in which it was
assessed and
approved by the heads of department within STT responsible for planning,
harvesting, roads and forest management. Forest
practices plan application
documents were prepared from STT internal systems. Mr Johnstone agreed that he
had never been asked to
certify a forest practices plan which had not been
prepared by STT. His employment income came from STT and he was not paid by the
Authority for his work as a delegate. Mr Johnstone explained that once a forest
practices plan is certified for an area and harvesting
commences, his work in
supervising the harvesting involved 'two hats': he acted as a forest practices
officer 'first and foremost',
but also as an employee of STT. He looked at the
harvesting operations from 'both angles.'
Burn was employed by STT in 2015 and at the relevant time his position was
Coordinator of Planning. His employment seniority and
authority within STT was
equivalent to that of Mr Johnstone. His evidence about that process for
identification of land proposed
to be logged, and preparation and certification
of the forest practices plan for that area mirrored the evidence of Mr
Mr Burn said that he took it upon himself to review and certify the
plan for CC105A because it was complex, and he had been working
with STT staff
since 2020 to ensure its compliance. He had inspected the land on a number of
occasions. When it came to considering
his decision to certify the plan he
spent several days reviewing the relevant materials and again walking the site.
He recertified
the plan for the same reasons concerning the validity of his
first delegation. He reconsidered it in detail and, in light of what
knew, determined that no changes were required.
practices officers are subject to a Forest Practices Officer Manual issued by
the Authority. Whilst a document with that title
does not seem to have
statutory force the Act provides for The Forest Practices Board to prepare a
code of conduct for forest practices
in Authority's manual are statements that:
'The role of the FPO is
to assist the FPA in the implementation of the Act. The primary objective of
the Act is the achievement of
sustainable management of Tasmania's forests with
due care for the environment. The achievement of this objective is required to
be as far as possible self-funding and self-regulating. The appointment of FPO's
from within the forest industry is part of a co-regulatory
FPO's are expected to undertake their FPO duties at the same time as they are
undertaking their normal duties for their employer or
The FPO has a separate responsibility under the Act to the FPA that may on
occasions have the potential to conflict with the FPO's
responsibilities to the
employer or client.
The FPO should ensure that their employer or client understands that FPO's
have statutory responsibilities under the Act and that
the effective functioning
of the forest practices system requires that FPOs actions are consistent with
the Act and FPA directions.
The FPO Code of Conduct gives guidance on how these
issues are to be handled.'
Mr Johnstone and Mr Burn deposed that in deciding whether to certify a forest
practices plan they acted independently as delegates
of the Authority. I was
impressed by the evidence of both men and have no doubt that they well
understand their obligations as forest
practices officers and delegates of the
Authority. However, the applicant does not assert that either Mr Johnstone or
Mr Burn were
actually biased when making the decisions to certify. The
applicant submits, correctly in my view, that the evidence of Mr Johnstone
Mr Burn about their own impartiality carries no weight when considering the
issue of apprehended bias. The test is one which
requires no conclusion about
matters which actually influenced the outcome of decisions and so no attempt
should be made to inquire
into the actual thought processes of Mr Johnstone or
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
at [8]. That is
not to say that some of the circumstances averted to by Mr Johnstone and Mr Burn
which each decision to certify was made may
not be relevant to what a fair minded lay observer, aware of all the relevant
circumstances, might apprehend. But even in that respect care should
be taken to not give such matters undue weight.
explained earlier in these reasons, STT as the Forestry corporation established
Forestry Act
1920, is a statutory authority subject to the
Government Business Enterprises Act
. Under that Act, s 7, the
principal objectives of a Government Business Enterprise include to perform its
functions and exercise
its powers so as to be 'a successful business by
operating in accordance with sound commercial practice and as efficiently as
and 'achieving a sustainable commercial rate of return that maximises
value for the State in accordance with its corporate plan and
having regard to
the economic and social objectives of the State.' I also referred earlier, in a
different context, to the role
of STT as Forest Manager under the FM Act. It
manages and controls forest operations in Tasmanian public forests, permanent
production zone land, for the purpose of selling forest products. It
must do so in a manner that is consistent with the principles
management set out in the Forest Practices Code, as a contribution to the
sustainable management of Tasmania's forests.
It must also make available
minimum quantities of logs from permanent timber production zone land to the
veneer and sawmilling industries
and certain timber, including special species
timber, to other prescribed industries.
the Authority and its delegates, forest practices officers and STT have
obligations under the statutory scheme to comply with
the Act and the Forest
Practices Code. Even so, there is potential for conflict between the commercial
and business objectives of
STT and the monitoring of compliance with the Act and
the Code. That potential for conflict is a factor which may lead an observer
reasonably conclude that a forest practices officer who is on the one hand a
delegate of the Authority but on the other an employee
of STT may certify a
forest practices plan in accordance with an application made by STT other than
on an independent and impartial
evaluation of the merits. The same may be said
whether the delegate is an employee of STT or another entity which performs
operations. There may exist an unconscious influence in
decision-making arising from the conflicting duties to uphold strict compliance
with the Act and the Code and a duty or obligation to the employer. The
possibility of conflict is expressly recognised by the Authority
itself in the
passage in the Forest Practices Officer Manual to which I referred. Although
the manual makes clear the obligation
to give precedence to the duty to the
Authority and to enforce the Act, in my view a fair minded lay observer might
reasonably apprehend
an unconscious tendency to facilitate rather than refuse or
limit harvesting, because refusal or limitation might be contrary to
interests of an employer and contrary to the work done by the delegate in a
different capacity to prepare the plan."
Trial Judge –
Statutory Scheme
trial judge identified the relevant features of the legislative
The legislation
10 The Act, in its short title, is an Act to:
'... ensure that all forest practices are conducted in accordance with the
Forest Practices Code, to provide for the issue of that
Code, to provide for the
creation of private timber reserves, to provide for the issue of codes of
conduct for forest practices officers,
and to provide for incidental and
consequential matters.'
term 'forest practices' is broadly defined in s 3, the interpretation provision,
'(a) the processes involved in establishing forests,
growing or harvesting timber, clearing trees or clearing and converting
native vegetation communities; and
(b) works (including the
construction of roads and the development and operation of quarries) connected
with establishing forests,
growing or harvesting timber or clearing
Act regulates forest practices on both public and private land. It is part of a
suite of legislation which implements the State's
forest practices system. The
objective of that system is stated in the Act, Schedule 7, which
'The objective of the State's forest practices system is
to achieve sustainable management of Crown and private forests with due care
the environment and taking into account social, economic and environmental
outcomes while delivering, in a way that is as far
as possible
self-funding–
(a) an emphasis on self-regulation; and
(b) planning before forest operations; and
(c) delegated and decentralized approvals for forest
practices plans and other forest practices matters; and
(d) a forest practices code which provides practical
standards for forest management, timber harvesting and other forest operations;
(e) an emphasis on consultation and education;
(ea) an emphasis on research, review and continuing
improvement; and
(eb) the conservation of threatened native
vegetation communities; and
(f) provision for the rehabilitation of land in
cases where the forest practices code is contravened; and
(g) an independent appeal process; and
(h) through the declaration of private timber
reserves– a means by which private land holders are able to ensure the
of their forest resources.'
suite of legislation includes the Act, the FM Act, the
Private Forests Act
Tasmanian Forests Agreement Act
Forests Act
, establishes a body called Private Forests Tasmania.
Section 30(5) of the Act provides that the Authority shall, after consulting
with Private Forests Tasmania and considering public submissions on a draft
Code, issue a Code called the Forest Practices Code on
the conduct of forest
Authority is established by s 4AA of the Act. It has a Board of Directors
comprising seven directors, six of whom are appointed
by the Minister and who
must each hold relevant knowledge and expertise in specified fields. The other
member of the Board is the
person who may from time to time hold the position of
chief forest practices officer, who is a member of the State Service.
role, objectives, functions and powers of the Authority are respectively stated
in ss 4AB, 4B, 4C and 4D. The objectives of the
Authority include to act in a
manner that 'best advances the objectives of the State's forest practices
system': s 4B(2)(a). The
Authority's functions include 'to oversee standards for
forest practices plans': s 4C(e).
Act also establishes an entity called the Forest Practices Advisory Council
which comprises appointees with specified knowledge,
expertise and experience.
The Council has the objectives and functions stated in s 37B and s 37C,
including to advise the Authority
on review of the Act and the Code.
the Forestry corporation, STT undertakes forest operations in Tasmanian public
forests, more correctly referred to as permanent
timber production zone land as
that term is defined in the FM Act. By operation of s 7 of that Act, STT is
appointed the Forest Manager
for permanent timber production zone land and
has the functions and powers stated in s 8 and s 9. Its functions include to
and control all permanent timber production zone land and to undertake
forest operations on permanent timber production zone land
for the purpose of
selling forest products: s 8(a) and (b). The FM Act, s 15, provides that the
Forest Manager must perform its functions
in a manner that is consistent with
the principles of forest management set out in the Forest Practices Code, as a
contribution to
the sustainable management of Tasmania's forests. By s 16, the
Forest Manager must make available minimum quantities of logs from
timber production zone land to the veneer and sawmilling industries as well as
certain timber, including special species
timber, to other prescribed
industries. The Minister may declare specified Crown land to be permanent
timber production zone land
but only after having obtained advice from STT that
the land is required for the supply of forest products: FM Act, s 10(1) and
Any land purchased
or acquired by STT becomes permanent timber production zone land: s 12.
person may prepare a forest practices plan: s 18(1)(a). Applications must
contain the information specified in s 18(2) including
specifications of the
forest practices to be carried out on the land referred to in the plan in
connection with the harvesting of
timber or the clearing of trees: s 18(2)(a).
It is also to include an estimate of the period during which the forest
practices of
the plan, or phases of the plan, are to be carried out: s 18(2)(c).
If a plan involves clearance and conversion of a threatened native
community further specifications are required: s 18(2)(bb). All specifications
required by s 18(2) must be in accordance
with the Forest Practices Code: s
Applications
for certification of a forest practices plan are made to the Authority: s
18(1)(b). Applications must be in writing
and be accompanied by the required
fee and the approval of the owner of the land on which the forest practices are
to be conducted:
s 18(4) and (4A). The Authority may request provision of
further particulars of the plan: s 18(5). The Authority, when it receives
application for certification of a forest practices plan, may certify it, may
refuse to certify it, or may amend the plan in such
manner as it considers
necessary and certify the plan so amended: s 19(1). The Authority's power to
amend the plan includes the
power to insert conditions and restrictions to be
complied with in the harvesting and clearance of trees: s 19(1A). Certification
or refusal of certification must, unless further particulars have been
requested, occur within 28 days of the receipt of the application:
is an offence under s 17(4) to carry out, or authorise the carrying out of,
timber harvesting without a certified plan and it is
an offence under s 21 to
contravene a certified plan."
Authority's power to delegate functions or powers is contained in the Act, s 43.
At the time the delegations were made to Mr Johnstone
in 2006 and Mr Burn in
2013, s 43 was in these terms:
'43 Delegation by
(1) Subject to subsection (2), the Authority may
delegate any of its functions or powers other than this power of delegation.
(2) The Authority shall, by instrument in writing,
delegate to any person for the time being appointed as an officer
under section
38 (2), the performance or exercise of the Authority's
functions and powers under Division 1 of Part III, and shall not revoke wholly
or in part the delegation while he or she holds that appointment.
(3) A delegation under subsection (2) may be
unconditional or, if the instrument of delegation so provides, conditional.
(4) If the delegation under subsection (2) is
conditional, the delegate is, in the performance and exercise of the delegated
and powers, subject to the direction of the chief forest practices
that form, subss (3) and (4) of s 43 applied only to delegations made under subs
(2). In 2019, subss (3) and (4) of s 43 were
amended to expand their application
to delegations made under both subss (1) and (2). Section 43 was in those terms
when the new
delegations to Mr Johnstone and Mr Burn were made on 31 March
to be noticed is the distinction between the terms of subs (1) and subs (2) of s
43. Subsection (1) provides a power, which
be exercised, to delegate
any of the Authority's functions and powers under the Act. By contrast, s 43(2)
operates to require the
Authority to delegate to a person appointed as an
officer under s 38(2), "the performance or exercise of the Authority's functions
and powers under Division 1 of Part III". Those functions and powers include the
Authority's power under s 19 to certify, with or
without amendment, or refuse to
certify a forest practices plan.
provisions of the
Acts Interpretation Act
1931 (the AI Act) are also
relevant to the contentions about the validity of the delegations to Mr
Johnstone and Mr Burn. The AI
Act is to be applied in the interpretation and
construction of the Act except in so far as any provision is inconsistent
repugnant to the intent, object or express terms of the Act: AI Act, s
AI Act, s 23AA, is entitled Delegation and relevantly
(2) A delegation –
(a) may be general or limited; and
(b) must be in, or evidenced by, writing signed by the delegator or, if the
delegator is a body, by a person authorized by the body
for that purpose;
(c) may be revoked, wholly or partly, by the delegator.
(3) A delegated function or power may be exercised only in accordance with
any conditions to which the delegation is subject.
(4) A delegated function or power that is duly exercised by a delegate is to
be taken to have been exercised by the delegator.
(6) A function or power that has been delegated may, notwithstanding the
delegation, be exercised by the delegator.
(8) In all courts and before all persons acting judicially, an instrument
purporting to be executed by a delegate in the capacity
as a delegate is to be
received in evidence as if it were an instrument executed by the delegator and
is to be taken to be an instrument
executed by the delegator."
Trial Judge – Apprehended Bias
to the application of the legislative scheme to the circumstances under
consideration, the following passages expose the reasoning
of the trial judge
leading to the view that the exercise of the delegated power to certify was not
conditioned on the absence of
apprehended bias:
"Natural Justice
was stated by Lindgren J in Sun Zhan Qui v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic
1997] FCA 324
, 81 FCR 71:
'The general law
notion of natural justice comprises the 'impartial tribunal' requirement (the
'bias rule') and the 'fair hearing
requirement' (the 'hearing rule'):
Aronson and Dyer, supra,
at 387 ff.'
cases in which the decision maker is not a judge, consideration of the issue
must necessarily recognise and accommodate differences
between court proceedings
and other kinds of decision-making. Here, we are not dealing with a judicial
decision, but an administrative
decision. It is not contended by the applicant
that it had a right to be heard in relation to the decision to certify the
practices plans, either the certification or the re-certification. The
applicant had no such right. There is nothing in the legislation
recognises or suggests that a person in the applicant's position had any part to
play in that decision or was a person to whom
the rules of natural justice would
apply. An application for certification of a plan must be in writing and
accompanied by a memorandum
signed by the owner of the subject land or, if the
land is subject to a forestry right, the holder of that right approving the
application:
the Act, s 18(4). There is no requirement that an application for
certification be advertised or notified. There is no provision
giving any person
a right to be heard in respect to the application. Where the Authority
certifies a plan, refuses to certify a
plan or certifies an amended plan, it
must notify the applicant, the owner and the holder of any forestry right: s
19(3). There
is no requirement that any other person be notified. The Act also
provides for variations to a certified plan either at the application
person who applied for certification or at the instigation of the Authority: s
23 and s 24. The Authority may also revoke
a certified plan: s 24A.
Act provides for an appeal to the Tasmanian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
against a decision arising from an application to
certify a forest practices
plan or to vary or revoke a certified plan: s 25. Only a person who applied to
the Authority for certification
of a plan, and is aggrieved by the decision, has
a right to appeal: s 25(1). It follows from these provisions that the applicant
had no right to be heard in respect to a decision by the Authority or its
delegate to certify a forest practices plan and no statutory
right of appeal
against the decision.
the applicant contends for is that, independently of any expectation that it be
consulted and given an opportunity to put a case
to the Authority or its
delegate about the exercise of the power to certify, there exists an overriding
duty or obligation, owed
to the public, and particularly to the applicant after
its interest in the proposed harvesting activities and the plans was made
that the decision to certify was made without bias. Usually, although not
always, consideration of the question of apprehended
bias arises in
circumstances in which a person falls within a category of persons said to be
entitled to natural justice in respect
to a decision. As stated by Brennan J in
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
'Two distinct
but closely related questions can be perceived in the cases relating to the
exercise of a statutory power: the first,
or threshold, question is whether the
exercise of the power is conditioned upon observance of the principles of
natural justice;
the second question, arising when the exercise of the power is
so conditioned, is what the principles of natural justice require
particular circumstances. It is seldom possible to say that the legislature
intends to exclude observance of the principles
of natural justice in the
exercise of a statutory power which is apt to affect individual interests and
the more difficult and more
frequently addressed question is what the principles
of natural justice require in the particular circumstances.'
Honour continued at 616:
'To determine whether the legislature's
intention is to condition the exercise of a statutory power upon observance of
the principles
of natural justice - the threshold question - one must have
regard to the text of a statute creating the power, the subject matter
statute, the interests which exercise of the power is apt to affect and the
administrative framework created by the statute
within which the power is to be
exercised.'
circumstances such as the present, the distinction between a requirement to
observe procedural fairness and the content of the
duty is not always easy to
identify. In considering this issue I have in mind the following passage from
the reasons of Deane J in
Haoucher v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic
[1990] HCA 22
169 CLR 648
'Regardless of whether one can identify a right in the
strict sense or a legitimate expectation, the requirements of procedural
must be observed in any case where, by reference to "the particular
statutory framework" (see
Mobil Oil Australia Pty. Ltd. v. Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[1963] HCA 41
(1963) 113 CLR 475
, at p 504),
it is proper to discern a legislative intent that the donee of governmental
executive power or authority should be bound
by them. There is a strong
presumption of such a legislative intent in any case where a statute confers on
one person a power or
authority adversely and directly to affect the rights,
interests, status or legitimate expectations of a real or artificial person
entity in an individual capacity (as distinct from merely as a member of a
section of the general public). The rationale of that
strong presumption is to
be found not so much in sophisticated principle as in ordinary notions of what
is fair and just. In that
regard, it is important to bear in mind that the
recognition of an obligation to observe procedural fairness does not call into
a body of rigid procedural rules which must be observed regardless of
circumstances. Where the obligation exists, its precise content
reflect the common law's perception of what is necessary for procedural fairness
in the circumstances of the particular
case. In some cases where the
requirements of procedural fairness are applicable, nothing less than a full and
unbiased hearing of
each affected individual's case will satisfy them. In other
circumstances, something less may suffice. Thus, the circumstances of
particular case may be such that procedural fairness does not require that each
person affected be accorded an effective opportunity
of being personally heard
before a decision is made but nonetheless requires that the decision-maker be,
and appear to be, personally
unbiased (see, e.g., Jackson, Natural Justice, 2nd
ed (1979), p 100). Indeed, the law seems to me to be moving towards a
conceptually
more satisfying position where common law requirements of
procedural fairness will, in the absence of a clear contrary legislative
be recognized as applying generally to governmental executive decision-making
(cf. Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th ed (1989),
vol 1(1), par 85) and where the
question whether the particular decision affects the rights, interests, status
or legitimate expectations
of a person in his or her individual capacity is
relevant to the ascertainment of the practical content, if any, of those
requirements
in the circumstances of a particular case and of the standing of a
particular individual to attack the validity of the particular
decision in those
circumstances.'
my view the interests of the applicant are not apt to be affected by the
relevant decisions in a way which is substantially different
from the way in
which the decisions are apt to affect the interests of the public at large. I do
not see that the Authority or its
delegate was, in making the decision to
certify, bound or entitled to have regard to the interest of the applicant or to
extend procedural
fairness to it in the making of the relevant decision. There
is no legislative intent discernible that the delegate should be bound
principles of natural justice in favour of the applicant. The applicant relied
on the statements of principle concerning apprehension
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
, but the decision considered in that case to be made by the
Immigration Assessment Authority was of a nature which affected the individual
interests of the applicant. The nature of the decision and statutory context
was far removed and readily distinguishable from the
circumstances of this case.
The issue in
was not whether the statutory power was conditioned on
the absence of apprehended bias. It was not in dispute that the bias rule
applied to the Immigration Assessment Authority and the Minister and the
Secretary of the relevant Commonwealth department. The
issue in that case was,
rather, whether the bias rule had been breached. Similarly, in
Knox City Council
[2015] HCA 20
255 CLR 135
, it was accepted by the
decision maker that it was required to comply with the rules of natural
might be said that, in the context of the decision to certify a plan, even if it
is presumed that procedural fairness will apply,
a fair minded observer, with
knowledge of all of the relevant circumstances, would expect little more of the
decision maker than
the absence of personal interest, a willingness to give
genuine and appropriate consideration to the application and that the matters
required by law to be taken into account: compare the comments of Spigelman J in
McGovern v Ku-ring-gai Council
[2008] NSWCA 209
referred to in
in my view, the exercise of the delegated power to certify a forest practices
plan was not conditioned on observance of the
principle of natural justice that
the decision maker not be in a position of apprehended bias. The text and
context of the legislation
clearly exclude the implication that the exercise of
power was so conditioned. Some repetition of my earlier references to the
legislation
is necessary. The Authority is part of the State Forest system. The
objective of the system stated in Schedule 7 is to achieve sustainable
management of Crown and private forests with due care for the environment and
taking into account social, economic and environmental
outcomes. However that
objective is to be achieved 'in a way that is as far as possible self-funding',
'an emphasis on self-regulation'
and through 'delegated and decentralized
approvals for forest practices plans and other forest practices matters.' The
on self-regulation and delegated and decentralised approvals recognises
and assumes the possibility of the conflict which I have
identified. Systems
which emphasise self-regulation inherently involve recognition of competing and
not always consistent considerations
and the potential for balancing conflicting
interests I have already described. The earlier quoted passage from the manual
by the Authority itself for forest practices officers recognises the same
conflict. The statutory recognition of that proposition
is confirmed by other
provisions of the Act.
Act recognises that the Authority and the Forest Practices Advisory council must
balance competing interests. Both are required,
the Authority by s 4D and the
Council by s 37CA, to have regard to the wood supply obligations of the Forestry
corporation under
s 16 of the Act. In the case of the Authority that is so
'whilst not diminishing the ongoing application of the Forest Practices
By s 4E the Authority must at least once in each financial year 'assess the
degree to which the forest practices system is
self-finding and
self-regulating.' At the same time it must assess the implementation and
effectiveness of a representative sample
of forest practices plans, the clear
inference being that the forest practices plans being reviewed are those which
are the subject
of self-regulation. The Authority's responsibility under s 4G
to monitor and enforce compliance with the Act and Code is undertaken
through the chief forest practices officer but through investigations conducted
by forest practices officers.
aside delegated functions and powers, forest practices officers may also perform
duties while balancing competing interests.
Officers under s 38 may be employed
by the Forestry corporation, by a body corporate which has an involvement in
forest practices
or any suitably qualified person. Officers may hold office in
conjunction with any other office or appointment held by that person.
view, the scheme of the Act overwhelmingly suggests, and is based on, a system
in which forest practices officers perform
their duties in respect to forest
practices conducted by an employer of that officer. Forest practices officers
have a concomitant
duty to ensure and enforce compliance with the Act and the
Code. The scheme allows for enforcement of compliance through creation
offences and penalties and through ongoing assessment of the system of
self-regulation by the Authority and the Board.
implication also arises from s 43 in relation to delegations. A body corporate
required by s 27(1) to lodge a three year plan
with the Authority is entitled,
under s 38(2), to have at least one suitably qualified person appointed as an
officer under that
section. By s 43(2), the Authority is required to delegate
to that person its functions and powers concerning forest practices plans.
Delegates and forest practices officers are accountable to the Authority in the
exercise of their functions.
provisions, when viewed in the context and in light of the purpose of the Act
and legislative scheme, lead overwhelmingly to
the conclusion that it would be
artificial and unnecessary for a person exercising the delegated power to
certify a forest practices
plan to avoid being in a position, or acting in a
way, which creates the appearance of bias. The neutrality expected in a
or quasi-judicial decision is not required and the nature of the
decision under consideration and its statutory context is far removed
a circumstance. There is no statutory implication or condition on the exercise
of the delegated power that the decision
maker not be subject to an apprehension
of bias. The challenge to the certifications on this basis is not made
Case for the appellant
summary, the essential features of the appellant's written submissions were as
against bias, including apprehended bias, 'fosters public confidence in
decision-makers and their institutions' by 'enhancing
the appearance and
actuality of impartial decision-making'". [Footnote omitted.]
"The bias rule
is one of the requirements of procedural fairness. As such, it gives rise to a
common law principle of statutory interpretation:
observance of procedural
fairness (including the bias rule) is an implied condition of the exercise of
affect rights or interests by force of the statute,
'unless and to the extent that procedural fairness is clearly excluded by the
statutory scheme'. To exclude procedural fairness, Parliament must use 'plain
words of necessary intendment' – it must express
its intention with
'irresistible clearness'". [Footnotes omitted.]
As the decision
to certify, or otherwise, is a decision which affects "legal interest", the
decision is "conditioned on compliance
with the rules of procedural fairness,
unless Parliament has clearly stated otherwise".
"Parliament has
not, in plain words, excluded the bias rule as a condition on the power to make
a decision under s 19(1). Therefore,
the question is whether such an intention
can be discerned to be "irresistible clearness" standard by an implication
("necessary
intendment").
"Absent a clear
statutory direction to the contrary, the legislature should be taken to have
intended that the Authority will be,
to be, pursuing the
object of the legislation, and not otherwise in any sense
the outcome".
The decision to
certify or otherwise is a function Parliament has conferred on the Authority,
the composition of which the legislature
intended include a diverse range of
expertise, together with a concern for "independence and impartiality".
Directors are required
to disclose conflicts of interest, and not to be present
during any deliberation by the Board in relation to matters giving rise
conflict. The legislature has applied the principles relating to fiduciaries to
directors of the Authority's Board, including
the bias rule.
principles apply to the decision-makers on the Board of the Authority,
necessarily they apply to delegates exercising the
powers of the Board. "The
delegated power in the hands of the delegate is necessarily subject to the same
conditions or limitations
as the power in the hands of the delegator".
The application
of the principles relating to apprehended bias are not effected by an "emphasis
on self-regulation". While the Act
contemplates that the authority, together
with Officers and Forest Practices Officers will regulate the timber industry,
a limited degree of "self-regulation" contemplated in relation to
Forest Practices Officers by s 38(2). The written submission
"28 By s 43(2), any person appointed as an FPO
must receive a delegation from the Authority. This establishes a position where
organisation that is required to lodge a 'three year plan' under s 27 is, in
effect, entitled to have at least one person in its
employee appointed as an
Officer, an FPO, and a delegate of the Authority. That is the extent to which
the legislative design of
the FP Act contemplates 'self-regulation'. Nothing in
the FP Act authorises a delegate to certify a forest practices plan in respect
of their own application. Thus, the type of 'self-regulation' created by the FP
Act is not one which contemplates that a person may
certify their own
application for an FPP, noting that there is little practical difference between
a person certifying their own
application for an FPP and certifying an
application by their employer. In any event, the relevant delegations were made
Similarly, the
application of the principle is not affected by the power of delegations. While
the primary judge focused on the delegated
power, which his Honour found was not
conditioned on the observance of principles of natural justice, his Honour did
not consider
how the power of the authority conditioned by the bias rule could,
by delegation, "be freed from that constraint".
the context of the application of the principles of natural justice to decisions
by the Authority, in written submissions the
appellant advanced two examples.
First, where a decision to certify is made by the Authority, Parliament must
have intended that
a Director would be excluded from considering an application
for certification of a plan if the Director held a financial interest
proposed timber harvesting operation. Secondly, if an application came before a
Chief Forest Practices Officer, and the timber
harvesting operation was to be
carried out by a company of which the officer's brother was the managing
director, and in respect
of which profits would enter a family trust of which
the officer was a beneficiary, Parliament could not have intended to exclude
apprehended bias rule which would preclude the Chief Forest Practices Officer
from making a decision in such circumstances.
The public confidence in the
decision-making process would otherwise be seriously undermined.
Respondent's reply
second respondent highlighted the statutory context and the absence of any
effect upon the "rights, interests and expectations"
of the appellant. In
written submissions, after referring to various provisions of the Act, the
second respondent advanced the following
contentions:
following propositions are drawn from the above review of the Act:
(a) the forest practices system is to be self-funding with an emphasis on self
– regulation;
(b) the system is to operate with delegated and decentralised approvals for FPPs
consistent with the wide power of delegation in
section 43;
(c) the Authority has the role of overseeing forest practices comply with FPPs -
it must annually assess a sample of FPPs and report
(d) the Authority has to report to the Minister;
(e) the chief forest practices officer has a central role in ensuring
compliance;
(f) there is an obligation on persons responsible for forestry activities to
report on compliance to the Authority;
(g) persons employed by the STT may be appointed by the Authority as officers;
(h) persons employed by a body corporate which has involvement in forest
practices in Tasmania may be appointed by the Authority
as officers;
(i) the Authority must appoint as officers persons nominated by a body corporate
engaged in the industry who are required to lodge
three-year plans;
(j) the Authority may by warrant authorise STT employees to be compliance
(k) the Authority may by warrant authorise persons employed by a body corporate
which has involvement in forest practices in Tasmania
to be forest practices
(l) the Authority must by warrant authorise the officer nominated by the body
corporate required to lodge a three-year plan as a
forest practices officer;
(m) persons appointed as officers may hold that office in conjunction with any
other appointment.
Act expressly contemplates that employees of STT (and other corporations) can
act as officers and certify forest practices plans
for their employers as part
of the delegated and decentralised approval system which was intended to be
self-regulating. Compliance
with the Act cannot amount to bias, actual or
apprehended.
could easily have made a contrary intention clear by the insertion of words to
the effect that, a person delegated the
power to certify FPPs is not to certify
a plan applied for by an organisation which employs them."
to the appellant's submission that through s 4A(1) the legislature was concerned
to ensure a diverse range of expertise within
the Board, and that conditions
identified in Schedule 3 are "indicative of a concern for independence and
impartiality", coupled
with the requirement to disclose conflicts of interest,
the second respondent pointed out that this submission was not made to the
primary judge. In these circumstances, the second respondent urged that this
Court should not permit the submission to be advanced
on the appeal.
referring to authorities which discourage appellate courts from permitting
points not raised at trial to be advanced on an
appeal, the second respondent
pointed out that if the issue had been raised at trial, the second respondent
"may have sought to adduce
evidence including as to the industry, for the
purpose of showing the context in which the Act was enacted was one where it
not have been practical for delegates employed by a harvesting
organisation to recuse themselves from certifying their employer's
addition, the second respondent submitted that s 4A(6) and Schedule 3 have
effect with respect to the Directors, but not delegates.
The submission
"The inclusion of a provision whereby directors of the
Authority can determine conflicts arising from pecuniary interest demonstrates
that Parliament considered the need for this in the workings of the Board of
Directors but not in respect of the Authority's delegates.
significant that upon disclosure of a pecuniary conflict by a director, the
other directors can determine whether the
conflicted director can still take
part in the relevant decision-making and that there is no blanket ban for that
addition to the primary question as to the application of the rule against
apprehended bias to the decision-making process, the
written submissions of the
first respondent questioned whether, in the particular circumstances,
apprehended bias existed:
"29 The Act expressly contemplates that
employees of STT (and other corporations) could act as certifying planning
officers and certify
forest practices plans for their employers as part of the
delegated and decentralised approval system which was intended to be
self-regulating.
Compliance with the Act cannot amount to apprehended bias.
particular circumstances tend against a finding of apprehended bias. Certifying
officers were governed by the Forest Practices
Officer Manual ('FPO Manual'),
being a document produced by the Authority, which stresses that they must act
impartially. It expressly
contemplates that an employee of STT may be a forest
practices officer and sets out the guidelines as to how that happens. It states
that 'FPOs are expected to undertake their FPO duties at the same time as they
are undertaking normal duties for their employer or
client... the FPO has a
separate responsibility under the Act to the FPA that may on occasions have the
potential to conflict with
the FPO's responsibilities to the employer or
client'. While the Forest Practices Officer Manual does not have any statutory
it is a document consistent with the framework established by the Act
that contemplates a duality of role.
FPPs were not assigned to the officers by STT, and there was no 'direction' from
STT to certify any of those plans. There is no
evidence of STT exerting any
pressure on the delegates. Each delegate was to and did exercise his own
independent judgment.
scope of any duty owed in this case ought to be found to be 'an expectation that
the decision maker will bring to the decision
a willingness to give genuine and
appropriate consideration to the application and the matters by law to be taken
into account.'
The evidence does not establish a breach of that duty."
to whether apprehended bias existed, the written submissions for the third
respondent emphasised that the certifiers had no financial
interest in
certifying the plans, and "their role as delegates of the Forest Practices
Authority (ie to exercise powers under s 19(1)
of the FP Act) was not in any way
incompatible with their role as an employee of STT". The written submissions
"30 The sorts of things identified by his Honour as to
why it is that the statutory regime excluded the rule against bias is equally
apposite for purposes of considering the role of Mr Johnstone and Mr Burn as
repositories of s 19(1) power. They were obliged to
ensure that the relevant
forest practices plan contained a number of things – including '...
specifications of the forest practices
to be carried out on the land referred to
In the plan in connection with the harvesting of timber or the clearing of trees
18(2)(a)) (FP Act). They had to be '...in accordance with the
Forest Practices Code as in force at the time the forest practices
prepared'. The point being that Messrs Johnstone and Burn could not simply
rubber stamp any application for a plan; and their
evidence clearly shows that
they undertook a rigorous process of assessment of putative and proposed forest
practices plans.
Forest Practices Authority – and therefore any delegate such as Mr
Johnstone and Mr Burn - is required by s 4B(2)(a) to
'... act in all matters in
a manner that (a) best advances the objective of the State's forest practices
system'. As observed by
his Honour, schedule 7 specifies the objective of that
system, in its delivery, '... in a way is a far as possible self-funding'
(a) An emphasis on self-regulation; and
(b) Planning before forest operations; and
(c) Delegated and decentralised approvals for Forest Practices Plans...
is submitted that consideration of these things is such that a fair-minded lay
observer would not reasonably apprehend that Mr
Johnstone and Mr Burn might not
bring an impartial mind to determining the applications made for certification
of the respective
forest practices plans."
the context of the statutory scheme and issues raised at trial and on appeal, it
is necessary to consider the question of the
appellant's standing to bring the
proceedings. This issue was argued before the trial judge, but his Honour
determined it was unnecessary
to make a finding in that regard because of his
view that the absence of apprehended bias was not a condition of the exercise of
the power to certify. His Honour said:
"63 A good deal of time was
devoted by the applicant to submissions about whether the applicant had standing
to bring these proceedings.
The applicant is a non-profit community association
run by volunteers. It was established as an unincorporated association in about
2016 and was incorporated on 14 August 2020. It has no assets of substance. On
incorporation the constitution provided for a chair,
secretary, public officer
and treasurer as elected officers who, with between two and four other members
would constitute the executive.
Membership of the association was 'open to those
with a demonstrated interest in the protection of native forests in north east
and the creation of a North East Tasmania Gondwana National Park.' The
constitution also provided that new members 'must be nominated
by an association
member and be approved by the Executive.' The objects of the association
included to 'promote and advocate for
the creation of a North East Tasmania
Gondwana National Park', to 'publicise and promote the protection of native
forests and the
preservation and enhancement of ecological diversity', to 'work
cooperatively with government, industry and the general community
sustainable and integrated natural resource management outcomes' and to
'undertake other activities that are consistent
with best practice principles of
sustainable natural resource management, forest protection and the creation of a
North East Tasmania
Gondwana National Park.'
pursuit of its objectives, prior to 2022, members and officers of the
association carried out surveys of threatened species in
and around Derby,
corresponded with members of Parliament and government entities and enterprises
including STT, conducted community
activities and communications and maintained
a social media presence. At the relevant time the public officer and treasurer
applicant was Louise Morris. Her affidavit evidence was that she had been
involved in the protection of forests since 1997 through
various other
organisations including the Wilderness Society Inc. She had been monitoring the
areas which are the subject of these
proceedings since early 2021. She deposed
that by the time the proceedings were commenced, the logging in the area of 42.8
coupe CC119A was completed and the logging in the area of 37 ha called
coupe CC105A was well underway.
Morris deposed that on about 31 March 2021 she sought and obtained legal advice
to bring these proceedings when she became aware
of potential 'legal problems
with the logging operation' and that 'validating legislation was being
considered by the government'.
The evidence establishes that those logging
operations conducted by STT ceased as a result of the interlocutory order made
April 2022.
can be stated in the clearest terms without a need for further reasons that the
applicant has no interest which would entitle it
to standing concerning the
decision of the Authority to appoint a person as a forest practices officer or
delegate. The applicant
does not submit to the contrary. What is in issue in
these proceedings is the decision of a delegate of the Authority to certify
forest practices plans. However the issue of standing need not be wrestled with
because the determinative issue in this case
is not whether there exists any
apprehended bias, or whether the applicant has standing to bring proceedings.
The issue of standing
does not fall to be determined unless the basis of the
application for relief is established. The determinative issue is whether
absence of apprehended bias is a condition, either implied as a matter of
statutory construction or by the common law, of the
exercise of the power of a
delegate to certify. I have concluded that such an implication is clearly
excluded by the terms of the
Act when construed having regard to their context
and legislative purpose."
later passage in the reasons of the trial judge is also relevant to the question
of standing:
"73 In my view the interests of the applicant are not
apt to be affected by the relevant decisions in a way which is substantially
different from the way in which the decisions are apt to affect the interests of
the public at large. I do not see that the Authority
or its delegate was, in
making the decision to certify, bound or entitled to have regard to the interest
of the applicant or to extend
procedural fairness to it in the making of the
relevant decision. There is no legislative intent discernible that the delegate
be bound by the principles of natural justice in favour of the
applicant."
third respondent addressed brief written submission to this issue highlighting
the "novelty" of the circumstances:
"8 In order to be successful
upon the appeal it is necessary for the appellant to demonstrate that it had
standing for purposes of
prosecuting the originating application. The third
respondent did not concede that the appellant had standing and made no
submissions
to the learned primary Judge about that issue; but the second
respondent made lengthy submissions to the effect that the appellant
honourable Court could determine that issue; and likewise that which is raised
by ground 2(b). Alternatively, it could, if the
appellant is successful upon
ground 1 and 2(b) remit the two undetermined issues – standing and
apprehended bias - to the learned
primary Judge for determination.
to one side those issues, the novelty of this case lies in the fact that if the
appellant has standing, it is challenging
the decisions even though it had no
entitlement to be heard by the decision makers (i.e. Mr Johnstone and Mr Burn)
before they made
the decisions. As his Honour observed:
is not contended by the applicant that it had a right to be heard in relation to
the decision to certify the forest practices
plans... The applicant had no such
right. There is nothing in the legislation which recognises or suggests that a
person in the applicant's
position had any part to play in that decision or was
a person to whom the rules of natural justice would apply.
the curious position (if the applicant has standing) that whilst it was not 'a
person to which the rules of natural justice
... apply' it nonetheless seeks to
invoke one of those rules – the rule against bias – to have the
decisions to certify
the forest practices plans set to nought." (Footnotes
second respondent urged that the appellant is not a person aggrieved for the
purposes of
Judicial Review Act
because it is not "a
person whose interests are adversely affected by the decision":
particular, the appellant will not suffer a "grievance" as a result of the
decisions "beyond that which he or should has as an
ordinary member of the
second respondent also relied upon a passage from the judgment of Gummow J in
Australian Institute of Marine and Power Engineers v Secretary, Department of
[1986] FCA 443
(1986) 71 ALR 73
at 82 that "there flows from the decision ... a
danger and peril to the interest of the applicant that is clear and imminent
than remote, indirect or fanciful, and the applicant has an interest in
the matter of an intensity and degree well above that of
an ordinary member of
the public".
referring to authorities in the context of environmental issues, the second
respondent advanced the following written submissions:
appellant is not a person aggrieved for the purposes of
Judicial Review Act
entitled to relief in the nature of certiorari in respect of the decisions to
certify the FPPs.
appellant contends that it is sufficiently interested to obtain the relief it
claims because it has 'engaged in substantial 'active
use' of that forest,
including through research, community engagement and political engagement and
this case the appellant was incorporated on 14 August 2020 (Ms Morris' affidavit
of 8 April 2022 at LM-1). These proceedings were
commenced on 8 April 2022.
Whilst Ms Morris says that Blue Derby Wild was active as an unincorporated
association since 2016 (affidavit
of 8 April 2022 at [2]) there is no evidence
as to the degree of the formality of the unincorporated association nor as to
its activities.
scale of the appellant is very modest as demonstrated by its financial statement
for 20020/2021 (Weeding affidavit of 29 April
2022 at SW-6). It is run by
volunteers (Ms Morris' affidavit of 8 April 2022 at [2]). No membership details
have been provided. There
is minimal evidence as to the applicant's engagement
with the community of Derby. There is no suggestion of any endangered species
risk from the activity in question here. The harvesting of the relevant land is
substantially complete.
appellant has no role within the statutory scheme in question. It was not
engaged in the design of the regulatory prescriptions.
It has not received
funding from government.
evidence of the appellant's activities falls well short of the evidence in
Kinglake Friends of the Forest
, where there was evidence of specific
activities including
spotlighting
public meetings;
banner painting
afternoon with a special wildlife painter assisting participants to make a
series of banners raising awareness of
the forests, their wildlife, and the need
to protect them;
rallies and tours including for parliamentarians;
evidence of surveys over a two-year period of habitat trees and endangered
species in particular coupes;
reports from qualified experts in relation to fire hazard in a particular coupe;
fifteen separate
occasions of
reporting breaches of the applicable regulatory
grants to support greater glider detection activities;
a letter of
support from a local council, in recognition of its work of advocating for the
protection of the greater glider population;
commencement of
earlier court proceedings against VicForests alleging over harvesting of
bushfire management zones.
trial judge [in
] (whose judgment was upheld on appeal) placed
particular emphasis on the wildlife spotting nights, the forest surveys, the
it had organised for its members and other people interested in the
forests, community engagement and education, and notifying the
regulator of a
large number of instances of alleged over harvesting throughout the central
highlands."
appellant also relied upon the decision in
to support its case
for standing. In written submissions the appellant
"47 The discussion by the Victorian Court of Appeal is
most analogous to the present case, and may be summarised as follows.
47.1 In public interest cases, where the litigation concerns judicial review
of administrative action, there may well be many people
affected by the action.
The search for a 'special interest' to establish standing requires more than
that a person is affected by
a decision.
47.2 In environmental cases, 'active users' of the forest in which logging is
to occur are likely to have a special interest.
47.3 Active use of the forest may include 'scientific investigation and the
development of knowledge about the natural world, and
for the enjoyment of
nature, which is a fundamental human impulse' (at [75]).
47.4 A distinction may be drawn between holding beliefs (or having an
emotional or intellectual concern), and the taking of concrete
steps to give
effect to those beliefs. The latter demonstrates a commitment that distinguishes
the person or entity from other members
of the community and may give rise to a
'special interest'. In the context of environmental protection, the commitment
may be shown
by the conduct or support of research, community engagement,
interaction with the regulator, participation in the development of
controls, the development of expertise and knowledge, political lobbying or
other conduct. Such conduct would reveal that
the person or entity is not just
an 'intermeddler', 'crank' or 'busy body' (at [76]).
short, the appellant is sufficiently interested in logging at the two coupes in
question because it has engaged in substantial
'active use' of that forest,
including through research, community engagement, and political engagement and
advocacy. This is set
out in affidavit evidence filed at trial. This places the
appellant well and truly outside the general member of the
appellant did not challenge the summary of the relevant evidence cited earlier
in these reasons. It is appropriate, however,
to add the following
observations. First, for the purposes of standing, it is the appellant, an
incorporated body, who must be "aggrieved",
not others in their personal
capacities, including officers or members of the appellant. In this respect,
the evidence is significantly
inadequate.
Louise Morris is the public officer and treasurer of the appellant. She has
been involved in the protection of Australia's native
forests since 1997 in
capacities such as campaigner with the Wilderness Society Inc, campaign advisor
to then Senator Christine Milne,
campaign manager for Markets for Change Inc and
co-ordinator of the Forests Free Speech Campaign in response to the Gunns 20
litigation.
In her affidavit of 8 April 2022, Ms Morris did not state when she
became involved with the appellant, or its predecessor association.
to Ms Morris, "Blue Derby Wild" was active as an unincorporated association from
2016, under the name "Blue Derby Wild",
and was incorporated on 14 August 2020.
Throughout her affidavit, Ms Morris spoke of the activities of "Blue Derby
Wild", which
the affidavit stated in paragraph 1 was a reference to "Blue Derby
Wild Inc". However, in stating that "since its inception, Blue
Derby Wild has
engaged in the following activities ...", she did not distinguish between the
unincorporated association, which she
stated was active since 2016, and the
incorporated body which is the appellant.
Morris stated that "Blue Derby Wild is a community based, non-profit association
run by volunteers". The affidavit does not identify
specific activities
undertaken by the unincorporated association, as opposed to activities
undertaken by the appellant following
incorporation of 14 August 2020. No
information is provided as to the membership of the unincorporated association
or its financial
certificate of incorporation identifies four public officers, including Ms
Morris. The constitution states that there shall
be an "elected management
group", known as the Executive, but no information is provided by Ms Morris as
to whether such a group
has been elected. Clause 6 of the constitution provides
that membership "shall be equitably representative of community, business
government stakeholders involved in advocating for the protection of native
forests and creation of NETGNP", a reference to a
proposed North East Tasmania
Gondwana National Park. Clause 3 provides that one of the objectives of the
association is to promote
and advocate for the creation of such a national park.
6 provides that membership is also open to those with a "demonstrated interest
in the protection of native forests in North
East Tasmania, and the creation of
the national park. New members must be nominated by an association member and
approved by the
Executive."
affidavit of Ms Morris did not provide any information as to membership of the
appellant. Nor did the affidavit provide any
information concerning the
financial position of the appellant since its incorporation in August 2020.
Morris deposed to activities undertaken by "Blue Derby Wild", without
distinguishing between the unincorporated association and
the appellant. No
minutes of meetings of the appellant or its Executive were provided by Ms Morris
to evidence decisions by the
appellant to undertake any of the activities
identified in the affidavit. Although Ms Morris deposed that a reference in her
to "Blue Derby Wild" is a reference to Blue Derby Wild Inc, I am far
from satisfied that the activities of which Ms Morris spoke
were the activities
of the appellant, as opposed to individual members or supporters of the
appellant's cause in their personal capacities.
Ms Morris did not say the
activities were undertaken with the authority, and on behalf of, the
Morris deposed that since at least February 2021, she has personally monitored
the areas of logging under consideration. However,
there is no evidence that
her activity in this regard was an activity of the appellant. Similarly, Ms
Morris deposed to having published,
or caused to be published, evidence of the
logging, but there is no evidence to establish that this activity was an
activity authorised
to be undertaken on behalf of the appellant.
observations can be applied to all the activities of which Ms Morris deposed in
her affidavit. Simply put, there is no evidence
as to whether the various
activities were undertaken by persons in their personal capacity, or whether the
activities were authorised
by the appellant to be conducted on behalf of the
appellant. References on social media, and other forms of media, and in
correspondence
over the years, have consistently used the name "Blue Derby
Wild", but the link to the appellant is absent.
only information provided by Ms Morris as to decisions made by the appellant is
her statement that on 7 April 2022 the appellant
resolved to bring these
proceedings.
to the actual activities, it is readily apparent that, over a number of years,
using the name "Blue Derby Wild" persons have been
active on social media with
respect to environmental issues generally and, in particular, in connection with
the protection of the
forests and animal species in the Derby area. In the name
of "Blue Derby Wild", persons have actively lobbied against logging in
of the State through social media, newspaper and radio interviews, and releases
and correspondence with politicians.
Morris deposed that "Blue Derby Wild" has carried out "many threatened species
surveys in forest near Derby in North East Tasmania".
No details are provided
as to the number, nature and content of those
is common ground that the decisions in question to certify the plans were
decisions to which the
Judicial Review Act
Act provides that a person who is "aggrieved" by a decision may apply to the
court for order of review relating to the decision.
One of the grounds on which
such an application may be made is a breach of the rules of natural justice in
the making of the decision.
7 provides the meaning of "person aggrieved" as "a person whose interests are
adversely effected by the decision."
the extent that the appellant also sought an order in the nature of certiorari
quashing the certifications, for the purposes of
standing it is sufficient to
observe that if the appellant does not have standing to pursue the application
Judicial Review Act
, inevitably the application for certiorari
would fail.
mentioned, both parties rely upon the helpful decision of the Victorian Court of
VicForests v Kinglake Friends of the Forest
(above). The court
was concerned with a finding by the trial judge that the plaintiff corporation
possessed standing to bring proceedings
seeking to restrain logging operations
by the defendant.
court analysed a number of authorities, highlighting how the weight to be
afforded to numerous factors varies according to the
particular circumstances,
including the nature of the power being exercised. For present purposes, of
particular relevance is the
general observation that "the standing rule based on
a 'special interest', focuses on the relative position of the plaintiff when
compared with the broader population" [29].
analysing a number of authorities, the court identified relevant points emerging
from the decisions of the High Court in
Australian Conservation Foundation v
the Commonwealth
[1980] HCA 53
, 146 CLR 493 and
Onus v Alcoa of Australia
[1981] HCA 50
"60 A number of points
emerge from
(a) A plaintiff must show a special interest in the
subject matter of the litigation;
(b) The need for a special interest reflects the need
to show an interest or a position that is different from the public at large;
(c) The concept of 'interest' is not limited to
proprietary, business or economic interests;
(d) The need for the interest to be special or
different is not merely a function of the depth of feeling but reflects the
of the relationship between the person and the subject matter of the
litigation. The nature of the interest in the subject matter
must be more than
merely emotional or intellectual;
(e) The subject matter of the litigation will involve a
consideration of the statutory context, the nature of the power, and the form
relief sought. The place, if any, that the plaintiff has in the statutory scheme
may be important."
considering other authorities, the court also noted, as an important aspect of
the reasoning in
, that the application of the special interest test
is "fact and context specific", including the statutory context.
that the plaintiff was not a participant in the relevant regulatory regime, and
that it sought "to restrain the removal of
particular trees in the forest, on
the basis that their removal breaches the express prescription", the court
observed that the plaintiff
was involved in the Kinglake area and the Central
Highlands [69] as evidenced by the following
activities:
"(a) organising multiple public events, including
wildlife spotlighting nights, public meetings, forest habitat tree surveys, and
a banner painting afternoon;
(b) co-hosting and co-organising events in conjunction
with other organisations, including several rallies, a public forest tour,
forest recovery picnic;
(c) arranging tours for parliamentarians to promote the
cause for protection of Central Highlands state forests from logging;
(d) boosting media coverage of the case for stopping
logging of the Central Highlands state forests;
(e) maintaining a Facebook media presence advocating
for the protection of the Central Highlands state forests;
(f) carrying out five flora and fauna surveys in
various logging coupes in Central Highlands state forests;
(g) preparing and lodging seven separate submissions in
relation to logging in the Central Highlands to government, supervisory bodies,
and VicForests;
(h) arranging for an expert report to be prepared by a
Canadian academic assessing the fire hazards in a Central Highlands logging
(i) researching, preparing and lodging 18 breach
reports in relation to VicForests' logging activities in the Central Highlands
the Department of Land, Water and Planning ('DELWP');
(j) receipt of two grants from the Field Naturalists
Club of Victoria to support the plaintiff's Greater Glider detection
activities;
(k) presentation of a petition signed by 633
petitioners to the Victorian Legislative Council seeking cessation of logging in
Central Highlands state forests by July 2020;
(l) receipt of a letter of support from Murrindindi
Shire Council, in recognition of the plaintiff's work advocating for protection
of the Greater Glider population; and
(m) conducting court proceedings (S ECI 2020 04058)
against VicForests on 26 October 2020, alleging overharvesting of bushfire
zones in various locations in the Central Highlands state forests."
with the defendant's submission that the involvement of the plaintiff was "no
more than evidence of its strongly held views
or opinions", the court addressed
the nature of the interest held by the plaintiff
The nature of the interest
is apparent from the activities described in paragraph 69 that Kinglake FF is an
active user of the Central Highlands forests in
that it seeks not only to
agitate to preserve them, but to foster the understanding and enjoyment of them
by its members and by the
local and wider community. Its activities and position
in the local community are similar to those of EEG in Brown Mountain. The
forests of the Central Highlands are a locus of scientific investigation and the
development of knowledge about the natural world,
and for the enjoyment of
nature, which is a fundamental human impulse. In this sense, they are a resource
for Kinglake FF as much
as they are for VicForests. A breach of the regulatory
controls designed to balance the competing demands on the forests can therefore
be said to involve a disadvantage to Kinglake FF that gives rise to more than a
sense of grievance.
this context, a distinction may be drawn between merely holding beliefs (or
having a mere emotional or intellectual concern), and
the taking of concrete
steps to give effect to those beliefs. The latter demonstrates a commitment that
distinguishes the person
or entity from other members of the community and may
give rise to a 'special interest' in securing compliance with regulatory
requirements.
In the context of environmental protection, the commitment may be
shown by the conduct or support of research, community engagement,
interaction
with the regulator, participation in the development of regulatory controls, the
development of expertise and knowledge,
political lobbying or other
Such conduct would reveal that the person or entity is not just an
'intermeddler', 'crank' or 'busy body'. It may allay concerns
that the entity
will not be in a position to carry through the litigation. In this context, the
distinction between beliefs and action
is both logical and coherent, and
consistent with the purpose of the standing rule.
the facts, Kinglake FF has demonstrated a commitment to the specific environment
that it alleges is subject to unlawful logging
operations. By its proceeding it
seeks to restrain those operations.
judge placed particular emphasis on the wildlife spotting nights and forest
surveys conducted by Kinglake FF, and the events it
has organised for its
members and other people interested in the forests. She regarded community
engagement and education as significant,
and noted that Kinglake FF had directed
considerable effort towards its 'mission' of preserving the State forests of the
Highlands, notifying the Office of Conservation Regulator of a large
number of instances of alleged overharvesting by VicForests
throughout the
Central Highlands. In our view, these were all matters on which the judge was
entitled to place particular weight.
Having regard to the nature and extent of
these activities, there is a demonstrated interest in the protection of the
environment
in the Central Highlands that is qualitatively different from the
interest of ordinary members of the public."
drawing a distinction between the circumstances in
, and those the
court was considering, the court made the following observations
"The distinction lies in Kinglake FF's concentration of effort
in and commitment to preservation, understanding and enjoyment of the
Highlands native forests, which underscores its interest in the subject matter
of the proceeding, which itself is quite specific."
court then emphasised that the distinction to which it was referring did not
"signal the application of a different test", but
was a recognition that
"context is critical". Emphasising that the matters relied upon to establish
standing "relate back to the
specific issues in the litigation", the court
observed that, depending on the context, in the matter under consideration it
be accurate to describe those issues "as involving the protection of the
environment in the Central Highlands, the preservation of
trees in the Central
Highlands forests, the lawfulness of logging in that area, or the alleged
non-compliance with the specific prescription
relating to buffers." [84].
Further, the court observed that the issue in the proceeding could be expressed
"more generally" as
whether there had been "compliance with environmental
prescriptions and the lawfulness of certain tree removal operations in the
Kinglake and Central Highlands forests."
the context of a regulatory regime described by the court as imposing "multiple
requirements at varying degrees of specificity",
and a central issue in the
litigation being the lawfulness, but not the merits, of proposed logging
operations, the court was of
the view that the proceedings were "directly
related to Kinglake FF's special interest in preserving the native forests of
the Central
Highlands [90]. Further at [91]:
"In the present
context, the prohibitions are direct, mandatory and informed by the protection
of threatened species. There is a
close connection between the work of Kinglake
FF outside of the litigation and the issues in dispute."
reaching its conclusion that the plaintiff had standing, the court accepted a
submission of the plaintiff at [94]:
"In this case, Kinglake FF
contends that the relevant logging operations will result in the unlawful
destruction of part of the forest
environment. Should it succeed in obtaining
the relief it seeks, it will have gained an advantage (or perhaps not suffered
an unlawfully
imposed disadvantage), in respect of the particular forest to
which it is connected — that is, the forest's preservation. Achieving
an outcome would be consistent with the observations of Gibbs J in ACF."
JA was a member of the court in
. Subsequently his Honour
delivered a judgment in
Binginwarri Friends of the Jack and Albert River
Catchment Area Inc v VicForests
[2021] VSC 824
in which the plaintiff, an
incorporated association, sought declaratory and injunctive relief in respect of
forestry operations conducted
by the defendant. The plaintiff contended such
operations were unlawful.
the background of extensive activities of members of the plaintiff who,
personally, possessed a special interest in the subject
matter of the
proceedings, and in the context of incorporation of the plaintiff six days
before it commenced the proceedings, Niall
J found that the plaintiff did not
have standing to bring the proceedings. The following passages in his Honour's
judgment are of
direct relevance to the position of the appellant
"48 A critical focus of the inquiry is on the nature and
extent of the relationship between the putative plaintiff and the subject
of the litigation. Because the nature of the interests that may support standing
do not depend on the existence of legally
enforceable rights, a plaintiff does
not need to show a proprietary, business or economic interest that is liable to
be affected.
That point is amply illustrated by the decision of the High Court
where the plaintiffs had a deep cultural and spiritual
connection to the Aboriginal relics that were threatened by a proposed
development.
assessing the standing of a body corporate it will be necessary to have regard
to a range of matters, including its constituent
documents as well as other
matters, such as its purpose, activities, and scale. In making this evaluative
assessment it is unwise
to draw inflexible rules as to what is and is not
thing that emerges clearly from
is that standing is not established
merely because a person or entity sets out to be involved in the subject matter,
even if that
desire is born from a deep emotional or intellectual concern. In
this sense, a statement of corporate purpose or objective is little
different to
an exclamation by an individual that they are intent on being involved in a
particular issue and wish to vindicate their
proclaimed interest.
, Gibbs J expressed the point in this way:
natural person does not acquire standing simply by reason of the fact that he
holds certain beliefs and wishes to translate them
into action, and a body
corporate formed to advance the same beliefs is in no stronger position.
, Gibbs J also made the point that a corporation does not acquire
standing because some of its members possess it. The plaintiff submits
Honour was not addressing himself to the situation in which all of the members
of an incorporated body have standing and
that it may be inferred that such a
body would be viewed differently. I do not agree. As I read that part of the
reasons for judgment,
Gibbs J was making the point that the issue is the
standing of the plaintiff based on its conduct, activities, and relationship and
that this is not merely a derivative status derived from the position of its
members or corporators.
fact that a corporation, including an incorporated association, has a separate
and distinct legal identity from its members is
an important and related part of
the context in which to assess the entity's standing with respect to particular
litigation. It serves
to emphasise that it is the relative position of the
plaintiff, as a separate juristic entity, that is critical. However, it does
follow, as the defendant would have it, that the activities and interests of the
members, including those that occurred pre-incorporation
are necessarily
irrelevant.
activities of individual members of an organisation post-incorporation, at least
when conducted as a member, may be attributed
to the organisation in a variety
of contexts. If the member is acting as an agent of the entity or with its
authority, the entity
may be liable under the principles of agency or in
accordance with usual rules of attribution where a body corporate acts through
individuals. But the present issue is not the ascertainment of legal
responsibility for the conduct of members. Rather, it is necessary
to ascertain
the nature of the relationship between the entity and the subject matter and
there is no reason why the conduct of its
members is irrelevant.
issue is more nuanced in the case of pre-incorporation conduct. I am not
persuaded that such conduct is always irrelevant. For
example, the Act provides
for the incorporation of a pre-existing unincorporated association. Before
incorporation, such an association
has no separate legal existence that is
independent from its members. However, as a group of individuals the association
a collective identity and have engaged in conduct as a collective for
the purpose of common endeavour. In doing so, the group of
individuals may have
a connection with a particular subject matter and have engaged in activities and
conduct to express their collective
concern or involvement. I see no reason why
that conduct must be ignored when assessing standing of the incorporated
approach accords with
, where the predecessor association had been
formed in the 1950s and was formalised by a constitution in the early 1970s. On
incorporation,
a new legal entity was created, but as Ipp J observed, the
history showed a representative body of long standing. In such cases,
no reason to ignore that history in evaluating the connection of the body once
incorporated. That holds true even though
the new body may have no legal
responsibility for the conduct that occurred before incorporation.
the other hand, I cannot accept the plaintiff's submission that the broad fact
specific approach to standing, mandated by the authorities,
means that all of
the conduct of the individual members should be taken to be the conduct of the
plaintiff by means of some rule
of attribution. The plaintiff's resort to an
assessment of its 'character' based on its 'culture, identity or intentions' is,
practical terms, very similar to the case advanced and rejected in
. It amounts to a willingness and capacity to engage with the subject
matter, rather than an established connection based on its own
conduct and
activities.
the Court of Appeal explained in
'... a distinction
may be drawn between merely holding beliefs (or having a mere emotional or
intellectual concern), and the taking
of concrete steps to give effect to those
beliefs. The latter demonstrates a commitment that distinguishes the person or
entity from
other members of the community and may give rise to a 'special
interest' in securing compliance with regulatory requirements. In
the context of
environmental protection, the commitment may be shown by the conduct or support
of research, community engagement,
interaction with the regulator, participation
in the development of regulatory controls, the development of expertise and
political lobbying or other conduct. Such conduct would reveal that
the person or entity is not just an 'intermeddler', 'crank' or
'busy body'. It
may allay concerns that the entity will not be in a position to carry through
the litigation. In this context, the
distinction between beliefs and action is
both logical and coherent, and consistent with the purpose of the standing
distinction breaks down if the plaintiff is able to rely not on its own conduct
but solely on that of third parties even where
those other parties are members
of the association.
this case, the plaintiff is frank that its case for standing is based on a
combination of the position of its members and its object.
Although the Act
requires that there exist an association before incorporation, there is no
evidence here that the association that
was incorporated on registration had any
degree of formality, undertook any activities, or even had an informal structure
the nominal existence of an association coming together for the first
time and for the purpose of incorporation. The defendant takes
no issue with the
validity of the association and the process of incorporation but says that the
plaintiff cannot point to any pre-incorporation
activity or cohesion that would
be relevant to its current standing.
its highest, the plaintiff is an association of like-minded individuals each
with an interest in the preservation and protection
of the local environment and
in particular in the Jack and Albert River catchment area. The individual
members of the plaintiff have
been involved through various groups including the
JARR and the YYLN, but the facts do not suggest that the plaintiff is the new
embodiment of these pre-existing unincorporated associations.
agreed facts show that their interest is deep and long standing and has been
manifested in their activities and personal investment
in their local
environment. The standing of the individual members to bring an action of the
kind now before the Court was not seriously
put in doubt by the defendant.
Although the activities undertaken by the individuals had much in common, it
cannot be said that they
were undertaken as part of a group that now manifests
itself in the incorporated body of the plaintiff. They cannot meaningfully
said to belong to or be associated with the plaintiff.
experience, aptitude, and involvement in environmental work of the members of
the plaintiff, together with its object, amply show
that the plaintiff has the
purpose of protecting the local environment and the capacity to do so
effectively. However, at the point
of incorporation, and a short time later when
it commenced this proceeding, this capacity had not yet manifested itself in any
or conduct by the incorporated entity. It seems to me that in the
this is insufficient. I do not regard it as consistent with
the authorities that the entity be treated as and from its commencement
possessing all the relevant attributes of its members for the purpose of
determining its connection with the subject matter of
the litigation. In those
cases, such as
, the plaintiff
could rely on more than the activity of its members. The plaintiff cannot.
Although each case depends on its own facts
and statutory context, the approach
I favour is consistent with the approach taken by Richards J in
The People of
the Small Town of Hawkesdale Inc v Minister for
As was the case in that decision, there is no
evidence of any activity by the plaintiff to represent its members' interests or
its object, other than its commencement and pursuit of this
proceeding.
I am unable to conclude that the plaintiff is, in effect, a single purpose
vehicle for the conduct of the proceeding, the
fact that in its very short
existence the litigation is the only conduct of the plaintiff shows its
connection with the subject matter
is confined to bringing the action. I infer
that this particular litigation is a significant reason for the incorporation of
plaintiff. And, as a matter of both logic and precedent, the fact that the
plaintiff has commenced the litigation is not evidence
of its interest in the
subject matter that independently supports standing. An entity does not have
standing to bring a proceeding
merely because it has commenced the
proceeding.
one may infer that a reason that the litigation is conducted through a corporate
vehicle is to protect the individuals against
the risk of any exposure to costs,
ultimately I am not persuaded that this is of much significance on the question
of standing. The
decision of the plaintiff to commence the litigation was not
improper and should not be seen as some nefarious or underhanded manoeuvre.
may be accepted that rules as to standing are designed to ensure that the
plaintiff has a proper interest in the litigation and
the controversy is a real
one. However, the interest that must be demonstrated should not depend on the
size of cash reserves or
the holding of assets. The Court has available in its
armoury a number of means to prevent unfairness or injustice to an opposing
party by reason of the impecuniosity of a corporate plaintiff, including
security for costs, cost caps, and orders against non-parties.
In the ordinary
case, the fact that the plaintiff is incorporated and without substantial assets
may say little if anything about
the plaintiff in
Binginwarri
, the appellant was incorporated a little
over two years before instituting the proceedings. However, as the earlier
summary demonstrates,
there is a paucity of evidence as to the activities of the
appellant, as opposed to individual members and supporters in their personal
capacities. While the activities of such individuals remain relevant, as Niall
J pointed out, the position of the appellant as a
"separate juristic entity" is
important, and it is necessary to "ascertain the nature of the relationship"
between the appellant
and the subject matter. In the context of the statutory
scheme, what is the special interest of the respondent in the subject matter?
Forest Management Act
, the respondent is the Forest Manager for
timber production land zoned accordingly, with the following functions
identified in
of that Act:
"(a) To manage and control all
permanent timber production zone land;
(b) To undertake forest operations on permanent timber production zone land for
the purpose of selling forest products:
(c) Such other functions as are approved in writing by the Minister and the
Treasurer."
9 provides that the Forest Manager has such powers as are necessary to enable it
to perform its functions. Section 15 directs
that the Forest Manager must
perform its functions in a manner that is "consistent with the principles of
forest management set out
in the Forest Practices Code, as a contribution to the
sustainable management of Tasmania's forests."
Forest Manager, the respondent is required to make timber available to the
veneer and sawmilling industries.
Forest Management Act
directs that each year the Forest Manager must make available, for those
industries, "a minimum aggregate quantity of eucalypt veneer
logs and eucalypt
sawlogs, from permanent timber production zone land, that meets the prescribed
specifications that are in force
immediately before the commencement of this
Act", and other prescribed timber for a prescribed industry in prescribed
quantities.
discussed by the trial judge, it would be unlawful for the respondent to seek to
comply with its obligations by harvesting timber
unless the harvesting is
authorised by a certified forest practices plan pursuant to the Act. Such a
plan must be approved by the
Authority or a properly authorised delegate of the
Authority. The respondent is required to prepare a plan and present it for
certification.
The legislation does not provide for a role by the appellants,
or anyone else, in the preparation of the forest practices plan.
the legislative scheme does not provide for a role by anyone other than the
owner of the land in the assessment of the
forest practices plan prior to
lodging the application with the Authority (or delegate). The application for
certification of a
plan must be accompanied by a memorandum in writing signed by
the owner of the land stating that the owner has given approval for
the plan to
be submitted to the Authority (s 18(4)(b)). The appellant has no involvement in
that process, and is not entitled to
any input at any stage of the process.
the applicant for certification of a forest practices plan may appeal against
the decision of the Authority (or delegate) to
the Tasmanian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (s 25).
is clear from the statutory scheme that the appellant does not possess any
"interest" which would entitle it to participate in
any stage of the process.
It is not entitled to have any input into the preparation of the plan or its
presentation to the Authority
(or delegate). It is not entitled to any input
into the decision-making process, or to undertake an appeal with respect to the
of the Authority (or delegate).
is in this context that the subject matter of the litigation is to be
considered. It does not involve the merits of the plans.
It does not involve
the lawfulness of logging pursuant to the approved plans.
subject matter is not related to the qualifications or expertise of the persons
certifying the plans to undertake that task.
Nor does it concern the merits of
the plans and whether they comply with the Act and regulations.
the proceedings in
, the appellant's proceedings are not
concerned with the lawfulness of the logging which would occur pursuant to the
plans. It is
not concerned with the wisdom or otherwise of such logging from
the point of view of legality and/or environmental considerations.
respect, the subject matter is well removed from the subject matter in
where the "central issued raised by the litigation" was the
"lawfulness – and not the merits – of proposed logging operations"
course, ultimately the aim of the appellant is to stop the logging operations.
However, that aim does not translate into a special
interest in the subject
matter of the litigation, namely, whether apprehended bias existed with respect
to the delegates who certified
the plans, and whether the exercise of the power
to certify the plans was conditioned upon compliance with a rule against
apprehended
my view the appellant does not possess a relevant interest. The appellant is
not "a person aggrieved". Even if the issue had
been the lawfulness of the
logging, the circumstances are well removed from those identified in
and the evidence is lacking with respect to the "interest" of the appellant,
as opposed to persons who support the broad cause of
environmental protection
and the prevention of logging.
these reasons, the appellant lacks standing to bring the
proceedings.
Apprehended bias
if the appellant had standing to bring the proceedings, in my view the trial
judge was correct in finding that the exercise
of the power to certify the plans
was not conditioned on the absence of apprehended bias. I can do no better than
repeat the relevant
paragraphs of his Honour's reasons:
"74 It might
be said that, in the context of the decision to certify a plan, even if it is
presumed that procedural fairness will
apply, a fair minded observer, with
knowledge of all of the relevant circumstances, would expect little more of the
decision maker
than the absence of personal interest, a willingness to give
genuine and appropriate consideration to the application and that the
required by law to be taken into account: compare the comments of Spigelman J in
McGovern v Ku-ring-gai Council
[2008] NSWCA 209
referred to in
in my view, the exercise of the delegated power to certify a forest practices
plan was not conditioned on observance of the
principle of natural justice that
the decision maker not be in a position of apprehended bias. The text and
context of the legislation
clearly exclude the implication that the exercise of
power was so conditioned. Some repetition of my earlier references to the
legislation
is necessary. The Authority is part of the State Forest system. The
objective of the system stated in Schedule 7 is to achieve sustainable
management of Crown and private forests with due care for the environment and
taking into account social, economic and environmental
outcomes. However that
objective is to be achieved 'in a way that is as far as possible self-funding',
'an emphasis on self-regulation'
and through 'delegated and decentralized
approvals for forest practices plans and other forest practices matters.' The
on self-regulation and delegated and decentralised approvals recognises
and assumes the possibility of the conflict which I have
identified. Systems
which emphasise self-regulation inherently involve recognition of competing and
not always consistent considerations
and the potential for balancing conflicting
interests I have already described. The earlier quoted passage from the manual
by the Authority itself for forest practices officers recognises the same
conflict. The statutory recognition of that proposition
is confirmed by other
provisions of the Act.
Act recognises that the Authority and the Forest Practices Advisory council must
balance competing interests. Both are required,
the Authority by s 4D and the
Council by s 37CA, to have regard to the wood supply obligations of the Forestry
corporation under
s 16 of the Act. In the case of the Authority that is so
'whilst not diminishing the ongoing application of the Forest Practices
By s 4E the Authority must at least once in each financial year 'assess the
degree to which the forest practices system is
self-finding and
self-regulating.' At the same time it must assess the implementation and
effectiveness of a representative sample
of forest practices plans, the clear
inference being that the forest practices plans being reviewed are those which
are the subject
of self-regulation. The Authority's responsibility under s 4G
to monitor and enforce compliance with the Act and Code is undertaken
through the chief forest practices officer but through investigations conducted
by forest practices officers.
aside delegated functions and powers, forest practices officers may also perform
duties while balancing competing interests.
Officers under s 38 may be employed
by the Forestry corporation, by a body corporate which has an involvement in
forest practices
or any suitably qualified person. Officers may hold office in
conjunction with any other office or appointment held by that person.
view, the scheme of the Act overwhelmingly suggests, and is based on, a system
in which forest practices officers perform
their duties in respect to forest
practices conducted by an employer of that officer. Forest practices officers
have a concomitant
duty to ensure and enforce compliance with the Act and the
Code. The scheme allows for enforcement of compliance through creation
offences and penalties and through ongoing assessment of the system of
self-regulation by the Authority and the Board.
implication also arises from s 43 in relation to delegations. A body corporate
required by s 27(1) to lodge a three year plan
with the Authority is entitled,
under s 38(2), to have at least one suitably qualified person appointed as an
officer under that
section. By s 43(2), the Authority is required to delegate
to that person its functions and powers concerning forest practices plans.
Delegates and forest practices officers are accountable to the Authority in the
exercise of their functions.
provisions, when viewed in the context and in light of the purpose of the Act
and legislative scheme, lead overwhelmingly to
the conclusion that it would be
artificial and unnecessary for a person exercising the delegated power to
certify a forest practices
plan to avoid being in a position, or acting in a
way, which creates the appearance of bias. The neutrality expected in a
or quasi-judicial decision is not required and the nature of the
decision under consideration and its statutory context is far removed
a circumstance. There is no statutory implication or condition on the exercise
of the delegated power that the decision
maker not be subject to an apprehension
of bias. The challenge to the certifications on this basis is not made
these reasons, I would dismiss the appeal.
The appellant has not appealed
against the ruling that the delegations were valid.
Ding v De Wit
Section 15(9)(a)(i)
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act
The amended application with
which the trial judge dealt was filed on 4 May 2022.
Tooheys Ltd v Minister for
Business and Consumer Affairs
[1981] FCA 121
(1981) 4 ALD 277.
VicForests v Kinglake
Friends of the Forest
[2021] VSCA 195
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (454 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter