URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCCA/2025/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rainbird v Tasmania [2025] TASCCA 14 (22 October 2025)
[2025] TASCCA 14
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (COURT OF CRIMINAL
Rainbird v Tasmania
[2025] TASCCA
: RAINBIRD, Stuart Dean
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Shanahan CJ, Estcourt J, Jago J
Criminal Law – Appeal and new trial – Verdict unreasonable or
insupportable having regard to evidence – Appeal dismissed
Appellant submits evidence contradicts complainant's testimony – Submits
jury could not have reconciled the two accounts
– Submits insufficient
evidence to uphold finding of intention to engage in unlawful sexual act –
Open to jury to be
satisfied of guilt on complainant's credibility – Jury
entitled to conclude the appellant was grooming the complainant for
the purposes
of procuring a sexual act – Grounds dismissed.
Aus Dig Criminal Law [3476]
Criminal Law – Appeal and new trial – Miscarriage of justice
– Particular circumstances not amounting to miscarriage
Misdirection or non-direction – Appellant submits trial judge misdirected
jury by conflating intention to procure with
exchange of indecent images –
Alternative verdict should have arisen – Submits errors regarding use of
tendency evidence
– No possibility of alternative verdict arising –
Tendency evidence sufficiently explained – No miscarriage of
arsing – Grounds dismissed.
Aus Dig Criminal Law [3470]
Criminal Law – Appeal and new trial – Particular grounds of
appeal – Misdirection and non-direction – Consideration
up as a whole – Appellant submits summing up lacked neutrality –
Undue emphasis on State's case – Nothing
in structure, tone or emphasis
lacking neutrality – Trial judge did not reveal personal thoughts in
summing up – Jury
warned to ignore anything that could be interpreted as
such – Ground without merit – Ground dismissed.
Aus Dig Criminal Law [3479]
Criminal Law – Appeal and new trial – Particular grounds of
appeal – Conduct of defence counsel – Appellant
submits counsel
failed to challenge key aspects of State's case in cross-examination –
Submits counsel failed to address key
exculpatory evidence in closing
submissions – Submissions demonstrate lack of appreciation of the purpose
of cross-examination
– Appellant's counsel an experienced trial lawyer
– Unable to conclude serious errors or omissions – Ground
Aus Dig Criminal Law [3515]
Criminal Law – Appeal and new trial – Appeal against sentence
– Grounds for interference – Sentence manifestly
excessive or
inadequate – Appellant submits sentence disproportionate to comparable
cases – Submits trial judge did not
properly consider mitigating and
pre-sentencing matters – Must establish that the sentence was unreasonable
or plainly unjust
– Comparative sentencing data of no use given unique
combination of circumstances – Regard the sentence as lenient and
wide sentencing discretion – Total sentence not manifestly excessive
– Ground dismissed.
Aus Dig Criminal Law [3521]
Legislation:
Criminal Code Act 1924 (Tas)
DPP v Pearce
[2015] TASCCA 1
(2016) 28 Tas R 1
House v King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Majok v The Queen
[2015] NSWCCA 160
Aliano v Tasmania
[2025] TASCCA 4
Anderson v Tasmania
[2020] TASCCA 11
Riley v Tasmania
[2020] TASCCA 1
[2016] HCA 14
(2016) 257 CLR 300
James v The Queen
[2014] HCA 6
considered.
REPRESENTATION
Barns SC, S Ashby
Appellant in person on grounds
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Office Director of Public
Prosecutions
Judgment Number:
[2025] TASCCA 14
paragraphs:
Serial No 14/2025
File No 3128/2024
STUART DEAN RAINBIRD v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
SHANAHAN CJ
22 October 2025
Order of the
Appeal dismissed.
Serial No 14/2025
File No 3128/2024
STUART DEAN RAINBIRD v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
SHANAHAN CJ
22 October 2025
have had the opportunity to read the reasons of Estcourt J for which I am much
obliged. Those reasons set out the facts in this
matter which I gratefully
adopt. I offer the following additional observations on ground 1 but otherwise
respectfully endorse the
reasons of Estcourt J with whom I am in agreement, and
I would join in the orders he proposes.
turning to ground 1, I note that Mr Barns SC and his junior, Mr Ashby acted for
the appellant only in respect of ground 1
of the appeal. The applicant acted
for himself on the balance of the appeal.
notice of appeal was amended at the hearing by the amendment of ground 1, the
deletion of what was ground 4 and the addition
of new grounds 4, 5, 6 and 7.
The new ground 7 was the old ground 4. The re-numbering of ground 4 of the
original grounds of appeal
as new ground 7 and the addition of new grounds 4, 5
and 6 reflects the order adopted in the written submissions filed by the
1 was amended, on the application of senior counsel, to read "The verdict of the
jury in relation to count 3 of indecent assault
was unreasonable or cannot be
supported having regard to the evidence". The amendment did not alter the
thrust of ground 1. The
question for an appellate court must always be "whether
... upon the whole of the evidence it was open to the jury to be satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty":
R v Baden-Clay
[2016] HCA 35
258 CLR 308
per coram at [66].
the deletion of the original ground 4, new grounds 4, 5, 6 and 7 were added to
the notice of appeal, on the application
of the appellant acting in person to
reflect the written submissions he had filed, in the following
"4 His Honour erred in failing to properly instruct the jury
on the limited use of tendency evidence.
Honour erred in summing up by placing undue emphasis on the respondent's
conduct of trial counsel resulted in a miscarriage of justice in relation to
each count on the indictment in that, trial counsel
(a) adequately challenge key aspects of the prosecution's case through cross
examination;
(b) adequately address key exculpatory evidence in closing submissions, and
(c) seek directions as to an alternative verdict available on the evidence in
relation to count 4 on the indictment.
cumulative effect of the sentences imposed was manifestly excessive in all the
circumstances."
is to be noted that, during the hearing of the appeal, the appellant sought to
raise a failure by defence counsel at trial to
adduce exculpatory evidence
provided by the appellant but no affidavit evidence was filed in support of that
contention, nor did
the contention fall within the terms of the amended notice
1 must be dismissed because the evidence relied on by the appellant as
underpinning that ground is a gloss on the evidence
given by the complainant in
respect of count 3 on the indictment and did not preclude the jury from
concluding beyond a reasonable
doubt that the appellant was guilty of the
offence charged. Further, the supplementary argument developed during the
course of oral
submissions that inconsistencies in the complainant's evidence
made her testimony so unreliable that the jury must have entertained
reasonable doubt as to the accused's guilt in respect of count 3 must also be
rejected because of ambiguities or obvious lacunae
in the evidence of the
complainant.
3 charged the appellant with indecent assault contrary to s 127 of the
Criminal Code
in that he, at Bruny Island in Tasmania between on or about
21 September 2016 and on or about 20 September 2017, unlawfully and indecently
assaulted the complainant by placing his hand under and on her breast. It is
noted that no particular was pleaded as to what the
complainant was wearing at
the time of the alleged offending. That remained the case when further and
better particulars of the
5 counts charged on the indictment were filed on 5
September 2024.
appellant's argument on ground 1 as set out in the appellant's further written
submissions prepared by appellate counsel filed
on 25 June 2025 (and to be
distinguished from the appellant's original written submissions filed on 27
February 2025) rest on the
obligation of an appellate court to intervene on
appeal when it considers that upon the whole of the evidence below it was not
for the jury to be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused was
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
181 CLR 487.
That contention was
abandoned in the course of argument. For the reasons that follow that was a
proper concession.
was initially put that, in this case, the evidence precluded the jury being
satisfied to the requisite standard in respect of
count 3. Some comparison was
drawn by the appellant with nature of the appeal in
Pell v The Queen
[2020] HCA 12
268 CLR 123.
The appellant relied upon evidence that it was said
contradicted the complainant's evidence at trial in such a fundamental way that
any jury acting rationally
have entertained a doubt as to the
appellant's guilt on count 3.
canvassing the evidence upon which the appellant relied for that purpose, it is
important to note that the complainant's evidence
was accepted by the jury, and
whilst this Court is required to conduct an independent review of the evidence
below it is important
to make full allowance for the advantage that the jury had
in having seen and heard the complainant give evidence. Issues of credibility
and reliability are matters for the jury:
R v Baden-Clay
per coram at
1 proceeds on the basis that, because the complainant's evidence was that she
was wearing bikinis at the time of the accused's
alleged offending in respect of
count 3, the verdict is unsafe because the accused's daughter's evidence was
that the complainant
only went out on the boat once. The photographic evidence
at trial showed the complainant on the boat with the appellant. The complainant
was wearing a hoodie and life vest, and she is not wearing bikinis in any of the
photos. Thus, it is said, the verdict is unsafe
if the complainant could not
have been wearing bikinis at the material time and was in fact wearing a life
jacket and a hoodie.
evidence of the complainant was that she went out on a boat to catch fish and
the appellant was the only adult on the boat at
that time (T 74 lines 40-45).
Other than the appellant and the complainant the complainant's sister was on the
boat and perhaps
another friend. The complainant and the others on the boat
caught flathead and the appellant took photographs of them with the fish.
complainant said she was wearing bikinis on the boat but she was not sure if
that was the same day. The complainant was leaning
over the boat and the
appellant placed her in a bear hug and his hands touched her breasts. She felt
pressure from the appellant
in touching her breasts, both of them, he was
touching the front of them. The complainant was not sure at that time who was
boat. It occurred when the boat was "on the shore".
were important differences between the factual summary set out above and that
proffered by the appellant is his further written
submissions where the
appellant summarised the complainant's evidence-in-chief at paragraph 12
(un-numbered page 5); where he describes
the evidence-in-chief of the
complainant in respect of the touching impeached by count 3 in the following
terms: (page references
are to the AB V2, italics added):
On the same boat she was wearing bikinis but she is not sure if that was the
same day. The Appellant was taking photos.
She was leaning over the boat,
wearing bikinis
and the Applicant
placed her in a bear hug and his hands touched her breasts.
She felt pressure. He was toughing the front 'of them'.
She wasn't sure who else was on the boat.
[The complainant] is shown the photo of the fish ... [discussed below] ...
and agrees it isn't her, but is not sure about the circumstances
(sic) photo was
can immediately see the important difference is that the appellant has
attributed an additional piece of evidence to the complainant
examination-in-chief, ie that
she was wearing bikinis
at the time of the
alleged offending. It is that account upon which the appellant relied for the
proposition that the offending
occurred when the complainant was wearing
appellant then sought to build on that premise and rely upon the fact that the
complainant was wearing bikinis at the material
time in respect of the offending
charged for the gravamen of ground 1. He contends that the offending couldn't
have happened because
on unchallenged evidence led at trial the complainant
could not have been in bikinis at the material time.
the transcript reveals at AB V2 75 that this argument is that of a "straw man".
The complainant in her evidence-in-chief
stated that she was in the
course of swimming from the boat when the touching occurred, indeed she implies
it occurred when she was
not swimming and whilst on the boat. She was
asked in examination-in-chief what she was wearing at the time of
the touching ie (italics added):
"Thank you . So you'd gone out on
the boat to catch some fish, the three of you ?.. .. .. There could've been
[name removed] too,
' cause if it – sounds very strange that it was just
the three of us , but I can't remember exactly who else was on the boat.
Stuart was the only adult .
And what happened on the boat?... .. .We caught flathead and he took some
pictures of us with the flathead. And then I'm not sure
if it was the same day,
but on the same boat we went swimming in bikinis.
And while you were wearing bikinis, was Mr Rainbird doing anything?...
Watching. Taking photos.
So what happened when you went swimming?......
I'm not a big fan of the
water, so I'm not sure how much swimming I was actually doing , but I was on the
boat majority of the time.
And I can remember leaning over the edge of the boat
and just having a bit of fun, and I had Stuart come from behind me and sort
act like he was going to push me in, but then retracted and pulled me back into
sort of a bear hug. Like a – yeah, big bear
hug. And his hands actually
touched my breasts
. Now, your – you've indicated hands . So was that
both hands on both breasts?......Because it was a bear, sort of, embrace,
would suggest it was the both. I felt pressure on – enough to make me feel
uncomfortable that it wasn't a mistake. What part
of your breast was he touching
with his hands?.....The front of them. And where his fingers stretched out , or
where they clenched
in a fist, do you remember?......It wouldn't have been in a
fist. Describe the contact that you felt to your breast?.....It was quite
significant pressure on just that one area of my breast, which was enough to
make me feel uncomfortable and that it wasn't an innocent
How long did that contact last? .. ... .I 'm not sure.
Was anyone else on the boat when that happened? ... .. .
Sure. And the boat , was that stationary at the time?.. ... .Yes.
And was it moored, like, at a jetty? Or was it out – ?.. .. ..In the
shore, so at the – yeah, just on the shore. So close
to the beach?.. ...
.Yep. Do you remember seeing anyone else around at the time? ... ..
. Did Mr Rainbird say anything to you when he made that contact?.. ..
How did that make you feel?. .. .. .Uncomfortable. Did you tell anyone about
it straight away?. .. ...No. Why not?.. .. ..Because
I was worried about the
fact that I could have – if I could, in quotes, 'take it the wrong
HIS HONOUR: Is that a convenient time for a break, do you think –
MS AVERY: It is, your Honour, thank you."
complainant gave evidence at trial. The only other direct evidence concerning
the incident came from the appellant's daughter,
who was called as a witness for
the State. She gave evidence regarding the trip to Bruny Island, including the
boat trip during
which the alleged offence occurred. Photographic evidence
taken by the daughter was tendered as exhibit P05.
was a photo taken of the complainant with a fish. The photograph shows the
complainant with a laterally striped long sleeve
collarless shirt with shorts
and a life jacket holding a fish with a "hoodie" tied around her waist. The
complainant was not certain
of the circumstances in which that photograph was
taken. The photo shows the complainant in a very loose fitting life jacket with
the brand name "Essential" on it. The appellant initially put some significant
reliance on the premise that if the complainant was
wearing a life jacket at the
time of the alleged offending then the jury must have entertained a reasonable
doubt as to guilt in
respect of count 3. There is no evidence that the
complainant wore a life jacket at all times. Indeed her evidence was that she
could not remember. The evidence was that at the time of the offending the boat
was stationary and close to the beach, and may have
been moored. Indeed given
the nature of the allegation in count 3 it is highly unlikely that the accused
was operating the boat
at the material time. There was no evidence that
everyone on the boat wore life jackets when the boat was stationary or moored.
Indeed, on an inspection of the photograph there is no apparent reason why the
accused could not have committed the offence charged
whilst the complainant was
wearing the life jacket depicted in the photograph. Whilst the complainant was
wearing a "hoodie" it
was tied around her waist. It is unclear if the
complainant was wearing a bikini under her top,
cross-examination the complainant remembered fishing, and gave evidence that she
had been out on the boat two or three times.
She disagreed when it was put to
her that at no time when she was on the boat she was in "just a bikini".
However, that evidence
takes the matter no further as she was not asked whether
she was only in a bikini at the time of the alleged touching.
was no direct evidence of what the complainant was wearing at the material time.
There was no significant attempt in cross
examination of the complainant to
clarify that issue. There was no evidential basis for the proposition that the
complainant was
wearing a bikini at the time of the touching impeached by count
the course of argument ground 1 "evolved" and crystallised as a contention that
the verdict in respect of count 3 was unsafe
and unsatisfactory because of
inconsistencies in the evidence of the complainant. However, when these
inconsistencies were explored
during the course of argument they merely
highlighted ambiguities or lacunae in the evidence adduced at trial. There is
no evidential
basis for the argument advanced on ground 1 and it must be
dismissed. The balance of the grounds must also be dismissed for the reasons
published by Estcourt J.
STUART DEAN RAINBIRD v STATE OF TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
22 October 2025
The appeal and the background
The appellant appeals against his conviction and sentence imposed following
trial by a jury for charges on indictment number 282/2022.
To protect the
identities of the complainants, I will refer to them by the pseudonyms used when
the learned trial judge handed down
his Comments on Passing Sentence. The
counts on indictment number 282/2022 are as
Count 1: Indecent assault
contrary to s 127 of the
Criminal Code
(Tas) (the Code),
in relation to Sally Gladstone.
Count 2: Grooming with intent to expose a young person to indecent material
contrary to s 125D(3) of the Code in relation to Allison.
Count 3: Indecent assault contrary to s 127 of the Code in relation to
Count 4: Grooming with intent to procure a young person to engage in an
unlawful sexual act contrary to s 125D(1) of the Code in relation
Count 5: Involving a young person under the age of 18 years in the production
of child exploitation material contrary to s 130 of
the Code in relation to Jean
The appellant was sentenced to a total term of imprisonment of three years and
three months, one year of which was suspended for
three years from release from
custody. A minimum non-parole period of half of the operative sentence was
The grounds of appeal are, in short:
That the verdict
in relation to count 3 was unsafe and unsatisfactory.
That the verdict
in relation to count 4 was unsafe and unsatisfactory.
That the learned
trial judge erred in directing the jury as to the pathways to conviction in
relation to count 4.
That the learned
trial judge erred in his directions to the jury in relation to the use of
tendency evidence.
That the learned
trial judge erred in his summing up by placing undue emphasis on the
respondent's case.
That the conduct
of trial counsel resulted in a miscarriage of justice.
cumulative effect of the sentences imposed was manifestly excessive in all the
circumstances.
The State's case at
The State's case at trial in relation to count 3 was as set out in the
following paragraphs adapted from the written submissions
of counsel for the
State, Ms Avery.
Sally Gladstone, born in 2002, and Allison, born in 2001, were sisters. They
resided in the same suburb as the appellant and were
family friends. The
appellant had a close relationship with their father and would spend time at
their residence.
Jean Harrison, born in 2002, was an associate of the appellant's youngest
daughter and went to school with her.
The complainants were aged between 11 and 17 years over the period covered by
the indictment, namely November 2013 and May 2018.
The State called evidence from NN for a tendency purpose, as a piece of
circumstantial evidence supporting the case against the
appellant. The tendency
evidence extended to the cross-admissibility of the evidence from each
complainant.
It was the State's case that between on or about 24 November 2013 and on or
indecently assaulted Sally
Gladstone by placing his hand on her upper thigh and touching her to the left
The offending alleged by the State to have occurred in the complainant's family
was seated on the couch when
the appellant sat down next to her. He put his arm around her shoulders before
moving his arm down her
body. He made contact to the right side of her breast
(over or under clothing) and to her upper thigh (under clothing). This offending
occurred whilst there were other persons present in the lounge room and when the
appellant was socialising with the family.
The complainant gave evidence as to this count.
The State's case at trial in relation to count 2 was as set out in the
following paragraphs adapted from the written submissions
of counsel for the
was the State's case that between on or about 21 September 2015 and 20 September
2017, the appellant communicated with Allison
in a sexually explicit manner,
with intent to expose her to indecent material.
The offending consisted of the appellant sending the complainant electronic
messages and a photograph. The messages included enquiries
and her favourite sexual position, references to her bottom and masturbation.
The photograph depicted the appellant's
hand down his pants.
The complainant gave evidence at trial in relation to this count. Electronic
messages, preceding the offending, were tendered on
the trial. The complainant's
father, Mr Gladstone, and two of the complainant's friends gave evidence of
context and complaint.
The State's case at trial in relation to count 3 was as set out in the
following paragraphs adapted from the written submissions
of counsel for the
was the State's case that between on or about 11 March 2016 and 20 September
2017, the appellant unlawfully and indecently assaulted
Allison by placing his
hand under and on her breasts.
The offending alleged by the State was said to have occurred on a boat, during
a family holiday to Bruny Island. The appellant was
joking around with her and
placed her in a bear hug from behind. He then made contact to the front of her
The complainant gave evidence at trial in relation to this count and the
appellant's daughter gave evidence relevant to opportunity.
The State's case at trial in relation to count 4 was as set out in the
following paragraphs adapted from the written submissions
of counsel for the
It was the State's case that between on or about 22 May 2016 and 21 May 2019,
the appellant communicated with Jean Harrison in a
sexually explicit manner,
with intent to procure her to engage in an unlawful sexual act.
The offending consisted of the appellant sending the complainant electronic
messages and photographs and videos. The messages included
conversation, enquiries about the complainant's sex life and her appearance. The
photographs and videos depicted the appellant's
penis and masturbation.
The complainant gave evidence at trial in relation to this
The State's case at trial in relation to count 5 was as set out in the
following paragraphs adapted from the written submissions
of counsel for the
was the State's case that between on or about 22 May 2016 and 21 May 2019, the
appellant facilitated the involvement of Jean Harrison
in the production of
child exploitation material.
The offending comprised of photographs and videos, produced by the complainant
upon the appellant's request and/or instruction.
This material is the same
material involved in count 4 on the indictment.
The complainant gave evidence at trial in relation to this
Ground 1 - that the verdict in relation to count 3 was
unsafe and unsatisfactory
The law in relation to this ground of appeal was recently encapsulated by
Pearce J in
Aliano v Tasmania
[2025] TASCCA 4
"25 The assertion that a verdict is unsafe and
unsatisfactory finds statutory expression in this State in the
, s 402(1), which provides that the Court 'shall allow the appeal if it
is of opinion that the verdict of the jury should be set aside
on the ground
that it is unreasonable, or cannot be supported having regard to the evidence.'
The approach that an appellate court
must take when addressing "the
unreasonableness ground" was authoritatively stated in the joint reasons of
Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson
and Toohey JJ in
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
at 493. The court must ask itself:
"whether it thinks that upon the whole of the evidence it was open to the
jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused
was guilty".
explained in
, and restated in
MFA v The Queen
[2002] HCA 53
Pell v The Queen
[2020] HCA 12
268 CLR 123
question does not depend on whether, as a matter of law, there is evidence to
support the verdict, but rather whether the evidence
required the jury, acting
rationally, to have entertained a doubt as to the appellant's guilt. An
appellate court must conduct an
independent review of the evidence, but making
full allowance for advantages enjoyed by the jury, including from having seen
heard the witnesses. Because of the central role of the jury in the
administration of criminal justice, this Court is not to substitute
trial by an
appeal court for trial by jury:
R v Baden-Clay
[2016] HCA 35
258 CLR 308
. The court must proceed on the basis that issues of credibility and
reliability of oral testimony are matters primarily for the jury.
The function
of this Court is then to examine the record to see whether, notwithstanding that
assessment, either by reason of other
evidence, inconsistencies, discrepancies,
or other inadequacy, the court is satisfied that the jury, acting rationally,
ought nonetheless
to have entertained a reasonable doubt as to proof of guilt:
at 145 [39]."
The appellant submits that evidence concerning the incident which came from the
appellant's daughter (who was called as a witness
for the State), regarding the
trip to Bruny Island, including the boat trip during which the alleged offence
occurred, including
photographs taken by her which were tendered as Exhibit P05,
contradicts key aspects of the complainant's account.
The appellant submits that his daughter's evidence reflected that there was
only one boat trip involving the appellant and Allison
and that the complainant
was wearing a life jacket during that trip.
The appellant submits that the State did not challenge his daughter's evidence
or suggest that she was mistaken in her account and
no application was made to
have her declared an unfavourable witness.
The appellant submits that the jury could not have rationally reconciled these
two accounts, as:
complainant's description of the alleged touching is implausible given her
clothing covered her torso completely and she was wearing
a life jacket.
The only other
evidence in relation to these events contradicts the complainant's account and
was not impugned by the State.
The photographic
evidence corroborates an exculpatory version of events. (The appellant's case
was that the alleged conduct did not
The State submits that it was reasonably open for the jury to be satisfied of
the appellant's guilt, that the complainant was a
credible witness and her
account was supported by the tendency evidence. It submits that it was open to
conclude that the evidence
of the appellant's daughter was not exculpatory and
did not exclude the opportunity for the offending to have occurred.
following summary of the complainant's evidence is taken from the written
submissions of counsel for the State:
"40 The complainant gave
evidence of an unlawful indecent assault perpetrated against her by the
appellant (T 65-68 and 83-88). She
was the only direct eyewitness to this
gave evidence that around the time she was communicating with the appellant
online, they went on a trip to Bruny Island. She was
went out on a boat. The appellant was the only adult on the boat. She was unsure
whether this was the same day they caught flathead
and took pictures. They had
been swimming in bikinis and the appellant was watching, taking photographs (T
complainant gave evidence that she was leaning over the edge of the boat and the
appellant came from behind. He acted like he
was going to push her in but then
retracted. He pulled her into sort of a bear hug and his hands touched her
breasts (T 66).
believed both his hands, made contact to the front of her breasts. She described
'It was quite significant pressure on just that
one area of my breast, which was
enough to make me feel uncomfortable and that it wasn't an innocent thing' (T
67, lines 37-40).
complainant was unsure how long the contact lasted for or whether anyone else
was on the boat at the time. She said the boat was
stationary when this
occurred, just in shore (T 67-68).
did not make any immediate complaint because she was worried that she may have
misinterpreted the contact (T 68).
cross-examination, the complainant agreed that she could only recall one trip to
Bruny Island (T 83), and she had no memory
of [the appellant's daughter] being
in attendance (T 84). She disagreed with the suggestion that there was only one
boat trip and
that this was to go flathead fishing (T 84-85).
complainant could not recall wearing a life jacket (T 85) but agreed that she
was depicted in photographs wearing a life jacket
complainant conceded that she could not remember wearing only a bikini on the
boat (T 88). She maintained that the appellant touched
her on the breast (T
The evidence of the appellant's daughter is summarised as
"51 She stated that the families went on a trip to Bruny
Island in early March 2016 (T 131). They arrived in different groups (T 132).
They had a few trips on the boat before the complainant arrived (T 133).
the holiday, they mostly spent time together but there were moments of doing
separate things. They could not all fit on the
boat and only a couple could go
out at a time (T 133).
on the trial as exhibit P 5, were a bundle of photographs taken by [the
appellant's daughter] during this trip. The photographs
depicted other parties
swimming on the Saturday afternoon and [the appellant's daughter] said this was
the only occasion of swimming
(T 135). They depicted the appellant and
complainant on the boat Sunday morning, the complainant wearing a life jacket (T
cross-examination, [the appellant's daughter] maintained that they only went
swimming once and this was prior to the complainant's
arrival (T 143). She did
not recall the complainant swimming when she was in the boat and the complainant
had spoken about her fear
of water (T 146)."
The State also relied on the evidence of Allison, and others, as to the charged
and uncharged sexual conduct of the appellant as
evidence of a tendency of the
appellant to have a sexual interest in adolescent females and to act on it in
certain ways. The State
submits that if accepted by the jury, this was a piece
of circumstantial evidence that supported the complainant's account and
strengthened
the Crown case.
The appellant did not to give or adduce evidence. He declined to be interviewed
by police after taking legal advice. His case was
that the offending did not
occur. It was submitted to the jury that they ought to have a reasonable doubt
as to the allegation given
the passage of time and the contradictory evidence
provided by the appellant's daughter. It was suggested the complainant simply
created a false memory.
conducted my own review of the evidence, I am wholly unable to conclude that no
jury, acting rationally, could have been satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that
the appellant indecently assaulted the complainant in the manner she
Even leaving the tendency evidence to one side, proceeding on the basis that
issues of credibility and reliability of oral testimony
are matters primarily
for the jury, I am unable to say that the jury were not entitled, or ought not,
to have accepted the complainant's
evidence. It appears tolerably clear that
there was only one boat trip on Bruny Island and that at a point in time the
complainant
was wearing a life jacket as pictured in evidence. However, that
fact does not preclude an indecent touching in the manner described
complainant.
In my view it was reasonably open for the jury to be satisfied of the
appellant's guilt on the basis that the complainant was a
credible witness and
that her evidence was not negated by her wearing a lifejacket at the time of the
It is not necessary for me to consider the tendency evidence on this ground. It
was, no doubt, a potent source of circumstantial
evidence as will be seen when I
turn to count 4 on the indictment and if error is demonstrated in the learned
trial judge's directions
as to the use that can be made of tendency evidence, as
asserted by the fourth ground of appeal, then it will affect this count and
As a discrete ground of appeal I would dismiss ground 1 of the notice of
Ground 2 - that the verdict
in relation to count 4 was unsafe and unsatisfactory
The appellant submits that an intention to engage in an "unlawful sexual act"
is a central element of the offence under s 125D(1)
of the Code, and that a
conviction can only be sustained if the Court is satisfied that the evidence led
at trial, provided a rational
basis upon which the jury could conclude beyond
reasonable doubt that either the appellant had an actual intention to procure
complainant, to engage in an unlawful "physical sexual act" or, that there
was no reasonable alternate hypothesis consistent with
The appellant submits that the communications led as evidence in respect of
Did not contain
any explicit request for a sexual act.
Were open to
multiple interpretations, including an innocent or inappropriate but
non-criminal intent for the purposes of s 125D(1).
Without proper
jury directions on how to approach inferential reasoning in relation to intent,
the jury was at risk of allowing speculation
to form the basis of a guilty
circumstances, there was a real risk that the jury convicted without being
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the necessary
The following is an extract from the transcript of the complainant's
uncontradicted evidence about the messaging between her and
the appellant and
his drop offs of money, alcohol and marijuana:
"And from when you
first – that initial contact was made with Mr Rainbird or from Mr
Rainbird, how long did it take before the
conversations turned sexual?... ..
.Pretty quickly.
What do you mean by 'pretty quickly'?. .. ...With in a week [indistinct
And did you ever initiate any of the conversations with Mr Rainbird
yourself?... ..Yes.
And why was that? Was there any ever reason that you might be seeking to
make the contact with him?... .. .I enjoyed the attention
and the company.
Okay. And did you ever ask anything of him yourself?.. .. ..I asked for some
And was that something that happened once or more than once, that you asked
for money?. .. ...More than once.
How many times do you think it was you asked for money?... .. .Five or
And did he give you money?. .. ...Yes.
Now, I want to talk to you about the circumstances of this money, then. Why
did you ask him for money? .. .. ..I didn't work or anything,
and I just needed
some money at the time.
Okay. And when you asked for money, was i t always the same set amount, or
did it vary?.. ... .It was usually fifty to a hundred dollars.
Okay. And when you asked him for money, what type of response did you get
from Mr Rainbird?... .. .He said yes.
Did he ever ask anything of you?. .. .. .Yes.
What did he ask?.. . ...Pictures and videos.
Did you then agree to provide him with pictures and videos, or not?. ..
...Yes, I agreed.
And tell me about receiving the money, how would that happen, would he
transfer some money to you, would he give it to someone else,
would you meet
with him in person, or would he leave it somewhere, how did it happen?.. .. ..He
would leave it somewhere.
And was there a usual spot that he'd leave the money for you or did
–?.. .. ..There were –– it vary?.. .. .. –
What were those different spots ?. .. ...Next to the mailbox at my mum's
house , across the street from my mum' s house next to a
gate, and near Zap
Fitness in North Hobart.
And how are these sort of locations chosen?. .. ...Mine – the first two
were because I lived up at the signal station, and the
last one I believe was
because he had work or something nearby at North Hobart.
Was there any reason that the monies weren't handed over in person?.. ... .I
didn't want to meet in person.
Had that ever been suggested that you meet in person?. .. ...Yes.
And who'd suggested that ?.. .. .. Stuart asked me to get in his car .
Did he say why?... . .. Just to hang out .
Was he doing anything in his car when he asked you to get in?... .. .He was
sitting outside our house once he had dropped off the
Why didn't you get in his car?. .. .. .Because I didn't want to speak to him
How much money do you think you received from Mr Rainbird in total?.. ..
..Five or six hundred dollars.
Did he ever, during the course that you were in contact with him, give you
anything else?. ... ..Yes.
What else did he give you?.. .. ..Two bottles of vodka, a pack of cigarettes
and some marijuana.
And did any of those coincide with any special occasions?. .. ...My
Do you remember which birthday it was, like how old you were turning?. ...
..My 15th, I believe.
Your fifteenth, you believe. And were all these items gifted to you on your
15th birthday, or was i t one or more?.. ... .Yes, I asked
for these items, and
they were dropped together.
So, on this particular occasion when you turned 15, whereabouts were the
items dropped?. ... ..Next to the mailbox – oh no,
sorry, across the road
in the dirt car park.
Now, you've spoken about that he'd mentioned to you – you said earlier
that he mentioned to you about wanting to have sex. Can
you just take us through
that?. .. .. He wanted to have sex with me, but I wasn' t 18 .
So, what was – what did he say?. ... ..Well, he said he wished I was
Did he say or make comments like that just the once or more than once?.. ...
.About three or four times.
him dropping things off, seeing him in his car, do you
remember what type of car
it was?. ... ..I think it was a black – I don't know car s very well, but
I think it was black.
And when he would speak to you and make comments about sex and wanting to
have sex, what did you say, how did you respond back to
him, if at all?. .. ..
.I would kind of go along with it and just be like, 'Ha ha, yeah.'
So, in relation to this contact with Mr Rainbird, how did i t sort of come to
an end?.. .. ..I threatened to tell his wife..."
I do not accept any of the appellant's submissions. With or without
instructions as to inferential reasoning the jury were entitled
from the facts contained in the above passage of evidence that
the appellant was grooming the complainant for the purposes of procuring
sexual act. It is to my mind ludicrous to suggest otherwise.
The personal drop offs and the circumstances in which they occurred are wholly
inconsistent with merely wishing to secure the online
relationship. The
complainant had already sent the appellant images of her breasts and vagina and
video footage of her masturbating
herself. The jury was entitled to conclude
from the invitation or invitations to the complainant by the appellant to get
car, was or were invitations to do more than just "hang out" and
involved blandishments to procure physical sexual acts. And as is
submitted by
counsel for the State on this appeal, notwithstanding, the evidence that the
appellant suggested to the complainant
that he wished she were 18 so they could
have sex, it was open for the jury to reject this as an accurate reflection of
of mind and that such comments were designed to build her trust and
foster the relationship.
Notwithstanding that I may regard it as ludicrous to, in effect, suggest that
the appellant's gifts and personal drop offs to the
complainant of money,
alcohol and marijuana were mere random acts of generosity, it was not necessary
for the jury to conclude that
those things (and the online communications
generally) were designed to procure physical sexual acts. It was, as will be
seen, enough
to enable a finding of guilt if the jury were satisfied to the
required degree that they were designed to procure online sexual chat
exchange of sexual images and videos. That is sufficient for the less criminally
culpable alternative component of s 125D(1).
I have no hesitation in accepting the submission of counsel for the State that
the only reasonable inference open on the evidence
was that the appellant
developed this relationship for the purpose of procuring a child for physical
sexual abuse.
Again, as a discrete ground, I would dismiss ground 2 of the notice of
Ground 3 - errors in directions to the jury as to
pathways to guilt on count 4
The appellant submits as follows:
"60 The Appellant submits that
His Honour misdirected the jury by conflating 'intention to procure' with the
exchange of indecent
His Honour's summing up in relation to count 4, the jury was instructed at AB
Vol 2, 339:
'Now, if you're not satisfied that he wanted to persuade
her to engage in a physical sexual act with him, that's not the end of the
because, if we go back to this crime of an indecent act with a child or young
person which I've said at page 4.52, that can
be committed by for example,
exchanges of images. It can be an indecent act to procure her to engage in an
act which constitutes
an indecent act with or directed at her.
So, you would then think about that. Whether or not any of the images that
you're satisfied were sent. If you were satisfied that
they were sent,
constitute him intending to get her to engage in an unlawful sexual act, that is
to expose to her to either an indecent
image that he sent or perhaps produce one
herself to send to him...'
Appellant respectfully submits that this direction erroneously suggested that
the act of exchanging indecent images was sufficient
to establish intent under
s.125D(1), without requiring the jury to find actual intent to procure a
physical sexual act.
risk of jury confusion was compounded by the failure to leave an alternative
verdict under s 125D(3) (Ground 3). His Honour's
reasoning appears to reflect
elements of s 125D(3), but he did not clearly direct the jury that this was a
separate and distinct
misdirection had the potential to fundamentally alter the jury's approach to the
evidence, as they may have convicted without
being satisfied of the requisite
intent on the basis that they were satisfied that the Appellant had sent [Jean
Harrison] indecent
68(sic) His Honour's directions to the
jury misrepresented the legal threshold for conviction under s 125D(1), allowing
the jury to
convict on a legally erroneous basis.
error, combined with the failure to leave an alternative verdict under
s.125D(3), resulted in a serious miscarriage of justice.
Appellant submits that the conviction on Count 4 is unsafe and should be set
This submission begs the question as to whether s 125D(3) of the Code was an
alternative verdict which was open in circumstances
where the definition of
"unlawful sexual act" in the Code includes (by reference back to s 125B), not
just a penetrative act or an
indecent assault, but also "any indecent act with,
or directed at, another person who is under the age of 17 years".
The relevant sections in the Code are (relevantly), as
125B Indecent act with child or young person
(1) Any person who does any indecent act with, or directed at, another person
who is under the age of 17 years is guilty of a crime.
Charge: Indecent act with or directed at a child [or young person].
(2) . . . . . . . .
(3) The consent of a person against whom a crime is alleged to have been
committed under this section is a defence to such a charge
only where, at the
time the crime was alleged to have been committed –
(a) that person was of or above the age of 15 years and the accused person was
not more than 5 years older than that person; or
(b) that person was of or above the age of 12 years and the accused person was
not more than 3 years older than that person...
125D Communications with intent to procure child or young person
(1) A person (the 'accused person') who makes a communication by any means,
and to any person, with the intention of procuring a person
under the age of 17
years, or a person the accused person believes is under the age of 17 years, to
engage in an unlawful sexual
act, either in this State or elsewhere, is guilty
of a crime.
Charge: Grooming with intent to procure a child [or young person] for sexual
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1) –
unlawful sexual act means an act that would, if
committed in relation to a person under the age of 17 years, constitute an
under section 124, 125B, 126 , 127 , 133 or 185 .
(3) A person (the 'accused person') who makes a communication by any means,
and to any person, with the intention of exposing, without
legitimate reason, a
person under the age of 17 years, or a person the accused person believes is
under the age of 17 years, to any
indecent material, either in this State or
elsewhere, is guilty of a crime.
Charge: Grooming with intent to expose a child [or young person] to indecent
(4) For the purposes of subsection (3) –
indecent material means any indecent film, printed matter, electronic data
and any other thing of any kind (including any computer
depiction)."
In my view the appellant's argument is misconceived. When his Honour told the
jury, while taking them through the memorandum to
the jury, that if they were
not satisfied that the appellant wanted to persuade the complainant to engage in
a physical sexual act
with him, the "that's not the end of the story", he was
alluding to the reference back in s 125D(2) to s 125B. As can be seen, his
Honour directed the jury back to paragraph 4.5 in the memorandum where he had
explained what the words "indecent act with a young
person" included and told
them that, as distinct from a "physical sexual act":
"It can be an
indecent act to procure her to engage in an act which constitutes an indecent
act with or directed at her."
That is to say, for example, to ask the complainant to send him sexual
images or videos of herself, or to direct sexual images
of himself to her, with
the intention of having her reciprocate.
In the circumstances of this case there was no room to leave the crime created
by s 125B to the jury as an alternative verdict.
If the jury were not satisfied
that the appellant intended to procure the complainant for physical sexual acts,
they understood that
engaging with online sexual interactions including images
and videos, also amounted to unlawful sexual acts for the purposes of s
If they were not satisfied of that then there was no room for the operation of s
125B because the relevant alleged unlawful
sexual act for the purposes of that
section would be the same ones of which they were not satisfied for the purposes
of s 125D(1).
I would dismiss ground 3 of the notice of appeal.
Ground 4 - errors in directions to
the jury as to the use of tendency evidence
respect to this ground the appellant accepts that the learned trial judge
directed the jury that:
alleged that the appellant had a sexual interest in young girls and a tendency
to act on that interest.
If the jury was
satisfied that this tendency existed, it made it more likely that the offences
charged had been committed.
The jury were
not required to be satisfied of the tendency beyond reasonable doubt, but could
use it as circumstantial evidence in
deciding whether the offences were proved.
The appellant contends that those directions did not properly caution the jury
against using tendency evidence in that His Honour
failed to address in summing
evidence alone could not justify a conviction.
tendency reasoning and circumstantial evidence could be used by the jury to
draw particular inferences.
What constitutes
circumstantial evidence.
The defence
argument that the circumstances and context of each offence were very different,
thus undermining the tendency argument.
The appellant argues that the manner in which the learned trial judged framed
his directions blurred the line between a permissible
use of tendency evidence
and impermissible reasoning. His statement that a tendency "may increase the
likelihood" that the complainants'
accounts were true invited the jury to assume
guilt based on character rather than an assessment of the specific evidence for
Counsel for the appellant submits that this direction effectively lowered the
State's burden of proof and that in
IMM v The Queen
[2016] HCA 14
(2016) 257 CLR 300
the High Court stressed that the risk of unfair prejudice arises when tendency
evidence is used as a shortcut to guilt rather than
as part of a rigorous
assessment of the evidence. Counsel submits that the jury were not adequately
instructed on this and that created
a real risk that the jury reasoned in a way
contrary to law that is to say, that because the appellant had a tendency to
inappropriate communication with young girls, he must have engaged in
the specific conduct alleged in the indictment.
This is said to give rise to a miscarriage of justice.
There is nothing in
which requires a trial judge to give any
particular direction as to what tendency evidence is and how it may and may not
It is true, as submitted by counsel for the appellant, that central to
any direction is a warning to the jury not to use the tendency
evidence "as a
shortcut to guilt rather than as part of a rigorous assessment of the evidence".
It is also true that the adequacy
of any direction can only be gauged by looking
at the direction as a whole. It is therefore useful to set out what the learned
judge actually said to the jury on the subject of tendency.
After summarising the tendency evidence relied upon by the State, his Honour
directed the jury as follows:
"So how do you use this evidence?
First of all, you must be satisfied that the conduct which is the subject of
this evidence actually
occurred, because if you're not satisfied that it
occurred it can't be a basis for finding anything. But if you're satisfied that
all or some of it did occur, then the question you ask yourselves is whether or
not it does satisfy you that it discloses that Mr
Rainbird had a sexual interest
in – in these girls and a tendency to act – and/or a tendency to act
on it in a particular
Now again, in making that finding, you do not consider any evidence in
isolation, you consider all of the evidence and ask yourselves,
'Am I satisfied
that he had a tendency, had this state of mind or a tendency to act on this
state of mind in the way that's been
You don't have to be satisfied of the existence of this tendency beyond
reasonable doubt. If you are satisfied then, having considered
this evidence and
on the basis of the evidence that you accept that he did have a tendency of this
nature, then that can be used
by you as circumstantial evidence when considering
whether one or more of the particular charges have been proved.
An ordinary human experience is that if a person is sexually attracted to
another or another type of person and has acted on that
sexual attraction , then
it makes it more likely, perhaps, that they've done so again on another
occasion. In other words, if you
conclude that the accused has that tendency,
that sexual attraction to these girls,
increase the
that [Sally] and [Allison] and Jean Harrison's] accounts are
true. So that's the relevance of tendency evidence,
that it can be used by
you as circumstantial evidence
if you find that it existed, in deciding
whether it might make it more likely that the charges are proved.
Now, bear in mind that this is just one part of the evidence relied upon by
the State. You should give it what weight you think it
deserves in the context
of all of the evidence.
Finding that a person had a tendency
something is not enough on its own to prove guilt
. It may assist the proof
of guilt, but it's not enough by itself. The question is whether it makes it
more likely that the accused
conducted himself in the way the State alleges, and
you must not substitute the tendency evidence
for the evidence which
directly relates to each of the particular
. It's just a piece
of circumstantial evidence that you can take into account if you wish.
Now, at different stages of your deliberations – at a different stage
of your deliberations you would – you have to focus
on the particular
charges in the indictment and decide whether they are proved to your
satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt. That's
not what I'm talking about here.
You are considering this evidence in the context of whether you're satisfied
that this tendency's
been established and you can only use this evidence in that
context in the way that I've described.
Now, you recall I said to you yesterday
that it's open to you to draw
inferences, draw conclusions from other evidence, and in a criminal trial you
– you would always
think to yourself whether there might be some other
explanation for some of the evidence that you've heard
what the defence says here in respect of the tendency
The defence – the defence says that you can't be satisfied of any such
tendency because when you analyse the evidence, either
it didn't happen or
there's an alternative innocent explanation for it. The defence argues that in
many instances what's said to
be evidence of a tendency were, in fact, perfectly
innocent acts at the time being recast in the context of these allegations as
involving a sexual element.
And I'll explain what the defence position is by reference to particular
examples." (Emphasis added.)
In my view those directions answer all of the complaints made by the appellant.
Tendency evidence alone could not justify a conviction.
Indeed, no further or
other directions were sought by counsel for the appellant at trial.
As to tendency reasoning and circumstantial evidence, the learned trial judge
referred the jury back to what he had earlier told
them about drawing
inferences. And, his Honour clearly warned the jury against "taking a shortcut
to guilt" and clearly told the
jury that tendency alone could not establish
His Honour canvassed the tendency evidence itself including citing examples of
how the appellant said the evidence was capable of
being viewed in a perfectly
innocent light. To the extent that his Honour may not have highlighted the
appellant's argument that
the circumstances and context of each offence were
very different, "thus undermining the tendency argument" that was made clear
to the jury by his counsel at trial in her closing address.
As to that, the appellant's counsel said:
"Now, I'd ask that you
also scrutinise that carefully when you're considering your verdicts. In this
particular instance, the circumstances
and the nature of the allegations is
vastly different between the complainants, and I'd suggest is so vastly
different that I'd suggest
tendency reasoning is of little assistance in this
particular matter.
The three complainants make very different allegations, and I'd suggest that
they warrant looking at individually. You can't use tendency
reasoning to make
up the shortfalls in a prosecution case. And in this instance, given the
circumstances and the evidence that you've
heard, you would have to essentially
be doing that if you were to look at these matters from a tendency
perspective."
In my view there was no error by the learned trial judge in his summing up and
it is impossible to say that there was a miscarriage
of justice arsing in the
way suggested by the appellant.
I would dismiss ground 4 of the notice of appeal.
– lack of neutrality in summing up
Anderson v Tasmania
[2020] TASCCA 11
, Porter AJ
"109 The necessary content of a trial judge's summing-up has
been the subject of considerable judicial discussion. Many of the primary
were collected by Geason J in
(above) at [19]-[22]. The principles
are clear. Relevantly to this case, they are as follows. The fundamental task of
a trial judge
is to ensure a fair trial of the accused. That requires
instructions to the jury about so much of the law as they need to know in
to dispose of issues in the case, about the elements of the offence, the burden
and standard of proof, and the respective functions
of judge and jury. Subject
to any statutory provisions, it will require the judge to identify the issues in
the case and relate the
law to those issues. It will require the judge to put
fairly before the jury the case which the accused makes. See
RPS v The Queen
[2000] HCA 3
199 CLR 620
Lane v The Queen
[2013] NSWCCA 317
obligation to put fairly the case of the accused, extends to explaining any
basis on which the jury might properly return a verdict
in the accused's favour:
Castle v The Queen
[2016] HCA 46
259 CLR 449
. The way in which a
judge structures the summing-up and the extent to which the jury is reminded of
the evidence is a matter for
individual judgment and should reflect the
complexity of the issues raised in the case, the length of it, and the way in
is conducted:
(above). Each charge to a jury must be
tailored to the circumstances of the case and structured in the way assessed as
most effectively
distilling the issues for determination and, to the extent that
is necessary, remind the jury of the evidence bearing on the determination
those issues:
Alford v Magee
[1952] HCA 3
(1952) 85 CLR 437
Huynh v The
[2013] HCA 6
87 ALJR 434
trial judge is not bound to discuss all the evidence or to analyse all the
conflicts in it, and there is certainly no need to 'painstakingly
read all of
the evidence to the jury':
Domican v The Queen
(1992) 173 CLR 555
[2004] NSWCCA 355
. Where the jury is provided with a
transcript of the evidence, as it was in the present case, the judge may
consider that reference
to the parts of the evidence that bear on the particular
issues does not require reading passages from the transcript, or summarising
(above) at [59]. In
[1999] NSWCCA 15
CJ at CL (with whom Spigelman CJ and McInerney J agreed) commented that where
the summing-up in a short trial follows immediately
after a defence address,
particularly where the appellant has not offered any evidence, very little is
likely to be achieved by a
reiteration of the evidence or of the points made by
counsel in their closing addresses; to require otherwise 'would be to credit
jury with little in the way of intelligence or common sense.'"
Majok v The Queen
[2015] NSWCCA 160
–[31], R A Hulme J
(Hoeben CJ at common law and Hall J agreeing), the New South Wales Court of
Criminal Appeal said:
"26 The overarching principle is that 'the
requirement of fairness means that ordinarily the respective cases for the
prosecution
and the accused must be accurately and fairly put to the
Domican v The Queen
[1992] HCA 13
at 560-561.
[2006] NSWCCA 192
162 A Crim R 88
, Johnson J stated (at [140]) the
following as to the need for impartiality and balance in a summing
'[T]he judge's role in a criminal trial is to hold the balance
between the contending parties without himself taking part in their
disputations; the judge does not exercise an inquisitorial role in which he
seeks himself to remedy the deficiencies in the case
on either side, nor is it
part of the function of the trial judge to don the mantle of prosecution or
defence counsel:
at 682. The fundamental task of a trial judge
is to ensure a fair trial:
[2004] NSWCCA 355
at paragraph 76.
Trial judges should normally refrain from advancing an argument in support of
the Crown case that was not put by
the Crown. There are two reasons for the
unacceptability of a judge using the summing up as a vehicle for strengthening
case - first, it is inconsistent with judicial impartiality and
secondly, to do so denies the prosecution and the defence the opportunity
to disavow, or to meet the argument:
at paragraphs
to the ability of a judge to express a view about the facts, in
(1990) 19 NSWLR 91
, the Court stated (at 106-7):
'A judge is always
entitled to express his view of the facts, provided that he does so with
moderation and provided always that he
[or she] makes it clear that it is the
jury's function (and not his [or hers]) to decide the facts and that it is their
duty to disregard
the view which he [or she] has expressed (or which he [or she]
may appear to hold) if it does not agree with their own independent
of the facts.' (Citations omitted)
v The Queen
[2000] HCA 3
199 CLR 620
it was stated by Gaudron ACJ,
Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ at [42]:
'... it has long been held that
a trial judge may comment (and comment strongly) on factual issues. But although
a trial judge may
comment on the facts, the judge is not bound to do so except
to the extent that the judge's other functions require it. Often, perhaps
more often than not, the safer course for a trial judge will be to make no
comment on the facts beyond reminding the jury, in
the course of identifying the
issues before them, of the arguments of counsel'.
to a judge going beyond the arguments that were presented by the Crown, Wood CJ
at CL said in
[2004] NSWCCA
'[87] Finally, it may be observed that trial judges should
normally refrain from advancing an argument in support of the Crown case
was not put by the Crown. It is one thing to bring to the attention of a jury an
alternative lesser count, that is fairly open
on the evidence, or an available
defence, even though it was not mentioned by the Crown Prosecutor and defence
counsel, in their
closing addresses, for example manslaughter in a case where
the accused was indicted on a count for murder. It is quite another thing
judge to advance an argument, on behalf of the Crown in support of the
Prosecution case, which the judge considers was available,
but was either
overlooked, or not used by the Prosecution.
[88] There are two reasons for the unacceptability of a judge using the
summing up as a vehicle for strengthening the Prosecution
case. First it is
inconsistent with judicial impartiality. Secondly, to do so denies the
Prosecution and the defence the opportunity
either to disavow, or to meet the
[89] The observations of this Court in a joint judgment (Spigelman CJ, Wood
CJ at CL, and Kirby J) in
[2002] NSWCCA 104
"[55] In the present case, both of the issues that have arisen were of a
character that could have been put by the Crown as a suggestion
to the jury. In
neither case was there any necessity for the trial judge to say anything to the
jury. There was no suggestion of
any unfairness to the Crown in the way the case
was conducted. Nor was there any other reason for the trial judge to put an
not advanced by counsel. (see eg
R v Heuston
A Crim R 387
[59] In each of the two respects of which complaint is now made, the
intervention of the trial judge urged upon the jury a particular
thought. His Honour suggested that there could have been an explanation for the
deficiency in the complainant's evidence,
of a character which was not of itself
based on any evidence but which, to a legal mind, would appear to be in each
case a logical
possibility. Juries are not required to think like that.
[60] The fact that each of these 'possibilities' was put to the jury by the
trial judge, rather than by the Crown, may have directed
that the jury's
collective mind in assessing credibility in a particular way. Specifically, the
thrust of the trial judge's directions,
on each of the two occasions, was that,
notwithstanding the appearance of inconsistency in each of the two respects,
there was a
possible explanation. Such matters of speculation, whilst perhaps
appropriate for counsel, should not receive the added weight of
the intervention
of the judicial officer. In each respect the jury could have understood the
trial judge to be suggesting that, because
there may have been an explanation as
a matter of logic, they should not take these matters into account in
determining the credibility
of the complainant.
[61] In the event, in our opinion, the directions to the jury were, in a
critical respect, lacking in the appropriate balance."
[90] The permissible area within which a trial judge may draw to the jury's
attention an argument that was not put by Counsel, was
conveniently noted by
Hunt CJ at CL in
R v Heuston
(1995) 81 A Crim R 387
"Sometimes, of course, a judge is obliged - even in what might be described
as the ordinary case to draw the attention of the jury
to an argument which has
not been put by counsel, if it is necessary to do so in order to ensure that the
jury has sufficient knowledge
and understanding of the evidence to discharge
their duty to determine the case according to the evidence. Some such occasions
obvious - where, for example, the principal 'defence' is one of alibi, yet
there is clear evidence of intoxication which would be
relevant to specific
intention in the event that the alibi fails. Everyone realises that, from a
tactical point of view, if counsel
were to address upon such an issue of
intoxication it would weaken the strength of his client's case on alibi, and
trial judges should
usually discuss the need to give directions as to such
matters with counsel (in the absence of the jury) before the summing up
Other such occasions are not always so obvious, and - again, stated
in very general terms in relation to the ordinary case - there
miscarriage of justice if arguments which may have been available on the
evidence are not put by the judge in the summing
up if they had not already been
put by counsel. Sometimes, indeed, it may produce positive mischief if the judge
raises arguments
which could have been but which were not put or requested by
[91] Additionally, occasion might arise for the judge to draw attention to
some matter which had not been dealt with by the Crown,
where that is necessary
to restore a balance to the trial, and where the Crown Prosecutor had no reason
to foresee it, or any opportunity
to deal with it.
[92] As Blanch CJ also said in
"In this case it is clear that the remarks complained of were made by the
trial judge in the context of criticisms made of the Crown
case not foreshadowed
during the course of the trial and not anticipated by the Crown Prosecutor in
his address. This Court has drawn
attention before to the fact that judges may
find it necessary to become involved in forensic argument insofar as it is
to deal with matters raised by defence counsel who make the last
address to the jury - see for example
R v O'Donoghue
A. Crim. R. 397
R v William Booth
, (CCA (NSW) unreported 29 September,
R v Gluscheski
(1987) 33 A Crim R 193."'
is important to bear in mind as well that 'in order to determine whether a
summing up is unfairly balanced, it is necessary for
it to be considered in its
entirety and in the context of the issues and the evidence led in the
[2005] NSWCCA
(Wood CJ at CL)."
In the present case the appellant submits that the learned trial judge's
summing up lacked neutrality, gave the State's case undue
emphasis and failed to
properly direct the jury on the key aspects of the defence case.
In detail, the appellant's written submissions state as
"101 The Appellant argues that His Honour's summing up
favoured the prosecution case in several ways:
(a) Extensive repetition of the prosecution's key themes, reinforcing its case
in a way that risked overemphasizing its strength.
(b) Lack of equivalent clarity in presenting the defence case, leaving key
defence arguments underdeveloped.
(c) Use of language that subtly endorsed the prosecution's position, capable of
influencing the jury to accept the State's case without
applying their own
independent assessment of the evidence.
102 Specific examples from the summing up (AB Vol 2, 320-341) include:
(a) His Honour's strong reinforcement of the prosecution's tendency argument,
describing it as a pattern of behaviour, rather than
presenting it as a
contested issue.
(b) Minimal reference to defence arguments regarding inconsistencies in the
complainants' accounts.
(c) When addressing the complainants' credibility, His Honour emphasised their
consistency and believability but failed to adequately
summarise key defence
challenges to their reliability.
Appellant contends that His Honour's treatment of the defence case was unequal,
in that His Honour:
(a) Did not adequately highlight inconsistencies in the complainants' evidence,
despite these being a core part of the defence case.
(b) Provided less detailed analysis of the defence's challenges to the
prosecution evidence, reducing their weight in the jury's
(c) Did not fairly restate the defence's position on Count 4, where the
accused's intent was the key issue.
Domican v The Queen
(1992) 173 CLR 555
at 560, the High Court stated that
a judge is not required to repeat every argument but must ensure that the
defence case is properly
and fairly put to the jury. Where a judge fails to
provide adequate instructions on key defence issues, the verdict may be
the credibility-based nature of this trial, His Honour's summing up carried
significant weight in shaping how the jury assessed
the evidence. Any imbalance
in its presentation risked improperly influencing the jury's deliberations.
High Court in Castle held that judicial intervention should not distort the
presentation of evidence in a way that suggests a
preference for one side's
case. By overemphasising the State's position while failing to fairly summarise
key defence arguments,
the summing up failed to meet this standard.
light of these deficiencies, there is a real risk that the jury was improperly
influenced by the imbalance in His Honour's summing
up. This compromised the
fairness of the trial, and the verdicts should be set aside."
I have read the learned trial judge's summing up and I cannot accept the
appellant's submission that it was not neutral. In my view,
it offends none of
the principles set out in the passage above from
In her written submissions counsel for the State very helpfully epitomised the
summing up as follows:
"In the present case, the learned trial
judge, in the course of the summing up, canvassed the following matters:
• The use of the transcript and cross-referencing;
• The role of the judge;
• Directions of law binding;
• The role of the jury;
• The jury's task in assessing evidence;
• Assessing witnesses and relevant factors;
• Honest but mistaken witnesses;
• Drawing inferences;
• Reference to counsel's addresses;
• The need to be dispassionate given the nature of the case;
• Avoidance of speculation;
• Consequences of verdict;
• Jury deliberations;
• Presumption of innocence;
• Verdict of not guilty does not mean innocent;
• The concept of the burden of proof;
• Right to silence;
• The concept of proof beyond reasonable doubt;
• Separate consideration of each count on the indictment;
• Tendency evidence;
• Tendency evidence being part of the evidence;
• The memorandum to the jury handed out;
• The elements of the crime of indecent assault;
The respective
cases as to count 1 (T 20-22). With specific reference to the defence argument
that the offending was inherently implausible
and highlighting factors which
tend to undermine the complainant's credibility;
The respective
cases as to count 3 (T 22-23). With specific reference to the defence argument
that "it did not happen" and factors
which suggest the complainant's account was
The elements of
the crime of communicating with intent to expose a young person to indecent
The drawing of
inference/s as to intent;
The respective
cases as to count 2 (T 23-27). With specific reference to the defence argument
that there was no communication and
doubts as to the complainant's credibility
The elements of
the crime of communicating with intent to procure a young person to engage in an
unlawful sexual act. With specific
instruction as to the issues of intent;
The elements of
the crime of facilitating the involvement of a person under the age of 18 years
in the production of child exploitation
The respective
cases as to count 5 (T32-33). With specific reference to the defence argument
that there was not explicit request from
the appellant or facilitation by him;
complaint, highlighting the defence case in relation to delay and unreliability"
I see nothing in the structure, tone or emphasis of the learned trial judge's
comments that would permit it to be said they lacked
neutrality.
His Honour said in the early part of his summing up:
your duty to consider the evidence. I will not be trying to persuade you one way
or another what to make of the evidence
and most importantly, I will not be
hinting to you what verdict I think you should return. That's not my role. And
even if I were
hinting to you what I think about the evidence or what your
verdict should be, your duty would be to ignore what I say because what
mine. My duty is to be as fair as I can both
to the prosecution and the defence,
not tell you what I think of the evidence."
In my assessment his Honour did not hint what he thought about what was an
overwhelming case against the appellant, but lest the
jury might think that he
was, they were adequately warned to ignore anything he said that might be
interpreted in that way.
There is no merit in this ground. I reject the appellant's arguments. And I
note that in this case what was said by Wood J in
Riley v Tasmania
are entirely apposite. Her Honour said:
conclusion of the summing-up, just before the jury retired to deliberate, the
learned trial judge asked counsel (not the same
defence counsel representing the
appellant on the appeal) whether there was anything that they wished his Honour
to raise with the
jury. Counsel expressly stated that there was not. Defence
counsel was well positioned to assess the fairness and adequacy of his
summary of the defence case and the overall impartiality of the summing-up. Of
course, if there is any deficiency or misdirection
in a summing-up to the jury,
counsel should point that out to the trial judge before the jury retires to
deliberate so that it may
be rectified there and then. The response of defence
counsel in seeking or declining to seek further directions at the conclusion
a trial judge's summing-up is a factor that an appellate court may take into
account. It may be regarded as a cogent consideration
in determining whether
the summing-up is defective as asserted on appeal or whether some inadequacy or
misdirection in a summing-up
is so significant that there has been a miscarriage
of justice:
La Fontaine v The Queen
[1976] HCA 52
(1976) 136 CLR 62
per Barwick CJ
Lambert & Stokes v Tasmania
[2007] TASSC 76
Lee v Tasmania
[2006] TASSC 92
. As to these questions, it is
considered that counsel's response in the prevailing circumstances of a trial
can be a useful gauge.
Here, for the reasons expressed by Geason J, it has not
been shown that the summing-up was deficient or fell short of what was required.
I agree with the reasons of Geason J which dispose of the appeal. Moreover,
defence counsel's response at the closing stages of
the trial provides a sound
indication that it seemed then from the defence perspective the summing-up was
fair, the reference to
the defence contentions were adequate, and that it was
unnecessary for the learned trial judge to add anything further."
In this regard it must be noted that the appellant was represented at trial by
one of Tasmania's most experienced defence lawyers.
I would dismiss ground 5 of the notice of appeal.
– conduct of counsel resulting in a miscarriage of justice
The appellant submits that:
"110 A miscarriage of justice arises
where serious errors or omissions by defence counsel deprive the accused of a
fair trial (
JAGD v Tasmania
[2021] TASCCA 16).
The appellate court must
assess whether counsel's failures had a material impact on the trial's fairness
and the verdict's safety.
High Court in
TKWJ v The Queen
[2002] HCA 46
(2002) 212 CLR 124
confirmed that
errors by trial counsel can amount to a miscarriage of justice where they result
in the jury being deprived of a fair
consideration of the defence case.
amounting to such a miscarriage of justice includes failures to challenge
critical evidence, mismanagement of the defence
case, or failing to request
necessary judicial directions (
Birks v The Queen
(1990) 19 NSWLR
for the State does not take issue with those characterisations of the principles
to be extracted from those cases but adds:
"In addition, as a
general rule, an appellant is bound by the conduct of their counsel at trial:
Crampton v R
(2000) 206 CLR 161
per Gleeson CJ at 172-173 [15]-[19];
tandage v Tasmania
(2017) 28 Tas R 184
per Wood J at 215-216
[74]-[76]."
Counsel for the appellant submits, first, that trial counsel failed to
adequately challenge key aspects of the State's case through
cross-examination,
that the complainants' evidence contained significant inconsistencies,
particularly regarding timelines and interactions
with the appellant and that
the appellant's counsel failed to properly test those inconsistencies in
cross-examination, missing opportunities
to weaken the State's case. Second, it
is submitted that trial counsel failed to address key exculpatory evidence in
closing submissions.
In my view the first of these criticisms demonstrate a lack of appreciation of
the purpose of cross-examination. As I have already
noted the appellant's
counsel was an experienced trial lawyer. It is impossible to discount the
proposition that she was pursuing
a forensic purpose in the way in which she
cross-examined, preferring to put the impact of the inconsistencies to the jury
closing address, rather than argue her case through the witnesses by
seeking the witness's acceptance of the deductive logic involved.
Having reviewed the transcript of the evidence I am of the view that to the
extent that the appellant's counsel did not cross-examine
she nonetheless fully exposed them to the jury in closing. And while it is no
part of my role to evaluate on
appeal, the effectiveness of counsel's closing
address, I am wholly unable to say that there were serious errors or omissions
that the jury was deprived of a fair consideration of the appellant's defence
or that critical evidence was not challenged.
again counsel for the State's submissions provide an epitome of the key
cross-examination by the appellant's trial counsel and
the relevant elements of
her closing address:
"The respondent contends that the key State
witnesses were robustly cross-examined on the relevant issues at trial,
including potential
inconsistencies. The appellant highlights the inadequacies
in cross examination of witness, [Mr Gladstone]. These were then sufficiently
canvassed in the appellant counsel's closing address (T 31-32) and highlighted
to the jury.
the respondent contends that the appellant's counsel's closing address explored
contradictions in the complainant's evidence
and emphasised key arguments. For
(a) The contradiction in the evidence of the complainant's location when the
disclosures were made (T 31-32).
(b) The physical improbability of the allegation of indecent assault against
[Sally Gladstone] and the lack of complaint (T 32-33).
(c) The unreliability of the memory of [Sally Gladstone] (T 33).
(d) The potential for other innocent explanations for tendency evidence relating
to [Sally Gladstone] (T 33-34).
(e) Specific inconsistencies between the evidence of [Sally Gladstone] and [Mr
Gladstone] in relation to the wearing of bikinis (T
(f) The lack of corroborating evidence in relation to the grooming charge for
[Allison] (T 35).
(g) The lack of opportunity for the indecent assault allegation in relation to
[Allison], with specific regard to the evidence of
[the appellant's daughter]
and the photographs (T 35-36).
(h) The potential for other innocent explanations for tendency evidence relating
to [Allison] (T 36-37).
(i) The potential inconsistencies between the evidence of [Allison], [Mr
Gladstone] and [Sally Gladstone] in relation to circumstances
of the appellant's
masturbation comments (T 37-38).
(j) The limited probative value of the complaint evidence (T 39).
(k) The emphasis on the issue surrounding the appellant's intent in relation to
count 4 (T 39-40).
(l) The emphasis on the lack of evidence supporting 'facilitation' in relation
to count 5 (T 40-41)."
The third submission of counsel for the appellant as to the conduct of the
appellant's trial counsel is that she failed to ask the
trial judge to direct
the jury on the availability of an alternative verdict under s 125D(3). This
submission relies on
James v The Queen
[2014] HCA 6
for the proposition
that where an alternative verdict is available, but neither the judge nor
counsel press for it to be left to
the jury, a miscarriage of justice may
As to this submission, I have already explained at [55] above that there was no
alternative verdict available under s 125D(3) in
the circumstances of this
I accept the conclusion of counsel for the State that "the cross-examination
cannot be objectively assessed as lacking, the closing
address canvassed key
defence issues and alternative verdict was not open. In these circumstances,
there was no trial counsel error
which resulted in a miscarriage of
I would dismiss ground 6 of the notice of appeal.
Ground 7 – the sentence was manifestly excessive
In passing sentence on the appellant, the learned trial judge made the
following comments. I have set them out in full because they
concern offences
other than those which were the subject of the appeal against conviction. His
Honour said:
"Stuart Rainbird, you were found guilty by a jury of
two counts of indecent assault, one count of grooming with intent to expose a
young person to indecent material, one count of grooming with intent to procure
a young person for sexual abuse and one count of
involving a person under the
age of 18 years in the production of child exploitation material. It is my duty
to sentence you in accordance
with the verdicts. It is my responsibility to find
facts for sentence, but my findings must be consistent with the verdicts. Facts
adverse to you must be proved by the prosecution to my satisfaction beyond
reasonable doubt. Facts in your favour must be proved
by you on the balance of
probabilities.
All of the crimes were committed between about 2014 and 2018 against three
girls who were part of the broad friendship group of one
of your daughters. When
the offending commenced you were about 47. Within that group you knew and
socialised with some of the parents.
Throughout this period, despite the obvious
difference in age and personal circumstances, you interacted with those three
as well as others in the same group, on social media, usually Instagram
or Snapchat. In each case the contact was initiated by you
by responding in some
way to messages or images they had posted. I am satisfied, as I think that the
jury must have been, that your
by sexual attraction to girls of that age. Taking all of the evidence into
I find that you had a tendency to be sexually attracted to them and
that tendency was circumstantial evidence which made the accounts
complainant more likely to be true. To protect their identities I will, in the
published version of these comments, refer
to them by pseudonyms.
The first indecent assault was committed against Sally Gladstone. She said
that she was about 11 at the time but she may have been
slightly older. That
made it most likely 2014 or 2015. You became friends with her father. On an
occasion when you and your family
were visiting her home you sat down between
her and your daughter on the couch. Sally said that, after having put your arm
her, you moved your arm down behind her so that your hand exerted subtle
pressure on the side of her breast over her clothing. You
then moved your hand
further down and put it inside her track pants to as to touch the skin on the
top or outer part of her upper
thigh. It follows from the verdict that the jury
was satisfied that indecent touching occurred. I am satisfied that the touching
of the breast and the thigh both occurred. I found Sally's account to be
coherent and persuasive, and not in the least implausible.
Her evidence was
given calmly and clearly and she did not waver in cross examination. It is easy
to understand how she was too embarrassed,
confused and nervous to say anything
at the time to her parents and also why, in the circumstances, your actions were
not noticed
by anyone else. The contact with her breast was subtle and the
positions and perhaps the side of the couch. I accept her evidence that you had
initiated social media contact with her
in which you asked, sometimes late at
night, what she was wearing in bed. That conduct is not the subject of a charge.
However, her
evidence was strongly consistent with the evidence of other
witnesses about your social media interaction with them. Sally's evidence
corroborated their evidence and supported the evidence of your tendency.
The crime of grooming with intent to expose a young person to indecent
material was committed against Sally's older sister Allison.
At about the time
of her 15th birthday, later in 2016, you initiated contact with her on social
media, initially on Messenger but
then on Instagram and Snapchat. The fact that
you chose to communicate on-line so personally with a girl her age at all
an improper motive, but the nature and content of the messages
confirmed that to be so. At first the messages were seemingly friendly
innocuous, but they became increasingly intrusive, frequent, personal and
expressly or impliedly sexual. A feature of the Snapchat
application is that
communications, including messages and images, are temporary unless saved. Only
the Messenger messages were saved.
However I believe her evidence, as I think
the jury must have, about the Instagram and Snapchat messages she received. It
was strongly
supported by the evidence of a friend of hers who saw some of the
messages and was told by Allison about others. The communications
continued for
a prolonged period, at least many months if not longer. Your messages were very
frequent, sometimes daily, and were
often sent late at night when she was likely
to be alone in her room. You commented on the attractiveness of her bottom. You
her what her favourite sexual position was. You began to send images of
yourself. Most were apparently innocuous but one was of you
sprawled on the
couch with your hand down your pants. One message conveyed to her that you had
found her bottom so attractive in
the leggings she was wearing that you
masturbated yourself. Her evidence was that this message was a little later by
which time she
was 17. However her 17th birthday was not until late 2018 and I
am satisfied that the message was sent before then. The jury was
beyond reasonable doubt that your intention when communicating with Allison was
to expose her to indecent material. I find
that the indecent material took the
form of the messages to her to which I have referred with suggestive or overtly
sexual content
and the image of you with your hand down your pants. However, I
am satisfied that even the communications which were not indecent
were sent as
part of a course of conduct with the underlying intention to, over time,
introduce sexual material to her. There is
no evidence of any express request
from you that she respond in a sexual way either by words or images. If there
had been you would
have been charged with a different offence.
The other indecent assault was committed against Allison in March 2016 when
your family and her family shared a weekend away in a
rented house in a coastal
part of southern Tasmania. Allison was 14. It was before you began communicating
with her on-line, but
the assault demonstrates an already existing sexual
interest in her. The jury must have been satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of
the truth of Allison's evidence that, when you and she were together on your
small motor boat you grabbed her from behind into a
sort of bear hug and, in the
course of doing so you indecently touched the front of her breasts over her
clothing. She said that
she was wearing a bikini at the time. I am not satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that this was so, and find that she was more likely
wearing some form of summer clothing although not a life jacket. Whether she was
wearing a life jacket or not, consistency with the
verdict requires that you be
sentenced on the basis that the indecent touching of her breasts occurred. The
physical contact was
opportunistic and relatively brief. I cannot be satisfied
that anyone else was present.
The charge of grooming with intent to procure a young person to engage in an
unlawful sexual act and involving a person under the
age of 18 years in the
production of child exploitation material both concern Jean Harrison. The
charges are closely related. Your
offending against her was, objectively, the
most serious. She was friends with Sally Gladstone. I find that, in 2016, you
online contact with her by commenting favourably on messages she put
on Instagram wearing tight gym gear. You then began communicating
privately on Instagram. She was a willing participant. She was flattered by the
attention and was flirtatious. However she
was, when it began, only about 14.
The communications soon became sexual and resulted in the exchange of sexual
images. These exchanges
continued until about the time of her 16th birthday in
mid-2018. Some of the images exchanged were not sexual, but many were. You
her still and video images of your erect penis including video of you
masturbating. She sent you photographs of her naked breasts
and vagina, and
videos of a similar nature including one of her masturbating her vagina with her
hand. The communications were very
frequent, at times almost daily. I am
satisfied that the images she sent you of herself were produced and sent at your
request. There
is no doubt that it was child exploitation material and that you
knew it was child exploitation material because it depicted her
sexual activity or in a sexual context, in a way a reasonable person would find
I also find that, from relatively early in the piece, she requested other
things from you: money, alcohol and other gifts. You agreed
in return for more
images. Money and gifts were dropped off at an agreed hidden location for her to
collect. I believe her evidence
that she did not want to meet or speak to you in
person and so there was never, and never likely to be, any direct physical
However it was the intention of your communications which is the
important element of this grooming charge. I am left in no doubt
intention was to have her engage in an unlawful sexual act by receiving material
you created which was so indecent that
the sending of it amounted to an indecent
act with a young person. However I find that your intention went beyond that. On
her account,
which is the only account we have, you exchanged messages about, to
use her words, "we want to maybe have sex", but that she was
not 18. You told
her that you wished that she was older, the indication being that you would not
have sex with her because she was
not 18. Yet, she said that on occasions when
you were dropping things off for her you sent messages asking her to get into
with you to "hang out". She never agreed. She thought that it would,
again to use her words, "turn sexual" if she got into the car
with you. It is
your intention, not her expectation, which is relevant, but I find that she was
correct. The only reasonable and
rational inference to be drawn from all the
evidence in the trial is that your intention in communicating with her as you
to ultimately bring about actual sexual contact of some nature with her.
It may have been hopeful speculation but I am satisfied
that it was your
intention. Any sexual touching of any nature between you and her would have been
unlawful because of her age.
Your offending did not come to light until 2021 when those three girls
realised that, as between themselves, you had offended against
each of them.
Until then, none realised what had happened to the other. Mr Gladstone became
aware of what had been going on and the
police were notified.
I am required to take into account any aggravating circumstance referred to
in the Sentencing Act, s 11A, which may apply. The only
crime which was
committed against a victim under 13 was the indecent assault of Sally Gladstone.
That crime was committed while others
were present. Although none were aware of
it, their presence must have added to her embarrassment, discomfort and
confusion about
how to respond. None of the victims were under your care,
supervision or authority except in the case of the indecent assault of
Gladstone on the boat. That crime was committed when she was temporarily under
your supervision. By assaulting both her and
her sister you certainly breached
their trust and the trust of their parents in allowing them to be in your
immediate presence.
You are not entitled to the mitigation a plea of guilty may otherwise have
attracted. Each of the victims gave evidence during the
trial. There was some
delay prior to resolution of the charges. Your conduct was reported to the
police in February 2021 and you
were spoken to shortly thereafter. You were left
in a state of uncertainty until March 2022, more than a year later, when you
charged. Trial papers were not filed until April 2023 and the trial
occurred in September 2024. Delay of itself is not a mitigating
particular, for child sex cases, delay between the commission of an offence and
it being reported should not be regarded
as mitigating. However delay since then
can be relevant, delay before the bringing of charges generally being of greater
I would accept that you have had these charges hanging over your head
for almost four years, and that has been a source of some anxiety.
You lost one
job in March 2021 when the reason your phone was confiscated was disclosed to
your employer. However you obtained other
employment which continued until the
verdict. As to rehabilitation, you began counselling with a psychologist soon
after the police
spoke to you which has furnished you with the skills to address
and reduce the risk of re-offending. Conversely, the complainants
have also been
the subject of prolonged delay before being vindicated by the verdicts.
Your personal circumstances were outlined by your counsel and in a report
prepared by a probation officer of your suitability for
a home detention order.
I was given a number of references as well as a report dated 25 October 2024
from a clinical psychologist,
Michael Guy. You are now aged 57. You have no
relevant prior convictions. It is not suggested to me that there has been any
offending. During your life you have enjoyed close and supportive
relationships with your parents and siblings. Your physical health
is reasonable
and you have no alcohol or drug issues. You are currently unemployed as a result
having been found guilty of these
offences but, until then, you were engaged
throughout your adulthood in employment and self-employment in project and
manufacturing
management. References from past employers and clients speak
highly of your work and personal qualities. I accept that these convictions
make it much more difficult, if not impossible, to find other employment. You
have a long, loving and stable marriage of which
there are two adult children.
Your wife has written a letter describing your strong love, support and care for
her and your children.
References from other females within your daughters'
friendship group describe their trust of you and the support and friendship
have offered them without a hint of the type conduct of which you were found
guilty. However, as Mr Guy describes, you were,
at least at the relevant time,
living a double life which was kept secret from others.
As a teenager you were subjected to years of serious sexual, physical and
psychological abuse perpetrated by a male peer. That was,
no doubt, a very
distressing part of your past. Mr Guy indicates that you meet the criteria for
PTSD. Since March 2021 he has been
treating you for that disorder and associated
behavioural patterns. The pre-sentence report also refers to a diagnosis of PTSD
you manage with medication and ongoing psychological intervention.
According to Mr Guy, the effects of the abuse included a proneness
yourself sexually, use of pornography and a pattern of people pleasing. As to
the charges on the indictment, the only conduct
which you admit is part of the
interaction with Ms Harrison. You admit the impropriety of that conduct which
you attribute to poor
judgment and lack of insight arising from mental health
concerns, grief following the death of your father, unhappiness with your
employment and a tendency to wish to please. Mr Guy reports that you told him
that your contact with her commenced as being supportive
and non-sexual, but
changed when she sent photos unsolicited and requested photos from you. You
reported that when she asked for
money, cigarettes and alcohol and threatened
disclosure to your family, you felt compelled to comply but declined or ignored
requests. To the extent that this suggests that you only responded to
communications she initiated and, at some point, stopped requesting
images from
her I find it to be inconsistent with the evidence at trial.
Although Mr Guy assesses the risk you pose of future offending as low, there
is nothing in his report which would justify the conclusion
relationship between mental impairment and your crimes is such that the need for
general deterrence is moderated or that
your criminal culpability is reduced. Mr
Guy does indicate that imprisonment might severely affect your PTSD. I take that
into account
but, in the circumstances, it is a factor which is to be balanced
against other sentencing aims. I do not accept that treatment reasonably
required will not be available to you while in custody although not to the same
level as may be available in the community. Mr Guy
and your counsel mention the
potential impact on your family. Your wife has her own challenges. I accept that
the impact of a sentence
of imprisonment on her and your children will be
considerable but, generally, hardship to dependants is not a significant
factor. It is part of the price to be paid for serious crime and
should not be allowed to affect what is otherwise the correct sentence.
The factor of overwhelming importance in sentencing for crimes of this nature
is the protection of children. Offenders must not only
be punished and
denounced, but sentences must serve to, as far as a court is able to achieve,
signal to others the likely harsh consequences.
Child sexual offences carry the
presumption of harm. Your offences carry varying levels of objective gravity and
criminal culpability.
However all of the conduct had great potential to corrupt
and damage the victims. I heard victim impact statements from each which
the profound and lasting effects your behaviour has had on them. It is the type
of impact which is to be expected. As always,
circumspection is required when
considering the statements. I accept that the objective gravity of the indecent
assaults, when compared
to other sexual offences dealt with by this court, is
not high. The sentence I impose must be proportionate to the seriousness of
crime. That does not mean that the psychological impact cannot be real and
significant. There may have been other factors at
play when considering the
impact on Ms Harrison, but I am left in no doubt that your conduct was a
significant causative factor in
many of the psychological problems she
describes. All three victims describe an ongoing lack of trust in adult men
which affects
their own relationships.
To the extent that your offending consisted of on-line communications between
you and the victims, there is a strong need for general
deterrence and
protection of the public. Offences of that nature are difficult to detect and
are almost always committed in private,
beyond the notice of those who would be
responsible for the safety and protection of the young person. Young persons who
participate
in such on-line communications must, as far as a court is able to
achieve, be protected from their own vulnerability, immaturity
and misjudgment
by imposition of sentences which seek to deter those who would seek to take
advantage of them.
Had I been considering the indecent assaults of Sally and Allison Gladstone,
and possibly even the grooming offence against Allison
Gladstone, individually
and in isolation, then a community based order might have been an appropriate
sentence. I do not, by that
indication, wish to understate in any respect the
seriousness of those crimes or the impact on each of those victims. However
crimes are not to be considered in isolation. They are to be considered in
the context that the instances of unlawful sexual acts
directed at these
children were not isolated, but formed part of a course of conduct which
extended over a significant period and
affected each of the three victims. For
that reason I have concluded that home detention does not adequately address the
aims and is not an appropriate sentence.
I will impose separate sentences for each crime but will make orders of
cumulation and concurrency, and suspend some of the terms,
with the aim of
imposing a sentence which is a just and appropriate measure of your total
criminality across all counts, taking into
account the interests of, and
separate harm to, each of the three victims.
Stuart Rainbird, you are convicted on each count on the indictment. I am not
satisfied that you do not pose a risk of committing a
reportable offence within
the meaning of that term in the
Community Protection (Offender Reporting) Act
in the future. I make an order directing that the Registrar cause your name
to be placed on the Register and that you comply with
the reporting obligations
under the Act for a period eight years from your release.
On count 1, the indecent assault of Sally Gladstone, you are sentenced to
imprisonment for three months. On count 2, grooming Allison
Gladstone with
intent to expose her to indecent material, you are sentenced to imprisonment for
nine months. On count 3, the indecent
assault of Allison Gladstone, you are
sentenced to imprisonment for three months. I wholly suspend the terms imposed
on counts 1,
2 and 3 for three years from your release. Had I not suspended the
terms imposed on those three counts I would have ordered that
counts 1 and 3 be
served concurrently but cumulatively with count 2, an effective term of one
year. I would also have ordered that
effective term to be cumulative to the
terms I am about to impose. The law imposes a condition on the suspended terms
orders are in force you not commit any offence punishable by
imprisonment. If you breach that condition then you will be required
the suspended term unless that is unjust. On count 4, grooming Jean Harrison
with intent to procure her for sexual abuse,
you are sentenced to imprisonment
for 15 months from 12 November 2024, the day you were remanded in custody. On
count 5, involving
Jean Harrison in the production of child exploitation
material, you are sentenced to imprisonment for two years and three months,
from 12 November 2024, thus concurrently with the term imposed on count 4. For
each term of actual imprisonment imposed I order
that you not be eligible for
parole until half of the term is served.
The result is a total term of imprisonment of three years and three months
from 12 November 2024, one year of which is suspended for
three years from your
release. You are not eligible to apply for parole until you have served half of
the operative sentence of two
years and three months."
The appeal ground is that "the cumulative effect of the sentences imposed was
manifestly excessive". The appellant submits that:
The total length
of the sentence is disproportionate given the sentencing range in comparable
cases (Sentencing for Serious Sex Offences
Against Children Research Paper 3,
The appellant's
positive pre-sentence report, which assessed him as suitable for home detention,
was not properly considered in mitigation.
The learned
sentencing judge placed undue weight on the assertion by counsel for the State
that treatment for the appellant's post
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) would
be available to him in prison if he received a custodial sentence.
His Honour did
not sufficiently consider the recommendation made by the appellant's treating
psychologist, Mr Michael Guy, that his
rehabilitation and risk of reoffending
would best be addressed by the imposition of a non-custodial sentence which
would allow him
to continue treatment for PTSD.
(grooming with intent to procure) and 5 (involving a young person in production
of child exploitation material) share overlapping
factual elements (see in
particular the further and better particulars filed by the State on 5 September
The requests for
photographs and footage of the complainant were used to sustain both charges,
yet the sentences imposed by his Honour
were cumulative rather than
appropriately adjusted to reflect this overlap.
At the outset I note that notwithstanding the ways in which it is said that the
learned sentencing judge arrived at a total sentence
that was manifestly
excessive, the ground of appeal is nonetheless one of manifest excess. No
specific error has been made the subject
of a ground of appeal.
The task for this Court in such cases is well established. The appellant must
establish that the sentence imposed was "unreasonable
or plainly unjust":
[2015] TASCCA 1
(2016) 28 Tas R 1
per Pearce J at [8], citing
House v King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
There can be no tariff for the particular combination of crimes for which the
appellant was convicted, and comparative sentencing
data is of no use given the
unique combination of particular circumstances involved.
Counsel for the State enumerates in her submissions the relevant features of
the appellant's crimes that underpin the extent of
his culpability. They
(a) That the indecent assault committed upon Sally Gladstone took place when she
was under the age of 13 years (an aggravating circumstance
pursuant to s 11A of
Sentencing Act
(b) That the indecent assault committed upon Sally Gladstone occurred in the
presence of others (an aggravating circumstance pursuant
to s 11A of the
Sentencing Act
(c) That the indecent assault committed upon Allison occurred whilst she was
temporarily under the appellant's supervision (an aggravating
circumstance
pursuant to s 11A of the
Sentencing Act
(d) That the offending in relation to Sally and Allison Gladstone involved a
breach of their trust and the trust of their parents.
(e) That the appellant was not entitled to the mitigation of a plea of guilty
and the complainants were required to give evidence
(f) The profound and lasting effects the behaviour had on the complainants and
the impact on them as set out in their victim impact
statements.
(g) The nature of the acts, with varying degrees of objective gravity, and the
instances of unlawful sexual acts was over a significant
period of time.
It is well understood that in sentencing for child sexual offences the
principles of general deterrence, denunciation and vindication
of victims are to
the fore. I have no hesitation in concluding that the total sentence imposed on
the appellant was not manifestly
excessive and the appellant's assertion of
various overlooked or underweighted considerations on the part of the learned
judge do not shine any bright light for me on a different conclusion.
I regard the sentence as lenient, but well within his Honour's
wide sentencing
discretion.
I would dismiss ground 7 of the notice of
File No 3128/2024
STUART DEAN RAINBIRD v TASMANIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
22 October 2025
I have had the opportunity to read the reasons of Estcourt J. I agree with
those reasons and would join in the Orders he proposes.
I also agree with the
additional reasons provided by the Chief Justice.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (379 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter