URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASPComm/2025/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:19:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tasmanian Planning Scheme - Northern Midlands amendment 13-2024 [2025] TASPComm 11 (23 June 2025)
Tasmanian Planning Scheme - Northern Midlands
Planning authority
Northern Midlands Council
Date of decision
23 June 2025
The draft amendment is rejected under
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
and that the
planning authority is to prepare a substantially modified draft amendment under
section 40N(1)(c)(ii).
Dianne Cowen Alex Brownlie
Delegate (Chair) Delegate
REASONS FOR DECISION
draft amendment proposes to apply the Flood-Prone Areas Hazard Code to land in
Campbell Town, Perth and Ross.
Site information
The draft amendment is applicable for several
properties in Campbell Town, Ross and Perth.
Flood mapping for Campbell Town and Ross was developed for the town areas
based on potential impacts from the Elizabeth River at Campbell
Town and the
Macquarie River and Downs Creek at Ross.
Flood mapping was developed in West Perth for the catchment area of Sheepwash
Creek to Drummond Street.
The extent of the proposed flood mapping has been designated to an area
determined by Council to be within the urban boundary of each
Issues raised in representations
Ten representations were received from members of the
community. The following issues were raised:
Changes to the
extent of flood prone area from the current area
Increase in
insurance premiums
Impact on future
saleability of land
Climate change
is not real and should not be a consideration
Impact upon
future possible development
Land has not
flooded in the past
property value
infrastructure issues should be resolved
culverts are required
historical data for Ross to enable accurate flood prediction
Issues with the
modelling used and where data came from to inform the model
made a representation stating no objection to the draft amendment and that
TasWater did not wish to attend any hearing.
Planning authority’s response to the
representations
The planning authority considered the representations
and recommended no changes to the draft amendment.
Referrals to State Agencies
The Commission noted that a referral to the State
Emergency Service (SES) was not evident in the information provided with the
draft amendment and that the SES had been undertaking a statewide
flood mapping project.
The Commission issued a direction letter to the SES and TasWater dated 2
December 2024, inviting any relevant submissions and attendance
at the hearing
if required.
TasWater provided a submission dated 17 December 2024 stating no objection to
the draft amendment and no requirement to attend a hearing.
The SES provided an
extensive submission on 14 February 2025 and confirmed attendance at a hearing.
Date and place of hearing
The hearing was held at 13 Smith Street, Longford on
18 February 2025.
Appearances at the hearing
Planning authority: Paul Godier, Senior Planner
Cameron Oakley, Engineering Supervisor
Clare Hester ERA Planning and Environment (ERA) on behalf of Council
Representors:
Jeffrey Watson, Garry Dean
Other: Ann Stewart, State Emergency Service (SES)
Kate Kiresleva, State Emergency Service (SES)
Consideration of the draft amendment
section 40M of the Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993 (the Act), the
Commission is required to consider the draft amendment
to the Local Provisions
Schedule (LPS) and the representations, statements and recommendations contained
in the planning authority’s
section 40K report and any information
obtained at a hearing.
hearing was convened to assist the Commission consider the issues in the
representations.
Commission must also consider whether the draft amendment meets the LPS criteria
as set out under section 34(2) of the Act:
(a) contains all the provisions that the SPPs specify must be contained in an
(b) is in accordance with section 32; and
(c) furthers the objectives set out in Schedule 1; and
(d) is consistent with each State policy; and
(da) satisfies the relevant criteria in relation to the TPPs; and
(e) as far as practicable, is consistent with the regional land use strategy, if
any, for the regional area in which is situated
the land to which the relevant
planning instrument relates; and
(f) has regard to the strategic plan, prepared under
Government Act 1993
, that applies in relation to the land to which the
relevant planning instrument relates; and
(g) as far as practicable, is consistent with and co-ordinated with any LPSs
that apply to municipal areas that are adjacent to the
municipal area to which
the relevant planning instrument relates; and
(h) has regard to the safety requirements set out in the standards prescribed
Gas Safety Act 2019
Application of the Flood-Prone Hazard Areas
Code overlay
amendment proposes to apply the Flood-Prone Hazard Areas Code overlay to parts
of Campbell Town, Perth and Ross.
Section 8A Code Application Guidelines for the Flood-Prone Hazard Areas Code
overlay Guideline No.1
- Local Provisions Schedule
(LPS) Zone and Code Application (Guidelines) as follows:
The flood-prone hazard area overlay should be applied to areas known to be prone
to flooding, particularly areas known to
be within the 1 per cent annual
exceedance probability (AEP) level.
FPHAZ 2 In determining the extent of the flood-prone hazard area overlay,
planning authorities may utilise their own data, including
any equivalent
overlay contained in an interim planning scheme or section 29 planning scheme
for that municipal area, or data from
other sources.
the supporting report dated 6 March 2024, ERA on behalf of Council
The proposed approach is to use the 1% AEP plus climate
change scenario which will exceed the requirement in FPHAZ 1 but is in
with FPHAZ 2. This is consistent with the approach other Councils
have taken when updating the flooding overlays including Glenorchy
City Council
and Clarence City Council. This is also consistent with section 1.0.2 of the
draft Tasmanian Planning Policies which
include discussion on the benefits of
using land use planning as a mechanism to support measures that help address the
impacts of climate change, including localised flooding.
SES in its submission dated 14 February 2025 provided advice on the proposed
flood mapping in the draft amendment for Campbell
Town, Perth, and Ross. In the
submission, the SES also provided details of the progress on the Tasmanian
Strategic Flood Mapping
(TSFM) currently being carried out by the SES and
confirmed that the mapping would be publicly released in March 2025.
the hearing, it was noted that there are differences between the planning
authority and SES mapping, and particularly more relevant
to Ross and Perth.
planning authority noted that Entura and Hydrodynamica had been engaged by
Council to prepare a flood study which provided information
on the footprint of
potential flooding.
the hearing, the SES noted that the TSFM went further to identify depth and
velocity flood hazard and was prepared in accordance
with Australian Rainfall
and Runoff 2019 guideline for best practice mapping. The flood mapping also
identified areas of hazard
between H1-H6.
Campbell Town
its submission, the SES supported the certified overlay for Campbell Town,
noting there was strong alignment with TSFM.
the hearing, Mr Dean raised concern that the overlay was not present when he
purchased the property in 2021. Mr Dean raised concern
regarding the impact on
development potential because of the overlay and questioned whether local and
state government infrastructure
should be upgraded.
the hearing in response to Mr Dean’s concerns, Ms Hester on behalf of the
planning authority, submitted that the application
of the flood overlay did not
prohibit development, and Council could provide details of flood depth upon
request. Ms Hester noted
that council had opted to now implement the overlay out
of a sense of responsibility for public safety.
the hearing the SES confirmed it supported the overlay as certified for Campbell
Dean provided a further written submission dated 15 April 2025, reiterating
opposition to the application of the overlay to their
its submission, the SES was not supportive of the overlay as certified for
Perth. The SES raised concern in relation to the planning
authority overlay as
future culvert upgrades informed the level of potential flood levels and
SES suggest options for the Overlay update in the Perth area
could include the use of the local detailed flood modelling without the
inclusion of planned future capital works or the use of the of the [sic] TSFM in
the Perth locality using the 1% AEP with climate
the hearing, the SES reiterated it was not supportive of flood mapping which
relied on the future upgrade of culverts and submitted
it posed an
unsatisfactory risk as the works had not been completed.
planning authority noted at the hearing that no date for completion of culvert
upgrades could be provided with certainty.
Commission issued a post hearing direction letter on 20 February 2025,
requesting the planning authority provide comment on, or
support of, the SES
mapping. In response to the direction, the planning authority provided a
submission dated 7 April 2025 which
submitted that Council would need to
undertake further flood studies to clarify the extent of the differences between
the SES (excluding
future culverts) and Council mapping (including future
culverts) and at this stage Council had not planned for the expense in its
the submission, the planning authority supported use of the SES flood mapping
for all areas except as specified in Longford.
planning authority further stated it accepted the SES mapping for Sheepwash
Creek but submitted that further modelling and mapping
would be required once
culverts were completed.
response to the planning authority’s submission, no further submissions
were received regarding application of the overlay
in Perth from other parties.
response to the Commission’s subsequent direction letter dated 22 May
2025, the planning authority submitted it agreed with
the extent of the overlay
provided by the SES for Perth. In addition, the planning authority stated it
considered the application
of the overlay H1-H6 inclusive, was consistent with
consideration of the Flood-Prone Hazard Areas Code.
SES noted in its submission that there was a difference between the certified
overlay and TSFM for Ross. The SES noted several
differences between mapping
methodology as to why the certified overlay did not correspond with the SES
mapping. The SES suggested
the following as options to address the differences:
Adopt the TSFM flood extents, given their more conservative
approach; or
Conduct further hydrologic review to resolve discrepancies between models,
particularly regarding flow estimates at key gauges.
Commission provided a post hearing direction letter on 20 February 2025. In
response to the letter the planning authority provided
a submission dated 7
April 2025 which submitted that Council would need to undertake further flood
studies to clarify extent of a
flood overlay for Ross and at this stage Council
had not planned for the expense in its budget.
the submission, the planning authority proposed to use the SES flood mapping for
all areas, except as specified in Longford.
response to the submission provided by the planning authority, no further
submissions were received about the application of the
overlay in Ross.
response to the Commission’s letter dated 22 May 2025, the planning
authority submitted it agreed with the extent of the
overlay provided by the SES
for Ross. In addition, the planning authority stated it considered the
application of the overlay H1-H6
inclusive, was consistent with consideration of
the Flood-Prone Hazard Areas Code.
Commission consideration
Commission notes that there is similarity between the planning authority and the
SES on the application of the overlay in Campbell
Commission notes the concerns raised by Mr Dean, however further notes that
whether the overlay was applied or not, the Code may
still apply, as the
planning authority has information by way of the flood study indicating the
potential risk of flooding to the
Commission also notes the SES mapping was released to the public in May 2025 And
that the Flood-Prone Areas Hazard Code may also
be considered by planning
authorities under clause C12.2.3 and C12.2.4 without an overlay being present.
Commission is persuaded by the planning authority that further work is required
to consider the extent of the overlay in Perth
and Ross. The Commission further
notes that the mapping provided by the SES is based on the most recent studies
and provides a more
contemporary view on potential flood risk.
Commission considers the SES mapping most appropriate for the application of the
overlay for Campbell Town, Perth and Ross.
Commission agrees with application of the overlay where appropriately identified
however, contemporary data is an essential basis
for a supporting flood report.
extent of the application of the Flood-Prone Areas Hazard Code underpinning the
planning authority mapping, is not supported by
the expert evidence provided by
the SES for Perth and Ross.
Commission notes that the SES publicly released the TSFM in March 2025 and
provided mapping, based on more recent data and analysis,
than is currently in
the possession of Council.
Commission acknowledges that the planning authority and TSFM mapping is mostly
consistent for Campbell Town. However, the Perth
and Ross mapping component of
the draft amendment by the planning authority is not consistent with the SES
data. In Perth, the extent
of the overlay is reliant on culvert upgrades which
have not occurred and are to be completed on an unspecified schedule.
Commission finds that relying on works which have not occurred introduces an
unnecessary element of risk to landowners and the
broader community.
Commission notes the extent of the overlay for Ross differs between Council and
mapping provided by the TSFM. As the planning
authority has not provided any
evidence to support differences between the TSFM and the overlay as shown in the
certified amendment,
the Commission is persuaded the SES mapping is more
Commission finds that the SES mapping should be applied to Campbell Town, Perth
and Ross as the planning authority has not provided
an appropriate alternative
expert study of the areas to support the differences between the certified
amendment and the more recent
and contemporary SES mapping.
apply the most relevant and up to date information in a flood prone area overlay
for Campbell Town, Perth and Ross, the Commission
is of the view that the draft
amendment requires significant expansion of the overlay that warrants a new and
separate process to
be undertaken.
Regional land use strategy
relevant regional land use strategy is the Northern Tasmania Regional Strategy
(regional strategy).
applicant’s report dated 6 March 2024 submitted that the amendment was
relevant to Goal 3. Specifically, G3.1 Promote and
protect the Region’s
unique environmental assets and values and G3.2 Establish planning policies to
support sustainable development,
address the impacts of climate change, improve
energy efficiency and reduce environmental emissions and pollutants.
Additionally,
the applicant submitted that the amendment was relevant to E7, specifically E7.3
Key Environmental Strategies, Policy
Natural Hazards.
Commission consideration
Commission finds that the draft amendment is, as far as is practicable,
consistent with the regional strategy.
State Policies
State Policy on the Protection of Agricultural
ERA supporting report dated 6 March 2024 submitted that the application of the
overlay would not have any effect on agricultural
use and would be beneficial in
consideration of land management by raising awareness of future flood
State Policy on Water Quality Management 1997
ERA supporting report dated 6 March 2024 submitted that improved transparency of
flood risk was consistent with and supportive
of the State Policy on Water
Quality Management (Water Quality Policy).
Environmental Protection Measures (NEPMs)
ERA supporting report dated 6 March 2024 submitted that there were no current
NEPMs considered to be relevant to the amendment.
consideration
Commission finds that the State Policy on the Protection of Agricultural Land,
the Water Quality Policy and the NEPMs are relevant
to the draft amendment.
Commission finds that the Protection of Agricultural Land Policy would be met as
agricultural land use will not be affected by
the draft amendment.
Commission also finds that the Water Quality Policy would be adequately
addressed through future development applications.
Commission finds the draft amendment is not inconsistent with any of the NEPMs
and that no other State Policies are relevant to
the draft amendment.
Schedule 1 Objectives
ERA supporting report dated 6 March 2024 submitted that the amendment furthers
the objectives of schedule 1 and provided assessment
against Part 1 (a) - (e)
and Part 2 (a) - (i) of the Schedule 1 Objectives.
Commission consideration
Commission finds that, on balance, the amendment does not further the objectives
set out in Schedule 1 of the Act.
extent of the application of the Flood-Prone Areas Hazard Code underpinning the
planning authority mapping is not supported by
the expert evidence provided by
the SES for Perth and Ross as evidenced in the Commission’s
Decision on draft amendment
Decision under 40N(1)(c) to reject the draft
Commission rejects the draft amendment under section 40N(1)(c) for the reasons
discussed above.
Commission, in accordance with section 40N(1)(c)(ii), directs the planning
authority to provide a substantially modified draft
amendment that applies the
Flood-Prone Areas Hazard Code overlay consistent with the SES mapping to
Campbell Town, Perth and Ross
as shown in figures 1-3 in Attachment A.
Attachment A
Apply the Flood-Prone Areas Hazard Code overlay to properties in Campbell
Town as shown in Figure 1 below:
: extent of the Flood-Prone Areas Hazard Code
overlay Campbell Town.
Apply the Flood-Prone Areas Hazard Code overlay to properties in Perth as
shown in Figure 2 below:
: extent of the Flood-Prone Areas Hazard Code
overlay Perth.
Apply the Flood-Prone Areas Hazard Code overlay to properties in Ross as
shown in Figure 3 below:
: extent of the Flood-Prone Areas Hazard Code
overlay Ross.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (37.4 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter