URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASCAT/2025/200.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:12:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Griffin [2025] TASCAT 200 (29 October 2025)
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Griffin [2025] TASCAT 200
Health Practitioners
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia (Applicant)
Wyatt Griffin
(Respondent)
Hearing Date:
On the papers
Hearing Location:
Date of Orders:
29 October 2025
Date Reasons Issued:
29 October 2025
R O Winter, Senior Member
Orders Made:
respondent is reprimanded pursuant to s 196(2)(a) of the National Law.
respondent’s registration as a registered nurse is cancelled pursuant to s
196(2)(e) of the National Law.
respondent is disqualified from applying for registration as a registered health
practitioner for a period of 12 years from the
date of these orders pursuant to
s 196(4)(a) of the National Law.
respondent is prohibited from providing any health service until the respondent
is re-registered pursuant to s 196(4)(b)(i) of
the National Law.
respondent is to pay the Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia’s
costs of and incidental to the application calculated
at 90% of the scale of
fees in Part 1 of Schedule 1 of the
Supreme Court Rules 2000
as at the date that
the relevant work was undertaken, to be agreed or taxed by a registrar of the
Catchwords:
Health Practitioner Regulation – Registered nurse –
Professional misconduct – Criminal conviction for rape –
Professional misconduct – Unlawful behaviour – Agreement between
parties as to conduct and sanction
Legislation Cited:
Health Practitioners Regulation National Law (Tasmania) Act 2010
3A, 5, 130, 193, 195, 196;
Criminal Code Act 1924
Tasmania, s
Community Protection (Offender Reporting) Act 2005
Practitioners Tribunal Act
Cases Cited:
Medical Board of Australia v Zhao
[2021] VCAT 1053
& Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
Nursing & Midwifery Board of
Australia v Little (Review and Regulation)
[2020] VCAT 687
Osteopathy Board of Australia v Ratliff
[2021] VCAT
Chinese Medical Board of Australia v Zhou
[2020] SACAT
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Panell
[2019] SACAT
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Farrow (Review and
Regulation)
[2022] VCAT 43
Medical Board of Australia and Singh
[2017] WASAT 33
Medical Board of Australia v Shannon Lovell Greene
[2025] TASCAT 10
[Redacted] [2025] TASCAT 101B.
Representation:
Applicant: Erin Shriner
Respondent:
Un-represented
Solicitors:
Applicant: Australian Government
Respondent: Self Represented
Publication Restriction:
Amended pursuant to
Section 119
Tasmanian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2020
Redactions made at paragraphs 27 and 32.
Dated the 31 October 2025.
Senior Member
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia (the Board) has referred a matter to
the Tribunal pursuant to s 193(1)(a)(i) and s
193(2)(a)(i) of the
Practitioner Regulation National Law
(the National Law) which was adopted as
a law of this state by the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(Tasmania) 2010.
referral seeks a determination in relation to the respondent’s conviction
for rape on 5 February 2024. The referral also
seeks a determination in relation
to the respondent’s non-compliance with s 130 of the National Law by not
providing the relevant
Board within 7 days, written notice of a relevant event,
being his charging with and conviction for rape. It is also alleged that
wilfully and recklessly declared that he did not have a criminal history when he
applied for renewal of his registration as a
registered nurse on 27 May
193(2)(a)(ii) of the National Law requires inter alia a National Board to refer
a matter about a registered health practitioner
to a responsible Tribunal if the
Board reasonably believes after investigation that the practitioner has behaved
in a way that constitutes
professional misconduct.
agreed between the parties
parties have provided to the Tribunal a statement of agreed facts and sanctions.
The respondent has admitted he behaved in the
conduct particularised in the
allegations made by the Board, and further that the particularised conduct
amounts to professional
misconduct within the meaning of paragraphs (a) and (c)
of the definition of “professional misconduct”, contained in
the National Law.
Approach when the parties have agreed
a situation such as this where the parties have reached an agreed position with
regard to admitted facts, characterisations of
conduct, and proposed sanctions,
the Tribunal is guided by the principles set out
Medical Board of Australia v
[2021] VCAT 1053
The law relating to a negotiated settlement, of the kind reflected in the
[agreed statement of facts], is well settled and summarised
in the following
principles:
(a) There is an important public policy document benefit in receiving, and if
appropriate, accepting agreed penalty submissions;
(b) A court or tribunal must have regard to any such agreement reached between
the parties and should not readily depart form an
agreed finding and sanction
where a negotiated settlement and proposed penalty are broadly speaking within
the permissible range,
having regard to all the circumstances; and
(c) It is highly desirable for a tribunal to accept the parties’ proposal,
provided it is persuaded the agreed outcome is accurate
and appropriate and does
not represent an arbitrary outcome, but reflects a carefully and extensively
negotiated outcome that has
proper regard to all relevant facts and
circumstances.
However, an agreement between the parties does not automatically determine the
outcome and can never supplant the Tribunal’s
duty to determine the
appropriate level of conduct alleged and the determinations to be imposed. The
Tribunal must reach appropriate
findings and determinations after examining all
the circumstances, including the ASOF, applying the statutory definitions and
regard to applicable standards of professional conduct.
is the duty of the Tribunal to determine the facts, the level of conduct
alleged, and the appropriate sanctions to be imposed in
respect of that conduct.
No agreement between a regulator and a professional person under review can
supplant that duty – see
Medical Board v McGrath
[2014] VCAT 641
Medical Board of Australia v Serguei Borisovich Kisselev
[2023] TASCAT 28
civil standard of proof as set out in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
(1938) 60 CLR 336
applies. The Tribunal must reach a comfortable level of
satisfaction in finding the matters proved on the balance of probability
consistent with the seriousness of the allegations and reflecting the serious
consequences of any finding.
Background and registration status
of the respondent
is agreed between the parties that the respondent first obtained provisional
registration as a registered nurse in January 2022.
was further agreed that from that time the respondent was required to act in
accordance with the Code of Conduct for Nurses Australia
(the Code).
Code sets out the standards of behaviour expected of nurses including that:
(1.2) Nurses practice honestly and ethically and should not engage in unlawful
behaviour as it may affect their practice and/or
damage the reputation of the
profession.
(1.2(c)) Nurses must not participate in unlawful behaviour and understand that
unlawful behaviour may be viewed as professional
misconduct and have
implications for their registration.
The allegations
(a) On 3 June 2022, the respondent committed the crime of rape against the
victim (Ms A), also a registered nurse.
(b) The respondent was arrested and charged with one count of rape in
contravention of section 185(1) of the
Criminal Code Act 1924
(the Criminal Code) on 10 August 2022.
(c) On 1 February 2024, the respondent was found guilty of one count of rape.
(d) A conviction was recorded and the respondent was sentenced on
5 February 2024 (backdated to 1 February 2024), to a term of imprisonment
of 4 years, with a non-parole period of 2 years.
(e) In accordance with the
Community Protection (Offender Reporting) Act
, the respondent’s name was placed on the Community Protection
Offender Register and he was ordered to comply with the reporting
obligations
under that Act for a period of 5 years from his release from prison. The
respondent was further ordered to pay a compensation
levy of $50.00 to the
Victims of Crime Compensation levy within 28 days of release from prison.
(a) At all material times, the respondent held registration as a registered
nurse, prior to his resignation from the hospital on
20 December 2023.
(b) Section 130(1) of the National Law provides:
A registered health practitioner or student must, within 7 days after becoming
aware that a relevant event has occurred in relation
to the practitioner or
student, give the National Board established for the practitioner’s or
student’s health profession
written notice of the event.
(c) A ‘relevant event’ is defined by s 130(3) of the National Law to
(i) Being charged, whether in a participating jurisdiction or elsewhere, with an
offence punishable by 12 months imprisonment or
more (s 130(3)(a)(i)).
(ii) Being convicted of or the subject of a finding of guilt for an offence,
whether in a participating jurisdiction or elsewhere,
punishable by imprisonment
(s 130(3)(a)(ii) of the National Law).
(d) The respondent breached s 130 of the National Law on 3 occasions.
(i) On 10 August 2022, the respondent was charged with one count of rape, an
indictable offence, in contravention of s 185(1) of
the Criminal Code. The
maximum penalty for rape in Tasmania is 21 years.
The respondent failed to notify the Board of a relevant event (either within
7 days, or at all).
AHPRA became aware of the criminal charge when they received a notification
on 24 January 2024.
(ii) The respondent falsely, wilfully or recklessly declared that he did not
have a criminal history when he applied for the renewal
of the registration as a
registered nurse with the Board on 27 May 2023.
In his 2023 renewal application the respondent answered ‘no’ to
the following questions:
During your preceding period of registration, has there been any change to
your criminal history that you have not declared to AHPRA?
Do you have any criminal history that you have not disclosed to AHPRA (other
than that disclosed in the question above)?
The respondent’s offending took place on 3 June 2022. The respondent
was charged on 10 August 2022.
(iii) On 5 February 2024, the respondent was convicted of 1 count of rape in the
Supreme Court of Tasmania having been found guilty
beyond reasonable doubt, by a
jury in the Supreme Court of Tasmania.
The respondent failed to notify the Board of a relevant event (either within
7 days, or at all).
The applicable law
5 of the National Law provides that professional misconduct of a registered
health practitioner includes:
(a) unprofessional conduct by the practitioner that amounts to conduct that is
substantially below the standard reasonably expected
of a registered health
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience; and
(b) conduct of the practitioner, whether occurring in connection with the
practice of the health practitioner’s profession
or not, that is
inconsistent with the practitioner being a fit and proper person to hold
registration in the profession.
stated by the Tribunal in
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v
[2024] VCAT 321
, when dealing with s 5 of the National
75. The definition is inclusive. A practitioner may engage in professional
misconduct which does not fit neatly into one or other
of those categories.
Further, the definition does not preclude more than one sub-paragraph applying
to particular misconduct.
76. Characterising proven conduct is an objective assessment which looks towards
the conduct in light of the applicable standards
and relevant definitions,
rather than matters arising later in time, such as remorse, insight, and
rehabilitation.
77. In relation to a finding under paragraphs (a) of the definition, the
Tribunal must assess the degree of seriousness of the practitioner’s
conduct having regard to the extent to which the conduct departs from the proper
standards of professional conduct of a registered
medical practitioner. The
gravity of professional misconduct is not measured by reference to the worst
cases, but by the extent to
which it departs from the proper standards.
78. In relation to a finding under paragraph (c) of the definition, the term
‘fit and proper person’ allows for a wide
range of matters to be
considered. As stated by the Tribunal in
Psychology Board of
Australia v Griersmith
[2019] VCAT 32
It includes not only whether a person has the necessary honesty, knowledge and
ability but also whether the person possesses sufficient
moral integrity and
rectitude of character to permit them to be accredited to the public as a person
to be entrusted with the sort
of work the relevant registration or licence
entails. The decision maker needs to make a value judgment and, in so doing,
an assessment of the seriousness or otherwise of the particular
conduct for evaluation. The same approach is to be applied to weighing
in favour of the person.
Categorisation of conduct
am comfortably satisfied on all of the evidence before the Tribunal, noting the
agreement as between the parties that the conduct
outlined in Ground 1
constitutes professional misconduct under paragraphs (a) and (c) of the
definition for professional misconduct
contained in s 5 of the National Law. I
am also satisfied that the respondent’s conduct outlined in Ground 2
constitutes professional
misconduct under paragraph (b) of the definition of
professional misconduct contained in s 5 of the National
Findings of fact
on my consideration of all the material before the Tribunal, I am comfortably
satisfied of the following facts in relation to
both Grounds 1 and 2 of the
Board’s allegations against the respondent.
3 June 2022, the respondent committed the crime of rape against the victim (Ms
A) who also a registered nurse.
respondent was arrested and charged with one count of rape in contravention of s
185(1) of the Criminal Code on 10 August 2022.
a trial, on 1 February 2024 the respondent was found guilty of one count of
5 February 2024 (backdated to 1 February 2024), the respondent was convicted of
rape and was sentenced to a term of imprisonment
of four years with a non-parole
period of two years.
accordance with the
Community Protection (Offender Reporting) Act 2005
the respondent’s name was placed on the Community Protection Offender
Register and he was ordered to comply with the reporting
obligations under that
Act for a period of five years from his release from prison. He was further
ordered to pay compensation levy
of $50.00 to the Victims of Crime Compensation
Levy within 28 days of his release from prison.
facts are supported by the memorandum of sentence as well as the sentencing
remarks of the Honourable Acting Justice Martin
both dated 5 February 2024.
his comments on passing sentence His Honour relevantly stated:
Mr Griffin, all crimes of rape are serious crimes. They are serious crimes of
violence. It needs to be clearly understood, particularly
clearly understood by
men throughout our community, that all crimes of rape are serious crimes of
violence. You said to the police,
more than once, I am not a rapist. I do not
know whether you believed that statement at that time. But it would not be
unusual for
men to believe that type of statement when the crime has not been
accompanied by physical violence restraining or overcoming resistance.
of attitude or belief among men must cease. It cannot cease soon enough. Even if
a victim submits and does not physically
resist nevertheless the crime of rape
is a crime of violence. The violence is inherent through the bodily violation
without consent.
As I said, every crime of rape is a serious crime of violence, but as with every
crime there is a scale of seriousness. It is not
a mitigating factor as such,
but it is a relevant factor in assessing where your crime sits on the scale of
seriousness that your
crime was not attended by physical violence causing injury
or physical violence gratuitously applied to overcome physical resistance.
as I have said, it was nevertheless a crime of violence.
In assessing the gravity of your crime, it must be borne in mind that Ms A
trusted you as a platonic friend and you took advantage
of that trust and you
abused your position of trust. In addition I am satisfied that you were not in
need of a debrief that night.
You had in mind pursuing sexual intercourse and
you kept that in mind notwithstanding that you became aware that another male
had been in the company of Ms A earlier that night. You gained entry
using the false pretence of needing a debrief, knowing that
Ms A trusted you and
would be sympathetic to your request. Once in the bedroom, when Ms A made it
clear that she did not want to
engage in any form of intimacy with you, you
quickly decided to push ahead, notwithstanding that you knew Ms A was not
consenting.
You callously disregarded Ms A's wishes and forced yourself upon
her. You violated her and you violated the sanctity and security
of her home and
bedroom. There are no mitigating circumstances accompanying the objective facts
of the crime.
For these reasons in my view, your crime is not at the lower end of the scale of
seriousness for crimes of rape. Vindication of the
victim, denunciation,
punishment and general deterrence are important factors. (my emphasis)
You are convicted. I impose a sentence of imprisonment for four years,
commencing on 1 February 2024. I direct that you be eligible
for parole after
you have served two years of that sentence and I make a reporting order under
the Community Protection Offender
Reporting Act that you report for a period of
five years in accordance with the Act, that is the period of five years
on your release.
relevant times, the respondent held registration as a registered nurse prior to
his resignation from employment at the Royal Hobart
Hospital on 20 December
respondent breached s 130 of the National Law on three occasions:
(i) On 10 August 2022, the respondent was charged with one count of rape, an
indictable offence, in contravention of s 185(1) of
the Criminal Code. The
maximum penalty for rape in Tasmania is 21 years.
The respondent failed to notify the Board of a relevant event (either within
7 days, or at all).
AHPRA became aware of the criminal charge when they received a notification
on 24 January 2024.
(ii) The respondent falsely, wilfully or recklessly declared that he did not
have a criminal history when he applied for the renewal
of the registration as a
registered nurse with the respondent on 27 May 2023.
In his 2023 renewal application the respondent answered ‘no’ to
the following questions:
During your preceding period of registration, has there been any change to
your criminal history that you have not declared to AHPRA?
Do you have any criminal history that you have not disclosed to AHPRA (other
than that disclosed in the question above)?
The respondent’s offending took place on 3 June 2022. The respondent
was charged on 10 August 2022.
(iii) On 5 February 2024, the respondent was convicted of 1 count of rape in the
Supreme Court of Tasmania having been found guilty
beyond reasonable doubt, by a
jury in the Supreme Court of Tasmania.
The respondent failed to notify the Board of a relevant event (either within
7 days, or at all).
Determinations
The applicable law
Tribunal has power to make determinations under s 196(2) of the
. Section 3A(1) of the National Law provides that, in determining any
regulatory action to take, the paramount considerations the
Tribunal must take
into account are “protection of the public”, and “public
confidence in the safety of the services
provided by registered health
practitioners and students”.
guiding principles are contained within s 3A(2)(b) which states that
restrictions on the practice of a health professional are
to be imposed under
the scheme “only if it is necessary to ensure health services are provided
safely and are of an appropriate
is clear that a Tribunal’s primary role is to protect the public rather
than to punish health practitioners who engage in
professional misconduct or
unprofessional conduct. In appropriate cases, the Tribunal is required to make
determinations which will
deter the individual health practitioner from engaging
in the same or like conduct (specific deterrence), and which also serve as
warning to other health practitioners (general
deterrence).
Determination as to sanction
was stated by Senior Member Jack in [Redacted] [2025] TASCAT 101B [31]:
The principles to be applied by the Tribunal in making determinations as to
sanctions were summarised in
Medical Board of Australia and Pharmacy Board of
Australia v Lee
[2019] VCAT 311
(a) the purpose of the imposition of determinations is to protect of the
(b) determinations are intended maintain proper ethical and professional
standards for the protection of the public and also for
the protection of the
profession in the sense of maintaining stature and integrity in the eyes of the
(c) determinations should in no way be punitive;
(d) the objectives of determinations can be achieved by specific deterrence,
that is, the deterrence of the person concerned from
further inappropriate
conduct, by general deterrence, that is, the deterrence of other practitioners
minded to conduct themselves
similarly, and by facilitation of rehabilitation on
the part of the practitioner;
(e) personal matters such as shame, personal ordeal, and financial difficulty
are of little relevance save insofar as they contribute
to the specific
deterrence of the practitioner;
(f) the likelihood of recidivism, or, put another way, an assessment of the
ongoing risk posed by the practitioner, should be central
to the imposition of a
determination;
(g) the degree to which the practitioner has acquired insight into his or her
conduct is relevant to the assessment of the continuing
risk posed by the
practitioner;
(h) insight can include as an understanding of the nature of the conduct, an
acceptance that the conduct was wrong, an appreciation
of why the practitioner
engaged in that conduct, empathy with the consequences, and /or a willingness to
take measures to identify
risk factors and to do that which is necessary to
avoid further transgressions; and
(i) any form of official censure is of consequence. It has been held that a
reprimand should not be considered a ‘slap over
the wrist’.
Applying the principles
accept the Board’s submissions that the respondent’s conducts as
found for Grounds 1 and 2 of the Board’s allegation
professional misconduct.
regard to Ground 1 this is so because:
(i) The conduct is plainly very serious; and
(ii) The conduct constitutes a substantial departure from the applicable code of
conduct and recognised professional standards as
alleged by the Board.
a reading of Acting Justice Marshall’s comment on passing sentence, the
respondent’s conduct basing Ground 1 was found
to be very serious,
premeditated and deliberate with his crime not being “at the lower end of
the scale of seriousness for
crimes of rape”.
the respondent has shown some insight with respect to his conduct, as evidenced
by him signing a Statement of Agreed Fact
and admitting the conduct and a
position on sanction, I find, as the Board has asserted that this action
reflects his finding of
guilt, conviction and sentence, and should only be given
limited weight when considering an appropriate sanction in these
proceedings.
the Board’s admissions that this is a matter where there is a need for
specific deterrence, I consider the words of
Senior Member Jack in [Redacted] to
be equally applicable in this matter where she stated at [32]:
The above principles are relevant in the present case where the respondent has
been punished for his conduct already by the Supreme
Court of Tasmania. The
emphasis before the Tribunal is now the protection of the public and the
maintenance of professional standards
and reputation of the nursing profession.
Although there will almost inevitably be a need for an element of specific
deterrence in
matters where professional misconduct has been found, in the
present case I think the issue of specific deterrence plays a more limited
than general deterrence.
Board’s submissions support a finding that there is a need for general
deterrence in the sanction imposed on the respondent.
the respondent’s position of trust and the responsibility as a nurse and
his responsibility to ensure the delivery of
safe and quality care, there is a
need for this sanction to serve as a reminder to registered health practitioners
that conduct of
this type is clearly unacceptable and to deter other
practitioners from engaging in similar conduct.
support this submission, the Board refers to
Nursing & Midwifery Board of
Australia v Little (Review and Regulation)
[2020] VCAT 687
General deterrence requires consideration of whether there is a need to signal
to other members of the professional that adverse
consequence will follow such
conduct and thereby deter them from the same conduct, in the interest of
maintaining professional standards
and public confidence in the profession. In
assessing the need for general deterrence, the Tribunal takes into account the
and gravity of the conduct and the potential consequences of others
engaging in similar conduct.
confirms that general deterrence is an important consideration in a proceeding
such as this.
respondent’s conduct as found relating to Ground 2 of the Board’s
allegations clearly indicate his omission to comply
with the requirements of the
National Law in notifying the applicant of relevant matters and his
falsification of answers to use
the applicant’s words, “strikes at
the heart of moral integrity and character requirements for a nurse with respect
their registration. The conduct calls into question the respondent’s
character”.
the Agreed Statement of Facts and Sanctions at [27] – Joint Position on
Sanction, the parties have invited the Tribunal to
make the following orders
pursuant to s 195, 196(2) and 196(4) of the National Law and these
(i) The respondent is reprimanded pursuant to s 196(2)(a) of the National Law.
(ii) The respondent’s registration as a registered nurse is cancelled
pursuant to s 196(2)(e) of the National Law.
(iii) The respondent is disqualified from applying for registration as a
registered health practitioner for a period of 12 years
from the date of these
orders pursuant to s 196(4)(a) of the National Law.
(iv) The respondent is prohibited from providing any health service until the
respondent is re-registered pursuant to s 196(4)(b)(i)
of the National Law.
(v) The respondent pay the Board’s costs to be taxed in default of
agreement pursuant to s 195 of the National Law.
the evidence I agree that a reprimand is appropriate. A reprimand is a formal
denunciation of a practitioner’s conduct. A
reprimand is a form of
official censure. It is a formal statement of denunciation of a
practitioner’s conduct which appears
on their registration record –
see for example
Medical Board of Australia v Adams
[2025] TASCAT 125
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Brealey
[2012] QCAT 323
Honey v Medical Practitioner Board of Victoria
[2007] VCAT 526.
regard to cancellation of registration, disqualification and prohibition, the
applicant has appropriately stated that whilst
each case is decided on its own
facts and reference to past sanctions is an imperfect guide, considerations of
sanctions imposed
in similar cases or cases involving analogous conduct can
assist in determining an appropriate sanction – see
Osteopathy Board of
Australia v Ratliff
[2021] VCAT 658
Chinese Medical Board of
Australia v Zhou
[2020] SACAT 23
Nursing and Midwifery Board
of Australia v Panell
[2019] SACAT 42
. The Board has also provided
an extensive list of what they assert to be similar cases.
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Farrow (Review and
Regulation)
[2022] VCAT 43
is cited by the applicant as being of particular
relevance, this being a case where a practitioner was convicted and found
responsible
for engaging in sexual behaviour directed towards a nursing
colleague and the sexual assault of a patient. Additionally, the practitioner
failed to report criminal charges and convictions to the regulator. In this case
the practitioner received a reprimand, registration
cancellation and orders were
made disqualifying him from reapplying for registration and prohibiting him from
providing a health
service for a period of 10 years.
agree with the Board’s submissions, given the seriousness of the
respondent’s conduct, that the Tribunal should send
a strong and clear
message to practitioners and the public that such serious conduct will not be
the clear seriousness of the respondent’s conduct, I agree that a
disqualification of the respondent from reapplying for
registration for a period
of 12 years from the date of this order is appropriate.
Board has also sought that the respondent be prohibited from providing, whether
as an employee, contractor, manager or volunteer
and whether directly or
indirectly, any health service until he is granted registration as a health
practitioner under the Nation
Tribunal has the power to make such an order, and I consider it appropriate to
do so in the circumstances, noting that this will
avoid the possibility of a
“back door” means of the respondent engaging in such work before his
period of disqualification
also considered the
State Administrative Tribunal of Western
Australia’s decision in Medical Board of Australia and Singh
, the circumstances of this case warrant a global approach to
sanction rather than the imposition of a separate sanction for each
unprofessional act as the facts in this case are so inextricably woven as to
make it difficult to meet a clear standard of prescription.
Health Practitioners Tribunal Act
and s 195 of the
provides a power to award costs.
the discretion expressed in the National Law as to costs is unfettered, there is
no starting point for costs to follow the
event and neither is there a starting
point that the parties will bear their own costs.
the agreed statement of facts and sanctions the Board and the respondent have
reached an agreement that the respondent will pay
the Board’s costs to be
taxed but they have not referenced a scale of costs.
Medical Board of
Australia v Shannon Lovell Greene
[2025] TASCAT 10
Deputy President Grueber stated at [59]:
... It is common for the Tribunal to award costs in health practitioner matters
at 90 per cent of the Supreme Court Scale. Given
the issues and conduct of this
matter I am satisfied that that is appropriate in this case.
see no reason to depart from the use of the scale in this matter.
is clear that in this matter, the respondent has acquiesced to the Board’s
position and has agreed to pay the Board’s
the material before me I do not consider it appropriate to upset this aspect of
the agreement between the parties.
make the following orders:
respondent is reprimanded pursuant to s 196(2)(a) of the National Law.
respondent’s registration as a registered nurse is cancelled pursuant to s
196(2)(e) of the National Law.
respondent is disqualified from applying for registration as a registered health
practitioner for a period of 12 years from the
date of these orders pursuant to
s 196(4)(a) of the National Law.
respondent is prohibited from providing any health service until the respondent
is re-registered pursuant to s 196(4)(b)(i) of
the National Law.
respondent is to pay the Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia’s
costs of and incidental to the application calculated
at 90% of the scale of
fees in Part 1 of Schedule 1 of the
Supreme Court Rules 2000
as at the date that
the relevant work was undertaken, to be agreed or taxed by a registrar of the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.87 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter