URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASPComm/2025/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:19:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tasmanian Planning Scheme - West Tamar amendment AMD03-24 [2025] TASPComm 22 (17 October 2025)
Tasmanian Planning Scheme - West Tamar
AMD03-24 - to apply the Low Density Residential Zone and
Residential Supply and Density Specific Area Plan to part of the land at
Upper McEwans Road, Legana.
PA-2024-132 - a three lot subdivision of the land at 11 Upper
McEwans Road, Legana.
Planning authority
West Tamar Council
Veris Australia Pty Ltd
Date of decision
17 October 2025
The draft amendment is rejected under section
40N(1)(c) and the planning authority is directed to submit to the Commission a
draft amendment under
section 40N(1)(c)(i)
Planning and Approvals Act 1993
as set out in Annexure A.
The permit is refused under
section 42B(1)(d)
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
Paul West Kevin Hazell
Delegate (Chair) Delegate
REASONS FOR DECISION
draft amendment proposes to apply the Low Density Residential Zone and the
Residential Supply and Density Specific Area Plan (the SAP) to
land at 11 Upper McEwans Road, Legana (folio of the Register 174506/1).
The permit provides for a three lot subdivision to
the land at 11 Upper McEwans Road, Legana.
Site information
The subject site is part of a split-zoned parcel. The
entire lot is 1.658ha, with approximately 1,000m
included in the Low
Density Residential Zone and the remainder of the lot is included in the
Agriculture Zone. The SAP only applies
to the portion of the lot zoned Low
Density Residential.
The part of the lot subject to this draft amendment (the subject site) is
entirely contained within the Agriculture Zone. The land
is subject to the
Bushfire-Prone Areas Code and some of the land is subject to the Landslip Hazard
The subject site contains an existing dwelling and garden, and this land is
listed as Urban Areas and the rest of the land is listed
as Agricultural land in
the TasVeg 4.0 mapping. The land is listed as unconstrained in the Land
Potentially Suitable for Agriculture
layer in the LISTmap.
There is no vegetation visible in the imagery and no native grasses
identified in the TasVeg mapping.
Land to the north and east is zoned Low Density Residential and included in
the SAP. Land to the south and west is zoned Agriculture.
Issues raised in representations
Three representations were received during the
exhibition period of the draft amendment and related permit. The representators
the following:
easement considerations
Flooding/existing
Water runoff
Road issues
Ad-hoc zone
application
conflict/impact on new owners
Council strategy
inconsistency
The draft amendment and related permit were referred to
TasWater under
sections 56S
Water and Sewerage Industry Act
In response TasWater advised they had no objection to the draft amendment and
provided a submission to planning authority notice (SPAN)
providing conditions
to be included with any permit. TasWater stated they did not wish to attend a
These issues and any additional matters raised by representors at the hearing
are discussed as relevant below.
Planning authority’s response to the
representations
The planning authority considered the representations
and recommended that no modifications to the draft amendment were required,
the following modifications were required to the related permit:
condition 2 to read as follows:
AMENDED PLANS REQUIRED
to works commencing, amended plans must be submitted and approved by
Council’s Director Planning and Development. When
approved, these plans
will form part of the permit.
The Amended Plans must show:
(a) A 3.0m wide drainage easement, benefitting West Tamar Council, along the
north-western boundary of lots 1-3, which connects
to Upper McEwans Road in lot
1 via the perimeter of the property described in Certificate of Title Volume
165613 Folio 2.
condition 19 to read as follows:
Final Plan of Subdivision for stage 1 must include a 3.0m wide drainage easement
along the northwestern site boundary, in favour
of West Tamar Council.
drainage easement is to connect to Upper McEwans Road in lot 1 via the perimeter
of the property described in Certificate of Title
Volume 165613 Folio
Date and place of hearing
The hearing was held at Windsor Community Centre,1
Windsor Drive, Riverside on
26 August 2025.
Appearances at the hearing
Planning authority: James Stewart, Planning
Consultant, Nova Land Consulting
Krstyna Ennis, Team Leader Planning, West Tamar Council
Eric Smith, Senior Statutory Planner, West Tamar Council
Applicant: Allan Brooks, PDA Surveyors, Engineers & Planners
Leigh and Jozie De Deuge, landowners
Jason Lynch, Senior Agricultural Consultant, Pinion Advisory
Representors:
Matthias Utzinger, Utzinger Wines
Harry Galea, Utzinger Wines
David Butler, Landowner
Christina Holmdahl, Mayor, West Tamar Council
A site visit was undertaken on 25 August 2025.
Consideration of the draft amendment
Statutory Requirements
section 40M
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
the Commission is required to consider the draft amendment to the Tasmanian
Planning Scheme - West Tamar and the representations,
statements and
recommendations contained in the planning authority’s section 40K report,
any information obtained at a hearing,
and any technical matters.
hearing was convened to assist the Commission consider the issues in the
representations.
Commission must also consider whether the draft amendment meets the LPS criteria
as set out under
section 34(2)
of the Act:
(a) contains all the provisions that the SPPs specify must be contained in an
(b) is in accordance with
(c) furthers the objectives set out in Schedule 1; and
(d) is consistent with each State policy; and
(da) satisfies the relevant criteria in relation to the TPPs; and
(e) as far as practicable, is consistent with the regional land use strategy, if
any, for the regional area in which is situated
the land to which the relevant
planning instrument relates; and
(f) has regard to the strategic plan, prepared under
Government Act 1993
, that applies in relation to the land to which the
relevant planning instrument relates; and
(g) as far as practicable, is consistent with and co-ordinated with any LPSs
that apply to municipal areas that are adjacent to the
municipal area to which
the relevant planning instrument relates; and
(h) has regard to the safety requirements set out in the standards prescribed
Gas Safety Act 2019
relevant, these matters are discussed in the sections below.
Suitability of the Zone and application of the Specific Area
applicant’s report dated April 2024 submitted that application of the Low
Density Residential Zone to the subject site would
be a logical extension to the
existing zone. The report submitted that the land is unsuitable for higher
density residential use
as it is restricted by topographical constraints.
planning authority in its supporting report dated 8 November 2024 submitted that
the application of the Low Density Residential
Zone to the subject site is
consistent with LDRZ 1 (a) and (b) and LDRZ 4 of the section 8A Guidelines. It
also noted that nearby
land zoned Low Density Residential is subject to the SAP,
which enforces a minimum lot size of 5,000m². It broadly submitted
extending the SAP to the subject site is consistent with the existing zoning,
while managing infrastructure and environmental
(landslip and bushfire)
constraints.
planning authority’s section 40K report did not emphasize matters relevant
to the protection of agricultural land on and/or
around the land.
the hearing, the planning authority submitted that the draft amendment is best
considered an anomaly. The planning authority advised
it was not promoting low
density residential development in this locality beyond the subject
Commission consideration
draft amendment seeks to rezone the subject site for residential purposes
through the Low Density Residential Zone, the purpose
for which is to provide
for residential use and development. The planning authority and proponent
focused justification on the presence
of other low density residential
development in the locality, including immediately adjoining the subject site,
and the current lot
size not being sufficient for productive agricultural uses.
The regional land use strategy emphasis for the locality to transition
development, a policy no longer supported by the planning authority, was also
advanced as a justification for the Low Density
Residential Zone being
Commission accepts the subject site is not of a size that, on its own, could be
efficiently used for productive agriculture use.
It does not however accept lot
size is the primary determinant of an acceptable loss of land within the
Agriculture Zone as lot size
is not a consideration under the
State Policy on
the Protection of Agricultural Land 2009
(PAL Policy).
It is common,
including in this locality, for multiple lots to be farmed as a single
agricultural enterprise. It is self-evident by
existing adjoining and nearby
uses that the land (including the soil and access to water) is suitable for
productive agricultural
Commission notes the planning authority submitted at the hearing that
amendment sought to enable a rural living outcome, where
dwellings and agriculture are in close proximity to each other. The Commission
considers this to be a somewhat different justification than pursued in the
documentation for the draft amendment but on balance
finds this logic more
reasonable.
Commission has considered the submitted evidence, along with the local context
and circumstances of the case. Relevant factors
include the subject site’s
lot size, which is consistent with the Rural Living Zone, and the presence of
existing dwellings
in reasonable proximity on three sides (though only partially
on the eastern boundary). It is also significant that the adjoining
land to the
north is zoned Low Density Residential and is subject to the SAP and has been
subdivided to include an additional dwelling
at the rear. This has resulted in a
zoning pattern that has enabled residential use and development to be
established and extend
into the surrounding Agriculture Zone on all
boundaries.
Considering
this local context, the Commission is not satisfied that it is appropriate for
the subject site to be wholly contained
within the Low Density Residential Zone
with the SAP, primarily because this would enable two additional lots suitable
for residential
development to be created. This housing density is not suitable
for the subject site considering the land use and development and
zoning context
of surrounding land.
Commission understands the proposed SAP is a mechanism to manage infrastructure
constraints (for already created low density residential
zoned lots). It is not
a strong basis for entirely new situations. Amendments should seek to use the
State Planning Provisions (SPPs)
where possible to give effect to anticipated
outcomes in the Tasmanian Planning Scheme.
Commission is not satisfied that the minimum lot size identified in the SAP is a
sound basis to determine the acceptable density
of housing on the subject site
when recognising the intent is to enable dwellings and agricultural uses close
to each other.
Commission is satisfied that the subject site is suitable for rural living
development, but with a limit to the increased lot
yield of only one additional
lot rather than the two proposed lots in the amendment through the Low Density
Residential Zone and
outcome appropriately considers the infrastructure constraints on the land, land
capability and the potential for land use conflict
between residential and
agricultural uses, while facilitating one additional dwelling. The Commission
considers this outcome would
meet the LPS criteria. This finding is discussed
further below in the decision.
Regional land use strategy
relevant regional strategy is the Northern Tasmanian Regional Strategy (regional
its supporting report dated 8 November 2024 the planning authority submitted the
land is within an Urban Growth Corridor in the
regional strategy. Although the
inclusion of the subject site within the map in the regional strategy is
identified as indicative
only, the planning authority submitted the existing
land use is more consistent with surrounding rural residential use.
the report dated April 2024, the applicant submitted that the draft amendment
was consistent with the regional strategy as it was
a logical expansion of a
residential area within a growth corridor.
the hearing, the planning authority advised that urban development within the
growth corridor indicated in the regional strategy
would not be pursued in
preference to alternative growth areas in Legana. The planning authority
submitted that it envisaged the
emphasis on urban growth in the locality would
not feature in future iterations of the regional strategy.
planning authority emphasised that the subject site is best considered as a form
of rural living development in that it is too
small for agriculture and
therefore supported an alternative use as reasonable.
Commission consideration
Commission is not persuaded that the land is ‘lost’ to agriculture
because of the regional strategy’s policy
on urban development. The
planning authority advised that this policy is not being pursued. While the
previously envisaged loss of
agricultural land to urban development may have
been reasonably contemplated in the regional strategy, translating a policy on
residential development to justify low density residential development
does not automatically flow.
Commission is not satisfied that the inclusion within a growth corridor in the
regional strategy provides justification for the
subject site to be wholly
rezoned from Agriculture Zone to the Low Density Residential Zone. The
substitution of a policy seeking
a locality wide urban transformation, that the
planning authority is no longer pursuing, as justification to rezone a part of a
parcel of land is not accepted.
regional strategy at D2.2 seeks to protect rural land by recognising the
importance of agricultural land, prevent inappropriate
fragmentation of rural
land, and protect farming operations from conflict with rural living residents.
The regional strategy at D.2.2.2
recognises the need for rural residential areas
to balance a range of matters, including the impact on the agricultural values
surrounding land.
Commission finds that, on balance, the draft amendment is not, as far as
practicable, consistent with the regional strategy.
State Policies
State Policy on the Protection of
Agricultural Land 2009
applicant report dated April 2024 included an agricultural report from Walker Ag
Consultancy. The applicant submitted that based
on the contents of the report
that agricultural use on the land was highly unlikely given the constraints and
the impact from the
existing surrounding agricultural uses to any proposed
residential use on the land was considered low.
its supporting report dated 8 November 2024 the planning authority submitted:
‘The size of the property is 1.66ha, which is not considered suitable for
agricultural use. It has been indicated that considerable
inputs would be
required on the land in order to realise any minimum commercial value. The site
is in close proximity to existing
residential areas, with the rear of the
property adjoining rocky, steep portions of land that are not suitable for
agricultural production.
The agricultural report indicates the potential for spray drift from adjoining
properties is offset as a result of historic weather
data. The adjoining
operator is classified as an ‘organic entity’, which provides strict
guidelines in relation to spray
activities. The activities used for spraying
purposes (as a result of their organic classification) are considered to have a
softer impact on the surrounding environment than non-organic operators.
It is considered that conversion of the site to allow residential use and
development, is consistent with the relevant principles
the section 40K report the planning authority addressed concerns raised about
agricultural use with the following:
‘In response to representations received, Council engaged Nicholbrook
Horticultural Consultants to undertake a peer review
of the Walker Ag report.
The peer review ultimately concluded that the rezoning and subdivision of land
was appropriate and that
the site could not be used for a viable agricultural
activity. The report stated there was insufficient scale for an agricultural
use, other than for a “hobby” activity. The peer review considered
the PAL policy as part of its analysis when undertaking
the review. ‘
State Coastal Policy 1996
applicant report dated April 2024 submitted that:
‘The subject land has limited ecological value. No adverse impacts are
expected on the air, adjacent land and water resources,
including the Tamar
River and the subject land is not identified to contain historical or aboriginal
heritage values.’
its supporting report dated 8 November 2024 the planning authority submitted:
‘The amendment is considered to not conflict with or interfere with
natural or cultural values of the coastal zone, having
- The subject site has not been identified as containing ecological values;
- There are no expected adverse impacts on air, adjacent land, and water
resources, including the Tamar River;
- The land contains an existing dwelling, and is located within an existing
residential settlement;
- The rezoning is not classified as ribbon development or an isolated node of
residential development; and
- The site is connected to existing services, including stormwater. The
stormwater system is maintained by West Tamar Council as
the stormwater
planning authority concluded that the draft amendment is therefore assessed as
being consistent with the State Coastal Policy.
State Policy on
Water Quality Management 1997
applicant report dated April 2024
‘The subject land has access to reticulated water and stormwater services.
A wastewater report demonstrates that all proposed
lots are capable of
accommodating on-site wastewater systems. The existing provisions within the
Tasmanian Planning Scheme –
West Tamar are applicable to the site and
therefore will ensure that any existing or future use or development on the site
is consistent
with this policy.’
its supporting report dated 8 November 2024 the planning authority submitted:
‘The subject land has access to reticulated water and stormwater
infrastructure. An onsite wastewater assessment by Tasman
Geotechnics has been
provided which demonstrates that given the size of the proposed lots, there is
adequate area available on each
lot for proposed wastewater disposal.’
National Environment and Protection Measures
applicant report dated April 2024 submitted that the draft amendment was
considered consistent with the
National Environment and Protection Measures
(NEPMs) because it was not likely to adversely impact any environmental
matters specified in the policy.
its supporting report dated 8 November 2024 the planning authority submitted
that the draft amendment does not relate to any issues
covered under the
Commission consideration
Commission considers that the size of the subject site does adversely impact
available options for establishing suitable agricultural
uses on the land,
recognising that the land would need to be used in conjunction with other
adjoining and/or surrounding agricultural
land. However, there are no planning
mechanisms that require this to occur. The practical loss of the land for
productive agricultural
uses likely arose in previous planning decisions which
created the current lot size and the legacy of the existing zoning pattern.
Commission broadly accepts the agricultural reports prepared and accepts that in
pursuing the amendment, the land would likely
no longer be available for
agricultural uses. However, the Commission notes that lot size is not a
consideration under the PAL Policy.
It is common, including in this locality,
for multiple lots to be farmed as a single agricultural enterprise. It is
self-evident
by existing adjoining and nearby uses that the land (including the
soil and access to water) is suitable for productive agricultural
relation to all other State Policies, the Commission accepts
the planning authority’s and applicant’s
submissions and finds the draft amendment is generally consistent with those
Commission finds that the draft amendment is not inconsistent with requirements
Schedule 1 Objectives of the Act
planning authority in its supporting report dated 8 November 2024 submitted that
the draft amendment furthers the Objectives of
the Resource Management and
Planning System.
applicant’s report dated April 2024 addressed each of the Objectives set
out in Parts 1 and 2 of Schedule 1 of the Act individually
and concluded that
the draft amendment was consistent.
Commission consideration
Commission finds that, on balance, the draft amendment does not further the
Schedule 1 Objectives of the Act. The subject site
is not considered to be
suitable for application of the Low Density Residential Zone and the SAP due
the lack of
protections offered in the Low Density Residential Zone and the SAP, which would
benefit adjoining agricultural uses in
managing potential land use
the lot density
allowed by the Low Density Residential Zone and SAP is too high in the context
of the existing lot layout and title
boundaries, and the surrounding and
existing residential land use and development pattern and character of the area,
and the identified
infrastructure and environmental (landslip and bushfire)
constraints.
Modifications required to the draft
section 40M of the Act the Commission must consider whether modifications to a
draft amendment of an LPS ought to be made.
Commission considers the following:
Zone selection
should give weight to the protection of agricultural land. Adjoining
agricultural uses should benefit from the protections
provided by the Rural
Living Zone which are not present in the Low Density Residential Zone or the SAP
proposed in the draft amendment.
The purpose of
the Rural Living Zone is to provide for residential use or development in a
rural setting, a purpose which is applicable
to the locality. The Rural Living
Zone is already used extensively in the locality.
Enabling one
additional dwelling on the subject land would be acceptable without unduly
intensifying the land for residential purposes.
dwelling to be sited with generous setbacks to adjoining agricultural land would
be appropriate to enhance the protection
of adjoining agricultural uses.
site specific qualification (SSQ) would be necessary to enable an additional
residential lot as the minimum lot size specified in
the Rural Living Zone would
prohibit subdivision to create two lots (the lowest minimum lot size is Rural
Living Zone A - 1ha). The
intent of the SSQ would be to adjust the minimum lot
yield possible in this zone for the subject site, to enable subdivision to
one additional lot, while maintaining the Rural Living Zone protections
for adjoining agricultural uses and managing development.
Rural Living Zone A with a SSQ enabling a minimum lot size of 0.6ha would
provide the desired planning outcome for the subject
Commission considers that the Rural Living Zone provides the best protection for
adjoining agricultural. This planning outcome
would emphasise Principle 5 of the
PAL Policy which suggests that residential use of agricultural land is
consistent with the policy
where it does not unreasonably convert agricultural
land and does not confine or restrain agricultural use in the vicinity of the
that land. It would also give effect to Principle 1 which advises that
agricultural land is a valuable resource and its use for the
sustainable
development of agriculture should not be unreasonably confined or restrained by
non-agricultural use or development.
section 32(4) of the Act, an LPS may only include a SAP or a SSQ if:
(a) a use or development to which the provision relates is of significant
social, economic or environmental benefit to the State,
a region or a municipal
(b) the area of land has particular environmental, economic, social or spatial
qualities that require provisions, that are unique
to the area of land, to apply
to the land in substitution for, or in addition to, or modification of, the
provisions of the SPPs.
Commission considers that section 32(4)(b) is applicable, in that the land has
particular qualities that are unique to the area
of land which warrant modifying
provisions of the SPPs. The particular spatial qualities are:
Economic, having
regard to the need to protect agricultural land and productive agricultural uses
on adjoining and nearby land.
Spatial, in
recognising the locality has agriculture uses and housing in proximity to each
because of legacy settlement patterns which
has resulted in the subject site
having dwellings on three sides whilst concurrently also adjoining agricultural
uses that are viable,
productive and expanding.
Spatial, to
enable only one addition dwelling with generous setbacks to agricultural uses
that would concurrently leave an area of
land to the rear which could be used in
conjunction with adjoining agricultural uses, therefore not being lost entirely
potential for agricultural uses.
unique spatial qualities require provisions unique to the subject site that are
in addition to the provisions of the Rural Living
Zone, to enable land use
conflicts to be managed and to regulate the intensity of residential uses on the
subject site.
can provide unique provisions specific to the land to achieve the following:
Substitute the
1ha minimum lot size in the Rural Living Zone A for a 0.6ha minimum lot size, to
enable a two lot subdivision on the
subject land.
Substitute the
Acceptable Solution (A4) for buildings for a sensitive use from 200m to 30m
(setback to the south) and 80m (setback
to the west) to enable a second dwelling
with generous setbacks to adjoining land in the Agricultural Zone.
representation identified a concern that stormwater flows to the properties to
the east of Upper McEwans Road may increase and impact
on overland flows if
additional development occurred on the subject site. At the hearing, it was
agreed by all parties that development
on the subject site should result
in no net increase in flows to properties east of Upper McEwans Road.
The Commission seeks to give effect to this outcome via an additional
Provides that
there be no net increase in stormwater flows to properties to the east of Upper
McEwans Road.
Commission considers that the SSQs discussed above for the site are consistent
with section 32(4)(b) of the Act.
Decision on draft amendment
draft amendment is rejected under section 40N(1)(c) of the Act for the reasons
discussed above.
Commission, in accordance with section 40N(1)(c)(i), directs the planning
authority to provide a substitute draft amendment that
applies the Rural Living
Zone A to the subject site, remove the SAP applying to part of the site and
insert three new SSQs to apply
to the site that provides for one additional lot,
introduces reduced setbacks and prohibits any increase in stormwater flows to
properties to the east of Upper McEwans Road, as outlined in Annexure
A within 28 days of receipt of this decision.
Consideration of the permit
section 40T(1) of the Act , a person who requests a planning authority under
section 37 to amend an LPS may also:
(a) make an application to the planning authority
for a permit, which permit could not be issued unless the LPS were amended as
(b) request the planning authority to consider
the request to amend the LPS and the application for a permit at the same time.
section 42A of the Act, the Commission must consider the permit and, under
section 42B, review the planning authority’s
decision as reported under
section 42.
the hearing, the drafting of the planning permit conditions was
Decision on permit
its consideration of the permit under section 42A of the Act, the Commission is
required to review the planning authority’s
decision as reported under
section 42B.
proposal includes an application for permit for a 3 lot subdivision on the land
at 11 Upper McEwans Road, Legana.
such the development application must be considered against the applicable
standards in the Agriculture Zone and the applicable
codes in the SPPs.
3 lot subdivision of the land does not meet the provisions in clause 21.5
Development Standards for Subdivision in the Agriculture
permit application relies on the approval of the draft amendment. As the draft
amendment is rejected, the permit is refused under
section 42B(1)(d) of the
Attachments
Annexure A - Substitute draft amendment
Substitute draft amendment AMD03-24 to the Tasmanian
Planning Scheme - West Tamar.
the Rural Living Zone A to the whole title at 11 Upper McEwans Road, Legana
folio of the Register 174506/1 as shown below:
the WTA-S3.0
Residential Supply and Density Specific Area Plan from a
portion of the land at 11 Upper McEwans Road, Legana, as shown
the planning scheme ordinance to insert site specific qualifications WTA-11.2,
WTA 11.3 and WTA 11.4 as
Reference Number
Site reference
Folio of the Register
Description (modification, substitution or addition)
Relevant Clause in State Planning Provisions
11 Upper McEwans Road, Legana
A substitution for this clause is:
Buildings for a sensitive
use must be separated from an Agriculture Zone or Rural Zone a minimum distance
southern boundary where it adjoins an Agriculture Zone, and
western boundary where it adjoins an Agriculture Zone.
Rural Living Zone - clause 11.4.2 A4 Building height, setback and
11 Upper McEwans Road, Legana
A substitution to this clause is:
Rural Living Zone A at 11 Upper
McEwans Road, Legana – 0.6ha.
Table 11.1 Rural Living Zone minimum lot sizes
11 Upper McEwans Road, Legana
An addition to this clause is:
Each lot, or lot proposed on a
plan of subdivision, excluding for public open space, a riparian or littoral
reserve or Utilities,
must be capable of connecting to a public stormwater
system and must not result in a net increase of stormwater flows to properties
to the north of Upper McEwans Road.
No Performance Criterion.
Rural Living Zone – clause 11.5.3 Services
the planning scheme maps to insert a site specific qualification overlay with
annotation WTA-11.2, WTA 11.3 and WTA 11.4 on
folio of the Register 174506/1 as
shown below:
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (17.6 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter