URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFC/2024/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:14:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Piscioneri v Whitehouse, Piscioneri and Gates [2024] TASFC 4 (15 August 2024)
[2024] TASFC 4
: SUPREME COURT OF
Piscioneri v Whitehouse, Piscioneri and
[2024] TASFC 4
: PISCIONERI, Gabriella
WHITEHOUSE. David Milne
PISCIONERI, Matthew
GATES, Genevieve Maria
APPEALED FROM:
v Whitehouse
[2024] TASSC 2
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Estcourt J, Pearce J, Porter AJ
Professions and Trades – Lawyers – Duties and liabilities –
Duties to court – Generally – Honesty and
candour – Whether
solicitors should be restrained from acting further in litigation –
Testamentary capacity of testator
client in issue.
Kallinicos v Hunt
[2005] NSWSC 1181
64 NSWLR 561
, referred to.
Aust Dig Professions and
REPRESENTATION
: M Flanagan, L
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Murdoch Clarke
[2024] TASFC 4
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 4/2024
File No: 206/2024
GABARIELLA JEAN PISCIONERI v DAVID MILNE
WHITEHOUSE,
MATTHEW DOMINIC PISCIONERI and GENEVIEVE MARIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
15 August 2024
of the Court:
Appeal dismissed.
Serial No 4/2024
File No 206/2024
GABARIELLA JEAN PISCIONERI v DAVID MILNE
WHITEHOUSE,
MATTHEW DOMINIC PISCIONERI and GENEVIEVE MARIA
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
15 August 2024
agree with Pearce J.
GABRIELLA JEAN PISCIONERI v DAVID MILNE WHITEHOUSE,
MATTHEW DOMINIC PISCIONERI and GENEVIEVE MARIA GATES
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
15 August 2024
appellant, who is plaintiff in the action, applied for an order restraining the
legal firm Murdoch Clarke from continuing to
act for the respondents in a
contentious probate action. Blow CJ dismissed the application:
Piscioneri v
[2024] TASSC 2.
This is an appeal from his Honour's order.
the following reasons, I would dismiss the appeal.
The background
to the application
proceedings concern the estate of the appellant's mother, Marie Theresa
Piscioneri who died on 17 June 2021. In the primary judge's
reasons he referred
to the late Mrs Piscioneri as the testator, and so I will refer to her in the
same way. She had six children.
She left a will dated 8 May 2019 (the 2019 will)
which was prepared by the third respondent, David Whitehouse. In the will the
appointed Mr Whitehouse and two of her children, Matthew Piscioneri and
Genevieve Gates, as executors and trustees. The executors
are the defendants in
the action in that capacity. Mr Whitehouse, when he drafted the 2019 will, was a
partner in Murdoch Clarke.
The will was witnessed by a Mr and Mrs Baker. They
were neighbours of the testator and had no connection to Murdoch Clarke. By the
will the testator revoked all prior wills and testamentary dispositions, forgave
all debts owed by her children, gave $10,000 to
each of her grandchildren and
left her residuary estate to her trustees upon trust for her six children in
equal shares, with provision
for a substitional gift if any of those children
did not survive her.
respondents applied to the Supreme Court of Tasmania for a grant of probate in
common form of the 2019 will. On 6 December 2021
the appellant commenced an
action opposing the grant. In her statement of claim she pleaded that the 2019
will was invalid as a result
of lack of testamentary capacity, absence of
knowledge and approval of the contents of the will, undue influence, and breach
agreement between the testator and her late husband as to mutual wills.
defendants, in a defence and counterclaim, sought to propound the 2019 will or,
in the alternative, a will dated 6 April 2018
(the 2018 will) and codicils
thereto dated 10 and 30 September 2018. The 2018 will was also prepared by Mr
Whitehouse. He witnessed
that will with a legal secretary employed by Murdoch
Clarke, Lynette Ellis. On 10 September 2018 the testator executed two versions
of a hand written codicil in virtually identical terms, leaving a legacy of
$10,000 to each of her grandchildren. On 30 September
2018 she signed another
codicil to the same effect. The codicil of 30 September 2018 was prepared by Mr
Whitehouse to overcome any
uncertainty about the validity of the handwritten
codicils. All of the codicils were witnessed by Mr and Mrs Baker.
an amended defence to counterclaim, the appellant disputed the validity of the
2018 will and codicils, pleading lack of testamentary
capacity, unsoundness of
mind, ignorance of the contents of the 2018 will and undue
The grounds of the application
interlocutory application filed 8 August 2023 the appellant applied for an order
"that the legal firm Murdoch Clarke is disqualified
from acting for the
defendants". The application included 17 paragraphs of "Grounds". In those
grounds, and in her oral submissions
to the primary judge, the appellant
advanced two principal contentions. The first was that Murdoch Clarke should be
restrained from
continuing to act for the respondents because Mr Whitehouse and
other employees of the firm may be witnesses in the action, and because
claimed conflicts of interest and duty. The substance of the second contention
advanced by the appellant to the primary
judge was that Murdoch Clarke had,
after the action was commenced, breached the duties of a solicitor to the Court
to conduct the
litigation efficiently and effectively and with honesty and
candour such that the "proper administration of justice" required that
should be prevented from continuing to act for the respondents.
contention was accepted by the primary judge. His Honour's reasons are most
conveniently considered when addressing the appellant's
The nature of the appeal
decision whether to restrain Murdoch Clarke from acting for the respondents in
the action involved the exercise of judicial discretion.
The principles upon
which a court will interfere with the exercise of the discretion are those
referred to in
(1936) 55 CLR 499
at 504-505. The
appellant must demonstrate that the primary judge acted on a material error of
fact or law, or erred by reaching
a conclusion which was unreasonable or unjust.
In addition, the
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act
Thus, this Court is not to reverse or vary his Honour's decision unless
satisfied that he declined or failed to exercise
the discretion, proceeded on a
wrong principle or otherwise contrary to law, or on irrelevant or insufficient
materials, or misapprehended
the facts or failed to consider a material fact, or
the adjudication is founded wholly or in part on an erroneous finding of fact
an erroneous determination in point of
material before the primary judge and this Court
appellant conducted the proceedings without legal representation. She was
unrepresented before the primary judge and unrepresented
before this Court. One
of the issues underlying many of her contentions is that the primary judge
failed to have regard to the "evidence"
she produced at the hearing of the
application. The transcript of the hearing before the primary judge discloses
that no evidence
was adduced before his Honour in the usual sense. However, in
the course of her submissions, the appellant mentioned what she referred
"judge's book". Just what was in the judge's book the appellant referred to has
not been made clear, but it is to be assumed
that the material before the
primary judge was included in the papers prepared for this appeal. The documents
comprise, in the main,
various documents and affidavits filed in or concerned
with the principal proceedings, including a series of affidavits of testamentary
scripts, affidavits verifying lists of documents, applications and
correspondence with the Legal Profession Board, the Court registry
and between
solicitors.
the agreement of the respondent and leave of the Court, the appellant relied on
a further affidavit she swore on 25 June 2024
in support of her appeal. At the
hearing of the appeal, following the submissions for the respondents, the
appellant was given leave
to file written submissions in reply. The appellant
subsequently filed 23 pages of submissions comprising 81 paragraphs, accompanied
by a further affidavit sworn on 23 July 2024.
The grounds of
are 24 grounds of appeal. They fall into three broad categories although there
is some overlap. Most of the grounds concern
the primary judge's rejection of
the two broad contentions advanced to the primary judge. The remaining grounds
assert that the primary
judge denied the appellant procedural fairness and was
Witnesses and allegations of conflict of interest
appellant is not, and never has been, a client of Murdoch Clarke. Thus, this is
not a case in which the application to restrain
a legal practitioner from acting
arises from complaints of a conflict of duty or interest arising from a
relationship with a client
or former client, or breach of a duty of loyalty, or
from the risk of disclosure or misuse of confidential communications or
information.
The primary judge was asked to restrain a practitioner from acting
for a client in judicial proceedings as an incident of the Court’s
inherent jurisdiction over its officers to discipline and control legal
practitioners in aid of the administration of justice. The
test to be applied
was stated by Mandie J in
Grimwade v Meagher
[1995] VicRp 28
[1995] 1 VR
"The objective test to be applied...is whether a
fair‑minded reasonably informed member of the public would conclude that
proper administration of justice required that [the lawyer] be [...]
prevented from acting, at all times giving due weight to the
public interest
that a litigant should not be deprived of his or her choice of [lawyer] without
good cause."
test was adopted in
Kallinicos v Hunt
[2005] NSWSC 1181
, a case specifically referred to and applied by the primary judge. In
, Brereton J, at 76, relevantly stated the following
principles:
"• ...the court always has inherent jurisdiction
to restrain solicitors from acting in a particular case, as an incident of
inherent jurisdiction over its officers and to control its process in aid of the
administration of justice;
The test to be
applied in this inherent jurisdiction is whether a fair-minded, reasonably
informed member of the public would conclude
that the proper administration of
justice requires that a legal practitioner should be prevented from acting, in
the interests of
the protection of the integrity of the judicial process and the
due administration of justice, including the appearance of justice;
The jurisdiction
is to be regarded as exceptional and is to be exercised with caution;
should be given to the public interest in a litigant not being deprived of the
lawyer of his or her choice without due
The timing of
the application may be relevant, in that the cost, inconvenience or
impracticality of requiring lawyers to cease to
act may provide a reason for
refusing to grant relief." (Citations removed)
appellant does not argue that those principles should not be applied. Her
contention is that application of the principles should
have led the primary
judge to grant her application.
2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8 and 22 of the appeal concern the primary judge's decision about
the propriety of Murdoch Clarke having a
continuing role because Mr Whitehouse,
Ms Ellis, Mr Flanagan or Mr Padgett may be witnesses in the action, or because
of some perceived
breach of duty or conflict between the interests of the firm
and the executors. In my respectful opinion, not only is no error demonstrated
in the exercise of the primary judge's discretion, but his Honour was correct to
conclude that none of the facts relied on by the
appellant were grounds for
restraining Murdoch Clarke from continuing to act for the executors appointed in
the 2019 will.
issues for determination in the action will be whether, at the time the testator
signed the 2019 will, or possibly the 2018 will
and codicils, she had
testamentary capacity, knew of and approved the wills, had been subject to undue
influence and was bound by
an agreement for mutual wills. As the primary judge
correctly found, Mr Whitehouse will almost certainly be a relevant witness as
the testator's intention, capacity and knowledge. It is not pleaded that it was
Mr Whitehouse who unduly influenced the testator.
That claim is made against the
testator's children and grandchildren or "some unidentified person". Any such
allegation against Mr
Whitehouse is limited to the assertion that he "took
advantage" of his relationship with the testator to insert a charging clause
the wills. It is possible that Ms Ellis may be a witness in the action as to her
observations of the testator when Ms Ellis witnessed
the 2018 will, or on some
other occasion.
2 asserts that the primary judge erred by finding that Mr Padgett and Mr
Flanagan were "not material witnesses", and failed
to give sufficient weight to
the fact that Ms Ellis is (or was) an employee of Murdoch Clarke and may be a
witness. It is possible
that Mr Flanagan or Mr Padgett or both may appear as
counsel at the trial. However, the primary judge's conclusion that neither was
likely to be a witness in the action was correct. Neither of those two
practitioners would be able to give any evidence relevant
to the issues raised
by the pleadings. The action concerns events which preceded the death of the
testator. None of the material
before the primary judge suggested that Mr
Flanagan or Mr Padgett had any role at all until after the commencement of the
litigation.
The appellant focussed her submissions on the role that those two
practitioners have played in the conduct of the action. I will
submissions about that when addressing other grounds of appeal. However, the
primary judge was correct to conclude
that any such matters are "not relevant to
the issues that will have to be decided as to the validity of the various
testamentary
documents". In her submissions the appellant suggested that she did
not admit the validity of one or more testamentary documents
and hinted that one
or both practitioners, by their searches in the strong room at Murdoch Clarke,
may be able to give evidence relevant
to that issue. She even seemed to suggest
that one or other may have played some unspecified role in the concealment or
of false testamentary documents. Her contentions are not only not
pleaded and unsupported by any evidence at all, but so fanciful
that they may be
disregarded as a material factor.
Ellis may be a witness in the action because she witnessed the 2018 will and may
be able to give some relevant evidence about
the testator's capacity and
understanding at the time. Even if that is true, it is no reason to conclude
that the firm by which she
was employed at the time, or may still be employed
by, is prevented from acting for the estate.
learned primary judge was informed that Mr Whitehouse was retired, was no longer
a partner of Murdoch Clarke and no longer did
any work for the firm. The
assertions were not disputed and there was no evidence to the contrary. Ground 3
asserts that the primary
judge erred in not giving sufficient weight to the
potential for practitioners of the firm to be witnesses. Ground 4 asserts that
the primary judge erred by finding that Murdoch Clarke did not have a conflict
of interest by continuing to act for Mr Whitehouse.
Ground 7 asserts that the
primary judge gave too much weight to the fact that Mr Whitehouse was retired.
In an appeal of this nature
the contention that the primary judge placed too
much weight on one relevant factor is not a proper ground of appeal. Unless it
demonstrated that the primary judge failed to take a material fact into
account, the appellant must demonstrate that the primary
judge reached a
conclusion which was unreasonable or unjust when all material factors are taken
into account. The primary judge expressly
took into account the fact that Mr
Whitehouse had retired and considered the significance of that fact in the
exercise of his discretion.
In any event, his Honour was correct to find that
the fact that Mr Whitehouse would be a witness did not preclude the firm from
to act for the defendants. No conflict of interest or duty exists
between Murdoch Clarke and the executors. In my view that is so
Whitehouse remained a partner or employee of the firm or had retired. I will
in the wills. Otherwise, the duty of
the executors is, in the interests of the beneficiaries, to seek to propound the
which is rational on its face and duly executed and attested in
accordance with the relevant legal requirements. In the absence of
sufficient to incite suspicion to the contrary, it is presumed to be valid:
Hookway v Hookway
[2016] TASSC 28
McKay v Hearps
Ground 3 also asserts that the primary judge erred in not giving
sufficient weight to the "firm's potential liability with respect
to its profit
costs". The fact that the firm was entitled to charge costs for professional
services in contentious probate proceedings
did not, in the circumstances of
this case, give rise to any conflicting duty or interest.
her submissions, the appellant relied on the
Legal Profession (Solicitors'
Conduct) Rules
. There is nothing in any rule which supports her
contentions.
is the most relevant. It reads:
Solicitor as material witness in client’s case
(1) In a case in which it is known, or becomes
apparent, that a solicitor will be required to give evidence that is material to
determination of contested issues before the court, the solicitor may not
appear as advocate for the client in the hearing.
(2) In a case in which it is known, or becomes
apparent, that a solicitor will be required to give evidence that is material to
determination of contested issues before the court, the solicitor, an
associate of the solicitor or a law practice of which the solicitor
is a member
may act or continue to act for the client unless doing so would prejudice the
administration of justice."
is not suggested that Mr Whitehouse will appear as advocate at the trial. Ground
22 of the appeal asserts that the primary judge
gave insufficient weight to "the
desirability of avoiding a suggestion of real or apparent conflict between the
duty owed by a practitioner
to the Court and the obligation of the practitioner
to the client or to the self-interest of the practitioner". Ground 5 asserts
that the primary judge "erred in finding that the conduct of Murdoch Clarke was
not an indication of their lack of objectivity and
independence attributed to
their loyalty to the former partner and colleague and potential liability for
his negligence". Ground
8 asserts that his Honour "erred in finding that Mr
Whitehouse's conduct in relation to the 2018 will was inconsequential as Mr
himself will not be doing professional work for the firm in
circumstances that the (sic) Murdoch Clarke is profiting from Mr Whitehouse's
conduct." On the material before the primary judge there was no reason to
conclude that it would prejudice the administration of
justice if Murdoch Clarke
were to continue to act, even if Mr Whitehouse remained a member of the firm.
Murdoch Clarke has no conflicting
duty or interest, either to their clients or
the Court. The primary judge stated:
"There is no basis for a
finding that the interests of Murdoch Clarke are in conflict with the interests
of their clients, the three
defendants. There is no reason to infer that there
is any significant risk of a lack of objectivity and candour on the part of the
firm or any barrister that the firm might instruct."
error is demonstrated in that conclusion. It was a conclusion his Honour was
entitled to reach in the proper exercise of his discretion
and, in my view, it
is correct. As to the assertion in ground 5 that there was a "potential
liability for negligence" and the reference
in ground 8 to "Mr Whitehouse's
conduct in relation to the 2018 will", there is no reason at all to question the
professional conduct
of Mr Whitehouse in making the relevant testamentary
instruments. The appellant does not identify or explain the nature of the
or the basis of the liability she claims may exist, or why any conflict
of interest or duty may arise for that reason.
case relied on by the appellant in support of her contentions was
(Unreported, Supreme Court of Western Australia, 11 November 1998,
Butterworths unreported case BC 9807243). In that case Parker J
made an order
restraining a firm of solicitors from continuing to act. However the decision
depended strongly on the facts and circumstances
which applied. It concerned an
application for revocation of a grant of probate made more than 10 years earlier
on the grounds of
lack of testamentary capacity, in circumstances in which the
defendant, who was a solicitor and a member of the firm, had been acting
administration of the estate and charging profit costs. Parker J concluded that
the determinative factor was the risk that
the defendant, or the firm, would be
obliged to restore the status quo in the estate and the resulting potential for
a direct conflict
of interest with the firm's obligations to the court. The
primary judge considered
Miles v Hughes
but distinguished it because of
important differences in the factual circumstances. The course taken by the
primary judge involves
no error of fact or law and no error in principle in the
exercise of his discretion. In any event, I agree with the conclusion his
contained a clause in these terms:
"8 My Trustees may charge and be
paid out of my estate their usual professional fees for their time and effort in
the administration
of my estate."
appellant's contention is that because Mr Whitehouse included such a clause in
the 2019 will and the 2018 will there exists a
conflict between the interests of
the defendants and the personal interest of Mr Whitehouse or the personal
interest of the members
of the firm. The primary judge dealt with the matter in
his reasons at [23]-[24] as follows:
"A clause in a will allowing an
executor to charge for professional work done is treated as a legacy of the
relevant charges:
[1891] UKLawRpCh 78
[1891] 2 Ch 613
[1898] UKLawRpCh 101
[1898] 2 Ch
Commissioner of Stamp Duties (NSW) v Pearse
[1954] AC 91
Subject to certain exceptions, 'where a beneficial disposition is made by a will
to a person who attests the execution
of the will, the disposition is void so
far ... as concerns that person or any person claiming under that person':
Therefore the prima facie position was that the
witnessing of the 2018 will by Mr Whitehouse precluded him from charging for
professional
work done in relation to the testator's estate as an executor
appointed under that will:
Sacks v Gridiger
(1991) 22 NSWLR 502
In such a situation a charging clause can be validated by obtaining the consent
of the residuary beneficiaries or an order
of this Court:
By witnessing a will in which he had included a charging clause, it appears
that Mr Whitehouse blundered in a way that could only
have disadvantaged him and
his partners. The invalidity of the 2018 charging clause could only have
advantaged the plaintiff. It
is now inconsequential for a number of reasons. In
particular, because Mr Whitehouse has retired, he will not be doing any
professional
work in relation to the testator's estate."
error is demonstrated in his Honour's conclusion, although I would not have
referred to Mr Whitehouse's actions as a "blunder".
Mr Whitehouse was not a
witness to the 2019 will. In respect to that will, the
had no application. It is not improper for a solicitor who is appointed as
a trustee to include in a trust instrument a clause that
entitles the solicitor
to charge for professional services. The operation of such clauses was
considered, for example, in
Chick & Anor v Grosfeld (No. 3)
NSWSC 1536.
Had Mr Whitehouse been a continuing a member of the firm, I would
not have regarded it as a matter of such significance as to require
exceptional step of preventing Murdoch Clarke from continuing to act. The
primary judge was, however, correct to conclude that
Mr Whitehouse's retirement
put an end to the issue as one of any consequence. He was no longer entitled to
charge his "usual professional
fees" and no conflict or potential conflict
between the interests of the firm and the estate could have arisen. The clause
application to the firm, which was entitled to be paid professional fees
in any event if retained to act by the executors.
Protection of
the integrity of the judicial process and the due administration of
appellant's other argument to the primary judge was that matters arising from
Murdoch Clarke's conduct of the action after it
was commenced justified the
order sought. Again, the test to be applied is whether a fair-minded, reasonably
informed member of the
public would conclude that the proper administration of
justice requires that a legal practitioner should be prevented from acting.
appellant's grounds of appeal and contentions are focussed on what she claims to
be Murdoch Clarke's non-compliance with procedural
steps and orders in the
action. The primary judge, at [16] of his reasons, summarised the history of the
litigation as follows:
"• On 3 June 2022 Mr Whitehouse's first
affidavit of testamentary scripts was sworn and filed. A copy of one version of
handwritten codicil of 10 September 2018 was annexed as 'annexure K'. That
document was described in a list of annexures on the front
page of the affidavit
as "Letter to Murdoch Clarke from Marie Piscioneri dated 10/10/2018". The
codicil was in the form of a letter,
but it was dated 10 September 2018, not 10
October 2018. The existence of a second version of that document appears to have
unknown to Mr Whitehouse at that time.
At a directions
hearing on 5 October 2022, Holt AsJ ordered that the defendants file affidavits
verifying their lists of documents
within 21 days. Nothing was filed during the
following 21 days.
On 24 October
2022 the second defendant, Matthew Piscioneri, swore an affidavit verifying his
list of documents. That affidavit was
filed on 27 October 2022. The other
defendants did not swear and file similar documents at that stage.
The plaintiff
took the point that all three defendants were required to swear and file lists
of documents verified by affidavit. At
a directions hearing on 10 March 2023,
Holt AsJ ordered that the first and third defendants file and serve such
documents within
14 days. The documents were filed a few days late, on 27 March
On 23 March 2023
the second version of the handwritten codicil of 10 September 2018 was found in
Murdoch Clarke's strongroom. Murdoch
Clarke only ever located a copy of the
other version of that codicil.
On 31 March 2023
a second affidavit of testamentary scripts sworn by Mr Whitehouse was filed. In
that affidavit he explained the situation
regarding the two handwritten
At a directions
hearing on 19 May 2023 the plaintiff argued that the defendants had not made
adequate discovery. Holt AsJ ordered
that they were to file 'their affidavits
verifying their lists of documents in accordance with the requirement of the law
the rules' within four weeks after that day. Those affidavits were
filed a few days late, on 19 June 2023."
primary judge described Murdoch Clarke's conduct of the action as with "not an
ideal degree of efficiency" and, later in his
reasons, "with lamentable
inefficiency". Nevertheless, his Honour concluded that the facts did not warrant
any conclusion as to dishonesty
or lack of candour and no reason to infer that
the firm withheld documents in order to disadvantage the appellant or advantage
else. His Honour found that non-compliance with some of the interlocutory
orders made by Holt AsJ resulted from inefficiency and
failure to advert to the
firms obligations. His Honour declined to find that, on that basis, the firm
should be restrained from continuing
are multiple grounds of appeal, in various terms, attacking his Honour's
conclusions. The appellant repeats her complaints
part of Murdoch Clarke, asserts that the primary judge should have found that
the conduct was an abuse
of process designed to "harass and annoy" her and
"antagonise and vex and frustrate her", repeats her claim to have been
disadvantaged
as a result and asserts a "public interest in ensuring that
limited court funds and resources are not wasted". In her further affidavits
sworn 25 June 2024 and 23 July 2024 in support of her appeal, and in her further
submissions "in reply", the appellant repeats her
litany of claims that Murdoch
Clarke's conduct of the action was designed to antagonise and frustrate her. She
refers to late delivery
of documents and failure to comply with interlocutory
orders. She asserts "criminal conduct" concerning a document not directly
to the probate action without, in my respectful view, any rational
basis. None of the material adds anything to the strength of the
claims. Much of
it is irrelevant. Very little of it says anything about the issues in the
action. No application was made for leave
to rely on the 23 July 2024 affidavit,
but it matters not. Nothing included in the affidavit adds to the strength of
her contentions
in support of the appeal. No error in the primary judge's
findings or conclusions is demonstrated. Further, in my respectful conclusion,
the primary judge correctly exercised the discretion. There is no reasonable
basis to conclude that Murdoch Clarke's conduct of the
action was aimed at the
his Honour, I think his use
of the term "lamentable inefficiency" when
describing Murdoch Clarke's conduct of the action considerably overstates the
Some of the matters relied on by the appellant as demonstrating
non-compliance with orders were technical and pedantic, and resulted
injustice to her. She has made many applications throughout the course of the
proceedings, very few of which have facilitated
the efficient conduct of the
action or were focussed on the issues which will be considered at trial. Her
submissions to this Court
exaggerate and overstate the nature of Murdoch
Clarke's conduct and, again, focus on matters other than those which will be in
at trial. In any event, I agree with the primary judge that the
circumstances relied on by the appellant did not justify the exceptional
of restraining the legal firm of the defendant's choice from continuing to
Allegations of breach of procedural fairness
remaining grounds of appeal, grounds 16 to 21 and ground 25, assert that the
primary judge, in various ways, denied the appellant
procedural fairness or was
appellant's interlocutory application came before the learned primary judge on
29 August 2023. His Honour was expecting to hear
the application on that day but
neither party was ready. As a result, the application was adjourned until 1
September 2023 and it
was ultimately heard on 3 October 2023. At the conclusion
of the hearing the primary judge gave leave to the appellant to file further
written submissions in reply to the submissions made by counsel for the
respondents. Those written submissions were dated 10 October
2023 and were filed
on 25 October 2023. The primary judge's decision was handed down on 18 January
2024 with written reasons.
appellant's complaint that the primary judge failed to have regard to the
material she sought to rely on is without merit. The
primary judge's attention
was drawn to the contents of what the appellant called the "judge's book" in the
course of the hearing.
Just because he did not specifically refer to all of it
does not mean that he did not have regard to it. Much of it was, as I have
already explained, irrelevant to the application his Honour was considering. His
Honour specifically referred to the documents he
took into account which could
only have come from the material the appellant referred to.
were other applications listed before the primary judge on 29 August 2023. By
interlocutory application filed 15 May 2023 entitled
"Application to adjourn
hearing for leave to administer interrogatories and other applications and
orders sought and general submissions"
the appellant sought 14 different
interlocutory orders in various terms. She sought orders related to leave to
administer interrogatories,
discovery of documents, delivery and signing of
witness statements, issue of subpoenas, provision of evidence, a suppression
preservation of assets, access to property and payment of air fares and
accommodation expenses for travel to Tasmania to inspect
documents. The
application included 99 paragraphs of what the appellant referred to as "Grounds
and submissions". One of the 14 orders
sought was:
"An order for
contempt given the defendants failure to comply with Order 4 of the
October 2022 and Order 3 of the 10
especially given the effort and stress this has subjected the plaintiff to and
that, as she is unrepresented, she is unable
to get an award for costs."
orders referred to in that part of the application were these. On 5 October 2022
Holt AsJ made a series of orders, one of which
was that "within 21 days the
defendants are to file and serve their affidavits verifying their list of
documents." On 10 March 2023
Holt AsJ made a number of other orders including
that "The first and third defendants are to make, file and serve their
verifying their lists of documents within 14 days". In each case, the
orders were one of a number of interlocutory orders. The terms
and effect of the
second general order for discovery is confusing because, by then, some
affidavits verifying lists of documents
had already been filed by the
defendants.
8 August 2023 the primary judge determined that:
"...the first thing
I have to decide is whether to restrain Murdoch Clarke from continuing to act.
Everything else is going to have
... The other applications ... that are before me, I adjourn sine die, that
... means without date, Ms Piscioneri. When I've resolved
the application to
stop Murdoch Clarke from acting in the matter, I'll then do something about the
listing of the other outstanding
applications. Now, unless there's anything
further, I think that’s all for today. Ms Piscioneri is there anything
further you
want to say?"
response to his Honour's invitation to say something about what he proposed, the
appellant replied "No, that's sounds like a sound
the interlocutory application filed 8 August 2023 came before the primary judge
for hearing on 3 October 2023 there was no other
application before his Honour.
In her grounds of appeal the appellant complains that the primary judge erred by
hearing the application
for disqualification before her other applications and
failing to give her an opportunity to be heard about that course. She contends
that his Honour denied her procedural fairness and was biased because he took
"nearly three months" to decide the disqualification
application.
of these contentions are misguided and completely without merit. The decision to
hear and determine the application to disqualify
first was logical and sensible
and well within his Honour's power to conduct the litigation as he thought
appropriate and efficient.
The appellant has not pointed to any unfairness or
disadvantage which resulted. Having regard to the many other demands on his
time the application was determined promptly. He prepared detailed
written reasons. The appellant's assertion that she was adversely
affected in
some other unidentified way in pursuing her other applications because they were
"time sensitive" is without foundation.
is no basis at all for the contention that his Honour did not act impartially,
or that a fair-minded lay observer might reasonably
apprehend a lack of
impartiality, with respect to any of the decisions his Honour made. The
transcript reveals that his Honour conducted
the hearing with patience and
respect to both parties and with the utmost fairness to the appellant given that
she was unrepresented.
When the appellant sought leave to make further written
submissions in reply, leave was granted.
appellant claims procedural unfairness because she was "only given 48 hours'
notice that the application would be listed and
the judgment handed down."
Nothing about that was unfair. The notice she was given of publication of his
Honour's decision is a matter
of no consequence. She also claims procedural
unfairness because she was not, when the judgment was published to her, given
information
appellant of her appeal rights. In any event, she commenced this
appeal within
25, asserts denial of procedural fairness by "dismissing the application", in
that it was "inequitable" to not recognise or
remedy the conduct of the legal
practitioners. The ground does not identify error or procedural unfairness at
all. It is not procedurally
unfair to make a decision which a party does not
agree with.
she asserts procedural unfairness in relation to the part of her application
seeking an order that the defendants be found
in contempt. On 29 August 2023 his
Honour struck out that paragraph of her application of 15 May 2023. As he was
he briefly addressed the part of the application which sought
an order for contempt and said this:
"... in one of the
interlocutory applications, there's an order sought in relation to punishment
for contempt. It's order number 4,
in proposed order number 4, in the
application filed on the 15th of May 2023...I will not deal with a contempt
application that is
included in an interlocutory application, that’s not
how contempt applications should proceed.
So the appropriate way to deal – to bring a contempt application is to
file an originating application intended to be served,
and that would then be
listed before a judge in court. If contempt is a matter that is heard in court
by a judge in robes, not in
– not heard as in chambers, the requirement
that it be done that way is to be found in
Supreme Court
So I – I strike out – paragraph 4 of the application filed on the
15th of May 2023."
appellant complains that his Honour denied her procedural fairness by taking
that course without giving her an opportunity to
be heard. Her other complaint,
presumably made against the Court registry staff, is that her application was
accepted for filing
without advice to her that it, to the extent that it sought
an "order for contempt", ought to have been made by originating application.
Both grounds must be rejected. The second contention may immediately be
rejected. It was not for the Court staff who accepted her
multifaceted
application of 15 May 2023 for filing to consider part of it and give her advice
be made and no injustice resulted. As to
the course taken by the primary judge, there are a number of reasons why the
appellant's
complaints must be rejected. Though in most circumstances a judge
should give a party an opportunity to be heard before making a
procedural order
of substance, the order made by his Honour was the type of procedural order he
was entitled to make in the proper
conduct of the action. His Honour drew the
appellant's attention to the terms of the
Supreme Court Rules
which requires that an order for punishment for contempt must be made by
application to the Court and acted in accordance
with it. The course his Honour
took was consistent with the just and efficient disposition of court business.
In any event, on 2
May 2024, since this appeal was lodged, his Honour set aside
the order he made striking out the contempt application and listed it
hearing. His Honour took that course after the appellant drew attention to the
terms of the
Supreme Court Rules
, r 942, which permits such an
application, in some circumstances, to be made by interlocutory application. As
a result, the appellant
has suffered no disadvantage and her application will be
heard and determined. Her claim that by hearing the application that Murdoch
Clarke be disqualified before her contempt application the primary judge took
the proceedings out of proper order, and that she may
suffer some forensic
disadvantage because "you don't know what would have come out", are without
merit. The primary judge was entitled
to determine the appellant's various
applications for interlocutory orders in the order he saw fit. I would add that,
in my view,
neither the application for disqualification nor the application for
contempt advance the just, timely and efficient disposition
of her action. No
intervention by this Court is justified.
Conclusion and
my opinion, none of the grounds of appeal are made out. I would dismiss the
GABRIELLA JEAN PISCIONERI v DAVID MILNE WHITEHOUSE,
MATTHEW DOMINIC PISCIONERI and GENEVIEVE MARIA GATES
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
15 August 2024
agree with Pearce J.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (229 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter