URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASSC/2025/54.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:21:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Diplomat Dan v Marriott [2025] TASSC 54 (31 October 2025)
[2025] TASSC 54
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA
Dan v Marriott
[2025] TASSC 54
MARRIOTT, Michael
31 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
15 October 2025
JUDGMENT OF:
Magistrates – Orders and convictions – Orders to
restrain domestic, family or apprehended violence or for personal
– Requirements for making order – Finding that
provocative and offensive behaviour was such as was likely to lead to
of the peace not made.
Aust Dig Magistrates [1200]
Magistrates – Appeal and review – Tasmania – Motion to
review – Other matters – Review of restraint
order - Grounds for
interference – Error demonstrated – No substantial miscarriage of
Aust Dig Magistrates
Legislation:
Justices Act
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Respondent:
Walsh Day Mihal
Judgment Number:
[2025] TASSC 54
paragraphs:
Serial No 54/2025
File No 1626/2025
DIPLOMAT DAN v MICHAEL MARRIOTT
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT PEARCE J
31 October 2025
magistrate has power under the
Justices Act
, to make an
order which imposes on a person such restraints as are necessary and desirable
to prevent that person from committing
actual or threatened violence to a person
or damage to property, or behaving in a provocative or offensive manner likely
to a breach of the peace. This notice to review challenges a restraint
order made by a magistrate, Ms L Topfer, on 2 May 2025 directed
Gandini. The order was made on the application of the respondent, Michael
Gandini is not a name recognised by the applicant. He identified himself in the
notice to review as Diplomat Dan but wishes
to be called Dan. To avoid any
difficulty I will refer to him as Dan.
magistrate ordered that, for two years from 2 May 2025, Dan must not threaten,
harass, abuse or assault Mr Marriott, approach
Mr Marriott or enter Mr
Marriott's professional rooms in Burnie. Dan argues that the restraint order
should not have been made. Mr
Marriott filed an appearance to the motion but his
counsel indicated that he did not wish to be heard and he did not appear.
reject the challenge to the order. The magistrate made one error in her
reasoning, but no miscarriage of justice occurred and the
motion should be
The evidence in support of the application
magistrate heard Mr Marriott's application on 2 May 2025. Both Mr Marriott and
Dan were present although Dan, with the magistrate's
agreement, appeared by
audio visual link. Mr Marriott gave oral evidence and relied on the contents of
his application filed on 19
April 2024, in which he detailed the information on
which the application was based, and an affidavit he affirmed on 7 March 2025.
He was Dan's treating psychologist from 2005 until about 2023. In his opinion,
Dan suffered from a delusional disorder, with personality
disorders which
predisposed him to conflict with most people he encountered. Mr Marriott
believed that Dan "had always done better"
when treated with anti-psychotic
medication which helped to suppress his paranoid ideas.
8 July 2021, Dan was involved in a police siege at Port Sorell. He had armed
himself with a knife, barricaded himself inside the
house and locked his wife
and children out. Mrs Gandini phoned Mr Marriott who then phoned the police. Mr
Marriott was called to
the scene and spoke to Dan a number of times by phone.
Dan was subsequently charged with criminal offences and Mr Marriott was to
called as a prosecution witness in the trial.
2023 there were proceedings between Dan and his wife in the Federal Circuit
Court. Mr Marriott's file was subpoenaed by the
independent lawyer for the
children. On 26 August 2023 Dan sent a text message to Mr Marriott complaining
and demanding a copy of it. The text message also
complained about Mr Marriott having failed to report to the police what Dan said
was family violence committed by his wife, that Mr Marriott was "half drunk",
and had "breached patient confidentiality". Mr Marriott
responded by letter
dated 29 August 2023 in which he attempted to explain the reason for production
of the file, but refused to copy
the file and suggested to Dan that he request
access to it at the Court. Dan sent an email on 30 August 2023 in which he,
name Daniel Victor of the family Gandini, accused Mr Marriott of
gaslighting, corruption, lies and lack of ethics. By text message
on 6 October
2023 Dan again demanded that Mr Marriott send him a full copy of his file by
email. Mr Marriott responded on 9 October
2023 that he did not have time to do
so and, in any event, the file had been provided to the court. There followed
further persistent
requests from Dan to Mr Marriott for the file.
5 March 2024 Dan sent a text message to Mr Marriott indicating that he was
"coming to collect" his file. On 12 March 2024 Dan
attended Mr Marriott's
practice rooms and demanded the file. On 12 April 2024 Dan sent Mr Marriott a
letter by registered post again
complaining that the file had not been given to
him, purporting to charge $10,000 per hour under some form of contract for the
he waited, amounting to $7,200,000 in "late fees", and accusing Mr Marriott
of lying, wanting to "force medicate" him, being delusional
and associating with
paedophiles. The letter included the following passages:
biggest problem Michael is your waste of life and your envy of others who are
doing well, you want to hurt them you can tell
a lot about a man when he has
cruel intention, and action to show those cruel intentions. which you have shown
Diplomat Dan. The
fear in your eyes told me all I need to know...
Love you Michael and I forgive you, but our contract is a contract and you
have agreed the terms and conditions which I made sure
I provide you while you
were having me tortured, I am happy and can't wait for another trial its going
to be trial by media wow its
going to be biblical."
application for a restraint order was made on 19 April 2024. On 23 April 2024,
after he had been served with the application,
Dan went again to Mr Marriott's
rooms, this time to serve documents intended to respond to the application.
While doing so, Dan filmed
himself and Mr Marriott and live streamed the images
to the internet. The images were in evidence before the magistrate. Superimposed
on the image was the assertion that Mr Marriott was "party to war crime and
torture". Dan narrated his visit and the purpose of it,
knocked loudly at the
door and then repeatedly rang the doorbell until Mr Marriott answered. On the
recording Dan commented that
Mr Marriott "committed fraud", had "slept with and
groomed" one of his patients, was part of "an elite paedophile network", that
had "force medicated" Dan, that he was an "assessory" (sic) to paedophiles and
grooming, that he was "complicit with torture"
and an "assessory" (sic) to "the
35 paedophile police officers who tried to murder" Dan.
the time Mr Marriott swore his affidavit on 7 March 2025 the trial of the
charges arising from the so called siege on 8 July 2021
was complete. Dan was
found guilty of two charges of assault and four charges of committing an
unlawful act intending to do bodily
harm. The judge's sentencing comments were
included in the evidence before the magistrate. It followed from the jury
verdicts, and
the sentencing judge found, that on 7 July 2021, Dan and his wife
argued and he assaulted her by pushing her chest. On the following
morning they
argued again and he assaulted her by throwing water on her and holding a glass
close to her head and threatening to
drive it through her head. The remaining
charges concerned Dan's actions towards police officers when they attended his
threw some form of corrosive fluid, likely hydrochloric acid, at four
police officers in an attempt to prevent his lawful arrest.
He was sentenced to
a term of imprisonment of three and a half years from 22 January 2023 with
eligibility to apply for parole after
having served 21 months of that term.
Thus, he became eligible to apply for parole on 23 October 2024. At the hearing
of this motion
on 15 October 2025, Dan had not been granted parole. If not
granted parole his term will conclude on 22 July 2026.
the hearing Dan cross-examined Mr Marriott. He asked no questions relevant to
whether a restraint order should be made. His questions
made clear his intention
to use the hearing as a means of pursuing the grievances he had previously
expressed. The questions he sought
to ask served only to demonstrate his
fixation about Mr Marriott's refusal to give him the file and his many other
complaints. When
giving evidence, Dan took the same approach. He had prepared a
written response to the application which he attempted to read to
magistrate. It consisted of assertions which were irrelevant or irrational or
both. Her Honour allowed Dan an opportunity to
give evidence, but when he
persisted in attempting to read a statement full of irrelevant and baseless
allegations, her Honour, entirely
correctly in my respectful view, prevented him
from doing so. As a result, Dan was not cross-examined. At the conclusion of the
the learned magistrate announced her reasons and made the
Restraint orders and appeals
Applications
for a restraint order are to be heard and determined in open court in the same
manner, as nearly as practicable, as
a complaint for an offence being dealt with
by a magistrate:
In deciding whether or not to make a restraint order
a magistrate must consider the protection and welfare of the person for whose
benefit the order is sought to be of paramount importance:
s 106B(4AAB)(a).
am considering a motion to review the determination and order of a magistrate
pursuant to the
Justices Act
To succeed, an
applicant must identify and establish some error or mistake on the part of the
magistrate, either on a question of
fact or law or both:
A motion to review under
is not an appeal by way
of rehearing. I am not to weigh the evidence and reach my own
conclusions:
Richardson v Shipp
[1970] TASStRp 6
[1970] Tas SR 105
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Hosken (No
[2000] TASSC 12
per Cox CJ at par 7. On the hearing of the
motion the applicant shall be held to the grounds stated in the motion to review
an amendment is allowed:
Only one relevant
ground of appeal
filed a notice to review on 5 May 2025, three days after the order was made. It
attached the twelve page handwritten document
he had attempted to read to the
magistrate at the hearing. The grounds are brief and shed no real light on the
errors which Dan claims
the magistrate made. They assert misconduct, abuse of
process, bias,
unreasonableness, conspiracy, fraud, the rights
of an artificial person, the statute law of supremacy, malfeasance,
misrepresentation
and intentional infliction of mental harm. The record of
proceedings discloses that, in a directions hearing, Daly AsJ explained
that he would be bound by his grounds of appeal unless they were amended. Dan
filed a further notice to review on 4 August
2025. It was not necessary for him
to file a fresh motion, but the document contains many further grounds which I
agreed to consider
by adding them by amendment as grounds to the original
motion. The second notice to review consists of 17 handwritten pages purporting
to identify 48 mistakes on the part of the magistrate, accompanied by 69 pages
of other documents. Dan expresses views and arguments
typically advanced by
persons who are sometimes called sovereign citizens. He rejects the authority of
the court and the government
and claims personal sovereignty from the legal
system. He variously asserts that he is referred to by the wrong name, the
Justices Act
does not apply to him because he is not a legal entity and
is a "non-citizen", the magistrate was biased and failed to allow due
the magistrate was party to a fraud and assisted Mr Marriott in a "breach of
contract", Mr Marriott withheld evidence intending
to pervert justice and to
intentionally cause him emotional harm, his "common law rights" were being
overridden, the magistrate had
no authority without his consent, and he had
diplomatic immunity. The documents which accompany the second motion are full of
pseudo-legal
argument. Much of it is bizarre and irrational. I accept that Dan
genuinely believes that these arguments have merit but they do
not. They carry
no force in court. In one document Dan describes himself as "'Dan' and/through
the living being Incarnated into,
'Daniel Victor' of the family Gandini, the
principal for the deceased estate at law DANIEL VICTOR GANDINI" and states his
as "Galactic emissary" who has his "own sovereignty". He refers to
his "standing as a living being" and resorts to Latin maxims and
references to the
Constitution
and other State and Federal legislation,
international treaties and conventions and the Magna Carta.
his submissions to this Court, Dan complained that the magistrate did not accept
these submissions and continued to maintain that
he had been wrongly dealt with
by Mr Marriott. He repeated that the only reason he had to approach Mr Marriott
was to obtain his
file and that Mr Marriott's refusal to copy it for him made Mr
Marriott responsible for the situation which developed. Those submissions
demonstrate a continuing lack of insight into his own conduct and do not assist
him to establish that the magistrate was wrong to
make the order.
the hearing before the magistrate Dan asserted to the magistrate that she had a
biased mind. The reasons for that assertion were
not explained or investigated
but there was no basis to conclude that the magistrate did not bring an
impartial mind to the application,
or that a fair-minded lay observer might
reasonably apprehend that she was not impartial:
Ebner v Official
Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
205 CLR 337.
Subject to the following
comments, nothing else in the notice addresses any relevant issue or identifies
error relevant to the magistrate's
No finding of a
likely breach of the peace
Notwithstanding
the obvious deficiency in a vast majority of the material just referred to, one
ground raises a relevant issue. In
paragraph 43 of the document, which
accompanies the second motion to review, Dan claims that the "learned magistrate
had no evidence
to be satisfied on the balance of probabilities", and
"...telling the truth does not meet the standards of behave in a provocative
offensive manner. There was no intention to breach the peace...". The assertions
were made in the context of his misguided allegations
failure to provide a copy of his files, but, fairly viewed, raise the issue of
the requirements for making a
restraint order.
Justices Act
"106B Restraint
(1) Where on an application made under this section, justices are satisfied
on the balance of probabilities –
(i) a person has caused personal injury
or damage to property; and
(ii) that person is, unless restrained,
likely again to cause personal injury or damage to property; or
(i) a person has threatened to cause
personal injury or damage to property; and
(ii) that person is, unless restrained,
likely to carry out that threat; or
(i) a person has behaved in a provocative
or offensive manner;
(ii) the behaviour is such as is likely
to lead to a breach of the peace; and
(iii) that person is, unless restrained,
likely again to behave in the same or a similar manner; or
(d) that a person has stalked the person for
whose benefit the application is made or a third person the stalking of whom has
the person for whose benefit the application is made to feel apprehension
they may make an order imposing such restraints upon that person as are
necessary or desirable to prevent the person from acting in
a manner specified
in this subsection."
was no evidence sufficient to support a finding of actual or threatened violence
or damage to property or stalking. The magistrate
correctly did not make the
order on the basis of either sub-sections (a), (b) or (d) of
relevant provision which was capable of supporting Mr Marriott's application
s 106B(1)(c)
, and thus, to make the order, the learned magistrate was
required to be satisfied on the evidence before her, on the balance of
probabilities,
of the three essential facts required by that provision: that Dan
had behaved in a provocative or offensive manner, that the behaviour
was such as
was likely to lead to a breach of the peace, and that, unless restrained, he was
likely again to behave in the same or
a similar manner.
magistrate expressly dealt with two of those essential facts. Her Honour found
that Dan had behaved in a provocative and offensive
manner. There was ample
evidence on which, as a reasonable person, the magistrate was entitled to come
to that conclusion. The magistrate
also found that, although at the time of the
hearing Dan was in prison serving a sentence, unless restrained, he was likely
to behave in the same or a similar manner on his release. There was ample
evidence of his past and continuing conduct to justify
that conclusion. However,
nowhere in her Honour's reasons did she address the question of whether Dan's
provocative and offensive
behaviour was likely to lead to a breach of the peace.
At the commencement of the hearing the magistrate correctly recited the terms
s 106B(1)(c)
so as to attempt to explain to Dan the nature of her function.
Before a restraint order could be made under that sub-section it was
essential fact to be established on the balance of probabilities that the
behaviour was likely to lead to a breach of the peace.
However, the issue was
not addressed in the learned magistrate's reasons. No such finding was made.
With respect, the learned magistrate
erred by making the order in the absence of
such a finding.
No miscarriage of justice
Notwithstanding
the error, I am satisfied that the motion should be dismissed because no
substantial miscarriage of justice has occurred:
Justices Act
110(2)(ab).
That is so because the evidence before the magistrate compelled the
finding that Dan's behaviour was likely to lead to a breach of
the peace. No
magistrate, acting reasonably, could have come to a different conclusion.
amounts to a breach of the peace was considered in
Nilsson v McDonald
[2009] TASSC 66
19 Tas R 173.
That case concerned the
Offences Act
s 15B(1)(d)
, which empowered a police officer to
direct a person to leave a public place if the police officer believed on
reasonable grounds
that the person had committed or was likely to commit a
breach of the peace. Like the
Justices Act
Police Offences
does not contain any definition of "breach of the peace". Crawford J and
Blow J both applied the common law meaning stated by the
Court of Appeal
[1982] QB 416
and determined that there cannot be
a breach of the peace unless there was an act done, or threatened to be done,
which either actually
harmed a person, or in his presence, his property, or was
likely to cause such harm, or which put someone in fear of such harm being
Crawford J also referred to
Percy v Director of Public
Prosecutions
(1995) 1 WLR 1382
in which the Queens Bench Division was
concerned with a situation where a protester, although acting peacefully while
protesting,
was likely to provoke violence by others as a natural consequence of
what she was doing. The court applied
and accepted that
a breach of the peace occurs where the violence, or threatened violence, is not
that of the offender but of others
likely to be provoked by the offender's
conduct. I will apply the law as determined by the majority in
his submissions in support of the motion, Dan argued that his correspondence and
direct contact with Mr Marriott involved no threats
of violence. He claimed that
the evidence did not show that Mr Marriott was fearful of him. In my view, the
evidence before the magistrate
compelled the conclusion that the facts required
to be proved under s 106B(1)(c) were proved on the balance of probabilities.
the restraint order was made Dan was serving a term of imprisonment. Thus,
the magistrate had to decide whether, on Dan's release,
a repeat of his past
provocative and offensive behaviour was likely and the behaviour was such as
would likely lead to a breach of
the peace. As to past behaviour, the issue was
not whether the provocative and offensive behaviour in fact led to a breach of
peace, but rather whether it was such as to be likely to do so. In other
words, the question was whether the nature of the behaviour
was such that a
breach of the peace may well happen. The magistrate was to consider Mr
Marriott's protection and welfare as the paramount
consideration. The evidence
included details of Dan's conduct on 7 and 8 July 2021 directed at his wife and
police which resulted
in his imprisonment. There was evidence that the issues
and personality characteristics which led to those events were continuing.
conduct towards Mr Marriott had persisted over a long period and his
preoccupation, if not obsession, with Mr Marriott's perceived
conduct, which was
formed prior to the application for a restraint order, had not abated by the
time of the hearing a year later.
His behaviour was consistent with Mr
Marriott's opinion that Dan's attitudes were delusional and that he was
predisposed to conflict.
The tone of his written correspondence over a prolonged
period was irrational and intimidating. The evidence established that, in
context of the delusional allegations made against Mr Marriott in text messages
and emails and letters, Dan had gone to Mr Marriott's
professional rooms twice.
His attitude on both occasions was inflammatory, confrontational and
adversarial. There were no express
threats of violence but the evidence
established without any doubt that his attitude and presentation would be
perceived by any reasonable
person as volatile, intimidating and frightening.
Although Mr Marriott, in his application, deposed that Dan, to his knowledge,
not "violent or likely to damage property", he was "fixated, angry and can
be intimidating" and did "make unreasonable demands and
accusations". Mr
Marriott had been directly involved in the events at Port Sorell in 2021 and by
the time of the hearing was aware
of the result of the trial. The evidence also
established beyond doubt that the persistence with which Dan was pursuing Mr
visit may occur following Dan's release from prison and that
such a visit would,
in all the circumstances, likely put Mr Marriott in fear of harm. There was a
chance that others might be present.
There was a good chance that some form of
violence or threatened violence would occur as a natural consequence of what he
magistrate, acting reasonably, could fail to have been satisfied on the balance
of probabilities that, unless restrained, Dan
was likely to again behave in the
same or similar provocative and offensive manner and that such behaviour was
likely to lead to
a breach of the peace. No substantial miscarriage of justice
occurred as a result of the magistrate's failure to address and make
Result and order
motion to review is dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (170 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter