URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASRMPAT/2021/30.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:19:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
B Rees v Hobart City Council and LXN Architecture and Consulting and Anor [2021] TASRMPAT 30 (8 October 2021)
B Rees v Hobart City Council and LXN Architecture &
Consulting and Anor
[2021] TASRMPAT 30
: Bevan Rees
First Respondent
: Hobart City Council
Second Respondent
: LXN Architecture & Consulting
Party Joined
: Leslie Lauder AM
Subject Land:
98 Argyle Street,
Hobart and adjacent Road Reserve
Planning Appeal
Hearing Date(s):
7, 8 & 13 September 2021
Decision Date:
8 October 2021
Delivered At:
R Grueber, Presiding Member ME Ball, Member
: Self-represented
First Respondent:
Second Respondent:
Party Joined:
Self-represented
Solicitors:
: Self-represented
First Respondent:
Self-represented
Second Respondent:
Billett Legal
Party Joined:
Self-represented
Catchwords:
Planning Appeal – Multiple residential development in
commercial zone – area relevant to streetscape – building
– meaning of transition – setback – communal open
REASONS FOR DECISION
21 June 2021, the First Respondent, the Hobart City Council (the Council)
granted a planning permit in respect to a development
application submitted by
the Second Respondent, LXN Architecture & Consulting, reference PLN-20-706.
The approval was subject
to conditions. By notice of appeal dated 6 July 2021,
the Appellant, Bevan Rees, appealed the grant of the permit to the Tribunal.
Subsequently, Mr Leslie Lauder AM, was joined as a party.
The Proposed Development
2. The development application sought approval for
demolition of a building at 98 Argyle Street, Hobart and the construction of a
new six storey building containing 20 multiple dwellings. The new building would
include carparking on the ground floor with four
apartments on each subsequent
3. The site is zoned Commercial under the Hobart Interim Planning Scheme 2015
(the Scheme). The proposed residential use is discretionary.
Grounds of Appeal
4. The revised grounds of appeal considered at the
hearing were:
1 The proposal does not meet the acceptable solution with respect to
clause 23.4.1 A1 of the Hobart Interim Planning Scheme 2015,
or the performance
criterion P1 because the building height does not satisfy all of the
with any Desired Future Character Statements provided for the area;
with the scale of nearby buildings;
unreasonably overshadow adjacent public space; and
for a transition in height between adjoining buildings.
2 The proposal does not meet the acceptable solution with respect to
clause 23.4.2 A1 of the Hobart Interim Planning Scheme 2015,
or the performance
criterion P1 a), b), c) because the building setback from the frontage does not
satisfy all of the following:
with any Desired Future Character Statements provided for the area;
with the setback of adjoining buildings, generally maintaining a continuous
building line if evident in the streetscape;
the characteristics of the site, adjoining lots and the
streetscape.
3 The proposal does not meet the acceptable solution or the performance
criterion with respect to clause 23.4.8 A6 or P6 of the Hobart
Interim Planning
Scheme 2015 because there is no provision on site for communal open space that
provides reasonable amenity and outdoor
recreation opportunities for
See the Use Table in Clause 23.2 of the
Planning Controls
5. The relevant development standards within the
Commercial Zone relate to building height, setback and provision for communal
space within the site.
6. In respect to building height the relevant provision is Clause 23.4.1
To ensure that building height contributes positively to the streetscape
and does not result in unreasonable impact on residential
amenity of land in a
residential zone.
Acceptable Solution
Performance Criteria
Building height must be no more than:
(a) 11.5m high and a maximum of 3 storeys; or
(b) 15m high and a maximum of 4 storeys, if the development provides at
least 50% of the floor space above ground level for residential
Building height must satisfy all of the following:
(a) be consistent with any Desired Future Character Statements provided for
(b) be compatible with the scale of nearby buildings;
(c) not unreasonably overshadow adjacent public space;
(d) allow for a transition in height between adjoining buildings, where
appropriate;
7. In respect to setback, the relevant provision is Clause 23.4.2 P1:
To ensure that building setback contributes positively to the streetscape
and does not result in unreasonable impact on residential
amenity of land in a
residential zone.
Acceptable Solution
Performance Criteria
must be parallel to the
and must be no less than:
Building setback from frontage must satisfy all of the following:
(a) be consistent with any Desired Future Character Statements provided for
(b) be compatible with the setback of adjoining buildings, generally
maintaining a continuous building line if evident in the streetscape;
(c) enhance the characteristics of the site, adjoining lots and the
streetscape;
opportunity
8. The relevant provision in respect to open space is Clause 23.4.8 P6:
To ensure that buildings for residential or visitor accommodation uses
provide reasonable levels of amenity and safety in terms of
noise, access to
daylight and natural ventilation, open space, storage.
Acceptable Solution
Performance Criteria
Sites with 10 or more dwellings or serviced apartments must provide
communal open space on the site that:
(a) is at least 70m2, with an additional 2m2 for every dwelling or serviced
apartment over 10;
(b) if provided in multiple locations, at least one single area must be a
minimum of 40m2;
(c) has a minimum horizontal dimension of 3m;
(d) includes at least 20% of the total area for plantings (including food
growing), being deep soil planting if at ground level;
(e) is directly accessible from common entries and pathways;
(f) screens any communal clothes drying facilities from public view;
(g) may be above ground floor level, including rooftops;
(h) is screened visually and acoustically from mechanical plant and
equipment, service structures and lift motor rooms;
(i) does not include vehicle driveways, manoeuvring or hardstand areas;
(j) includes no more than 20% of the total area located between 30 degrees
East of South and 30 degrees West of South of:
(i) a building on the site with a height more than 3m; or
(ii) a side or rear boundary within 5m.
Sites with 10 or more dwellings or serviced apartments must provide
communal open space on the site that provides reasonable amenity
and outdoor
recreation opportunities for occupants, having regard to:
(a) the area and dimensions of the space;
(b) the total number of dwellings or serviced apartments on the site;
(c) the accessibility of the space;
(d) the flexibility of the space and opportunities for various forms of
recreation;
(e) the availability and location of common facilities within the
(f) landscaping;
(g) the provision of gardens, trees and plantings (including food gardens)
appropriate in area to the size of the communal open space;
(h) accessibility to daylight, taking into account the development
potential of adjacent sites;
(i) the outlook from the space;
(j) the level of noise intrusion from external noise sources; and
(k) any advice from a suitably qualified person;
(i) the dwellings or serviced apartments are located in an existing
building where communal open space cannot be reasonably achieved
constraints, or impacts on historic
cultural heritage values of a place or precinct listed in the Historic
Heritage Code;
(ii) open space, accessible by the public, that is of high quality in terms
of location access to sunlight, outlook, facilities, landscaping
accessibility and that can adequately accommodate the needs of occupants is
provided on the site; or
(iii) private open space is provided for all dwellings or serviced
apartments on the site, provides a reasonable level of amenity
in terms of
access to sunlight and outlook, and sufficiently caters for flexible outdoor
recreation needs including relaxation, entertainment,
planting, outdoor dining
and children’s play.
Expert Evidence
9. It is useful at the outset to make some comments
in respect to the expert evidence heard by the Tribunal. The Second Respondent
relied on evidence from an architect, Ms Sarah Lindsay, and a planning expert,
Ms Emma Riley. The Council called evidence from an
expert planner, Mr Adam Smee.
The Appellant is an architect and gave evidence on his own behalf. The Second
Respondent and the Council
were represented by counsel. The Appellant acted as
his own advocate.
10. The Appellant’s CV sets out a distinguished career as an architect
over 50 years. The Appellant described his expertise
as in architecture and
urban design, however, he does not hold any formal qualifications in planning
and did not hold himself out
to the Tribunal as a planning expert. The fields of
architecture and planning, while no doubt having related aspects, are separate
fields of specialist knowledge. The standing of Ms Riley and Mr Smee as experts
was not challenged by the Appellant or the Party
Joined. The Appellant’s
evidence included material that, in a planning context, was simply irrelevant to
the planning controls
in question. It included matters going to the history of
the Commercial Zone, a concept of ‘sense of place’, heritage
and cultural tourism. The Appellant cross-examined the other experts on matters
that had no relevance to the planning controls
in issue, for example, issues of
11. There is a friction between the Appellant’s role as an expert
witness providing opinion to assist the Tribunal in reaching
the correct and
preferable outcome and his role as an advocate seeking to persuade the Tribunal
that the appeal should be upheld.
The Appellant pursued his role as advocate
with appropriate vigour in his cross examination of the other experts and in his
submissions.
That vigour extended to his answers in cross-examination, which at
times were argumentative and not responsive to the questions put
Fagenblat v Feingold Partners Pty Ltd
, Pagone J considered an objection to the
inadmissibility of evidence by an expert witness who was also the brother-in-law
of the parties to the action. He noted that:
[2001] VSC 454.
“An expert witness has a special and important role in judicial
proceedings to assist the Court by providing objective and unbiased
make. ...The possibility of a witness having
a bias in favour of a party
(directly or indirectly) is undoubtedly a matter to take into account by a Court
when deciding what weight
to give to the expert’s evidence. ...It is the
Court, and not the witness, which has the task of doing justice to the parties
and, in my view, the Court should not exclude from its consideration the probity
of evidence which expert witnesses may be capable
of giving if the evidence
which they do give can be shown to be probative and reliable.”
His Honour determined the lack of independence or bias of an expert did not make
the evidence inadmissible, but was a matter to be
taken into account in giving
weight to the evidence.
13. For reasons of both
expertise and independence, where the Appellant has expressed opinions in
respect to planning matters that
contradicts or is contradicted by the opinion
of Ms Riley and Mr Smee, the evidence of Ms Riley and Mr Smee has been
Ground 1 – Clause 23.4.1 – Building Height
14. The objective in Clause 23.4.1 is:
“To ensure that building height contributes positively to the
streetscape and does not result in an unreasonable impact on residential
of land in a residential zone.”
The site of the proposed development is not located in proximity to a
residential zone, which leaves the focus of the objective on
ensuring that
building height contributes positively to the streetscape. The specific
provisions of the performance criteria will
override the more general provision
in the objective
objective will provide context for interpretation for the meaning of the
Performance Criteria.
15. It was common ground that
the development did not meet the acceptable solution in A1 and that it should be
assessed against the
performance criteria in P1. It was also common ground that
there is no Desired Future Character Statement provided for the area relevant
P1(a), leaving for consideration P1(b), (c) and (d).
16. ‘Building Height’ is defined in Clause 4.1.3 and the Scheme
in the following terms:
Means the vertical distance from natural ground level at any point to the
uppermost part of a building directly above that point,
excluding minor
protrusions such as aerials, antenna, solar panels, chimneys and vents.
Building Height may therefore vary depending upon which point at ground level is
chosen and is not necessarily the maximum height
17. The evidence discloses the following in respect to
the proposed building:
the maximum
overall building height of the proposal is 19.52m to the top of the lift
the maximum
building height to the roof of the top floor is 18.77m; and
See also Kirch Communications Pty Ltd
v Gene Engineering Pty Ltd
[2002] NSWSC 485
Anada Marga
Pracaraka Samgha Limited v Tomar
[2012] FCA 385
to [51]. As
to whether the principles of apprehended bias apply to expert witnesses, see
Nagel v Clay
[2020] FamCA 326
Von Witt v Hobart City Council &
[1995] TASSC 12
Raff Angus Pty Ltd v Resource
Management & Planning Appeal Tribunal
[2018] TASSC 60
the building
height of the façade to Argyle Street, being to the top of the parapet to
the fifth level, is 16.87m.
18. In respect to the building on the
neighbouring property at 110 Argyle Street, to the north western of the site,
which is on the
corner of Argyle Street and Brisbane Street:
the maximum
building height is 7.0m; and
façade building height is 6.68m.
19. The building on the neighbouring property at 92-96 Argyle Street, to the
south east of the site, is known as the ‘Minty’s
Building’. It
comprises three storeys and has:
building height of 12.75m; and
building height of 9.92m.
20. At 90 Argyle Street to the south east of the Minty’s Building, i.e.
on the opposite side to the development site, is a cottage
which also figured in
the evidence concerning height and has:
building height of 5.4m; and
building height of 3.6m.
P1(b) compatibility with the scale of nearby buildings
21. P1(b) requires that building height of the
development be compatible with the scale of nearby buildings.
22. Compatible in this context means
in harmony or broad correspondence
23. It requires an overall assessment of how two things relate to each other
and is concerned with the ultimate result.
The approach to assessment should
be qualitative, rather than quantitative.
9 Sandy Bay Road Pty Ltd v Hobart City Council and Ors
the Tribunal considered that
comparison with the scale of nearby buildings should focus largely on height but
can be informed by the
form of the building. The standard requires comparison of
height with scale rather than merely height with height. In
Randwick Council
South Wales Land & Environment Court noted that scale refers to the relative
size of two or more things.
Referring collectively to height, bulk and scale, the Court said:
“All the above are highly subjective terms, since a building one person
perceives as too big, another person finds appropriately
sized. This is the
reason why, in almost all disputes about height and bulk, the Court receives
evidence from an expert who thinks
that these attributes are excessive and one
who thinks that they are appropriate.”
9 Sandy Bay Road Pty Ltd v Hobart
City Council and Ors
[2017] TASRMPAT 19
Clarence City Council v Drury
[2021] TASSC 5
Clarence City Council v Drury
9 Sandy Bay Road Pty Ltd v Hobart
City Council and Ors
ibid at [58].
[2007] NSWLEC 428.
That observation is apposite in this case, where the Appellant says that the
building height is not compatible with the scale of
nearby buildings, while Ms
Riley and Mr Smee say that it is.
25. ‘Nearby’ is
also an imprecise term. The usual meaning is “
close at hand
not far off.
Consideration of nearby buildings will extend beyond adjoining or adjacent
buildings. The meaning of nearby in P1 will be given context
by the objective,
which directs the Tribunal to a consideration of the streetscape.
26. Streetscape is defined in Clause 4.1.3 of the Scheme as:
“the visual quality of a street, depicted by road width, street
planting, characteristics and features, public utilities contributed
road reserve, the setbacks of buildings and structures from the lot boundaries,
the quality, scale, bulk and design of
buildings and structures fronting the
road reserve.”
The definition includes a proviso that:
“For the purposes of determining streetscape with respect to a
particular site, the above factors are relevant if within 100
27. Mr Rees limited his consideration of
streetscape to the length of Argyle Street between Melville and Brisbane
Streets, a distance
of approximately 100m in total, but less than 100m from the
site in either direction. Ms Riley considered the streetscape as 100m
Argyle street in either direction from the site. However, she had regard to a
wider area for nearby buildings, reflecting the
grid pattern of the city blocks.
That area was similar to the area within Mr Smee’s assessment of
streetscape. Mr Smee considered
the streetscape to be an area within a circle
with a radius of 100m from the site, which incorporated parts of Brisbane and
Streets as well as Argyle Street. Mr Smee’s area of streetscape
was consistent with the approach taken by the Tribunal in
Hexa Pacific Pty
Ltd v Hobart City Council and Ors
and is therefore to be
28. The Appellant assessed compatibility of scale by reference to the
buildings on adjoining lots and immediately opposite the development
Street and Brisbane Lane. Having regard to the meaning of ‘nearby’
and the approach taken by the Tribunal in
9 Sandy Bay Road Pty Ltd v Hobart
City Council and Ors
, that approach is too narrow. Further, the Appellant
took a quantitative rather than qualitative approach. Mr Smee and Ms Riley each
had regard to a broader area and took in a broad range of nearby buildings
within the area of the streetscape, or in Ms Riley’s
case closely
approximating that area. They each took a qualitative approach. For these
reasons, and the reservations outlined above
generally in respect to the
Appellant’s expert opinion insofar as it was expressed in respect to
planning matters, the evidence
of Ms Riley and Mr Smee is preferred to that of
29. Ms Riley’s evidence was that the development would sit comfortably
within the range of existing building heights of nearby
buildings, and will
continue a pattern of taller buildings sitting amongst shorter buildings, with
strong and often high building
walls to the street, within a broader pattern of
transitioning building height density from high rise in the city core to medium
to low rise at the city fringe. Insofar as form informs scale, she considered
that, while the proposed development would have a greater
building height than
that generally found in the surrounding area, there are existing buildings in
the area that have significant
and comparable bulk as a result of their
footprint and wall
Macquarie Dictionary.
[2020] TASRMPAT 1
For reasons of comity the Tribunal should
take a uniform approach to the interpretation of clauses unless it considers
that the construction
applied in a previous case is clearly wrong: see
McKenzie v. State of Tasmania
[TASSC] 42 at [29]
length such that the development, having a narrow street frontage, would have a
scale which assisted with integrating the building
height into the
streetscape.
30. Mr Smee assessed the proposed development by
reference to the Tribunal’s approach to scale in
9 Sandy Bay Road Pty
Ltd v Hobart City Council and Ors
. He considered that while the proposed
development would therefore have a greater building height than that generally
found within
100m of the site, the proposal would have a comparable bulk and
mass to nearby buildings and would be compatible in scale notwithstanding
difference in height between the proposed development and nearby buildings. Like
Ms Riley, he considered that buildings within
the area surrounding the site have
a relatively large footprint and long walls. He noted that the development would
be seen against
the backdrop of the taller buildings found towards and within
the Hobart CBD.
31. The Tribunal accepts the opinions of Mr Smee and Ms Riley that the
building height will be compatible with the scale of nearby
P1(c) Overshadowing public space
32. P1(c) requires that building height of the
proposed development not unreasonably overshadow adjacent public space. The only
public space near the site is Brisbane Lane, to the rear of the
33. The Appellant conceded that Brisbane Lane functions largely for
commercial vehicle access and that the increase in overshadowing
resulting from
the development would not be unreasonable in that context. He contended that
possible future residential development
across Brisbane Lane could be
unreasonably affected in the future. That land is not public space for the
purposes of P1. In so far
as its development might affect use of Brisbane Lane,
there was no evidence of intended future residential development on that land
and any impact is entirely hypothetical.
34. The assessment of overshadowing is a qualitative one which requires a
comparison of the existing situation and the outcome if
the development were to
35. Mr Smee’s evidence was that the laneway did not derive significant
amenity from solar access. The increase in overshadowing
would not be
unreasonable as it would not significantly detract from the amenity of that
land. Ms Riley described the land as a
vehicular access with low pedestrian
36. The Tribunal finds that the increased overshadowing of Brisbane Lane will
not be unreasonable. The proposal satisfies P1(c).
P1(d) Transition between adjoining buildings
37. P1(d) requires that the building height allows
for a transition in height between adjoining buildings, where appropriate.
38. Transition is not defined in the Scheme. Its ordinary meaning is
qualified in the clause by an adverb to identify the quality or nature of the
change to be allowed for. In the context of
P1(d) the requirement for transition
must mean something more than just a change in height. If not, then the clause
would be rendered
impuissant unless the intention is to prevent adjoining
buildings having the same height, which seems unlikely as a planning
consideration
and which could be more easily and clearly expressed if so. It
will have meaning if read in the context of the objective
- to entail an assessment of whether the change contributes positively to the
streetscape (noting that
A & N McCullagh v Glamorgan
Spring Bay Council and Ors
[2019] TASRMPAT 30
Macquarie Dictionary,
Sunset Rock
Investments Pty Ltd v Hobart City Council and CNC Management Pty Ltd
in this case residential amenity is not relevant). Clause 23.4.1 P1(d) will only
require a transition in height between adjoining
buildings “where
appropriate”. Therefore, consideration is first required as to whether
requirement for an allowance
for transition is appropriate. If so, then whether
building height allows for a transition in height between adjoining buildings
will require assessment of the change in height, having regard to the visual
quality of the street depicted by the factors in the
definition. As the Tribunal
observed in
9 Sandy Bay Road Pty Ltd v Hobart City Council and Ors
“Transitions between adjoining buildings are common provisions in town
planning controls. Obviously, the intent of such controls
is to avoid discordant
differences in building heights by requiring the design of higher buildings to
have regard for, and a recognition
of, lower buildings. Stepped buildings are
one way to achieve a transition, and that is the predominant approach adopted in
the present
39. Adjoining buildings, for the
purposes of P1(d) means buildings that are near to, but not necessarily
conterminous with the development.
40. The Appellant’s position is that the proposed development would
have an abrupt step height difference to the adjoining buildings
which would be
discordant, and accentuate the impact of the scale and bulk of the proposed
building in the streetscape. The Appellant
assessed this in the context of
conflict with the
distinctive identified character of the precinct
that is not a relevant consideration under this performance criteria. Insofar as
he might have meant to reflect the streetscape
in that phrase, his approach to
streetscape is unreasonably narrow for the reasons set out above.
41. Ms Riley and Mr Smee both considered that it was appropriate to require
allowance for transition in height between the proposed
development and the
adjoining Minty’s Building. They both considered that the proposed
development allowed for transition.
There would be a proportional step up from
the Minty’s Building to the proposed development comparable to the step up
the cottage at 90 Argyle Street and the Minty’s Building. The
difference in height between the Minty’s Building and the
development would be the equivalent of only two storeys.
42. The Tribunal accepts that evidence of Ms Riley and Mr Smee that the
development does allow for transition between the adjoining
Building and the development.
43. Both Ms Riley and Mr Smee considered that it was not appropriate to
require allowance for transition with respect to the adjoining
building at 110
Argyle Street, or the adjoining building at 31 Melville Street (which is the
building to the rear of the development
site, across Brisbane Lane). Unlike the
well established or recent developments to the south east of the site, they
considered that
110 Argyle Street and 31 Melville Street are under-developed.
The building heights of these existing buildings are significantly
that permitted under the Acceptable Solution A1. There are no constraints on
development of these sites, such as heritage
listings. For those reasons they
considered that it was not appropriate to require transition to the existing
buildings. In the alternative,
they both considered that, if it was appropriate
to allow for transition in height between the proposed development and 110
Street and 31 Melville Street, then the development did allow for a
transition, having regard to the eclectic nature of the streetscape.
44. The Appellant did not contradict the evidence of Ms Riley and Mr Smee
that the properties at 110 Argyle Street and 31 Melville
under-developed, and that there are no restrictions on their development. In
Boland v Clarence City Council
Brett J observed that an
acceptable standard will not constitute a bench mark against which to assess
compliance with performance
criteria, but considered that regard could be had to
an acceptable standard applying to a development site to provide context for
consideration of an effect on the amenity of adjoining sites. It
Op cit at [91]
R Boland v Clarence City Council
[2021] TASFC 5
Op cit at [20] to [24].
appears reasonable to consider the acceptable standard pertaining to adjoining
sites to provide context to the assessment of P1,
not as a benchmark for whether
the development allows for a transition in height between adjoining buildings,
but in respect to whether
it is appropriate to require the development to allow
for that transition. A1 would permit a building up to 15 metres high, with
storeys. In this instance, having regard to the under-developed nature of the
sites, the Tribunal is satisfied that it is not
appropriate to require the
development to allow for transition in height to the buildings at 110 Argyle
Street and 31 Melville Street.
45. If the Tribunal is wrong in
this regard, the opinions of Ms Riley and Mr Smee are that, if allowance for
transition to 110 Argyle
Street and 31 Melville Street is required, the
development does so allow. At first blush, that might seem somewhat surprising
the substantial difference in height between the proposed development and
those buildings. In particular, the building at 110 Argyle
Street has a building
height less than half that of the proposal. However, Ms Riley and Mr Smee
explain the transition in the context
of the eclectic nature of the streetscape
and its location between the high rise in the city core and the medium to low
rise at the
city fringe. The only expert planning evidence before the Tribunal
is that of Ms Riley and Mr Smee. For the reasons outlined above,
their opinion
is to be preferred to that of Mr Rees.
46. The proposed development complies with P1(d).
Ground 1 – Clause 23.4.2 - Setback
47. The objective in Clause 23.4.2 is to ensure that
building setback contributes positively to the streetscape and does not result
in unreasonable impact on residential amenity of land in a residential zone. As
noted above, impact on residential amenity is not
relevant to this
development.
48. It was common ground that the development does not meet the acceptable
standard in A1. In response to P1, as noted already, there
is no Desired Future
Character Statement provided for the area which means consideration of P1(a) is
not required. In the circumstances
of this proposal consideration of P1(d) is
not relevant. That leaves consideration of P1(b) and (c).
P1(b) Compatibility with the setback of adjoining
49. P1(b) requires that the building setback from
frontage be compatible with the setback of adjoining buildings, generally
maintaining
a continuous building line if evident in the streetscape. What is
required is compatibility, as noted above, not conformity.
Setback is defined in Clause
4.1.3 of the Scheme as meaning
the distance from any lot boundary to a
building on the lot.
The Appellant’s assessment had regard to setback
not just to the building where closest to the boundary, but also to articulated
areas of the proposed building further back from the boundaries at upper levels.
This is not consistent with the meaning of setback
in the Scheme.
50. The evidence of Mr Smee is that the setback of the proposed building
varies between 60mm and 1274mm, which matches the limited
setbacks from frontage
of the adjoining buildings. He and Ms Riley considered that the proposal would
provide a generally continuous
building line on Argyle Street, benefiting the
streetscape in comparison to the significantly greater setback of the existing
on the site.
51. The proposed development will satisfy P1(b).
P1(c) Characteristics of the site, adjoining lots and the
streetscape
City Council v Drury
[2021] TASSC 5.
52. P1(c) requires that
the frontage building setback enhance the characteristics of the site, adjoining
lots and the streetscape.
53. Once again, the Appellant assessed this requirement by having regard to
the building elevation, rather than setback as defined
by the Scheme. He
focussed on the qualities of the design of the building and its comparison to
adjoining buildings in the streetscape,
an approach which is understandable
given that his expertise is in architecture, but which is not consistent with
the requirements
54. Mr Smee pointed out that the difference between the alignment of the
site’s front boundary and the façade of the
proposed building would
be less than 1 degree. He considered that such a negligible difference would not
be perceptible and would
be unlikely to affect the characteristics of the site,
adjoining lots of the streetscape. Ms Riley considered that the site was typical
of inner city lots in shape and that the expectation of the Scheme is that
buildings would be built to the boundary. She pointed
out the existing building
on the site has a deeper frontage setback which is a discordant element in the
streetscape and that the
new setback of the proposed building would assist in
completing and harmonising the streetscape by comparison.
55. The proposed development will satisfy P1(c).
Ground 3 – Clause 23.4.8 – Communal open
56. The objective in Clause 23.4.8 is to ensure that
buildings for residential or visitor accommodation uses provide reasonable
of amenity and safety in terms of noise, access to daylight and natural
ventilation, open space, and storage. It was common ground
that the proposed
development did not comply with Acceptable Solution A6 which requires a minimum
area of communal open space. The
proposed development will not provide any
communal open space on the site.
57. P6 provides performance criteria with respect to the provision of
communal open space, but P6(iii) provides that communal open
space is not
required where private open space is provided for all dwellings on the site,
which provides a reasonable level of amenity
in terms of access to sunlight and
outlook, and sufficiently caters for flexible outdoor recreation needs,
including relaxation,
entertainment, planting, outdoor dining and
children’s play. The case advanced by the Second Respondent and the
Council depends
on P6(iii) being satisfied.
58. Each of the proposed dwellings incorporates private open space by way of
balconies. The issue was whether those areas will provide
reasonable levels of
amenity in terms of sunlight and outlook and sufficiently cater for flexible
outdoor recreation needs.
59. Amenity is defined in Clause 4.1.3 of the Scheme in the following
“means in relation to a locality, place or building, any quality,
condition or factor that makes or contributes to making the
locality, place or
building harmonious, pleasant or
enjoyable.”
60. Reasonable expectations in respect to
the elements of amenity will vary, such that expectations in an inner urban area
different to those in a more suburban area.
The reasonable level of amenity
for the proposed development must be considered having regard to residential use
in the Commercial
Zone. Expectations in respect to sunlight and outdoor
recreation needs are likely to be lower than those in a Residential Zone. The
evidence of Ms Riley is that the level of amenity of inner city residential uses
is primarily driven by different characteristics,
such as proximity to services,
employment and entertainment. The private open space of all but four of the
residences would receive
at least some direct sunlight throughout the year. The
inclusion of balconies on more than one side of each apartment increases the
opportunity to receive sunlight at different times of the
L Hollier v Hobart City Council and
Platinum Plus Properties Pty Ltd
[2019] TASMRPAT 4 at [126].
day. Four apartments will receive less than one hour of sunlight during June and
six apartments would receive less than four hours
of sunlight for three months
per year, in mid-winter. Two of those apartments would receive less than four
hours direct sunlight
for five months per year. Mr Smee and Ms Riley considered
that sufficient access to direct sunlight was provided to constitute a
reasonable level of amenity having regard to the inner city nature of the
apartments. They considered that the size of the open spaces
was sufficient to
cater for flexible outdoor recreation needs and that each of the private open
spaces would enjoy a favourable outlook
towards the Glebe, Queens Domain or
kunanyi/Mount Wellington.
61. Mr Rees contended that over 50% of
the total private open space was compromised in respect to access to sunlight,
and in respect
to space and flexibility for various forms of recreation. In
respect to the latter, the only basis for his opinion was the width
of the decks
off the bedrooms, which constituted less than one fifth of the private open
space. He conducted a solar access assessment
which was clearly inferior in
detail to the shadow diagrams prepared by Ms Lindsay, which the Tribunal
62. The criteria in P6(iii) are satisfied, such that communal open space is
not required on the site of the proposed development.
The Party Joined
63. The above reasons do not refer to the Joined
Party’s case. Mr Lauder represented himself. He cross- examined the
called by the Second Respondent and the Council, but neither tendered or
called evidence. He made closing submissions. Mr Lauder
supported the
Appellant’s appeal. He clearly held genuine and thoughtful concerns about
whether the proposed development would
fit with his perception of the character
of the area, but his submissions were essentially irrelevant to the
considerations relevant
to determination of the grounds of appeal. The closest
his submissions went to an assessment of the proposed development against
development standards was a bare statement they did not comply.
64. The Council approved the development application
subject to conditions. At the hearing, the Second Respondent foreshadowed
the Tribunal with draft varied conditions agreed with the Council.
Following the hearing a draft of the proposed varied conditions
was provided.
The variations include removal of a condition in respect to minimum balcony
width rendered redundant by the plans submitted
at the hearing and amendments to
the conditions relating to archaeological matters in HER 6 and HER s1. The
conditions included a
modified plan marked
Ground + Level 1 Plan DA-02 Rev C
dated 30 September 2021
to replace the corresponding plan marked
Level 1 Plan DA-02 Rev B dated 23 August 2021
to facilitate the amended
archaeological conditions.
65. The Appellant and the Joined Party raised no objection to the draft
conditions. In the circumstances it is appropriate to direct
that a permit issue
subject to the varied conditions without the need for a s22 application.
Determination
66. The grounds of appeal are not made out and the
appeal is dismissed. The decision of the Council will be affirmed, subject to
varied permit conditions.
Acton View Tas Pty Ltd and Ors v
Clarence City Council and Ors
[2020] TASRMPAT 29
67. The following decision is made pursuant to s23 of the
Resource Management & Planning Appeal Tribunal Act 1993
Tribunal affirms the decision of the Council made 21 June 2021to grant a
planning permit in relation to development application
PLN-20-706 subject to
conditions; and
Council is directed to issue a permit subject to the conditions contained in
Annexure “A” of this decision for application
PLN-20-706 within 10
days from the date of this decision.
68. The Tribunal will entertain any application for an order for costs in
this appeal if made to the Tribunal in writing with supporting
submissions
within the next 21 days. If requested, the Tribunal may reconvene to hear any
evidence in respect of any matter bearing
upon an order for costs. In the
absence of any such application for an order for costs, the order of the
Tribunal is that each party
bear its own costs.
Annexure “A”
The following conditions and restrictions apply to this
The use/development of the land for the purpose of Demolition and New Building
for 20 Multiple Dwellings subject to the following
conditions and
restrictions.
The use and/or development must be substantially in
accordance with the documents and drawings that comprise PLN­20­706
­ 98 ARGYLE STREET HOBART TAS 7000 ­ Final Planning Documents except
where modified below.
Reason for condition
To clarify the scope of the permit.
The use and/or development must comply with the
requirements of TasWater as detailed in the Amended Submission to Planning
Notice, Reference No. TWDA2020/01741­HCC dated 27/4/2021 as
attached to the permit.
Reason for condition
To clarify the scope of the permit.
A demolition waste management plan must be
implemented throughout demolition. The demolition waste management plan must
include provisions
for the handling, transport and disposal of demolition
material, including any contaminated waste and recycling opportunities, to
satisfy the above requirement.
It is recommended that the developer liaise with the Council’s
Cleansing and Solid Waste Unit regarding reducing, reusing and
materials associated with demolition on the site to minimise solid waste being
directed to landfill.
Further information can also be found on the Council’s
Reason for condition
To ensure that solid waste management from the site meets the Council’s
requirements and standards.
The palette of exterior colours and materials must
be provided.
Prior to the issue of any approval under the
Building Act 2016
(excluding for demolition), revised plans, and montages and samples where
appropriate, must be submitted and
approved as a Condition Endorsement to the satisfaction of the Director City
Planning showing exterior colours and materials in accordance
with the above
requirement.
All work required by this condition must be undertaken in accordance with the
approved revised plans, montages and samples.
Advice: This condition requires further information to be submitted as a
Condition Endorsement. Refer to the Condition Endorsement
advice at the end of
this permit.
Reason for condition
In the interest of the streetscape and townscape values of the surrounding
A landscape plan must be prepared for the soft and
hard landscaping, by a suitably qualified landscape designer.
Prior to the issue of any approval under the
Building Act 2016
(excluding for demolition), revised plans must be submitted and approved to
the satisfaction of the Director City Planning in accordance
with the above
requirement.
All work required by this condition must be undertaken in accordance with the
approved revised plans. Prior to occupancy, confirmation
from the landscape
architect who prepared the approved landscaping plan (or another suitably
qualified landscape designer) that the
all landscaping works required by this
condition have been implemented, must be submitted to the satisfaction of the
Directory City
Advice: This condition requires further information to be submitted as a
Condition Endorsement. Refer to the Condition Endorsement
advice at the end of
this permit.
Reason for condition
In the interest of the amenity of the spaces, streetscape and townscape values
of the surrounding area.
Any cranes used in construction of the approved
development must not create an obstruction or hazard for the operation of
approaching and departing the Royal Hobart Hospital helipad.
Advice: The developer is encouraged to contact the Department of Health and
Human Services prior to construction to discuss the operation
Reason for condition
To ensure that cranes or other temporary structures used in the construction of
the development do not interfere with safe aircraft
operations in the vicinity
of the Royal Hobart Hospital helipad.
Prior to the issue of any approval under the
Building Act 2016
(excluding for demolition), revised plans must
be submitted and approved as a Condition Endorsement that demonstrate that
design elements
of the development are able to achieve internal noise levels in
accordance with relevant Australian Standards for acoustics control
(AS3671:1989 –
Road Traffic Noise Intrusion (Building Siting and
Construction)
and AS2107:2016 – Acoustics (
Recommended Design Sound
Levels and Reverberation Times for Building Interiors
The revised plans must be certified by a suitably qualified
person as demonstrating likely compliance with the above requirement.
All work required by this condition must be
undertaken in accordance with the approved revised plans.
Advice: This condition requires further information to be submitted as a
Condition Endorsement. Refer to the Condition Endorsement
advice at the end of
this permit.
Reason for condition
To ensure that buildings for residential uses provide reasonable levels of
amenity in terms of noise.
A construction waste management plan must be
implemented throughout construction.
A construction waste management plan must be submitted and approved as a
Condition Endorsement, prior to commencement of work on the
construction waste management plan must include:
for commercial waste services for the handling, storage, transport and disposal
of post construction solid waste and recycle
bins from the development;
for the handling, transport and disposal of demolition material, including any
contaminated waste and recycling opportunities,
to satisfy the above
requirement.
All work required by this condition must be undertaken in accordance with the
approved construction waste management plan.
Advice: This condition requires further information to be submitted as a
Condition Endorsement. Refer to the Condition Endorsement
advice at the end of
this permit.
It is recommended that the developer liaise with the Council’s
Cleansing and Solid Waste Unit regarding reducing, reusing and
materials associated with demolition on the site to minimise solid waste being
directed to landfill.
Further information can also be found on the Council’s
Reason for condition
To ensure that solid waste management from the site meets the Council’s
requirements and standards.
All stormwater from the proposed development
(including but not limited to: roofed areas, ag drains, and impervious surfaces
as driveways and paved areas) must be drained to the Council’s
stormwater infrastructure prior to first occupation or commencement
(whichever occurs first).
Reason for condition
To ensure that stormwater from the site will be discharged to a suitable Council
approved outlet.
Any new stormwater connection required must be
constructed, and any existing redundant connections be abandoned and removed.
The connection
works must be done by Council at the owner’s expense prior
to occupancy or commencement of use (whichever occurs first).
Detailed engineering drawings must be submitted and approved as a Condition
Endorsement, prior to commencement of work or issue of
any consent under the
Building Act
(whichever occurs first). The detailed engineering drawings must
1. the accurate location and levels of the
proposed connections and all existing connections;
2. the size and design of the connection such that it is appropriate to
safely service the development for all 5% AEP rainfall events
(including the
vertical catchment) and discharge is contained within the kerb;
3. plan and long section of the proposed connection clearly showing
clearances from any nearby obstacles including crossovers and
services, cover,
size, material and delineation of public and private infrastructure. Connections
must be free flowing gravity.
All work required by this condition must be undertaken in accordance with the
approved engineering drawings.
This condition requires further information to be submitted as a Condition
Endorsement. Refer to the Condition Endorsement advice
at the end of this
The depth and alignment of the stormwater connection shown on the Rare
Drainage and Service Plan DA01 RevA does not agree with Council
single connection for the property is required under the
Urban Drainage Act
. Standard sizes for kerb and gutter connections are in Council's
Fees and Charges Booklet
available from
must run in a straight line from the private boundary transition pit if
Once the Condition Endorsement has been issued, the applicant will need to
application
with Council's City Amenity Division. Should the applicant
wish to have their contractor install the connection, an
Application
to Construct Public Infrastructure
is required.
The stormwater service connection may be required to have been approved prior
to any plumbing permits being issued for private plumbing
Reason for condition
To ensure the site is drained adequately.
Stormwater pre­ treatment for stormwater
discharges from the development must be
installed prior to occupancy or the commencement of use (whichever occurs
A stormwater management report and detailed design must be submitted and
approved as a Condition Endorsement, prior to the issuing
of any approval under
Building Act 2016
or commencement of works (whichever occurs first). The
stormwater management report and design must:
prepared by a suitably qualified person;
2. include detailed design of the proposed treatment train, including
estimations of contaminant removal for the final design, driving
head, and a
long section;
3. include a supporting maintenance plan, which specifies the required
maintenance measures to check and ensure the ongoing effective
operation of all
systems, such as: inspection frequency, cleanout procedures, descriptions and
diagrams of how the installed systems
operate, details of the life of assets and
replacement requirements.
All work required by this condition must be undertaken and maintained in
accordance with the approved stormwater management report
and design.
Advice: Once the plans and report have been approved Council will issue a
condition endorsement (see general advice on how to obtain
endorsement).
Where building approval is also required, it is recommended that
documentation for condition endorsement be submitted well before
documentation for building approval. Failure to address condition endorsement
requirements prior to submitting for building
approval may result in unexpected
Reason for condition
To avoid the possible pollution of drainage systems and natural watercourses,
and to comply with relevant State legislation.
An ongoing waste management plan for all domestic
waste and recycling must be implemented post construction.
The waste management plan must be submitted and approved as a Condition
Endorsement, prior to commencement of work on the site (excluding
demolition). The waste management plan must
1. Details of commercial waste services for the
handling, storage, transport and disposal of domestic waste and recycle bins
the development.
2. Written evidence from a suitable private waste collection company that
they are willing to and able to collect waste from the development
site in the
manner and frequency described in the waste management plan.
All work required by this condition must be undertaken in accordance with the
approved waste management plan.
Advice: This condition requires further information to be submitted as a
Condition Endorsement. Refer to the Condition Endorsement
advice at the end of
this permit.
Reason for condition
To ensure that solid waste management from the site meets the Council’s
requirements and standards.
A construction traffic and parking management plan
must be implemented prior to the commencement of work on the site (including
demolition).
The construction traffic (including cars, public transport vehicles, service
vehicles, pedestrians and cyclists) and parking management
plan must be
submitted and approved as a Condition Endorsement, prior to commencement work
(including demolition). The construction
traffic and parking management plan
1. Be prepared by a suitably qualified
2. Include a communications plan to advise the wider community of the
traffic and parking impacts during construction.
3. Include a start date and finish dates of various stages of
4. Include times that trucks and other traffic associated with the works
will be allowed to operate.
All work required by this condition must be undertaken in accordance with the
approved construction traffic and parking management
Advice: This condition requires further information to be submitted as a
Condition Endorsement. Refer to the Condition Endorsement
advice at the end of
this permit.
Reason for condition
To ensure the safety of vehicles entering and leaving the development and the
safety and access around the development site for the
general public and
adjacent businesses.
Prior to first occupation or commencement of use
(whichever occurs first), vehicular barriers compliant with the Australian
AS/NZS1170.1:2002 must be installed to prevent vehicles running off the
edge of an access driveway or parking module (parking spaces,
manoeuvring area) where the drop from the edge of the trafficable area to a
lower level is 600mm or greater, and wheel
stops (kerb) must be installed for
drops between 150mm and 600mm. Barriers must not limit the width of the driveway
access or parking
and turning areas approved under the permit.
The Council
does not consider a slope greater than 1 in 4 to constitute a lower level as
described in AS/NZS 2890.1:2004 Section 2.4.5.3.
Slopes greater than 1 in 4 will
require a vehicular barrier or wheel stop.
Designers are
advised to consult the
National Construction Code
to determine if pedestrian handrails or safety barriers compliant
with the NCC2016 are also required in the parking module this area
considered as a path of access to a building.
Reason for condition
To ensure the safety of users of the access driveway and parking module and
compliance with the standard.
The access driveway, circulation roadways, ramps and
parking module (parking spaces, aisles and manoeuvring area) must be designed
and constructed in accordance with Australian Standard AS/NZS2890.1:2004
(including the requirement for vehicle safety barriers where
required), or a
Council approved alternate design certified by a suitably qualified engineer to
provide a safe and efficient access,
and enable safe, easy and efficient
It is advised
that designers consider the detailed design of the access and parking module
prior to finalising the Finished Floor
Level (FFL) of the parking spaces
(especially if located within a garage incorporated into the dwelling), as
failure to do so may
result in difficulty complying with this
Reason for condition
To ensure the safety of users of the access and parking module, and compliance
with the relevant Australian Standard.
The access driveway, circulation roadways, ramps and
parking module (parking spaces, aisles and manoeuvring area) design must be
and approved as a Condition Endorsement, prior to the issuing of any
approval under the
Building Act 2016
(excluding for
demolition).
The access driveway, circulation roadways, ramps and parking module (parking
spaces, aisles and manoeuvring area) design must:
prepared and certified by a suitably qualified engineer,
2. Be generally in accordance with the Australian Standard
AS/NZS2890.1:2004,
3. Where the design deviates from
AS/NZS2890.1:2004 the designer must demonstrate that the design will provide a
safe and efficient
access, and enable safe, easy and efficient use, and
4. Show dimensions, levels, gradients & transitions, and other details
as Council deem necessary to satisfy the above requirement.
It is advised
that designers consider the detailed design of the access and parking module
prior to finalising the Finished Floor
Level (FFL) of the parking spaces
(especially if located within a garage incorporated into the dwelling), as
failure to do so may
result in difficulty complying with this
design has been approved, the Council will issue a condition endorsement (see
general advice on how to obtain condition
endorsement).
Reason for condition
To ensure the safety of users of the access and parking module, and compliance
with the relevant Australian Standard.
The access driveway, circulation roadways, ramps and
parking module (parking spaces, aisles and manoeuvring area) must be constructed
in accordance with the design drawings approved by Condition ENG 3b.
Prior to the commencement of use, documentation by a suitably qualified
engineer certifying that the access driveway and parking module
constructed in accordance with the above drawings must be lodged with
Certification
may be submitted to Council as part of the
Building Act 2016
approval process or
via condition endorsement (see general advice on how to obtain condition
endorsement)
Reason for condition
To ensure the safety of users of the access and parking module, and compliance
with the relevant Australian Standard.
The access driveway and parking module (car parking
spaces, aisles and manoeuvring area) approved by this permit must be constructed
to a sealed standard (spray seal, asphalt, concrete, pavers or equivalent
Council approved) and surface drained to the Council's
stormwater infrastructure
prior to the commencement of use.
Reason for condition
To ensure the safety of users of the access driveway and parking module, and
that it does not detract from the amenity of users,
adjoining occupiers or the
environment by preventing dust, mud and sediment transport.
The number of car parking spaces approved on the
site for use is twenty (20).
All parking spaces must be in accordance with Australian Standards AS/NZS
2890.1 2004, prior to commencement of use.
Reason for condition
To ensure the provision of parking for the use is safe and
The number of bicycle parking spaces approved on the
site for use is eighteen (18).
Bicycle parking spaces and storage must be in accordance with Australian
Standards AS
2890.3 2015, prior to commencement of use.
Reason for condition
To ensure the provision of bicycle parking for the use is safe and
Any damage to council infrastructure or any third
party infrastructure within the road reserve resulting from the implementation
this permit, must, at the discretion of the
1. Be met by the owner by way of reimbursement
(cost of repair and reinstatement to be paid by the owner to the Council);
2. Be repaired and reinstated by the owner to the satisfaction of the
A photographic record of the Council's infrastructure adjacent to the subject
site must be provided to the Council prior to any commencement
A photographic record of the Council’s infrastructure (e.g. existing
property service connection points, roads, buildings, stormwater,
driveway crossovers and nature strips, including if any, pre­ existing
damage) will be relied upon to establish the
extent of damage caused to the
Council’s infrastructure during construction. In the event that the
owner/developer fails to
provide to the Council a photographic record of the
Council’s infrastructure, then any damage to the Council's infrastructure
found on completion of works will be deemed to be the responsibility of the
Reason for condition
To ensure that any of the Council's infrastructure and/or site related service
connections affected by the proposal will be altered
and/or reinstated at the
owner’s full cost.
Prior to the commencement of use, the proposed
driveway crossover Argyle Street highway reservation must be designed and
constructed
in accordance with:
TSD­R09­v1 – Urban Roads Driveways and TSD R14­v1 Type KC
vehicular crossing
­ Urban Roads Footpaths TSD­R11­v2
Lighting plans approved by TasNetworks must be submitted and approved prior
to commencement of work.
All work required by this condition must be undertaken in accordance with the
approved drawings.
The applicant
is required submit detailed design documentation to satisfy this condition via
Council's planning condition endorsement
process (noting there is a fee
associated with condition endorsement
approval of engineering drawings [see general advice on how to obtain
condition endorsement and for fees and charges]). This is a
separate process to
any building approval under the
Building Act 2016
Please note
that your proposal does not include adjustment of footpath levels. Any
adjustment to footpath levels necessary to suit
the design of proposed floor,
parking module or driveway levels will require separate agreement from Council's
Road Services Engineer
and may require further planning approvals. It is advised
to place a note to this effect on construction drawings for the site and/or
other relevant engineering drawings to ensure that contractors are made aware of
this requirement.
address condition endorsement requirements prior to submitting for building
approval may result in unexpected delays.
Reason for condition
To ensure that works will comply with the Council’s standard
requirements.
Sediment and erosion control measures, sufficient to
prevent sediment leaving the site and in accordance with an approved soil and
water management plan (SWMP), must be installed prior to the commencement of
work and maintained until such time as all disturbed
areas have been stabilised
and/or restored or sealed to the Council’s satisfaction.
A SWMP must be submitted as a Condition Endorsement prior to the issue of any
approval under the
Building Act 2016
or the commencement of work,
whichever occurs first. The SWMP must be prepared in accordance
the Soil and
Water Management on Building and Construction Sites fact sheets (Derwent Estuary
Program, 2008), available
Contamination Management Plan for the site, as required by the Pitt & Sherry
Site Contamination Appraisal.
All work required by this condition must be undertaken in accordance with the
approved SWMP.
Advice: This condition requires further information to be submitted as a
Condition Endorsement. Refer to the Condition Endorsement
advice at the end of
this permit.
Reason for Condition
To avoid the pollution and sedimentation of roads, drains and natural
watercourses that could be caused by erosion and runoff from
development.
All onsite excavation and disturbance in the areas
identified in the Austral Tasmania report (dated 21 Feb 2020) and shown as
moderate archaeological potential (shown in yellow in the diagram upon
p.20) must be monitored and excavated in accordance with recommendations
of the above report. Should any features or deposits of an archaeological nature
be discovered on the site during excavation
disturbance:
1. All excavation and/or disturbance must
stop immediately; and,
2. A qualified archaeologist must be engaged to attend the site and
provide advice and
assessment of the features and/or deposits discovered and make
recommendations on further excavation and/or disturbance;
3. All and any recommendations made by the
archaeologist engaged in accordance with the above subclause 2 must be complied
4. All features and/or deposits discovered and excavated must be reported
to Council within 1 day and prior to the conclusion of the
excavation;
5. A qualified archaeologist must undertake an audit of all bulk
archaeological materials such as worked sandstone blocks, 19th century
cobblestones suitable for reuse. These bulk archaeological materials shall be
retained on site subject to the approval
of their removal by the
6. A copy of the archaeologist's advice, assessment, and recommendations
obtained in accordance with the above sub-clauses 2, 3, and
5 must be provided
to Council prior to the commencement of building work (excluding excavation and
demolition) in the entry and lobby
area marked on Ground + Level 1 Plan DA-02
Rev C dated 30 September 2021.
Excavation and/or disturbance must not recommence until approval is granted
from the Council.
Reason for condition
To ensure that work is planned and implemented in a manner that seeks to
understand, retain, protect, preserve and manage significant
archaeological
All artefacts of high interpretative value and/or
rare or otherwise significant as determined by the qualified archaeologist
in accordance with Condition HER 6 must be incorporated into an
on­site interpretation and history.
An interpretation plan must be prepared and submitted and approved by Council
prior to occupation.
The on­site interpretation must be:
in accordance
with the approved interpretation plan;
incorporate
the artefacts described above;
located in a
publicly accessible space; and
provided upon
completion of the development.
Reason for condition
To ensure that there is public benefit from archaeological
investigations.
The audit report prepared in accordance with
condition HER 6, must be submitted and approved as a Condition Endorsement prior
commencement of building work (excluding excavation and demolition) in
the entry and lobby area marked on Ground + Level 1 Plan DA-02
Rev C dated 30
September 2021.
The audit report must also demonstrate how the finds described in condition
HER 6, sub- clause 5 are to be incorporated into the development
in landscaping,
vertical or horizontal surfaces, or other designed or decorative features.
Revised plans must be submitted and approved
as part of the Condition
Endorsement showing the recommendations of the audit report in accordance with
the above requirement.
All work required by this condition must be undertaken in accordance with the
approved revised plans.
Advice: This condition requires further information to be submitted as a
Condition Endorsement. Refer to the Condition Endorsement
advice at the end of
this permit.
Reason for condition
To ensure that archaeological evidence is retained, protected and preserved or
otherwise appropriately managed.
The recommendations in the report "HB20090 ­
Site Contamination Appraisal ­ 98 Argyle Street by Pitt & Sherry",
24 March 2020, must be implemented and maintained for the duration of
construction of the development. Specifically:
Contamination Management plan (CMP) should be prepared prior to the commencement
of works, which should detail management measures
for the protection of
construction workers and management of potentially contaminated soil and
groundwater, triggers and contingency
2. If significant soil and or groundwater contamination is encountered
during site works an appropriately experienced Environmental
Scientist should be
present to monitor ambient vapours and identify/sample potentially contaminated
soil. If significant contaminated
soil is identified, it may be required to be
excavated with validation sampling of the remaining soil to demonstrate it will
pose a health risk to futureoccupants.
Reason for condition
To ensure that the risk to workers and future occupants of the building remain
low and acceptable.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (8 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (416 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter