URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASLPDT/2024/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:16:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Suzanne Stephenson v Christopher John Bartlett [2024] TASLPDT 8; (17 December 2024)
LEGAL PROFESSION DISCIPLINARY TRIBUNAL
Suzanne Stephenson v Christopher John
[2024] TASLPDT 8
Suzanne Stephenson Applicant
Christopher John Bartlett Respondent
FILE NO: 01/20DT
DELIVERED ON: 17 December 2024 DELIVERED AT: Hobart HEARING DATE: 22 August
THE TRIBUNAL: M. E. O’Farrell SC (Chairman)
J Ker (Member)
M Shirley (Member)
application is dismissed.
application that either party wishes to make for the costs of the application
should be made in writing by no later than 4pm 10
January 2025, with supporting
submissions.
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: In person Respondent: In person
Decision Number: [2024] TASLPDT 8 Number of paragraphs: 81.
DETERMINATION
Introduction
determination relates to an application made to the Tribunal under
Legal Profession Act 2007
(Tas) (‘the Act’). It arises out of
a third complaint made to the Legal Profession Board of Tasmania (‘the
by the applicant against the respondent arising out of the
respondent’s conduct of her file between 2006 and 2013.
8 May 2020 the Board summarily dismissed the complaint in the following
The complaint concerns conduct alleged to have occurred more
than three years prior to the complaint being made, and absent a determination
of the Board pursuant to
section 428(2)
, is summarily dismissed pursuant to
section 433(1)(e)
of the Act as the Board does not have the power to otherwise
deal with it.
Otherwise, to the extent the Complainant is attempting to further agitate
matters in her complaint, or in relation to any parts of
her complaint which she
has subsequently amended, which have been the subject of previous complaints to
the Board which have been
dismissed, those matters are summarily dismissed
pursuant to
section 433(1)(b)
of the Act.
the reasons that follow, we dismiss the application.
Self-represented litigant
acknowledge that the applicant is self-represented and has from time to time had
difficulties with procedural requirements relating
to this application. However,
despite the disadvantages the applicant may have faced, the correct approach is
to ensure that both
parties obtain a fair hearing.
see the discussion of the analogous principles in
[2023] NSWSC 299
, [85]-[89].
Standard of proof
is well recognised that the standard of proof requires the Tribunal to
reasonably satisfied, and that threshold is not reached ‘by inexact
proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences’.
direct ourselves according to that standard.
Previous complaints to the Board
to this application, the applicant made two complaints to the Board. The first
complaint was made in 2013. It related to the
respondent’s conduct during
his retainer by the applicant to advise and represent her in relation to the
manner in which Child
and Family Services (‘CFS’) had dealt with a
complaint apparently made against the applicant by the applicant’s
daughter in 2006. The applicant instructed the respondent in her capacity as her
daughter’s litigation guardian, and in her
own capacity, to advise and
represent her in an action against the State (by its agency the Department of
Health and Human Services)
for negligence. The gravamen of the applicant’s
case was that CFS had not properly investigated allegations that she had
her daughter. The allegations initially were made by her daughter to
staff at her school. The school, in turn, reported them to CFS.
As a result of
that report, the daughter was placed in foster care from 5 October 2005 to 2
March 2006. The daughter later withdrew
the allegations against the
applicant first retained the practitioner in September 2006. A number of steps
were taken to pursue the action, culminating in
a writ being filed in the
Supreme Court in February 2009. This followed a letter dated 3 December 2008 in
which the respondent gave
advice relevantly about the applicable time limits in
relation to an action of this nature.
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
362 (Dixon J)
Board referred the first complaint for investigation. The Investigation Report
was made on 20 January 2015. The Board dismissed
the complaint in March 2015. We
note that there is an outstanding question, not the subject of this application,
as to whether the
applicant applied to the Tribunal under
to review the
Board’s decision. The Tribunal, separately constituted, will consider that
question. We put it to one side.
second complaint was made in May 2015. The Board summarily dismissed it in
August 2015. There was no challenge to that determination.
Magistrates’ Court proceedings
some time in 2018 the applicant instituted proceedings in the Magistrates Court
for damages in negligence. The matter was heard
on 10 August 2018 and 12
November 2018 before then Deputy Chief Magistrate Daly. On 12 November 2018 his
Honour gave
reasons for dismissing the action and ordered
accordingly. The Tribunal has had the benefit of audio recordings of the
proceedings,
as well as a transcript.
The present application
mentioned, the application in this matter is made under the Act,
has a long history before the Tribunal. It was first filed with the Secretary on
26 May 2020. It was one of the matters that awaited
the decision of
Profession Board v Disciplinary Tribunal
which was handed down
by Wood J on 15 November 2022.
then the Tribunal has endeavoured to manage the application to a hearing, with
directions hearings held on 14 February 2023,
27 March 2023, 21 August
[2022] TASSC 65.
2023 and 20 May 2024. On 14 June 2024 the matter was listed for hearing on 22
August 2024, when it was heard.
The complaint
far as proceedings under
are concerned:
The complainant, or
the Australian legal practitioner who is the subject of the complaint, who is
served with a notice of the determination
of the Board in relation to a
complaint may, within 21 days after the date of that determination –
(a) apply to the Tribunal or Supreme Court to have the matter to which the
determination relates determined by the Tribunal or Supreme
provision affords an applicant with an opportunity to have the Tribunal review
the determination of the Board
in relation to the complaint
. Accordingly,
it is important to identify the complaint.
applicant’s complaint to the Board was filed 30 April 2019.
its reasons determining the complaint, the Board distilled the matters of
complaint as follows:
The specific nature of the
Practitioner’s alleged ‘misleading’ of the Board, as it
appears from the Complainant’s
e-mail complaint correspondence dated 26
and 27 May 2019 respectively, which she confirms constitute her complaint, is as
Practitioner misled the Board by providing to the Board at the time the First
Complaint was being investigated, evidence in relation
to relevant time limits
that was contrary to the evidence given by the Practitioner during the
Magistrates Court proceedings.
Practitioner misled the Board by providing to the Board at the time the First
Complaint was being investigated in relation to
Civil Liability
, evidence that was contrary to the evidence given by the
Practitioner during the Magistrates Court proceedings.
The other allegations in the present complaint are references and allegations
relating to past conduct of the Practitioner, which
have previously been dealt
with to finality by the Board and the Magistrates Court. Further, the
Complainant’s other asserted
‘allegations’ are in the
Board’s view, no more than a statement of fact, or traverse information
which is irrelevant
to the complaint at hand.
the hearing before us the applicant took issue with this formulation. She
submitted that she did not have input into the formulation
of the complaint
this manner, that her complaint was much wider, and that she did not agree with
the formulation. She referred us to an exchange of
emails between her and the
Board in May 2019. It is important to set out the sequence.
a letter to the applicant 14 May 2019, the Board set out its belief that the
allegation was:
Bartlett mislead (sic) the Board in circumstances where:
made a complaint in 2013 with respect to Mr Bartlett;
complaint was investigated and ultimately dismissed by the Board on 31 March
2016 you were involved in a civil action against Mr Bartlett which was finalised
in the Magistrates Court in December 2016;
the Magistrates Court hearing Mr Bartlett gave clear evidence about why he did
not provide any advice to you prior to 3 December
2008 with respect to time
Board, in its determination to dismiss your 2013 complaint, stated that there
was evidence that Mr Bartlett had given earlier
advice about time
believe that Mr Bartlett mislead (sic) the Board during its investigation and
that Mr Bartlett did not give you advice about time
limits prior to his letter
dated 3 December 2008.
email 21 May 2019 the Board asked (amongst other things) the applicant to
confirm that allegation A, as set out above, was correct,
and whether there were
any further allegations or amendments she wished to add.
26 May 2019 the applicant sent the Board an email attaching amended wording and
saying that she was ‘happy for you to suggest
any further wording.’
She wrote, however, that she would like ‘all of the information included
in the complaint wording,
so that the issues she had raised were not
overlooked.’
document that was attached to that email included the
Allegations of complaint
A. Mr Bartlett misled the Board in circumstances where:
made four complaints in 2013 with respect to Mr Bartlett
complaints were either dismissed because the action occurred outside of the 3
year time limit (and in LPBT opinion the behaviour
would not be viewed as
professional misconduct) and/or investigated and ultimately dismissed by the
Board on 31 March 2015.
(With regard to my 2013 complaint that Mr Bartlett did not advise me at any
time while he acted for me, approx 8 years, that the Department
benefitted from
significant legislated protections which could impact the likelihood of success,
I would like to advise that I provided
evidence to LPBT of letters which were
dated within the 3 year LPBT time limit where Mr Bartlett referred to his
initial advice letter
and reiterated that advice; however LPBT didnt accept that
as being within the 3 year time limit.)
Also the LPBT decision stated that there was evidence that Mr Bartlett
provided time limit information in his letter of 3/12/2008
and that there was
"evidence that he gave earlier oral advice to the complainant" about time limits
. LPBT made no mention in their
2015 decision of the fact that with his advice
of time limits in his letter of 3 December 2008, he also wrote that the time
may have already expired; or that he wrote several letters after this date
where he said time limits were an issue, he also wrote
a letter advising that he
may have found a way around the time limit issue, but still wrote subsequent
letters stating time limit
One of my complaints involved significant time delays in Mr Bartlett
responding to me of 7 months, 5 months, 4 months and 2.5 months;
another of my
complaints involved the fact that these time delays impacted upon my ability to
have my complaints actually investigated
by LPBT because of the 3 year limit,
and Mr Bartlett would have been aware of the 3 year limit.)
2016 you instigated civil action against Mr Bartlett which was finalised in the
Magistrates Court in December 2018; two court hearings
were held, one in
November 2018 and one in December 2018.
the Magistrates Court hearings Mr Bartlett advised that he did not provide any
advice about time limits until his letter of
3 December 2008, when he also wrote
that the time limits may have run out. Mr Bartlett also gave clear evidence of
the reasons why
he decided not to provide you with time limit information until
3 December 2008, that being: the Ombudsmans report hadn't arrived,
the Medical
Certificate supplied at the initial consultation between Mr Bartlett and Sue did
not attribute Sues adjustment disorder
to the Departments actions, and that Mr
Bartlett was waiting for date of discovery to become an issue.
was a case against a government department, we were suing for damages
(negligence, failure to act) and during the Magistrates
Court hearing Mr
Bartlett advised that he did not ever consider the
Civil Liability Act
acted for you (approx 8 years); he said
Civil Liability Act
not apply to this action and is not relevant; he advised he was not troubled at
and the fact that he didn’t give you any advice about that ;
he agreed that he did not advise you that the Department had a
"right to be
protected under the Act" or would likely argue " its right to be protected under
the Act" until letter dated September
2012; when asked if the Departments "right
to be protected under the Act" would likely encompass the
Civil Liability Act
he responded "no"; He stated that he believed that he shouldn't have considered
because he "formed the opinion that the issues were other than
When instructed by you in writing he failed to provide and identify which
section of which Act he was referring to
when he wrote the
Department will likely argue "its right to be protected under the Act" and when
the Magistrate asked him if he had
a section of the Act in mind when he wrote
this , Mr Bartlett replied "No I didnt your Honour".
Board, in its determination to dismiss your 2013 Complaint, stated that there
was evidence that Mr Bartlett had given earlier
oral advice about time limits.
The Board , in its determination to dismiss your 2013 Complaint identified the
legislation that applied
to this matter , and included the
Civil Liability Act
in their list.
believe that Mr Bartlett misled the Board during its investigation when he did
not advise the Board that he did not give you advice
his letter dated 3 December 2008,(when he also noted that time may have run
believe that Mr Bartlett misled the Board when he did not advise the Board that
he did not ever consider the Civil Liability
while he acted for you (
approx 8 years), and that he did not give you advice that the Department
benefitted from legislated protections
Civil Liability Act
when you gave him written instructions requesting him to supply the meaning of
his written comment" the department will likely
argue its right to be protected
under the Act" he failed to comply with those written instructions; and that he
advised in the Civil
Court hearing that when his file notes referred to
"statutory provisions" he was not referring to the
Civil Liability Act
asked by the Magistrate did you have a section of the Act in your mind when you
(the department will likely argue its right to be protected under
Act),his response of "no , I didnt your Honour" is bemusing.
The LPBT 2015 decision states "In the Boards view the legislation relevant to
the Complainants action was Childrens and Young Persons
and their Families Act
Civil Liability Act 2002
Limitation Act 1974
' and "where his advice
refers to statutory provisions,
the Boards view it was relevant,
accurate and appropriate having regard to the extent of his instructions" and
"the complainant was
advised in the initial 2006 advice letter that
Liability Act 2002
The LPBT decision letter states
"the complainant was advised in the
initial 2006 advice that the civil liability act 2002 applied. The civil
liability act 2002 contains
some provisions which impacted on the complainants
legal claim, such as the requirement for there to be
psychiatric illness in order to make
claim for mental harm
the formula restricting quantum for non-economic loss
The complainant
was advised of relevant matters by letter dated 29 May 2009 and in the initial
letter of advice given in 2006."
There is no letter on the file that I viewed in Mr Bartletts office, nor in
my files dated 29 May 2009.
The only reference to CLA in Mr Bartletts initial advice letter of 2006 is
"The civil liability act 2003 (sic) is applicable and after applying the
deductible (approx $4000) you may not receive much in the
way of damages at
were also submissions about ‘out of time complaints’, which had been
requested by the Board in its letter 14 May
2019 given that ‘the
circumstances that give rise to [the applicant’s complaint], that [the
respondent] mislead (sic)
the Board, occurred prior to the Board’s
determination dated 31 March 2015.’
27 May 2019 the applicant wrote an email to the Board ‘in addition
to’ point 4 of the previous amended complaint. It
regard to Mr Bartletts letter dated 3/12/2008 where he advises information about
time limits for the first time, and also writes
that the time limit may have run
did not ever receive the letter dated 3/12/2008
is no record on Mr Bartletts files of me responding to this letter
had no knowledge of the contents of this letter until I viewed Mr Bartletts file
under discovery for the Civil court hearing in
Nov and Dec 2018
copied the entire letter by hand at that stage because I did not have this
letter on my files.
is no record of Mr Bartlett trying to phone me on or around 3/12/2008 to give me
the urgent news that time was running out.
writ was not filed until early Feb 2009, (10/2/09 I believe from
Bartlett did not follow up this important letter for over a month
is a record of a flurry of calls from me about filing the writ before time runs
out in Jan 2009, after Mr Bartlett phoned me
in January 2009
Bartlett would not file the writ until I paid him the money to do so, even
though time was running out ( this matter was about
a period from October 2005
to late Feb 2006 from memory, although Mr Bartletts 3/12/08 letter states it was
from May 2005 I believe)
had previously paid Mr Bartletts account promptly and had a perfect credit
history and was working, so he had no reason to believe
that I would not pay his
will immediately be noted that the formulation of the complaint in the manner
requested by the applicant is a combination of factual
allegations, particulars,
evidence and submissions. The correspondence reveals that the Board gave the
applicant the opportunity
to set out her complaint in full, and that she availed
herself of that opportunity.
so far as the substance of the complaint sought to raise the matters complained
of in the first complaint in 2013 that were dismissed
by the Board in 2015, the
Board’s powers were exhausted. That left for consideration whether there
were any and, if so, what
new allegations left for the Board to consider.
Board was well aware of the applicant’s emails of 26 and 27 May 2019. It
specifically identified them in its formulation
of the complaint. It is apparent
that on 14 June 2019 the Board wrote to the respondent with all of the documents
that made up the
applicant’s complaint, including the original complaint,
the Board’s correspondence to the applicant of 24 May 2019 and
applicant’s emails of 26 and 27 May 2019, together with the annexure.
our view, the only ‘new’ matters that can be discerned from all of
that material are the two allegations relating to
the respondent misleading the
Board during the investigation of the first complaint. Those complaints were
substantially informed
by the evidence that was given in the Magistrates Court
proceedings.
the lengthy submissions the applicant has made in this application it is fair to
say that she is unable to accept, or at least
fully accept, that the
respondent’s conduct alleged in her first complaint in 2013 was the
subject of a determination by the
Board, which forecloses it from being agitated
again as either unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct.
we take the contrary view. The Board was correct to find (at least so
far as it was concerned) that those matters had been ‘dealt
follows that we agree with the Board’s formulation of the substance of the
complaint in its reasons determining the complaint
and we have no ability to
consider the substance of any of the conduct that was determined in relation to
the first complaint.
The nature of a review
a memorandum from the Secretary of the Tribunal dated 25 July 2024 the parties
were invited to make submissions in relation to
the nature of a hearing under s
458(1)(a) and the power of the Tribunal to receive further evidence. We
determine those issues, as
hearing of an application under s 458 is a re-hearing. It does not involve a
completely fresh hearing.
It has however, been held, in cases such
as this one, where the Board has made a determination under s 433 of the Act,
that the Tribunal
has a discretion to receive further material, which is not
constrained in the same way as it is in a re-hearing following an actual
by the Board.
‘...before the Board’
is a question about the content of material that was ‘before the
In our view, the material that was before the Board is
confined to the Board, deliberating as a Board. The Board is defined by the
s 4 as the Legal Profession Board of Tasmania established by section 589. So
established, under s 589 of the Act, the Board
is a body corporate. It consists
of the members identified in s 590(1), who are appointed by the Governor under s
590(2). Because
the Board is a corporation, its proceedings must be conducted
collegially, at properly constituted meetings of the Board, which are
by the provisions of schedule 3 of the Act. The Board’s determination of
the complaint in this application was duly
made at one of its meetings.
relevant determination made in relation to the complaint, as we have identified
it, is made under s 433(1)(e) of the Act. That
determination was made because
the Board had not made a determination under s 428(2) of the Act. The question
whether, in the exercise
of its jurisdiction under s 458 in relation to a
dismissal of a complaint under s 433(1)(e), the Tribunal should ask itself
Boland v Boxall
[2016] TASSC 30
, [8], [9] (Blow CJ).
Legal Profession Board v Disciplinary Tribunal
[88] (Wood J).
See for example,
Legal Profession Board v Disciplinary
[2022] TASSC 65
, [71] (Wood J).
the allegations should have been dismissed ‘essentially on the materials
the Board’ has been described elsewhere as
‘uncontroversial’.
Accordingly,
we conclude that the relevant record of proceedings, the documents and other
exhibits that were ‘before the Board’
are those which were before
the Board for consideration at the meeting at which the complaint was
determined. Those documents were
supplied by the Board to the Tribunal and
provided by the Tribunal to the parties for the purposes of this
application.
‘...otherwise ordered’
Tribunal has a discretion to receive fresh material in the case of a review of a
dismissal under s 433.
applicant had previously applied to the Tribunal for summonses to issue in
respect of a number of documents. The Tribunal rejected
the bulk of that
application, but issued directions to the Board to provide some documents. In
response, the Board provided the following
(a) Letter from the Board to respondent 7 January 2015, marked A2 at the hearing
(b) File note of the Board’s investigator 12 January 2015, marked A3.
A2 and A3 were admitted as a result of a concession from the respondent that he
had no objection to their admission. However, they
have been of no real
assistance to the Tribunal.
applicant also sought to tender the following documents:
(a) email from her to the Board’s investigator 3 December 2014;
(b) email from her to the Board’s investigator 4 December 2014; and
(c) bundle of documents containing the practitioner’s letters of advice
during the period from 2006 to 2013.
ruled against the admission of these documents. They would not have assisted us
in the determination of this matter.
applicant also indicated that she wished to call the following
(a) Mr Paul Turner SC, the previous Assistant Solicitor-General (Litigation)
(referred to by the applicant as the previous DPP);
(b) Mr Mark Rapley, the present State Litigator (referred to by the applicant as
the present DPP);
(c) Mr Frank Ederle (the Board’s CEO);
(d) Ms Emily Warner (the Board’s investigator of the first complaint);
(e) the Respondent.
467(5)(b) provides the parties with a right to give and adduce evidence and
examine any other person who gives evidence at
a hearing of an application made
under s 464. The present application is not made under s 464. The present
application is made under
s 458(1) of the Act. Section 458(5) expressly excludes
the operation of s 467(5)(b) from the hearing of an application made under
458(1). Accordingly, the ‘statutory right of the parties to adduce
evidence and examine witnesses cannot be invoked by the
in a hearing under s 458.
The request also sought ‘the complete file of the
Legal Profession Board v Disciplinary Tribunal
[60] (Wood J).
Issues on complaint
the reasons already given, there are only two issues of substance for this
review. They relate to whether the respondent relevantly
misled the Board when
it conducted its investigation in 2014 and 2015 and made its determination in
2015 by providing to the Board:
(a) evidence in relation to relevant time limits
(b) evidence in relation to
Civil Liability Act
that was contrary to the evidence given by the Practitioner during the
Magistrates Court proceedings.
The Board’s reasons
Board firstly noted that, before it could proceed with a matter of complaint
which occurred more than 3 years before the complaint
was made, it would need to
be satisfied of the elements of s 428. That section provides:
(1) A complaint may be made about conduct of an Australian legal practitioner
irrespective of when the conduct is alleged to have
(2) However, a complaint cannot be dealt with (otherwise than to dismiss it)
if the complaint is made more than 3 years after the
conduct is alleged to have
occurred, unless the Board determines that –
(a) it is just and fair to deal with the complaint having regard to the delay
and the reasons for the delay; and
(b) the complaint is capable of amounting to an allegation of professional
misconduct and it is in the public interest to deal with
the complaint.
(3) A determination made under
is final and cannot be challenged in any proceedings by the complainant
or the Australian legal practitioner concerned.
first point to note is that the first complaint related to an investigation on
12 February 2014, which concluded on 15 January
2015. The complaint in this
matter was filed on 30 April 2019. Thus, the provisions of s 428(2) were engaged
and the Board was correct
to consider them.
Board then went onto consider the matters of complaint, namely, whether it had
been misled in the respects alleged in the complaint.
It found in each case that
the allegations were unsustainable.
our view, the only conclusion that it was possible to draw from those findings
is that the complaint was not capable of amounting
to professional misconduct,
and that s 428(2)(b) was not engaged. Having reached that view, the Board had no
option other than summarily
to dismiss the complaint, because, under s 433(1)(e)
it was ‘not one that the Board [had] power to deal with’.
Board, however, went on to consider whether it was just and fair to deal with
the complaint. It found that it was not. It also
considered whether it would be
in the public interest to deal with it and found that it was not. The premise
for both findings was
that the allegations, having no substance, could not
amount to professional misconduct. It was not necessary to make those further
findings. Nevertheless, the Board concluded:
The Board does not
therefore make a determination pursuant to section 428(2) of the Act so as to
enable it to deal with this complaint
concerning the Practitioner’s
conduct, which occurred more than three years prior to the date of the
Board, having declined to make a determination under s 428(2), it seems clear
that the provisions of s 428(3) have no effect on
the Tribunal’s
Section 428
is incontrovertible that the matters of complaint before us are made out of time
and that s 428(2) is engaged. If, having reviewed
the material that was before
the Board, we are not satisfied, to the requisite standard, that the
respondent’s conduct amounts
to professional misconduct, we must dismiss
the application. We will deal with that question first.
Legal Profession Board v Disciplinary Tribunal
Professional misconduct
421 provides that for the purposes of the Act,
professional
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of an Australian legal practitioner,
where the conduct involves a substantial or consistent
failure to reach or
maintain a reasonable standard of competence and diligence; and
(b) conduct of an Australian legal practitioner ... occurring in connection with
the practice of law ... that would, if established,
justify a finding that the
practitioner is not a fit and proper person to engage in legal practice.
adopt the evaluative assessment approach to professional conduct, referred to by
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v Barclay
There is no need to set that passage out in full.
question is whether we are satisfied to the requisite standard that any of the
conduct complained of amounts to professional misconduct.
Time limits
the hearing before the Magistrate, the respondent gave evidence that the
applicant ‘didn’t advise me about time limits
until December
2008.’ She identified a letter of 3 December 2008, ‘where he advised
time limits’.
respondent also said that he gave advice about time limits in his letter 3
December 2008. He does not appear to have taken issue
with the point made by the
applicant that the letter of 3 December was the first time advice was given.
However, he sought to explain
the case by the fact that there was no issue with
time limits, because the date of discoverability had not yet arrived.
Magistrate’s finding, was:
[2022] TASSC 14
, [11]; applied in
Legal Profession Board of
Tasmania v Williams
[14] (Estcourt J, with whom Jago J and Porter AJ agreed).
Undoubtedly Mr Bartlet provided no advice - I agree with Mrs Stephenson,
there was no advice provided about time limits until December
that’s my understanding of the evidence. Mr Bartlett admitted as much.
was common ground before us that the respondent did not give the applicant
advice about time limits until he wrote the letter 3
December 2008. There is no
reason to think differently.
question is then what he told the Board during the investigation of the first
complaint and whether that was misleading. The genesis
of the allegation
emanates from a file note, produced to the Board by the respondent during the
investigation. The note is dated
19 September 2006. The text is:
L on way + refer to escape provisos in Act and 3 yrs so need all docs and
reports. You’ll chase.
respondent explained to us at the hearing that ‘L’ meant
‘letter’. The Board’s
reasons record:
[31] In the Investigator’s view, the handwritten note suggested that
some verbal advice about the limitation period may have
been given by the
Practitioner, however, the Investigator went on to say that she had not sought
to further investigate that matter.
The Board was satisfied however, that the
brief file note amounted to evidence of the Practitioner informing the
Complainant of time
limits. It did not make a specific finding that he had done
points arise from this material. The first goes to the alleged inconsistency
between the evidence given by the practitioner in
the magistrates’ court
and the evidence he gave to the Board. The second goes to the sufficiency of the
Board’s investigation.
her written submissions, and at the hearing, the applicant urged upon us that
when dealing with legal regulatory authorities, such
as the Board, practitioners
have an obligation of candour. We agree with that general
proposition.
Law Society v Scott
[2007] TASSC 72
, [19]-[20]
(Tennent J); on appeal
Scott v Law Society
[2009] TASSC 12 (Full
pressed on the question of what she said it was that the applicant did that
misled the Board, she submitted, in effect, that
had the practitioner been
candid with the Board and told them everything, they would not have concluded as
they did. The effect of
the applicant’s submission is that because there
was some evidence of advice having previously been given in 2006, the respondent
must have misled the Board by not telling it that he did not give advice until
December 2008.
meets the immediate problem that all of the evidence, including the file note of
19 September 2006 and the letter of 3 December
2008, were produced to the Board
by the respondent with his file during the investigation into the first
complaint. It is palpable
that the Board knew about both documents, because they
are referred to in its reasons for determination of the first complaint. The
letter of 3 December 2008 is expressly mentioned, and there is an oblique
reference to the file note being ‘evidence’
of advice. It is
difficult to fathom what more the respondent could have done. This is not a case
in which the respondent sought
to secure an advantage during the investigation
by concealing evidence. To the contrary, the evidence was produced.
other problem we perceive with this allegation, is that if, in fact, the
respondent gave advice about time limits in 2006, it
detracts from the
proposition that he failed to give the applicant advice until 2008, which was
the thrust of the applicant’s
case on this point before the
Magistrate.
this respect the applicant is faced with a contradiction. On the one hand she
positively asserts that the respondent did not give
her advice until 2008, so
para 7 of the complaint, as set out in the applicant’s email 26 May 2019 .
You believe that Mr Bartlett misled the Board
during its investigation when he
did not advise the Board that he did not give you advice about time limits prior
to his letter dated
3 December 2008,(when he also noted that time may have run
her case it must follow that the respondent would at least have been mistaken
had he told the Board he gave the earlier advice. Yet
at the same time, the
gravamen of the complaint is that he failed to tell the Board he gave the
earlier advice.
final point we make is that the issue concerning misleading the Board is
somewhat inverted. It relies on evidence given in Court
at a time well after the
respondent was dealing with the Board during the investigation. It is well
recognised that memories are
affected by the passage of time. Inconsistent
evidence in similar circumstances is common. The mere fact of an inconsistency
one exists) should not be elevated to conduct that misleads, unless there is
good reason to do so. We cannot find, in any of the
material, any suggestion
that the respondent misled the Board in 2014 and 2015.
are unable to see how these circumstances could elevate the respondent’s
conduct to professional misconduct. Although we
approach the matter differently
from the Board, we agree with its conclusion that there is no substance in this
is unnecessary, therefore, to consider the point about the sufficiency of
Board’s investigation.
Civil Liability Act
great deal of time was spent during the Magistrates Court hearing in relation to
whether the respondent ought to have provided advice
to the applicant about the
effect (if any) of
Civil Liability Act 2002
applicant’s case before the Magistrate was that the respondent should have
provided the advice. She submitted that the CFS
benefited from significant
legislative protections in the CLA, and she specifically referred to
respondent on the other hand said he did not consider that
was relevant.
Essentially, he said there was a generally endorsed writ filed in February 2009;
that no statement of claim had been
filed; and, accordingly, no defence had been
received from the State, which would have put him on notice in relation to
whether any
of the principles expressed in
were relevant.
Magistrate rejected the applicant’s submissions, in our view most
significantly because:
(a) he found that the applicant’s case against the CFS involved the
positive conduct of its officers (we interpolate, not whether
the CFS had failed
to act because of lack of resources); and
(b) he was not satisfied that the applicant would not have incurred the fees to
investigate the liability of the CFS had she known
That is, his Honour considered that there was a significant element missing from
the chain of causation that the
respondent’s conduct of the file was causative of any damage.
question is whether anything that was put to the Magistrate by the respondent
was inconsistent with what he had previously told
the Board during the
investigation in 2014 and 2015. It is notable that the Board did not think
applicant’s complaint in 2013 referred to the failure to give advice in
relation to the ‘significant protections under
statute’. The
Board’s investigator provided a detailed analysis to the Board about a
number of statutory provisions,
of the CLA, which are the
only substantive provisions that appear to be relevant.
investigator also considered the advice that was apparent from the
respondent’s file that was given to the applicant by the respondent.
is very important to remember that we are not here concerned with the quality of
the respondent’s advice. We are concerned
only with whether he relevantly
misled the Board. We also reiterate our comments that the inquiry into whether
the conduct misled
the Board is somewhat inverted.
is it, then, that the respondent did, or said, to the Board or its investigator
that was inconsistent with what the respondent
said to the Magistrate? We are
unable to discern from the material before us that there was anything
inconsistent put to the Board
in 2014 and 2015 concerning the relevant
provisions of the CLA,
Even if there was, we positively reject the
assertion that the Board was misled. To the contrary, it had the
respondent’s file,
a fulsome analysis of the advice given by the
respondent to the applicant, and an analysis of the relevant provisions of the
agree with the Board and conclude that this complaint lacked
Other matters
one point, the applicant made an assertion before us that the Board was biased.
We mean no criticism of the applicant when we say
that the assertion was made
without reference to the authorities on questions of bias. The applicant is not
a lawyer. There is, in
our view, no basis for an assertion of bias on the
materials before us and we reject it.
the extent that the applicant made other criticisms of the probity of the Board,
its staff and the respondent, we likewise reject
dismiss the application.
Act, s 481 provides:
481. Cost orders of Tribunal
(2) The Tribunal may make orders requiring an Australian legal practitioner
whom it has not found guilty of unsatisfactory professional
professional misconduct to pay costs (including costs of the Board and the
complainant), if the Tribunal is satisfied
(a) the sole or principal reason why the proceedings were instituted in the
Tribunal was a failure of the Australian legal practitioner
to cooperate with
the Board or prescribed authority; or
(b) there is some other reason warranting the making of an order in the
particular circumstances.
(4) The Tribunal may make an order requiring the complainant to pay costs if
the Tribunal is satisfied that the complaint is vexatious,
misconceived,
frivolous or lacking in substance.
(5) An order for costs –
(a) may be for a specified amount; or
(b) may be for an unspecified amount but must specify the basis on which the
amount is to be determined.
(6) An order for costs may specify the terms on which costs must be paid.
(7) The Tribunal may make an order directing that costs be taxed in
accordance with the
Court Rules 2000
application that either party wishes to make for the costs of the application
should be made in writing by no later than 4pm 10
January 2024, with supporting
submissions. The Tribunal will then give further directions as to the
disposition of that application.
M. E. O’Farrell SC
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (846 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter