URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMC/2024/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Police v Clark [2024] TASMC 10 (7 August 2024)
[2024] TASMC 10
MAGISTRATES COURT OF TASMANIA
Police v Clark
[2024] TASMC
CLARK, Craig
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
DECISION OF:
CATCHWORDS:
Traffic Law – Licencing of drivers – Tasmania –
Disqualification or suspension of licence – Restricted licence
Driving in contravention of conditions of licence
Traffic Law – Particular offences – Alcohol and drug related
offences – Disqualification under
Road Safety (Alcohol and Drugs)
– Defendant driving outside conditions of restricted licence
– Whether such driving is capable of amounting to breach
Safety (Alcohol and Drugs) Act
(driving while
disqualified) and/or
Vehicle Traffic Act
1999 s 18(10) (driving in
breach of conditions of a restricted licence)
Statutes – Acts of Parliament – General approaches to
interpretation – to give operation and effect to Act –
meaning to every word in an enactment
Criminal Law – Burdon of proof – Exemption, exception, proviso,
condition, exercise of qualification – Driving in
breach of a condition of
restricted licence – Onus on defendant to prove
REPRESENTATION:
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Tasmania Police
Respondent:
Number of Paragraphs:
Serial No.10/2024
File No. 33518/2023
POLICE V CRAIG DOUGLAS CLARK
REASONS FOR DECISION
7 August 2024
Introduction
defendant is charged with two counts of driving while disqualified in breach of
Road Safety (Alcohol & Drugs) Act
1970 (“RSA”), those
occurring on two separate occasions on 4 July 2023. The first count alleges that
he drove while disqualified
on Quail Street at St Helens at 12:30 p.m. that day
and the second alleges that he drove again on the same day on Tully Street at
1:20 p.m. The defendant has pleaded not guilty to the matter. The matter
proceeded to hearing at St Helens Court on 3 July 2024 after
which I reserved my
Prosecution case
of the prosecution case is not in issue. The defence did not take issue with the
fact that the defendant was driving as and when
alleged and it is common ground
that the defendant was disqualified from driving pursuant to the RSA at the
time. Further it is common
ground that at the relevant time the defendant had a
restricted licence allowing him to drive as required to run his earthmoving
contracting business from his home just north of the township of St Helens.
prosecution case is that at about 12:30 p.m. on 4 July 2023 Senior Constable
Minehan saw the defendant, a person he knew, driving
a red sedan on Quail Street
at St Helens heading in a generally easterly direction. He was alone in the car.
The officer believed
that the defendant’s driver’s licence was at
that time suspended due to non-provision of a medical report to licencing
authorities. Believing that the defendant was therefore not licenced he then
looked about for the car in the immediate area and could
not find it. Then some
50 minutes later at approximately 1:20 p.m. he again saw the defendant driving
on Tully Street and then turning
onto the Tasman Highway. At that time his wife
was in the car with him. He followed the car travelling in a generally northerly
on the Tasman Highway (obviously heading to the defendant’s
his property. An
exchange that I will discuss later occurred and then they move further onto the
property where the exchange between
the defendant and Senior Constable Minehan
continued. The body worn camera recording of this put into evidence shows that
the initial
discussion at the defendant’s driveway started at about 1:21
p.m. so the officer’s sighting of the defendant in Tully
Street must
necessarily have actually been some minutes before that.
is fair to say that the exchange between the defendant and Senior Constable
Minehan was highly conflictual. At that time the defendant
was accompanied by
his wife who alighted from the vehicle, as did the defendant.
is clear from the outset of the interaction that the officer believed that the
defendant was not authorised to drive at all by
virtue of him having failed to
provide a medical report or similar to licencing authorities. The defendant took
issue with that.
He indicated that he had not received any notice of the need to
do so and that he was licenced to drive. It is clear from that interaction
the defendant vehemently disagreed with Senior Constable Minehan’s initial
suggestion about his licence situation. In
short, he indicated that he had a
restricted licence that he got
at considerable legal expense
in court in Launceston.
response to this the defendant produced his restricted driver’s licence
and the related court order and gave those to the
officer. At that point Senior
Constable Minehan asked the defendant why he was driving to which the defendant
responded that he was
driving to pick up his wife. The officer then opined that
picking up his wife was not authorised by the restricted licence. Later
pressed about his restricted licence the officer asked the defendant if he had
his logbook (it being a condition of his restricted
licence that he have one,
complete one and produce it to police). In answer to that the defendant asserted
that he had, he did not
and talked about recording trips on his phone. In that
regard Senior Constable Minehan then opined that that did not comply with
conditions of his restricted licence.
is common ground in this case that the defendant had obtained an order
authorising and granting him a restricted licence from a
Magistrate at
Launceston on 3 April 2023. The relevant conditions of that licence were as
Condition 1:
that the applicant be authorised to drive as follows – at times as
required for the applicant’s self-employment
as Craig Clark Contracting on
each day Monday to Sunday between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
Condition 2:
that every journey shall be without deviation by the shortest and most
practicable route without unnecessary interruption.
Condition 3:
Condition 4:
that the applicant shall maintain a logbook which records a written record of
each journey which they will carry with
them at all times and produce it if
called upon to do so by a police officer or other authorised officer.
Condition 5: the
logbook shall record the following information:
date, time and place of departure;
purpose of each journey;
place of destination; and
time of arrival at the destination.
Condition 6:
Condition 7:
Condition 8:
prosecution case is put on the following basis:
a) That the defendant was disqualified from driving at the time.
b) That the defendant’s restricted licence did not authorise him to
lawfully drive for the purposes he was driving at either
12:30 p.m. or at 1:20
c) The defendant’s restricted licence did not authorise him to drive
lawfully at any time that day in any event because he
did not have a logbook
with him when he drove.
In this regard Mr Gillard for the prosecution referred me to
Police v Thomas
(2018) TASMC 7
, a decision of my own. That is authority
for the proposition that the defendant here is liable under both the RSA,
s 19A (driving
while disqualified under that Act) or the
Vehicle and
Traffic Act
(driving in breach of a condition of a
restricted licence) in the above circumstances.
The defence case
the defendant, Mr Olding submitted that at the relevant time the defendant was
driving as required for his business to:
a) provide a quote at Sunshine Court at St Helens, and then;
b) to collect some parts at “Busters” (a spare parts outlet in St
Helens which was on his way to and from Sunshine Court)
and to then;
c) see a Greg Maney to arrange a battery load test for a work vehicle;
d) that the defendant’s wife had found the defendant’s car while he
was doing these later jobs and sat in it and waited
until the defendant returned
to the vehicle and they then drove home;
e) that the defendant had used his mobile phone before he left home that morning
to voice record a voice message that he was going
to Joy McPhee’s house at
Sunshine Court at St Helens to give her a quote and how he was going there; and
f) that the defendant’s practice was that at the end of each day where he
worked, that he would then enter those recorded voice
messages into his written
diary (a document of the type he had been keeping for years) and thereby keep a
written record of the day’s
journeys and then erase his voice messages
from his phone. On the basis of this and (e) above it is submitted that the
was driving as authorised by his restricted licence in that he was
complying with its logbook conditions.
defendant gave evidence to this effect. In doing so he produced his mobile phone
and demonstrated the method by which he said
he would record his journeys for
work before he drove pursuant to his restricted licence. This was done by means
of recording a simple
voice message. He said that on the day in question at
around 10:30 a.m. that he recorded that he was going to Joy McPhee’s
at Sunshine Court at St Helens to provide a quote for her for some earthmoving
tasks. His evidence was that he did so and took
the shortest, most practical
route there (from his home heading generally south on the Tasman Highway –
which then becomes
Cecilia Street, the main thoroughfare through St Helens
proper, then turning left onto Quail Street heading generally easterly and
turning right off Quail Street into Sunshine Court). He said he was alone in his
car when he did so. He said that he went to
her place at
and was there for perhaps 45 minutes or an hour, or
thereabouts talking to Ms McPhee to provide her with a quote for the work that
she required at that site.
said that after he had been to Ms McPhee’s that he returned retracing the
same route, that is that he drove from Sunshine
Court turning left onto Quail
Street and from Quail Street in a generally westerly direction where it
intersects with Cecilia Street
it and then north on Cecilia Street (which then
becomes the Tasman Highway) to the turnoff to his own address just north of St
He said that on his way home he stopped twice, firstly at
"Buster’s East Coast Auto Parts”
for some spare parts (I
assume for his work vehicle), and then to
"Greg Maney’s"
unspecified) to arrange for a battery load test (again I assume for a work
vehicle). He said in his evidence that when he
left one of those places (which
was unspecified) that he returned to his motor vehicle and his wife was sitting
in the passenger
seat of that having come from her work. He said that she had
got a lift to work in St Helens earlier that day and found her way independently
to his car. They then drove home. In the course of that Senior Constable Minehan
pulled in behind them and eventually pulled them
over on their driveway. He gave
no explanation I could follow as to how this took him onto Tully Street.
Defence submission re Thomas
Olding referred me to
McKenzie v Hiesler ex parte Hiesler
(1987) 2Qd R at
559, a decision of the Full Court of Queensland. Mr Olding submitted that was a
binding authority.
I apprehend Mr Olding’s submission to me, if I was satisfied that his
client did drive to give the quote and to get parts
and to arrange a battery
check for work vehicles, then he was driving as authorised by his restricted
licence and therefore not driving
while disqualified. Reference was also made by
him to the prosecution’s decision to charge the defendant with driving
disqualified (RSA
and to not charge him with driving
in contravention of the conditions of his restricted licence (
Vehicle and
Traffic Act
doing the best I can, I apprehend the defence submission to be that if I were to
find the defendant was driving for the purpose
authorised by his restricted
licence, then any technical failing regarding his logbook (or indeed a breach of
any other condition)
does not mean that he was driving whilst disqualified. I
say that as I remain somewhat confused because at the end of his submission
enquired as to whether the defence position was that my decision in
was incorrect and, somewhat confusedly, Mr Olding disavowed that
proposition. I take that disavowal to be a polite response to my
blunt language
rather than a concession that
was correctly decided.
provides as follows:
“19A. Driving
while disqualified under this Act
(1) A person who, except in so far as he is authorized to do so by a
licence issued pursuant to an order made under
Vehicle and
Traffic Act 1999
, drives a motor vehicle while he is disqualified from driving
under this Act is guilty of an offence.
Penalty: In the case of –
(a) a first offence – a fine not exceeding 40 penalty units or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months (or both) and
a further period of
disqualification (not exceeding 3 years) fixed by the court; and
(b) a second or subsequent offence – a fine not exceeding 80 penalty
units or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months
(or both) and a further
period of disqualification (not exceeding 5 years) fixed by the court.
(2) A person who drives a motor vehicle while his or her licence is
suspended under section 18B(3)(a) is guilty of an offence.
Penalty: In the case of –
(a) a first offence – a fine not exceeding 40 penalty units or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months (or both) and
a further period of
disqualification (not exceeding 3 years) fixed by the court; and
(b) a second or subsequent offence – a fine not exceeding 80 penalty
units or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months
(or both) and a further
period of disqualification (not exceeding 5 years) fixed by the court.”
VTA, s 18(10) provides as follows:
“(10) A person who
holds a restricted driver licence must not drive a motor vehicle in breach of a
condition imposed in accordance
with an order of a court.
Penalty: In the case of –
(a) a first offence – a fine not exceeding 40 penalty units or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months, or both; and
(b) a second or subsequent offence – a fine not exceeding 80 penalty
units or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months,
decision of
McKenzie v Heisler
is somewhat difficult to understand in the
absence of a clear understanding of the statutory scheme on which it was based.
Unfortunately
I can find no way to revisit the statutory scheme as it was in
Queensland in the mid-1980s.
the defendant had been disqualified from driving on 24 January
1986 but on the same day he was granted a
"provisional licence"
under s 20A of the then
Queensland Traffic Act
provisional licence allowed him to drive a motor vehicle only in the course of
his employment between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
on some days. The provisional
licence appears to be akin to what we, in this state, call a restricted
11 June 1986 at 7:50 p.m. (so nearly three hours after the allowed hours) the
defendant was intercepted driving by police. This
driving was not in the course
of his work and of course it was also outside the hours he was permitted to
drive in any event. He
was convicted under s 15(1) of the Queensland
legislation of
"not being at the time a holder of a driver’s licence
authorising him to drive a motor vehicle on that road"
(a provision akin to
unlicenced driving under our
Vehicle and Traffic Act
appealed that conviction and was successful. He argued that he could not be in
which required that
"a person shall not at any time
drive a motor vehicle on a road unless at that time he is the holder of a
driver’s licence authorising
him to drive that vehicle on that
argument mounted there was that the provisional licence was a driver’s
licence for the purposes of the provision. Of course
the definition of a
provisional licence under the Act confirmed that such a licence was a
driver’s licence.
court held that rather than being liable for unlicenced driving under s 15
of the relevant legislation, the defendant should have
been charged under
s 20A(10) which was essentially a charge of driving otherwise than in
accordance with the restrictions to which
a provisional licence is subject.
I understand the defence argument is that, by analogy, the same applies here,
that is the defendant could have been charged with
breaching the
Vehicle and
Traffic Act
but cannot be guilty of driving whilst
disqualified in breach of s 19A of the
Road Safety Act
held a driver’s licence when he drove.
do not accept that. Section 15 of the then Queensland Act made it an ingredient
of the offence that the defendant was not the holder
of a driver’s licence
authorising him to drive on that road. In
the defendant had
such a licence. Here, the charge is quite different. In order for driving
pursuant to a restricted licence to
afford a defence to a charge of driving
whilst disqualified, it must be shown that the restricted licence in question,
granted under
Vehicle and Traffic Act
authorised that
Vehicle and Traffic Act
permits a court to make an order
authorising the issuing of a restricted licence (subject to conditions as
specified in the order).
Therefore the language of
of the then
Queensland Act and s 19A of the
Road Safety Act
Vehicle and Traffic Act
are very different.
Road Safety Act
makes no reference to the absence of a
"driver’s licence"
as being an ingredient of the offence. It
simply requires the following elements:
a) driving;
b) whilst subject to a disqualification;
c) albeit with an exception that such driving is permitted if it is authorised
by a restricted licence.
Therefore while
might at first blush seem to be
relevant, it is not on all fours with the provisions under consideration in this
of course, while
McKenzie v Heisler
is the decision of a court of
superior jurisdiction, it is not one that I am bound by and it could only be a
persuasive authority
in any event, but that is not to the point in this case.
Burden of proof
case raises another issue. That is the matter of the burden of proof. The RTA,
Road Safety (Alcohol and Drugs) Act
starts with the
following words:
“(1) A person who, except in so far as he
is authorized to do so by a licence issued pursuant to an order made under
Vehicle and Traffic Act 1999
, drives a motor vehicle while he
is disqualified from driving ...”
Evidence Act
s 142A provides as follows:
“142A. Proof of exemption
(1) It is not necessary in any complaint or indictment to specify,
negative or prove any exemption, exception, proviso, condition,
qualification.
(2) If a defendant or an accused relies on any exemption, exception,
proviso, condition, excuse or qualification, the proof lies on
the defendant or
the accused.”
question which therefore arises here is does the prosecution need to prove
beyond reasonable doubt that the defendant was driving
in a way unauthorised by
his restricted licence in order to make out the charge; or having been
disqualified and having proved that
the defendant was driving during that period
of disqualification, is it for the defence to establish – on the balance
of probabilities
– that the defendant was driving as authorised by his
restricted licence?
my view the latter formulation is correct. Section 142A and its predecessors
have been discussed in this state on a number of occasions.
(See: Wood J in
Merrigan v Oakley
[2016] TASSC 58
[27].) Earlier in
State of Tasmania v Mayes and O’Mahony
Slicer J referred with approval to Neasey J in
Tasmanian (Unreported Decision List A No. 11 of 1982 at [3-4] where
his Honour said referring to s 110 of the
Evidence Act
1910 (the direct
predecessor of s 142A):
"Section 110 has its counterpart in
most if not all of the other Australian States and elsewhere. The point of
origin of these various
provisions lies in the English Licensing Act of 1872 ...
the purpose of which is explained by Blackburn J (as he then was)
v Humphreys
(1873) LR QB, 483, at pp 488-9. Reference has been made to this
in a number of Victorian cases in which the relevant Victorian section
review - see, e.g.,
Bell v Hyde
[1939] VicLawRp 44
(1939) VLR 300
Barritt v Baker
[1948] VicLawRp 85
(1949) Arg LR, 144
at p 146, and
Harris v Macquarie Distributors Pty Ltd
[1967] VicRp 28
(1967) VR 253
Typically, provisions such as this relate to the specification of a
statutory offence which indicates that it shall be committed in
a given set of
circumstances subject to certain stated exceptions. The existence of such
exceptional circumstances in any particular
case is in the nature of things
usually a matter wholly or largely within the knowledge of the defendant, and
therefore is extremely
difficult for the prosecution to disprove. It has been
thought just in such cases to place the onus upon the defendant to prove the
exception if he relies upon it by way of defence. (There is a similar rule at
common law – see Cross on Evidence, 2nd Aust
edn, pp 95-96, para 4.23.)
This is so with s 110 of the Tasmanian Evidence Act. It applies to the
specification of an offence in an indictment or complaint,
in respect of which
it provides that it shall not be necessary to specify or negative any exemption,
exception, etc, nor necessary
for the prosecutor or complainant to prove it as
part of his case. It further provides that proof of any such exemption,
etc, relied upon by the defendant shall lie upon him. ...”
my view what his Honour sets out there is relevant in this case. All the
prosecution need to prove in order to make out the case
is that the defendant
was disqualified at the relevant time and that the defendant was driving at the
relevant time. If it be that
the defendant asserts that his driving was lawful
by means of him having a restricted licence and complying with its conditions,
it is for him to establish the existence of the right to drive under the
restricted licence and his compliance with its terms and
conditions. Proof of
the existence of a restricted licence is obviously easily obtained and can be
established by either party. Indeed
here the prosecution tendered without
objection a copy of the court’s order granting the defendant the
restricted licence as
referred to above. However, evidence of compliance or
non-compliance with its conditions will nearly always and certainly very often
be something the prosecution cannot be privy to.
support for this interpretation is of course to be found in the language of s
19A itself (see my emphasis in para 26 above)
which specifically refers to an
exception. So, in my view, here the defendant must establish on the balance of
probabilities that
he was authorised to drive by virtue of his restricted
the defendant gave evidence and was cross-examined, his wife, who was present
during the second act of driving seen by Senior
Constable Minehan, did not. The
defendant’s explanation for her failure to do so was simply that she was
at work locally at
St Helens. Neither of the people (nor any employee) at the
two businesses that he asserted he attended to get parts or to arrange
battery load test gave evidence. No receipts, records or documents as to
purchase of items or the arranging of tests et cetera
were tendered in evidence
to corroborate his attendances. How it was that the defendant’s wife
materialised inside his car
while he was out of it in either the spare parts
shop or at the auto-electricians was entirely unexplained by the defendant to
Tully Street is not in a direct route of travel either to or from the
defendant’s home to Sunshine Court. I note of
course that Quail Street
necessarily is. How he came to be in Tully Street was entirely unclear.
terms of there being any corroboration of the defendant’s version of
events Ms Julie McPhee gave evidence. She confirmed
that the defendant came to
her beach house at Sunshine Court on 4 July 2023 to give her a quote for some
earthworks there. She was
challenged about that and was unmoved that that was
the day that he attended. She said the defendant was there for between three
quarters of an hour and an hour. When asked as to when he arrived she said that
it was around
“10, 11, 12-ish”
and in cross-examination said
that it was
“some time before lunch”
accept on the balance of probabilities her evidence that the defendant did
attend at her place for the purposes of his business
for a period on the morning
of the day in question. In that regard I note that the defendant’s
evidence before me was that
he had recorded this journey to her place on his
phone before he left home at around 10:30 a.m. and on his evidence he said that
he believed he left at around 11:00 a.m. or thereabouts.
Constable Minehan saw the defendant alone and heading in a generally easterly
direction on Quail Street at 12:30 p.m. That
is, as I understand it, not
inconsistent with the defendant driving towards Sunshine Court and from his
not only consistent with that.
the state of the evidence the timing of the defendant’s driving alone
causes me to have real doubts about the defence case.
On the defendant’s
version of events he must necessarily have been driving to
Ms McPhee’s at around 12:30 p.m. –
i.e. far later than he
thought he did and very much at the absolute outside of her estimate. That is
possibly just a timing error
on the defendant’s part and on Ms
McPhee’s, something people do all the time. However, on the evidence of
both the defendant
and Ms McPhee he was present at Sunshine Court for between 45
minutes and an hour after having arrived. I accept that as a reasonably
estimate of the time they spent discussing the jobs she wanted him to do. If the
defendant had got to Ms McPhee’s
place soon after being sighted at 12:30
p.m. it is difficult to understand how, less than 50 minutes later (noting the
interception
back at the defendant’s driveway after all of his driving,
starts at only 1:20 p.m.), he was seen on Tully Street having completed
quote work at Sunshine Court then having travelled for the purpose of his other
work related tasks, completed those tasks at
two separate locations and got home
within the period both he and his witness asserted he was likely at Sunshine
Court arranging
in all this it should not be forgotten that when he was pulled over by Senior
Constable Minehan and after he had himself raised
the existence of his
business-related restricted licence when asked why he was driving the defendant
asserted that he was driving
to pick up his wife. For the defence, Mr
Olding’s submission (based on the defendant’s answer to his
questions about
this) was that by that stage of the exchange the defendant was
confused about the police position – particularly the erroneous
his medical reports espoused initially by Senior Constable Minehan – and
that his answer is therefore one arising
from confusion and not to be relied on.
I reject that submission entirely.
by the time that issue was raised, the discussion with Senior Constable Minehan
had moved on from the matter of the provision
of the medical certificate (for
the purposes of this case a red herring) and onto the defendant’s
assertion as to the existence
of his restricted licence, he having agreed he was
disqualified. It was the restricted licence which was being discussed at that
point. When asked about the conditions of it he said
bother reading that shit”
as he handed the court conditions he had in
his wallet to the officer. The defendant was plainly asked why he was driving
simply said he was picking up his wife from work saying he was driving
“to Grace’s work to pick her up at Parkside, nothing
. The defendant had been cautioned at that point. He then went on
to assert that the licence allowed him to drive to collect her from
work saying
“I’m employed to do that. I’m her carer”
challenged about that he asserted
“that’s near enough to being
. I take that as meaning that getting her from work was
“near enough”
to his business or work. Further, directly
after so advising, Senior Constable Minehan challenged him about that, the
officer asserting
fairly forcibly that that was not for the purposes of
employment. The defendant belligerently asserted
“I’m employed by
Grace to pick her up”
. It was only when he was asked about why he was
driving on Quail Street earlier did he mention other work tasks. He said
gone to see Greg Maney about his battery test. He did not mention
answers were an admission and made when the very issue of the purpose of his
driving was the point of the discussion. There was
no confusion. When challenged
he asserted
“I reckon you’re giving me a hard time”
take that to be his opinion that the officer was being pedantic about his
driving and his compliance with his restricted licence
conditions. The defendant
then talked about getting his wife
“down at the shops”
– as opposed to his earlier assertion he’d collected her from
Parkside. He then said she had got a lift
“to Marika’s”
and they drove from there. All in all the interaction between the defendant
and police was one which also showed that the defendant’s
events was confusing, contained multiple versions of what he did and an exchange
which clearly demonstrated that the defendant
paid no heed at all to the
restrictions on his driving imposed by the court.
the exchange with Senior Constable Minehan the defendant was also asked if he
had his logbook. He said he did not. When it
was put to him that this too was a
breach of the conditions of his licence the defendant said that if he was
driving for work
“outside St Helens”
that he would record his
journeys on his phone. He again expressed exasperation about the officer being
pedantic about that.
interaction with police captured on the tendered body worn camera footage played
in court does not support the defence case that
the defendant was driving for
business purposes. Nor does it support that he recorded the trip or trips on his
phone as asserted
in the defence case before me. That interaction contains
admissions as noted above which the defendant then attempts to either backtrack
from in a most unimpressive fashion and when again challenged he repeatedly
expressed frustration that the officer is being overly
technical or pedantic
but not to the extent Mr Olding
submitted. Indeed that submission is really not
properly founded on any reasonable view of the interaction.
am I able to accept the defendant’s evidence in court as honest and
reliable. Firstly, it is at odds with a great deal of
what he said to Senior
Constable Minehan. The assertion that the differences arise because he was
confused on the day carries no
weight whatsoever. Secondly, it was
uncorroborated by any reliable evidence. I accept he went to Ms McPhee’s
that morning,
but I can make no finding, even on the civil standard, about the
timing of that trip, let alone link it to the sighting on Quail
Street at 12:30
p.m. Her evidence is at best equivocal. There is no corroboration of the
defendant’s version of events as
given in court from any other source.
Thirdly, based on his recorded interaction with Senior Constable Minehan, the
defendant plainly
had a very cavalier attitude about compliance with the
conditions of his restricted licence. There was nothing about his evidence
his demeanour which caused me to change that view. He was an unimpressive
witness. I formed the strong view that his evidence
before me was no more than a
highly selective reconstruction based on some elements of what he asserted to
Senior Constable Minehan
and the fact that he had been to Ms McPhee’s at
some point that day, albeit likely earlier that day and unrelated to the
Senior Constable Minehan observed.
in all this it should be kept in mind that the geographic area encompassed by
all the journeys suggested is a small one and
the distances are short. It is in
no way impossible, improbable or unlikely that the defendant undertook a number
of journeys that
day before he was seen on Tully Street – some work
related, some not. That entirely accords with the defendants’ admissions,
his plainly cavalier attitude to the strictures placed on him by his restricted
licence and Ms McPhee’s evidence.
being the case the defendant has not satisfied me on the balance of
probabilities that he was driving as required for his earthmoving
business at
either 12:30 p.m. or at 1:20 p.m.
any event, for completeness I am not satisfied that when he drove that day that
he was complying with the conditions of his restricted
driver’s licence as
to a logbook in any event. It was put to me in his evidence that at the time
that he drove there was a
recording of his journeys on his phone. Mr Olding
asserted that that recording was a “document” pursuant to the
Evidence Act
and therefore
the logbook condition of his restricted licence had been complied with. I reject
that argument.
I am not satisfied that the defendant has established, even on the civil
standard, that such a recording was made before
any journey that day. In his
interaction with police he asserted he adopted this system when he drove
“outside St Helens”
. Plainly the trip or even trips here
where inside the St Helens local area. Mr Olding neglected to pursue the tender
of the defendant’s
diary which it might be said would evidence his alleged
habit of reducing his voice recordings into writing at the end of each day
his diary, including on the day in question. However, even accepting he did that
later that day after his interaction with police,
that goes nowhere in proving
he had made such a recording on his phone earlier on this day. By that evening
the defendant was on
notice about all this. Such a written record would have
ex post facto
and would carry no weight in establishing it was
based on a recording off his phone.
even if he did record the trips he made on his phone before he made them and
carried that with him, the defendant has not
complied with the logbook
condition requires that the record in the logbook be a
“written record
of each journey”
and that it be
“carried with him at all
times and produced to a police officer or other authorised officer if called
on his version he possessed no such
“written record”
drove. The fact that a phone recording is a document within the extended meaning
of that term in the
Evidence Act
2000, s 3 does not turn it into a
“written record”
. It remains a voice recording and no more.
charges are proved.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (160 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter