URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASSC/2025/48.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:21:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Superannuation Commission v Sandman [2025] TASSC 48 (30 September 2025)
[2025] TASSC 48
: SUPREME COURT OF
Superannuation Commission v Sandman
[2025] TASSC 48
: SUPERANNUATION
SANDMAN, Elizabeth
DELIVERED ON:
30 September 2025
HEARING DATES:
28, 29, 30 October 2024
Superannuation – Public service funds – Other matters –
Claimant had right in 1985 to purchase four teacher studentship
becoming permanent employee – Right not exercised at the time –
Claimant left and rejoined the Fund –
Claimant applied to be allowed to
exercise the right on the ground that right lost otherwise than through her
fault – Where
letter of initial acceptance to Fund referred to information
brochure which explained the right – Court not satisfied on claimant's
evidence that brochure not with the letter – Relevant comprehensible
information available – Court not satisfied failure
to make the election
was otherwise than through claimant's fault – Claim rejected.
Sector Superannuation Reform Regulations 2017
regs 101, 105
Superannuation [1013]
Superannuation – Public service funds – Other matters –
"Employee" for purposes of retirement benefits legislation
excluded a permanent
part-time employee – "Permanent part-time employee" defined to mean a
person who during a year was required
to work for at least 40 percent of the
hours of full-time work that would be required – Claimant arranged with
employer to
work at 60 percent of a full-time workload for a period of about two
months – Claimant deemed by Fund management not to be
an "employee" and
not required to make contributions – Claim that the right or benefit of
being a contributor lost otherwise
than through the fault of the claimant
– Meaning to be attributed to the phrase "during a year" in the definition
of permanent
part-time employee – Proper meaning was that the period of
part-time work had to be for at least one year – Claim for
Retirement Benefits Act
(Inspector of Taxes)
v Hasslacher
[1977] 3 All ER 396
Minister for Immigration
Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
, considered
Commonwealth v Baume
[1905] HCA 11
(1905) 2 CLR 405
Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
194 CLR 355
referred to.
Aust Dig Superannuation
REPRESENTATION
O'Farrell SC
: C McKenzie, J
Solicitors:
Tremayne Fay
Rheinberger
Respondent:
McLean McKenzie and
Judgment Number:
[2025] TASSC 48
paragraphs:
Serial No 48/2025
File No 2293/2022
SUPERANNUATION COMMISSION v ELIZABETH SANDMAN
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT PORTER AJ
30 September 2025
Introduction
Sandman, the respondent, is employed as a teacher within the Tasmanian
government department with responsibility for education.
It has had various
names; for a long time simply the Education Department and it is referred to in
these reasons as "the Department".
The respondent is presently on extended
leave. She started as a student teacher on 1 January 1981 and became a permanent
on 1 January 1985. On 4 February 1985 she was accepted as a contributor
for full benefits in the Retirement Benefits Fund Contributory
Scheme (the
Scheme), then administered by the Retirement Benefits Fund Board (the Board)
which was replaced in 2017 by the applicant,
the Superannuation Commission. In
1989 it was contended by the Board that the respondent's contributor status
ended on 10 September
of that year. The respondent continued to work as a
teacher and rejoined the Scheme on 1 April 1999.
6 December 2019, pursuant to reg 101 of the
Public Service Sector Reform
the respondent made a "lost rights application",
primarily arguing that she should be permitted to re-join the Scheme backdated
the commencement of her studentship. There are further, and later, rights
said to be lost up until 1999. Pursuant to reg 104 of the
2017 Regulations, the
Commission conducted a hearing of the application and made a decision adverse to
the respondent. As provided
for by reg 105(1) of the 2017 Regulations, the
respondent required the Commission to apply to the Supreme Court for a
declaration
in respect of the Commission's decision. That application was filed
on 26 August 2022 and is now before the Court. The application
declaration affirming the Commission's final decision.
legislative framework for the application
Scheme was established under the
Retirement Benefits Fund Act
and was continued pursuant to the
Retirement Benefits
(the 1982 Act) and the
Retirement Benefits Regulations
. The Scheme was further continued by way of the
Retirement Benefits
Retirement Benefits
Regulations 1994
followed by the
Retirement Benefits Regulations
. That Act was repealed by the
Public Sector Superannuation Reform
, and the 2017 Regulations were made pursuant to that Act.
101(1) of the 2017 Regulations provides as
Power of Commission to reinstate lost
(1) If the Commission is satisfied, after the
inquiry, if any, that the Commission thinks fit, that –
(a) a person has, otherwise than through his or
her own fault, lost or ceased to be entitled to a right, privilege or benefit
(i) these regulations; or
Benefits Act 1982
Benefits Act 1993
(iii) the former regulations –
to which he or she was otherwise entitled or which he or she might have
otherwise obtained; and
(b) it is equitable that he or she should be
allowed to have the enjoyment of that right, privilege or benefit –
the Commission, with the approval of the Minister, may permit that person to
exercise the right or grant to him or her the privilege
or benefit."
noted, these proceedings are brought and governed by reg 105 of the 2017
Regulations. Relevantly, that regulation provides as
"105 Right to apply to Supreme Court for declaration as to
(1) If the Commission has made a final decision under
regulation 104
to an applicant, the applicant may, within 6 months after notification of the
final decision, require the Commission to
apply to the Supreme Court for a
declaration in respect of that final decision.
(2) Subject to
subregulation (3)
the Supreme Court may, on an application under
subregulation (1)
make a declaration, having regard to facts existing and events that had occurred
at the time when the Commission's final decision
was made, as to the validity or
otherwise of that final decision.
(5) The Supreme Court may make a declaration –
(a) affirming the Commission's final decision; or
(b) remitting the matter to which the Commission's final decision relates to
the Commission for reconsideration in accordance with
the directions of the
(c) varying the Commission's final decision; or
(d) setting aside the Commission's final decision and substituting another
decision for that final decision of the Commission.
provisions to reg 105 were considered in
Loudon v Retirement Benefits Fund
[1993] TASSC 144
(s 87 of the 1982 Act) and
Elmore v Retirement
Benefits Fund Board
(reg 123 of the 2005
Regulations); on appeal,
Retirement Benefits Fund Board v Elmore
23 Tas R 36
FC). It is established that these
proceedings are by way of a hearing de novo, and in practical terms the
respondent has the burden
of adducing sufficient evidence to support findings of
fact favourable to her:
, first instance, at
, Wright J dealt with the requirement that the claimed lost right,
privilege or benefit must have occurred
than through the
of the person concerned. It is clear his Honour treated this as
involving a question of causation. At [45]-[46] his Honour said causation
essentially a matter of common sense, citing
March v Stramare
[1991] HCA 12
CLR 506. (See
Mason CJ at 515-516, Toohey and Gaudron JJ agreeing); Deane J at
522-523). Wright J added that the exercise did not involve apportioning
The application of the "common sense" test of causation to the requirement of
absence of fault in reg 101 is questioned by
the respondent. Counsel submitted
that the requirement was not akin to a test of causation for liability purposes
and that the ordinary
meaning of the word "fault" should be applied. Relevantly,
"fault" is defined in the
New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary
"default, failing or neglect."
The Macquarie Dictionary
ed, provides a definition of "a failing; an error or mistake."
used in reg 101, I think the provision is synonymous with the state of being
blameworthy. In any event, I am not sure I understand
the point of the argument.
There may be a misunderstanding of the view Wright J took. If there is an act,
omission or inaction which
can be said properly described as "fault", and fault
has a causal connection with the loss of the right, privilege or benefit, it
cannot be said that the loss was otherwise than through the person's fault. It
is the word "through" which assumes significance.
It is correct, as counsel
observed, that what Wright J said in
was an observation, but it
has persuasive quality, and I propose to adopt the same approach. It was
suggested that in
, Blow CJ took a different view to
but the passage in the judgment was not identified and I cannot see where his
Honour said anything inconsistent with it.
to what is involved in the phrase,"right, privilege or benefit", this was
addressed by Blow CJ at first instance in
(above). At [30], his
Honour said that the word can have a variety of meanings. His Honour cited
[1988] AC 806
at 825. In the relevant passage Lord Oliver said the
variety of different senses can be both popular and jurisprudential. In
FC at [50] I summarised the remainder of the passage as follows:
"It may mean a right to something in respect of which the law will
appropriate remedy, it may signify a privilege of doing something without
interference, or it may signify no more than
a hope of or aspiration to a social
FC, the parties accepted that the word "right" would mean a just
claim whether legal, prescriptive or moral, or something is due by
virtue of a
just claim. "Privilege" was suggested as meaning a right or immunity enjoyed by
a person beyond the common advantages
of others, or the grant of a special right
or immunity, while "benefit" meant a payment or other assistance, or anything
for the good of a person. I think the agreed position in that case is
entirely appropriate. Plainly, there is a degree of overlap.
A "right" can
involve an ability to take advantage of a process as provided for in relevant
legislation, or a contingent or inchoate
FC at [13],
is no doubt correct, as Blow CJ noted in
, first instance, at [30],
that the regulation should be given a beneficial interpretation, and not a
narrow or a restrictive one.
But any liberal or beneficial interpretation must
be one that falls within the confines of the actual language employed, and one
which is allowed by a fair meaning of the words used:
[49]. The ability to choose a construction which promotes a beneficial purpose
exists only insofar as any question of
construction presents a choice:
Attorney-General (Tas) v CL
[2018] TASFC 6
28 Tas R 70
it does not necessarily follow that because a person has lost a right, privilege
or benefit through no fault of their own,
that it is open for the Commission to
grant relief. There remains the requirement in reg 101(1)(b) that it is
equitable that the
person be allowed to have the enjoyment of the right,
privilege or benefit. That is a broader consideration, and one which I described
FC at [69] as a "controlling mechanism" which provides an
overriding requirement for equity. "Equitable" can be taken as meaning
characterised by equity or fairness; just, right or reasonable. Considerations
of these things must occur in the broad context of
the operation of the Scheme.
these proceedings the respondent advances six "lost right claims". (I will adopt
the manner of reference as used by counsel and
refer to claims in that way, and
by number.) The first, lost right claim 1, is the claim in respect of the
starting date of the respondent's
membership of the Scheme, the contention being
that it should be 1 January 1981. Lost right claim 2 relates to the decision by
Board in September 1989 that the respondent's contributory status ended on
10 September 1989. This was because of the Board being
advised that the
respondent had become a permanent part-time employee. By way of the definitions
in the 1982 Act, such a person was
not an employee for the purposes of the
Scheme. Lost right claim 2 is first to be determined primarily based on the
construction
of the relevant definitions in the 1982 Act. If the respondent
succeeds in respect of lost right claim 2, there is no need for me
lost right claims 3 to 6.
the reasons that follow, I am satisfied that the Commission has made a correct
decision in respect of lost right claim 1 and
will make a declaration
accordingly. However, I find for the respondent in respect of lost right claim
2. I will set aside the decision
relating to that claim and make a decision in
substitution. Although, as I have said, in that situation there is no need for
make a decision about the remaining claims, in discharge of my obligations
I will say something about them.
Lost right claim 1
right, privilege or benefit said to have been lost is the right to purchase the
studentship years from 1 January 1981 to when
the respondent was accepted into
the Scheme in February 1985. That acceptance occurred after being employed in a
permanent full-time
capacity on 1 January 1985 and the Board sent the respondent
a letter dated 7 February 1985 in confirmation. In addition to a "circular"
do with taxation, the letter refers to an "enclosed brochure" which, the letter
explains, gave a brief introduction to the cover
provided. The last paragraph of
the letter is as follows:
"If you have not already done so, please
indicate the desired rate of contribution to the Fund by completing the form
'Rate of Contributions
to Retirement Benefits Fund' which has been included with
this letter. Until the election form is returned to this office you will
treated as a member of 40 years' service scheme,
as explained in the
, with deductions from pay at the rate of 5.5% of salary." [Emphasis
brochure in evidence, said to be that referred to in the letter, comes from the
documents before the Commission at the hearing.
It is entitled "Membership and
Contributions" and is stated to be for employees who commence on or after 1 July
1982. There is no
argument that it was the brochure at least referred to in the
letter. The respondent does not dispute receiving the letter and the
Contributions form. The form signed by her on 25 February 1985 is in evidence.
Its receipt by the Board was acknowledged
by letter to the respondent of 12
March 1985. She elected to contribute at the rate of 2.75% of salary, being the
lower rate for
40 years' service. It is the receipt of the brochure which is the
2 of the brochure deals with the "Membership of Fund". Part 2(d) has a heading
in bold type; "Right of Trainees, Apprentices
and Students to Purchase
Recognition of Service". In short, it advises that student teachers and others
who were not regarded as
permanent employees are entitled to purchase service
retrospectively when they become permanent employees. Such persons must, within
one month of becoming a permanent employee, advise the Board of the intention to
pay the contributions due in respect of the whole
period of their training,
either in a lump sum or over a period of time not extending two years. As is
shown below, that advice summarises
the practical parts of the provisions of ss
27(1) and (2) of the 1982 Act. The brochure also contained advice that the
Superannuation
Branch of Treasury could be contacted for any enquiries about the
27(1) enabled the respondent, as a student teacher, to elect to pay
contributions for her studentship period. There was a
period of one month, or
such further time as permitted by the Board, in which to make the election. The
method of paying the prescribed
contributions for the retrospective purchase was
set out in s 27(2); a lump sum or over a period not exceeding two years as the
approved, subject to conditions as the Board imposes, including the
payment of interest. Section 27(3) provided that on making an
election, the
person was deemed to be an employee from a date not earlier than that on which
continuous service as a student teacher
commenced, and deemed to have entered
into an arrangement under subs (2) for the payment of the prescribed
contributions.
is common ground that in the period following the respondent's acceptance into
the Scheme, she had a right to make the election
under s 27(1) of the 1982 Act.
Although nothing turns on it, for the sake of completeness that proposition
needs to be explained.
The respondent may still at this time "purchase" the
years of her studentship but on, and with, less advantageous terms consequences.
Accordingly, the right is properly confined to the right under s 27(1) and it is
not contentious that that right has been lost. The
primary issue is whether it
was lost otherwise than through the respondent's fault. On the authority of the
decisions, the respondent relies on the proposition that the
failure of the Board to notify a person of a right under the Scheme,
inadequate explanation, can amount to satisfaction of the requirement of the
"absence of fault" requirement. That can be accepted
– see Blow CJ, first
instance, at [34]-[38] – and the Commission does not argue otherwise.
respondent addresses the receipt of the brochure in her primary affidavit in
these proceedings sworn on 6 February 2023. In the
first passage, she says that
when she joined the Fund, she does not recall being invited to purchase eligible
service. She has not
seen any evidence of any such invitation on the Board file
or that of the Department. She says she first saw a version of this brochure
– the 1992 version – as part of RTI disclosure, which seems to have
been in about 2019. Her position is that had she
received "an invitation "to
purchase past service, she would have done so back to 1 January 1981.
the same affidavit, she later refers to the receipt of the letter of 7 February
1985, the enclosed election form and the action
she took to elect the 2.75%
contribution. This she did on the advice of a friend. She says, "
then read the circular or brochure
as I was focused on my teaching demands."
[My emphasis] She says her knowledge of any provisions that would have permitted
purchase her studentship years comes from much later obtained RTI
documents but the "letter"from the Board made no reference to that.
cross-examination, the respondent first maintained that she has no memory of
receiving the brochure and had not seen it until
the RTI process. She confirmed
the process she went through to make the contribution election, but said she had
no recollection of
receiving the 12 March 1985 letter of acknowledgement.
Having been taken through the terms of section 2(d) of the brochure, the
respondent was asked whether she suggested that, if she received the brochure,
she had not been told about the entitlement to purchase
previous service. Her
answer and what followed is set out below:
I think – I
know that at the time, I would have looked at what was on that letter
that brochure to one side, if – not that I can recall receiving it. But I
would have put it to one side
. I was new to teaching, I was flat out,
trying to program for hundreds and hundreds of children. I never received any
other information
from RBF about this matter.
And there was nothing in the
front of that letter to draw my attention to the fact that I needed to look in
that brochure
studentship.
Mrs Sandman, the brochure is referred to on at least two occasions in the
letter?......
It didn't refer to the fact that I needed to address the
studentship issue in the letter.
But the letter enclosed the brochure, which was going to inform you of all
things about the – the superannuation scheme?......Yes,
but I was new to
teaching, new to superannuation. I couldn't – I couldn't have known that.
I couldn't have known that I could
buy that studentship, unless that – it
Unless you had read the brochure?......Well, true, true.
You chose not to, is that what you're telling us?......I'm not saying I
chose not to.
I put it to one side because I was a very new teacher with a
lot of – a lot of demands on my time
And it didn't seem to me
that it was important to read it straight away
. Nothing in that letter said
you need to refer to this section because you've just come off a studentship, to
purchase your studentship
" [Emphasis added]
a question or two, after being asked whether she looked at the four rates of
contribution as discussed in the
the respondent said, "
didn't look at the brochure. I didn't – I don't recall the brochure at
put in closing, the case for the respondent is based on her evidence that she
"does not recall being told about the option to
elect." That has the usual
ambiguity which attaches to that expression. It can either mean the person does
not have any recollection
one way or the other, or in a more colloquial sense,
it can be taken as a denial. I will assume counsel means the latter. The
Commission's
case is that the respondent was aware of the election but chose not
to make it, a position which is consistent with her choosing
to contribute at
the lower rate;
alternatively, that
the respondent did receive the brochure and, as she said, just put it to one
question of whether the respondent did or did not receive important documents is
one that arises in respect of later claims.
Counsel for the Commission was
critical of the respondent's credibility, citing (among other things) the
respondent's acceptance
of receipt of correspondence proven of being responded
to or supportive of her case, or of a much less important nature, while
attributing
blame for lost mail to the administration of various schools and at
times to the general postal system. Save to say that generally
the respondent
was non-responsive to many questions, I do not need to take the issue of her
credibility any further at this stage.
respect of the present claim, I take the view the respondent's evidence was
equivocal and unconvincing. I am not persuaded that
the brochure referred to in
the letter was not, in fact, with it. The information about the right was
readily understood. I am not
satisfied that the failure to make the election was
otherwise than through the fault of the respondent
I think it is probable that she was either aware of the election and simply did
nothing about it or simply failed to read the brochure,
something which I do not
consider a reasonable thing to have done in the circumstances. This claim is not
Lost right claim 2
right, privilege or benefit said to have been lost is that of contributor status
under the Scheme. As a permanent employee, the
respondent was an "employee" for
the purposes of the 1982 Act. Section 23(1) required "employees" to make
contributions to the Fund.
By s 25(3) contributions ceased to be payable after
the person ceased to be an employee. Up until 20 October 1989, the respondent
was an employee and required to contribute. On that date, the Board determined
that the respondent was no longer a contributor.
will later expand on the facts of the matter, but the Board's determination was
because it had been advised that the respondent
had reduced her working hours
for a short period of time. In the Board's view, that made her a "permanent
part-time employee" under
the Act which meant she was not an "employee" and
which, in turn, had the effect of putting the respondent in the position of
to elect to remain a contributor. The respondent elected not to do so,
and that issue is the subject of lost right claim 3. For the
moment, the focus
is on the Board's determination that the respondent was no longer an employee
but a permanent part-time employee,
and accordingly not required to contribute
to the Fund.
details of the relevant provisions of the 1982 Act are as follows. "Employee"
was relevantly defined as a person over the age
of 15 years and a permanent
employee within the meaning of the
Tasmanian State Service Act
, but did not include a
permanent part-time employee. It is the definition of that term in s 3 of the
Act which is at the heart of
the debate. A permanent part-time employee was
defined as:
" ... a person who is –
(a) during a year, required to work in an office or position –
(i) in the service of the State or in the service of an authority of the State,
...for at least 40%;
of the hours that he would be required to work if he were a full time
employee in that office or position; and
(b) paid at the same rate of salary for the period worked by him as a full-time
employee in that office or position would be paid
for working for the same
further facts, about which there is no dispute and as I find them to be, are as
follows. In about July 1989 the respondent applied
to the Department for
maternity leave. That was granted for the period 9 November 1989 to 25 May 1990.
For about two months before
being due to start that leave, the respondent
suffered illness because of her pregnancy. On the advice of her obstetrician,
she arranged
with the Department to reduce her working hours. There is no
documentation in relation to the process which took place, but there
documented outcome by way of a form entitled "Staff Movement Schedule to
Personnel Branch" dated 27 September 1989. Within that
document, and against the
heading of "Workload Variation", the respondent's then current full-time hours
were set out as 1.0, with
"NEW" being 0.6. The variation is noted as being from
11 September 1989 to 8 November 1989. In a remarks section there is a note,
"Decreasing TO .6 of FULL TIME", with that time to be split equally between
three schools: Railton, Wesley Vale and Spreyton.
to and including Friday 8 September 1989, the respondent had been at both East
Devonport Primary and Railton Primary with a 40/60
spilt. She was on sick leave
for the week commencing 21 August 1989 after which there was a two-week school
holiday break, taking
things through to 11 September 1989. The Department wrote
to the respondent on 5 October 1989 advising that following her current
of leave she would resume duty at Railton Primary School "as part-time teacher
on 11/9/1989 to 8/11/1989."
the end of her maternity leave the respondent took leave without pay until 17
September 1990, at which time she returned
to work at Spreyton at 40 per cent of
a full-time workload. Since then, apart from full-time working loads in the
periods 5 August
1999 to 6 September 1999, and from 22 September 2003 to 18
December 2003, the respondent has worked at various percentages of a full-time
load, all of which were 40 per cent or more.
20 October 1989, the Board wrote to the respondent. The manager stated he had
been informed by the Department that she was employed
"in a part-position" with
that Department. The letter continues:
"It may be possible to
continue to contribute to the Fund under Section 6(1)(c) of the
Benefits Act 1982
. Please complete the enclosed form indicating your intention
regarding contribution to the Fund and return it to this office.
It is important to note that should your application to be a contributor as a
part-time employee be approved you will deemed to have
become an employee within
the meaning of the
Retirement Benefits Act
. Accordingly, you
a contributor so long as you are continuously employed."
letter contained no explanation as to why employment in a "part-time position"
would lead to the situation of having to make
an application to remain a
contributor. Nor is there is any explanation about why the respondent would be
deemed to be an employee.
respondent relies on the position the Department has taken about the nature of
her employment. The evidence about this primarily
comes from the affidavit of
Paul Gourlay, the Department's Director of Human Resources. In summary, he says
that the respondent was
originally appointed as a full-time permanent employee
and there is nothing in the Department's files to suggest she has changed
or that she requested to be
an ongoing part-time employee. Mr Gourlay notes that while her workload has been
predominantly part-time
since 1989, the respondent has returned to full-time
work for periods in 1999 and 2003. He believes those periods are likely to have
been associated with staffing requirements at the school at the time. He says
the respondent's current status remains that of a permanent
employee "who holds
or 'owns' full-time status" but she is currently undertaking duties on a
part-time basis, noting that she is
presently on extended leave without pay.
relation to the "Staff Movement Schedule to Personnel Branch" document referred
to above, Mr Gourlay says this was an internal
document used at the time by the
then Personnel Branch to provide confirmation of changes for an employee to the
then Salaries Branch
so that any pay-related changes could occur. He says the
document primarily confirms the respondent has had a workload variation
set period, with the 0.6 workload being split between three schools.
his evidence, Mr Gourlay confirmed that his review of the respondent's file did
not reveal anything to suggest her status as a
permanent full-time employee had
ever changed. He said it is accordingly correct to say that in October 1989, she
had that status.
He also confirmed that for women who went on maternity leave,
even though they were on leave of absence, the employment status was
and remained so on their return. Mr. Gourlay referred to the respondent's
appointment under State Service legislation with
status being determined under
that legislation. The
Tasmanian State Service Act 1984
provided for the
appointment of permanent employees and temporary employees but not
Such things as part-time
work for permanent employees, leave entitlements and the like were done under
such things as Ministerial
directions, Commissioner's "Employment Instructions"
directions and industrial awards.
contentions
is common ground that, as the respondent highlights, the only change of
circumstances that could have brought about the Board's
determination of
permanent part-time employment was the workload variation which was approved by
the Department for that period of
eight weeks and two days starting on 11
September 1989. As I mentioned, the respondent's case is based on the evidence
that as far
as the Department is concerned, the respondent was and still is
regarded as a full-time employee. The argument is squarely put on
the basis that
the respondent was never, and still is not, a permanent part-time employee. In
October 1989 she was employed in a
permanent full-time capacity and is still so
employed. More particularly, the argument is she did not cease to be a permanent
teacher, so she did not cease to be an employee as defined in the 1982
Act and, because of s 23(1), she compulsorily remained a compulsory
contributor.
this point, I would accept the Commission's argument. Correctly in my view, Mr
O'Farrell submits that irrespective of what the
Department's position is or may
have been, or how the respondent's position may have been described under the
Tasmanian State Service Act 1984
, the terms of the 1982 Act prevail.
Having looked at both Acts there is nothing, relevantly at least, to suggest
there is any inconsistency
or contradiction in their respective areas of
operation. The State Service legislation deals with the general matter of
people and how that is managed. It deals with such things as
appointments, promotions, retirements, and transfers; secondment and
redeployment, along with discipline and conduct are also addressed. As the
preamble says, the 1982 Act concerns retirement benefits
for persons employed by
the State or by State authorities. It specifically and exclusively deals with
the Retirement Benefits Fund
and contributions to that Fund. It has its own
definition of "employee", and a definition of permanent part-time employee" not
Tasmanian State Service Act
Commission submits that the application of the definition of part-time permanent
employee plainly results in the conclusion reached
by the Board in 1989. It is a
simple proposition that the respondent was a person who was then, during the
year, required to work
for at least 40 per cent of the time she would be
required to work if she was a full-time employee, and accordingly she was not an
"employee". Mr O'Farrell observed that the legislation was not concerned with
the reason a person was required to work for at least
40 per cent of full-time
in oral submissions, Ms Bloomfield argued that the 1982 Act definitions do not
support the Commission's stance. She raised
the issue of Parliamentary
intention, and referred to the Minister's second reading speech in relation to
what became the 1982 Act.
There is a part that dealt with "Pro-rata Benefits for
Permanent Part-Time Employees". The Minister referred to the need for any
employee (obviously using the non-definitional sense) to work constantly for the
equivalent of at least four-tenths of the corresponding
number of full-time
hours. The Minister said it was anticipated the provision of these benefits for
permanent part-time employees
would be of particular relevance to the teaching
service, with one full-time position being capable of being broken down into two
part-time positions, which will spread the teaching burden and assist the
employment situation. The Minister continued: "Insofar
as instances occur when
an educational institution requires a fractional teaching position rather than a
whole position, savings
in salary costs can be realised."
short, counsel submits it is difficult to accept that the definition of
permanent part-time employee was intended to cover the
arrangement that had been put in place for the respondent. Counsel accepts that,
based on the wording of the definition,
an agreed reduction in hours for a
period of 12 months would make a person a permanent "part-time employee", but
submits what was
contemplated by Parliament was a stable long-term period of
part-time hours.
this question of the significance, Ms Bloomfield for the respondent observed,
correctly in my view, that retrospective reliance
on the entire period of the
respondent's employment from 9 November 1989 is not open as a possible way to
remedy what occurred on
20 October 1989. It was
at that time
when the respondent was
determined not to be an employee, and her compulsory contributor status ended.
What happened after that were
then unforeseen events.
brings me to the point of statutory construction. Implicit in the Board's
determination in October 1989, and in the Commission's
approach, is a strict
interpretation of the definition. In my view, that position along with the
respondent's submissions about the
proper approach to the definition to the
opposite effect, mean the focus must be put on the meaning of the phrase "during
as they appear within the words "a person who is
during a year
required to work in an office or position ..[etc]". That phrase was not the
subject of any scrutiny in the arguments.
preposition "during" in relation to a period of time or even a course of things
has been the benefit of much judicial attention.
As Rich J observed in
[1935] HCA 58
(1935) 53 CLR 526
at 529, cited in
Maney v Maney
SR 15, "In all instruments referring to time, the word 'during' is a fruitful
source of ambiguity." His Honour explained
that the word is capable of meaning
at some time or times between the beginning and the end of the period, and is
also capable of
meaning the whole of that period. That is, it may mean "within"
or "throughout":
at 16 per Morris CJ (See also Hutchinson J at 18).
Macquarie Dictionary
primary meaning of "throughout the continuance of", and a secondary one of "in
the course of".
It follows that the text of the definition does not provide as clear a meaning
as it might. Although ambiguity need not emerge before
examining context and
purpose, the definition's meaning must be effectively determined by having
regard to those things. See
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club
(1999) 187 CLR 384
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner
of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
Taylor v The
Owners – Strata Plan No 11564
[2014] HCA 9
253 CLR 531
Before considering those matters in respect of the 1982 Act, there are some
authorities which may provide guidance.
the risk of a digression, in earlier times there appears to have been a lesser
degree of ambiguity attributed to the word "during",
at least when used in a
formal or legal setting.
R v The Inhabitants of Anderson
(1846) 9 Ad
ER 1428 concerned a statement made in a ground of appeal that a
person had served in particular offices for specified years, "during
which years
he was an inhabitant and resident". Lord Denman CJ said the words "during which
years" appeared, in their strict and
proper legal sense, to mean for the whole
of the years, and that the other meaning, "at some time in those years" was
colloquial and incorrect
. Coleridge and Whiteman JJ agreed.
was considered in
R v Clixby (Inhabitants)
(1847) 11 JP 568
phrase used was in respect of a hired servant who, "during" a year's service
from a date had resided in a particular parish.
The same conclusion was reached.
Lord Denman also presided. His Lordship said he did not think the Court ought to
stop and inquire
whether there was any other
less correct, though more
popular sense
, which the expression may have been intended to
Patteson J agreed, saying
that the natural meaning of the word "during", when used in such passages as
were before the Court was
"during the whole." Interestingly, Earle J agreed
capable of more meanings than one", and context must decide which is to be
In any event, more recently, in
Davenport (Inspector of Taxes)
[1977] 3 All ER 396
, Slade J considered the term "during the
period of ten years" in capital gains taxation legislation. His Lordship
addressed whether
relief from capital gains tax required that a company be
considered a family company during the period of ten years ending with the
taxpayer's disposal of shares, or if it sufficed that it was categorized as such
at any time during that period. At 400, his Lordship
readily accept that, according to the ordinary use of language, the word
'during' when used as a preposition governing a stated
period of time, is well
capable of bearing the meaning 'in the course of' in a proper context. Indeed,
in many instances the context
will show clearly that it bears that sense,
because the activity or condition referred to by the relevant verb by its very
cannot have continued throughout the designated period. For example, if
someone were to tell me that during the afternoon X jumped
into the lake, he
would manifestly be using the word 'during' in the sense of 'in the course of'.
In my judgment, however, according to the ordinary use of English, the word
'during' tends to point more naturally to the meaning
'throughout the whole
continuance of' than the meaning 'in the course of' in any context where, having
regard to the verb to which
it is linked, it is capable of bearing the former
For example, if someone were to tell me that during the period 1880
to 1890 Rudolph was King of Ruritania, I would regard such statement
prima facie that Rudolph reigned throughout the period 1880-1890 unless there
were additional factors in the particular
context which showed the informant
merely meant that Rudolph's reign fell within that period." [Emphasis
In Australia,
Bagus v Minister for Immigration
Local Government and
Ethnic Affairs
(1994) 50 FCR 3
concerned immigration laws relating to an
application for an entry permit which provided for disqualification if the
applicant had
had contact with an overseas near relative during a reasonable
period preceding the application. At 402-403, Whitlam J considered
meanings of the word "during", noting the two ordinary meanings as provided by
Macquarie Dictionary
(above). His Honour said, "I think that the
natural meaning in the context of the word 'during' is that of 'throughout the
continuance
of'." As to context, his Honour said the provision was designed to
deal with compassionate grounds for the grant of an entry permit,
and it would
be extraordinary if an applicant's contact under the provision were not assessed
up to and at the time of the application
being lodged.
There is also
Tilney v Tilney
[1968] HCA 32
(1968) 118 CLR 526.
Matrimonial
Causes Act 1959
(Cth) contained a provision for dissolution of
marriage on the ground that "since the marriage, the other party has... during a
of not less than a year, habitually been guilty of cruelty ... ". At 528,
Kitto J with whom Taylor and Owen JJ agreed, held the provision
contained a time
element which specified the minimum period as the duration of the habitual
cruelty; the requirement being that it
must have endured for at least one
not a decision of a court of superior jurisdiction, I would add a reference to
Evans v Oxford Shop Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2023] FedCFamC2G 663
380 FLR 146.
The relevant provision was contained in the
Fair Work Act
(Cth) and was to the effect that an employer gave to an employee a direction of
a particular statutory type, if they directed the
employee to perform duties
during a period at a place that was different from the normal place of work. At
[40] Judge Lucev held
that "period" was intended to be of a specific and limited
duration, and the relevant direction had to be one to perform duties for
whole of that period. Accordingly, a direction to do a job at a certain location
with no period being specified did not satisfy
the legislative requirement.
the following reasons, it is inevitable in my view that the respondent succeeds.
I hold that by the action of the Board in October
1989, the respondent has lost
a right, privilege or benefit to which she otherwise would have been entitled.
It does not seem to
matter whether it is construed as a right as an "employee"
to be a contributor, or a benefit derived from contributions made compulsory
being an "employee” but I doubt that the word "privilege" is appropriately
used in the present situation.
are two immediately apparent things which cast very serious doubt on the
Commission’s position. The first is that the
period for which the
requirement to work part-time, as defined (more than 40 percent of a full-time
workload but less than 100 per
cent), is irrelevant. It could be days or weeks.
Second, the words "during a year" are completely superfluous and have no
If, for instance, as essentially occurred in this case, a person is to
work for a two month period on a part-time basis, that
must necessarily
mean that there is a requirement to work on that basis "during a year". As a
matter of the simple concept and precepts of time, it
cannot mean anything else.
By definition the two month period is "within" a year". It does not matter from
when the calculation of
a year commences. It follows that the construction
contended for gives no meaning at all to the phrase "during a year."
is very well established that courts must strive to give meaning to every word
of a provision, and are not at liberty to consider
words, phrases or sentences
as superfluous or insignificant, if by any other construction that can be made
Commonwealth v Baume
[1905] HCA 11
(1905) 2 CLR 405
Project Blue Sky
Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
194 CLR 355
The way in which meaning can be given to the phrase is to construe the
definition so that the requirement to work the defined part-time
workload must
endure for at least a year. That might have caused some administrative
difficulty but to interpret the definition otherwise
produces what I regard as
well-nigh an absurdity.
Administrative difficulties of equal, if not greater, proportions arise on the
Commission's construction. That interpretation allows
for persons employed on a
part time basis for very short periods of time – literally even one day
would suffice– to become
permanent part-time employees.
leads to a consideration of the question of purpose. This is beneficial
legislation. No doubt the success or otherwise of a
superannuation scheme such
as the RBF Scheme can best be measured by the use which contributors make of it.
A construction that deprives
contributors of their status as an employee because
of very short periods of part-time work as defined, is plainly not a beneficial
one. It does not sit happily with the Minister's second reading speech, which
appears to attribute significance to the category and
role of permanent
part-time employees. Conceptually, what was outlined in terms of its intended
use would not be as readily achieved
if the category included employees deemed
not to be "employees" because of short periods of part-time work.
is the task of the court to interpret the words used by Parliament, not to
divine Parliament's intent; that is, courts must determine
what Parliament meant
by the words it used and not determine what Parliament intended to say.
Parliamentary intention is as expressed
in the legislation:
Harrison v Melhem
[2008) NSWCA 67
[2008] NSWCA 67
72 NSWLR 380
per Spigelman CJ at [16]; and Mason P at [159]
– [161]. I have spoken about the relevant wording. The construction I
more readily gives meaning to the expression "permanent part-time
employee" when read as a whole. Generally, that construction should
be preferred
as an interpretation that promotes the purpose of the Act as against one that
Acts Interpretation Act
submissions for the Commission, both written and oral, refer to the fact that
the respondent had not, except for two short periods,
been working full-time
hours since her return to work on 17 September 1990. I am not sure I understand
the suggested importance of
this. Both sets of submissions highlight the
"critical" date of 11 September 1989, which was the starting date of the period
weeks and two days of working a 40 per cent full-time workload. It is
then, it is said, the reduction in workload had been approved
consequence, she had ceased to be an employee within the meaning of the 1982 Act
and was not required to continue to remain
a member of the Scheme.
agreed position is that this is a hearing de
but I note that in its
reasons the Commission did not refer to any period or periods other than that
commencing on 11 September 1989
to establish the proposition that the respondent
was no longer an employee within the meaning of the Scheme at that time. Rather,
it noted the workload on the return to work on 17 September 1990 as part of the
factual background. Nor is there any suggestion that,
because of one or other of
the two short periods of full-time work following the respondent's return to
work, the respondent regained
the status of an employee such that she was then
compelled to be a contributor. This might be expected to happen if the
Commission's
construction is correct. To be fair, I should add that the argument
before the Commission on this lost right claim was centered on
Bloomfield for the respondent submitted, correctly in my view, that
retrospective reliance on the entire period of the respondent's
employment from
9 November 1989 is not open as a possible way to remedy what occurred on 20
October 1989. It was
at that time
when the respondent was determined not
to be an employee, and her compulsory contributor status ended. What happened
after that were
then unforeseen events. Counsel for the respondent told the
court, without dissent, that the effect of allowing her to enjoy the
benefit was to permit her to gain access to past periods of eligible service by
the purchase of those periods on more favourable
concessional terms than are
otherwise available. Any established period of service before 1 July 1994, (the
commencement date of
the 1993 Act), also gives access to a more generous
conversion factor in the calculation of the retirement benefit. Counsel for the
Commission did not submit that to permit the respondent to exercise the right or
to grant the benefit would be futile.
respondent's right or benefit having been lost in the circumstances outlined, it
must mean that it is equitable that she should
be allowed to have the right or
enjoy the benefit, however it is best described. As I mentioned earlier, the
agreed position is that
the resolution of this claim in the respondent's favour
means that it is not strictly necessary to deal with the remaining claims.
follows is to be read accordingly.
Lost right claim 3
This claim is closely linked to the previous one. The Board having determined
that the respondent was no longer an employee and
not a compulsory contributor,
the respondent could have elected "to become a contributor" on the basis she was
a permanent part-time
employee. That election was provided for in s 6(1)(c) of
the 1982 Act. The respondent's case is that what was lost was the right
that election, or at least the benefit of being able to do so. The claim is put
on the basis that the Board's communication
with the respondent in around
October 1989 "was incomplete, error-prone and inadequate". The respondent says
had she known of the
right to elect (to continue) to contribute, she would have
Central to this issue is the letter of 20 October 1989 referred to above, and
the enclosed form. Before the receipt of that letter,
(sent to the respondent's
private post office box), the Board apparently sent a letter dated 28 August
1989, addressed to her at
the East Devonport Primary School. At the top of the
letter Mrs Stanfield was noted as the enquiries contact, with a 'phone number
provided. The letter refers to notification from the Department that the
respondent was to proceed on leave without pay from 22 March
1990. That was when
her maternity leave was due to expire. It contains an explanation of the option
of deferment of contributions
while on leave without pay, available by way of s
26(3) of the 1982 Act. It states that a condition of doing so is that upon
of duties, double the normal contributions will be deducted until the
arrears are cleared. Three alternative options are set out;
the payment of
contributions in advance by way of a lump sum, payment during the period by a
bank or third party, and payment in
arrears by lump sum plus interest. The
letter refers to an election form which the respondent was asked to complete and
respondent says that she did not receive this letter. She says, and there seems
to be no dispute about this at least, that she
did not return to the East
Devonport Primary School after 16 August 1989 because of illness and school
holidays. The copy of the
letter in evidence contains a handwritten note "R/S J.
Stanfield 28/9/1989". The respondent argues that "R/S" means return to sender,
but I think that is obviously not correct. Clearly what has happened is that Mrs
Stanfield, or someone at her direction, noted for
the file to be resubmitted in
one months' time. Otherwise, it could only have been that someone in the school
has opened the respondent's
mail, made the direction "return to sender", and
inexplicably wrote a date one month hence. (There is a follow up letter of 10
1989 which notes the lack of response to the letter of 28 August, and
with the same handwritten notations on it with a resubmit date
of 10 November
next thing before returning to the 20 October letter is an undated handwritten
note which is headed with the respondent's name
and her RBF identification
number. It says, "Send letter re total conts to date; election form for
part-time – since 11/9/89
.60% & info sheet about Fund." There is a
note of the respondent's house name and post office box address. It is common
this note was on the Board's file. The handwriting looks similar to that
on the letters. Although undated, the details noted to be
sent, when compared to
the first paragraph of the 20 October letter, indicate that the conversation
happened before that date and
the letter is in response to it. The first
paragraph of the letter, not previously set out above, reads:
refer to your recent telephone enquiry and advise that funds held by the
Retirement Benefits Fund as at 11
October, 1989 total $3,451.42.
This figure is represented by contributions of $2,986.89 plus interest of
In the passage set out above, the letter goes on to refer to the s 6(1)(c)
election. There is then a last paragraph which says that
should there be any
queries in relation to the matter, the respondent should not hesitate to contact
the office. At the top of the
letter, the name of Mrs J Stanfield and her
telephone number are again given for enquiries.
In accordance with the terms of the letter an election form, Form 6, was
enclosed. This was completed by the respondent on 23 October
and returned. The
form starts with the following:
"It is understood that I am a person
eligible to become a member of the Retirement Benefits Fund pursuant to either
Section 5 or 6
Retirement Benefits Act 1982
The rights available to me under the provisions of Sections 5 and 6 of the
Retirement Benefits Act 1982
have been explained by the 'responsible officer'
[sic] and I hereby elect: ..."
There were four options then set out, one under the other, next to boxes to be
ticked. The options were:
"To join the
Retirement Benefits Fund
NOT to join
the Retirement Benefits Fund
To remain a
contributor
NOT to remain
a contributor" [Capitals in original]
The respondent ticked both the second and fourth boxes although, of course, in
her circumstances it was only the third and fourth
options which were relevant.
The first and second options related to s 5 of the Act, which covered persons
who were not employees
but who were employed in a temporary capacity and a
certificate had been issued by the appropriate authority, stating they were
to remain in employment for at least three
Both sections refer to an
election to "become a contributor" language which is not reflected in Form 6. I
will come back to this.
issue is whether the respondent, otherwise through her own fault, lost the right
to elect to "become a contributor "under section
6 of the 1982 Act, although in
practical terms in her case, that would mean continuing to be a contributor. In
short, the respondent's
case is that at the time, she wanted to defer
contributions, and in a state of confusion contributed to by her illness, she
Form 6, not understanding the consequences. This is first covered in
her affidavit. She says she now understands from the letter
of 28 August 1989,
which she says she did not receive, that at the time it was permissible to defer
contributions.
says Form 6 was confusing in her circumstances. The form stated she was entitled
to join the Fund but she was already a member.
It appeared to her to refer to
the advice in the accompanying letter, but the letter did not require her to get
any further explanation
before proceeding. It did not include the option of
deferment and did not set out what the rights were under the sections referred
to. She did not think that completing the form she did would result in her
withdrawal from the Scheme. It contained an acknowledgment
her rights had been
explained, but she did not understand it was referring to a meeting or
discussion with a responsible officer.
respondent says she did not realise that it would be taken she was permanently
withdrawing from the Fund, or what consequences
would follow from her selection;
the options ticked were the ones she thought relevant, but she did not realise
the consequences.
As to the note of the phone call, the respondent says she does
not have any recollection of it but accepts there was phone call before
October 1989; she is certain that there was no mention during such a call, or
any other time, of the ability to defer contributions
as set out in the letter
of 28 August 1989. The respondent adds that she believes she called to advise of
a change of address rather
than enquire about the balance in her account, but at
the same time says she cannot "recall making this phone call."
references to deferral appear contradictory. Initially, there is a statement
that seems to clearly suggest the respondent did
not know of a right to defer
contributions until much later. That is confirmed by a further statement that at
the time of the "exemption",
(by which the respondent seems to mean being
treated as no longer an employee), she did not know about the option to defer
contributions.
However, further on in the affidavit, she says she ticked the box
to remain a contributor but wanted to "suspend" contributions until
she returned
from maternity leave. In cross-examination the respondent maintained that her
plan was to defer contributions, and intimated
she thought completing the form
in the way she did would achieve that. I suppose these positions are
reconcilable. The respondent
may have wanted to defer, but did not know that it
was legally open until later. But of course, at the time, any question of
could only have arisen after an election to "become a contributor" had
her affidavit, the respondent points out that the letter of 20 October 1989 does
not contain the deferral options listed in the
letter of 28 August. I do not
find that surprising given that, as I have just noted, two quite different
scenarios were being addressed.
As far as the Board was concerned, there was a
change in circumstances before the 20 October letter. By 20 October, in the
view of things, deferral had fallen by the wayside and would only again
arise after an election to contribute was made.
In cross-examination, the respondent confirmed the 20 October letter was
addressed to her post office box address. When it was suggested
she received it,
she said she had no knowledge of it; they were having a lot of problems with
their postal service at the time, and
both the Department and the RBF were using
incorrect addresses. She wanted to continue with an explanation of various
addresses being
used, but I pointed out that the question was just about the
receipt of the letter. When asked whether it was a categorical "no"
that she did
not receive it, she said, "
True – no, definitely not. And it was during
– no hang on, just let me think about this.
" When asked to read the
first paragraph she again said she needed to think about "this one" because it
went to her post office box
number, and then replied, "
Yes, I would have
received this letter
." She acknowledged that this was because it referred to
a recent telephone enquiry from her, but said she had no memory of making
Mr O'Farrell took her to the part of the letter which referred to the
possibility of continuation of contributions. The following
So, you were aware that you could continue to
contribute?........Well, no, I hadn't received any other information up until
tell me that that was a possibility –
No, no. Listen, you – once you received this letter and you read
that sentence, you were aware that there was a possibility
that you could
contribute under – if you made an election under s6(1)(c)?........No.
Until that time, I hadn't seen anything
It's not until that time –
HIS HONOUR: When you got this letter, you then understood that you could
continue to contribute? When you got this letter and read
it, that's the point
that's being made.
WITNESS: Okay.
I know at the time I still thought I couldn't
contribute.
MR O'FARRELL SC: (Resuming) You still thought you could?........I couldn't
contribute.
" [Emphasis added]
When Mr O'Farrell referred her to the terms of the letter, the respondent said
that this was the only sentence that had made that
point but that she was "on a
bit of a roller coaster"; "
I had to make decisions quickly, I was at the most
vulnerable time in my life, and with no other information I just proceeded
" Counsel took her through further terms of the letter, the ultimate
point put being that it made clear that if she had made the election,
have been in the Fund until she was no longer an employee. The respondent
I think that at – or I know that at the time what I wanted to
do was to postpone, defer contributions. And I think that is where
my confusion
In relation to the handwritten note of an apparent phone call, the respondent
was asked whether the content of that note was very
similar to the information
that was provided in the letter of 20 October. The respondent
I see that, and – and I know that at the time, as I
said, I was hoping to defer – my intention was originally to go back
my – the birth of my daughter, to full time work. That didn't eventuate.
So, at the time, my head would have been thinking
I need to – I want to
defer contributions, and when I come back, I will be full time again."
Shortly after, the respondent repeated she was simply looking to postpone
payments. In explanation for the ticks, she said she was
already a member so did
not need to tick to join, there was no box to tick for deferral so, because she
wanted to defer, that is
why she ticked the box "not to remain a contributor".
When it was suggested that Mrs Stanfield was just on the other end of the phone
to answer any enquiries, the respondent unresponsively said "
There is nothing
in that letter that you have shown me that says that she said anything about
things she could explain ... the options
I could have had. There is nothing in
that letter.
" Counsel pointed out that the phone number was on the letter;
the respondent said that she had "
already spoken with her
respondent repeated that at the time she wanted to pause contributions, and
without any other guidance, she filled out what
she thought was the form that
she needed to complete.
When it was put to the respondent that she made the election "to leave" the
Fund in the full knowledge that she was leaving and
withdrawing all
contributions, she said that was incorrect, that she had made an uninformed
decision because she did not have "any
other information at the time." She said
it was a pressing time for her.
broad terms, and with due respect, I think there is cause for a fair degree of
skepticism about much of the respondent's evidence,
particularly as to the
documents received or not received. None of the documents in evidence are hers,
in the sense that she has
produced them from a file or material kept by her. All
documents are derived from Departmental and Board/Commission files. The
had extensive Right to Information access to and the benefit of
documents exhibited to affidavits filed in these proceedings. I have
sense that a lot of what the respondent says she did or did not do is a
favourable reconstruction based on the documents
little to no real recollection.
reasons which will become apparent, I do not think the issue of the receipt of
relevant correspondence has a critical role to
play in the determination of this
claim, but it is relevant to credibility generally. One can accept some glitches
in administrative
systems, but the respondent seemed eager at every opportunity
to explain a range of difficulties which would suggest non-receipt.
These ranged
from school administrative problems – which included children being left
in charge of relevant duties –
to suggestions that staff were incapable of
making sure letters were passed on to the school where the teacher was then
or predominantly teaching, to Australia Post inefficiencies in relation
to the home address. All of this needs to be looked at in
light of the fact that
in the late 1980's ordinary mail communications were the predominant form of
were in use.
Mr Gourlay's evidence is that at this time the main form of communication from
the Department to employees was hard copy
correspondence, either addressed to
the employee at their work location, or on occasions to their home address if
they were absent.
It was the practice in schools in the 1980s and early 1990s
for the hard copy correspondence to be displayed on staff noticeboards
general correspondence, and/or placed in individual staff member's pigeonholes.
This was carried out by office administrative
staff at the particular school. In
that situation, I think it reasonable to have expected that there was a high
degree of application
to the task of ensuring mail deliveries and that
correspondence to teachers who had moved to other schools was passed on. If not
known, I cannot imagine any difficulty at all in ascertaining the person's new
The following considerations would lead me to resolving this claim against the
respondent. Irrespective of whether the respondent
received the 28 August
letter, the respondent's asserted state of mind seems be that, at the time of
the 20 October letter, she could
suspend, postpone or defer contributions while
on maternity leave. (She may have been using that expression to cover all leave,
the entitlement to defer relates to the leave without pay component.)
Reference was made to teachers known to her who went on maternity
leave and made
no contributions, but the respondent said she did not find out until later
whether they deferred or left the Scheme.
mentioned earlier an apparent contradiction relating to the respondent's state
of mind. There are also the answers to the questions
set out in par [76] above.
Taken literally, they mean that even after reading that letter the respondent
"knew" she could not make
contributions, (with source of that knowledge or
understanding not clear), but then completed the form thinking it was to defer
liability to contribute. In making these comments I do not lose sight of her
pregnancy related illness at the time, nor her present
condition which
necessitated regular breaks during questioning, and I make due allowance.
think it unlikely that the letters of 28 August and 10 October were not
delivered even though addressed to the East Devonport School
as they were, but
there may have been delay. Certainty, whether the 10 October follow-up letter
was delivered before the telephone
conversation of around 11 October is a moot
point but, in any event, something triggered what I am satisfied was a call by
the Board. This telephone conversation is important. There was most
likely a request for information about contributions "to date"
That implies
consideration of withdrawal. The reduction in hours from 11 September 1989 is
noted, and although the section of the
Act may not have been mentioned, I am
satisfied form the note that there was discussion about the consequences of that
in terms of being a contributor and the necessary election to continue
as one. The respondent's evidence about the fact of this call
and its possible
content is quite unconvincing.
That said, I would accept as valid, to a point, the criticisms made of the
letter of 20 October. The introduction to the topic of
a part-time position in
terms of, "Also, I have been informed ..." is strange, given what was mentioned
in the telephone conversation.
The concept of "election" was not mentioned in
the letter. But the position remains that the reduction in hours was mentioned,
was the possibility of continuing to contribute, along with an "application
to be a contributor as a part-time employee". I also
accept that the formatting
of Form 6 itself is unhelpful. (RBF Form 6 is a modified version of the form
prescribed for this situation
by the 1982 Regulations; Form
The two sections, ss 5 and
6, are different in their operation and effect as far as what elections need to
be made. Form 11 makes
provision for the person to "hereby elect to become a
contributor...", the election being the expression used in both sections.
6 does not. It introduces four options instead of the sole one of the election
to become a contributor.
the state of the documents can be contrasted with the position in
Blow CJ found that Mr Elmore did not receive a letter advising him of his
right to join the Scheme under s 5 of the 1982 Act but said
that in any event it
was inadequate to explain situation. There were two critical aspects of the
section which it did not mention
such that his Honour did not think Mr Elmore
could be said or been at fault if he had received the letter, and not then set
trying to become a contributor: see [36]-[37]. Here, it is to be
remembered the letter followed the telephone conversation. An "election'
mentioned in the note. The overall effect of the communications, including the
letter and form, adequately conveyed the position
the respondent was in. If
there were any doubts, telephone assistance was offered
I should add a comment about the reference in Form 6 to a discussion with a
"responsible officer". That term is defined in the 1982
Act as a person employed
in an agency and who was assigned the duty of conducting the business of the
agency in relation to the Fund.
There is no evidence about whether the
assignment had been made and if so, who the assignee was. Regulation 24(1)(ab)
of the 1982
Regulations required the officer to notify someone who was entitled
(among other things) to make an election to contribute to the
Fund of the right
to do so, and to send the prescribed form, Form 11
There is no dispute the 'responsible officer' form of notification did not
happen in this case, but the Commission argues that
the letter of 20 October
achieves the same result so that nothing turns on it. Of course, it is
inappropriate that the legislation
was not complied with, but in the present
context of determining whether a right has been lost, it is of no consequence.
is much in the Commission's argument that by ticking the box electing to not
remain a contributor, a person of the respondent's
obvious intelligence, would
reasonably think it was bringing about the suspension or deferment of
contributions during a period of
maternity leave. I would repeat that the last
paragraph in the letter invites any queries to be directed to the office without
hesitation.
At this point, I should also mention the fact that the 'Memberships
and Contributions' brochure discussed in the context of lost
right claim 1 also
deals with contributions during leave of absence. It clearly states that during
leave without pay, a contributor
may write to the Board seeking deferment of
contributions for a period not exceeding two years on such conditions as the
allow, including payment of interest. It sets out the alternatives I
referred to earlier.
There are also two further letters which I have not mentioned so far. There is
one of 2 November 1989 addressed to the respondent's
residence name and post
office box. It is an acknowledgement of receipt of the election "requesting to
withdraw from the Retirement
Benefits Fund on appointment to a permanent
part-time position". It concludes with asking the respondent to note that should
employment status change to permanent full-time, she would be required to
rejoin. When asked about this, after a somewhat lengthy
explanation about the
misdeeds of the Postmaster at Devonport, with letters just disappearing through
a very frustrating period,
the respondent said she had no recollection of the
letter, and her "heart would say" she did not receive it.
the same fate did not seem to befall a letter dated 24 January 1990 addressed in
the same manner. That letter set out details
of the eligible termination payment
and required the completion of an enclosed Australian Taxation Office document.
That was completed
and returned. There is a further letter, dated 9 February
1990 and again addressed in the same way, which acknowledges receipt of
form, and which refers to an enclosed cheque for the payout figure. That was
banked. On receipt of neither of these letters
did the respondent contact anyone
at all to question the process, given what she said she thought she had achieved
by filling in
the Form 6 as she did.
Although I have made some criticisms of the obscurities in the Board's
communications, I am not persuaded that the right or benefit
has been lost
otherwise than through the fault of the respondent, as I earlier explained that
concept. I am not satisfied the respondent
lacked the awareness of what her
options were or of what the consequences were of completing the Form 6. On the
whole of the evidence,
I cannot be satisfied she did not intend those
consequences. Although taken alone, the letter of 20 October was a little
in background explanation, it followed the phone call. The form was of
itself rather obscure, the respondent had, or had the ability
acquire, relevant information about the process.
Lost right claim
claim relates to a right, privilege or benefit, said to have been lost in April
1993. It arises out of what is described as
a "government initiative" to ensure
all permanent part-time employees were notified of the right to elect to
contribute to the fund
under section 6(1)c of the Act. This was done by way of a
"mail-output". The respondent says she did not get any notice of this
opportunity
and would have sought to rejoin the Scheme at that time.
setting out my views on the merits, I will mention a preliminary matter. The
material that gives rise to this claim comes
from the affidavit of Elizabeth
Sharp, General Counsel for the Commission, sworn on 19 May 2023. That is about
18 months after the
originating application was filed. This case does not
involve a general win/lose outcome. Although this claim is generically similar
to other claims in terms of the respondent's actual or potential status within
the Scheme, it does relate to a different point in
time and for that reason has
different consequences. This lost right was not claimed until written
submissions were filed by the
respondent on 8 December 2023, and accordingly it
was not a claim the Commission inquired into under reg 101 of the 2017
Regulations;
hence, not one in respect of which the subsequent statutory process
provided for in reg 104 was followed. In turn, it follows that
this Court is
being asked to make a declaration affirming, varying or setting aside a
determination which has not been made.
at [4], Blow CJ said that the review by application for
declaration under the then equivalent of reg 105, must be by way of a hearing
novo on the merits. There does not appear to have been any argument on the
point, and quite properly the parties in this case
have adopted Blow CJ's
approach. I think it can be taken as
But the procedure of an
application for a declaration provided for in reg 105 carries with it the
limitations that I have identified.
A hearing de novo does not mean that a
claimant is able to add separate and additional claims to the ones agitated
before the Commission.
Clearly, different evidence might emerge and different
arguments put in respect of claims made to the Commission; the argument in
right claim 2 is an example. I would take the view that this claim should not be
entertained, but I will address the merits
in any event.
the following reasons the claim should fail. It is clear from the documents that
the opportunity was to be afforded to all employees
who had not previously been
notified of the right to contribute to the Fund by way of the election to the
provided for in s 6 of
the 1982 Act. (Section 6(1)(c) dealt with permanent
part-time employees.) This move seems to have originated in Treasury. In
are copies of notices to employees and of memoranda to
paymasters/responsible officers and public sector unions. The material shows
that the intention was to put a copy of the individual notice on the person's
file. No such notice is to be found on that of the
respondent. There is no
evidence of how the recipients of the notice were identified. There is a mention
of 5,500 temporary employees
having been notified but no other information.
the notice was not sent to the respondent, the question remains whether she lost
a right, privilege or benefit at that time.
The answer must be in the negative.
This was not a new opportunity created in April 1993. As a permanent part-time
employee, she
retained the right to elect to become a contributor. As far as the
Board was concerned, the opportunity had been offered to her in
October 1989. If
there was a question of backdating membership, that depended on the Board being
satisfied of a lost right, privilege
or benefit within the meaning of section 87
of the 1982 Act, the equivalent of reg 101 one of the 2017 Regulations. It must
that in or about April 1993, the respondent did not lose any right
privilege or benefit.
Lost right claim 5
claim arises from a telephone enquiry made in August 1997 by the respondent to a
person with the Board. The essence of the claim
is that this was an opportunity
for the respondent to then rejoin the Scheme pursued to the 1994 Regulations.
The argument is that
she lost the right to rejoin under either reg 21(7) or reg
23(6). There is a factual difficulty and a difficulty with the interpretation
reg 23(6). The claim should fail.
first with the regulations, the Commission accepts that in August 1997, as a
permanent part-time employee before 1 July 1994,
the respondent had a right to
elect under reg 21(7) to become a contributor on and from the date of the
election. However, it argues
and I accept, that reg 23(6) did not apply to the
respondent's circumstances. It provided that if a permanent employee was exempt
from contributing under the 1994 Regulations or had been exempted under the 1982
Act or previous legislation, that employee was not
obliged to contribute to the
Fund unless they elected to contribute on from a date determined by the Board
having regard to the employee's
case for the respondent is based on a misconception that the respondent had been
exempted from contributing under the 1982 Act.
The misconception first appears
in the respondent's affidavit where she specifically refers to the October 1989
determination as
an "exemption ". That is not the case. For instance, there were
earlier provisions allowing exemptions for married women, people
over the age of
40 and for those who could prove to the Board they had made adequate provision
for themselves and family; under the
1982 Act, where a person satisfied the
Board that further contributions would cause the superannuation provision to be
of that taken to be reasonable under a law of the Commonwealth.
determination in October 1989 that the respondent was a permanent part-time
employee did not amount to an exemption. It led to
the situation in which the
respondent elected not to be a contributor. It did not grant an immunity or
freedom from any liability
to which she would otherwise have been subject:
Salemi v McKellar (No 2)
(1970) 137CLR 396 at 414.
factual difficulty is created by the respondent's evidence. A Board telephone
enquiry file note records what appears to be an
enquiry from the respondent on 6
August 1997 about estimates of benefits at certain ages and on a certain event.
(There is a letter
from the Board to the respondent of 22 August 1997 in which
this information is provided.) In her affidavit, the respondent says
this conversation she was not told she could then apply to rejoin the scheme.
She was not asked any questions about this
in her oral evidence. In submissions,
the statement in the affidavit was wrongly converted to an assertion that the
respondent was
she could not apply
claim is therefore based on the proposition that when responding to any enquiry,
no matter how specific, the Board through its
employees or agents, was under an
obligation to carry out a wholesale appraisal of the person's file and to offer
unsolicited, gratuitous
advice about what options may or may not be available in
relation to all aspects of Fund membership. That proposition cannot be accepted.
The right to rejoin under reg 21(7) was not lost and no other right, privilege
or benefit was lost.
Lost right claim 6
claim can be quickly dealt with. On 22 March 1999, the respondent wrote to the
Board and made an application to rejoin the Scheme.
The application was
considered by the Board under reg 21(7) of the 1994 regulations and the
respondent was accepted as a contributor
from 1 April 1999. The claim is based
on an assertion that the respondent was not told about the option of election
under reg 23(6)
and was accordingly deprived of the opportunity to nominate an
earlier commencement date. This claim should fail for the same reasons
lost right claim 5 as they relate to the meaning of reg 23(6) and the
respondent's situation.
The Commission's decision in respect of lost right claim 1 should be affirmed.
In relation to lost right claim 2, as Blow CJ observed
the equivalent provision, reg 101 allows the Commission to permit a person to
exercise a right, or grant the privilege or benefit,
but only with the approval
of the Minister. It follows that the Court cannot make a decision standing in
the shoes of the Commission
without the approval of the Minister. There is
nothing to suggest this has been done. Accordingly, taking a similar approach
Blow CJ, the orders are as follows:
(1) It is declared that the final decision of the Commission, made on 9 November
2021 in respect of the respondent's claim to have
lost the right to purchase her
studentship years is affirmed.
(2) The final decision of the Commission, made on 9 November 2021 rejecting the
respondent's claim that she lost the right, privilege
or benefit in 1989
regarding her eligibility to remain as a member of the scheme, is set aside.
(3) That matter be remitted to the Commission for reconsideration in accordance
with the following directions:
(a) The respondent has otherwise than through her own fault, lost a right or
benefit under the
Retirement Benefits Fund Act 1982
, to which she was
otherwise entitled, namely the right to continue to be a member of the Scheme
and the benefit of being a contributor.
(b) It is equitable that the respondent be allowed to have the enjoyment of that
right and benefit with effect from the date the
respondent ceased to be a
contributor to the Scheme it having been determined that she was no longer an
employee within the meaning
Retirement Benefits Fund Act 1982.
(c) Subject to the approval of the Minister, the Commission must permit the
respondent to exercise the right and/or grant the benefit
to her from that date.
40 years' service scheme
(higher rate), 40 years' service scheme (lower rate), 35 years' service scheme,
and 30 years' service scheme.
In evidence, the respondent
said superannuation was "very new"; she was very busy and she knew she had to
make a decision. She thought
she would go with the lower rate and look at it a
bit later on to see what was
This Act commenced on 30
An example of this position is
a document completed by the Department for the Board on 14 May 1999, which shows
the respondent's
employment status as "F/T" from 1 January 1981 to the date of
the document.
A "temporary employee" was a
person appointed under s 38 which allowed for the employment of persons in a
temporary capacity for
the purpose of providing relief or assistance, or to
undertake such other work as may be required, for a specified period of time
otherwise on a full-time, part-time, hourly, daily, weekly, contract or other
basis set out in s 38.
Lord Denman's views may be
borne out by an examination of the origin of the word. Middle English had a
present participle, "durying"
taken from an obsolete verb, "duren", which had
Latin and Old French roots and which meant to last or endure. In Latin the verb
has that meaning as does the French "durer". The
English Dictionary on Historical Principles
provides several meanings for
the word "during", none of which is "within" or "in the course of". The closest
relevant meaning is
"throughout the whole continuance of; hence, in the course
of, in the time of."
In terms of the rate of
contributions for affected employees where the period is lengthy but less than a
year, there may have been
an argument for pro-rata contributions. That would
depend on the proper construction of Schedule 3. Otherwise, full contributions
at the rate they which they would have been required to contribute would have
continued: s 23(8). However, there was the option
to defer under s 26(3)(c)
which, it seems, would have been available as it related to a lesser rate of pay
for the time being "for
any reason."
That was the view taken by Blow
at [3]-[4] where the proceedings were under the identical
provision in the 2005 Regulations.
In evidence is a pro forma
election form, Period of Leave Without Pay, sent to another contributor in late
1988 (with details redacted).
This form reflects the options set out in the 20
October 1989 letter.
was the provision under consideration in
I have some difficulty
accepting the Commission's submission that Form 6 was in substantial compliance
with the prescribed Form 11
within the meaning of
Interpretation Act 1931
. But this has no consequences for this case.
Because of its terms, reg
106 would involve a rehearing on the material before the Commission. That means
the only real alternative
under reg 105 would be proceedings akin to an appeal
in the strict sense; an unlikely interpretation.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (459 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter