URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASSC/2025/57.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:22:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Woodgate v Leahy [2025] TASSC 57 (5 November 2025)
[2025] TASSC 57
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA
[2025] TASSC 57
: WOODGATE,
LEAHY, Brandon Carlisle
DELIVERED ON:
5 November 2025
HEARING DATE:
22 October 2025
Criminal Law – Appeal and new trial – Appeal
against sentence – Grounds for
interference – Sentence manifestly
excessive or
inadequate.
Aust Dig Criminal Law [3521]
Vehicle and Traffic Act
Visser v Smart
[1998] TASSC 151
Criminal law – Appeal and new trial – Appeal against
sentence – Appeals by Crown – Principles applied by
court to Crown appeals – Residual discretion to dismiss appeal
not exercised.
Aust Dig Criminal Law [3527]
[2015] TASSC 60
Law – Licensing of drivers –Tasmania – Offences
– Drive while disqualified.
Aust Dig Traffic Law
Vehicle and Traffic Act 1999
REPRESENTATION
Solicitors:
Director of Public
Prosecutions
Respondent:
Tasmania Legal Aid
[2025] TASSC 57
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 57/2025
File No 1288/2025
HAMISH WOODGATE v BRANDON CARLISLE
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT PEARCE J
5 November 2025
is a prosecution appeal against a sentence imposed by a magistrate, Ms S Cure.
On 12 March 2025 the respondent pleaded guilty
to one count of driving while
disqualified. He was sentenced to a term of imprisonment of one month, wholly
suspended for nine months
from the date of sentence, and disqualified from
driving for one month cumulative to the period of disqualification he was
serving. The applicant is a police officer. The sole ground of the
motion is that the sentence is manifestly inadequate.
Prosecution
appeals against sentence are less readily allowed than defence
. However in this case, the
motion should be allowed. The sentence imposed by the learned magistrate
disclosed clear error
. The sentence
was so obviously inadequate that the sentencing discretion must have miscarried.
It was plainly outside the proper
limits of the wide discretion vested in the
. I am satisfied that I
should not exercise the residual discretion to dismiss a prosecution appeal and
I will re-sentence the respondent.
The circumstances of the
offending and the personal circumstances of the respondent
circumstances of the offence were that the respondent, on 9 March 2024, drove on
Friend Street in Georgetown when he was disqualified
from driving. He was
subject to court orders which disqualified him from driving until, on my
calculations, 9 May 2027, although
the magistrate was told that the period of
disqualification was between 27 October 2023 and 8 May 2026. He had been
released from
prison only four months earlier after having served a four month
term for the same offence. No other details of the offence were
given to the
magistrate by the police prosecutor. The respondent was unrepresented. He told
the magistrate that he and his partner
had a one year old child. He said his
partner was "going through a bit of post-natal depression" and he "needed to get
house". He said "we needed stuff for bub so I just went for a drive
to clear my head."
the time of the offence the respondent was aged 24. When sentenced he was 25.
The magistrate had some, albeit limited, details
of his personal circumstances.
Apart from the child he had referred to, the respondent had one other child with
his current partner,
and they were expecting another child. The respondent had
two children, a daughter and a son, from previous relationships. He said
"I've got my eldest daughter back from WA from my sister and my son he's with
kinship from my auntie". He was employed by a
shoe repairer, but it was a job he
had obtained only two weeks earlier.
respondent's record was an important matter in sentencing. He had a very bad
record for driving offences. He was first disqualified
from driving when he was
17 for two counts of driving without a licence and two counts of driving with an
illicit drug in his blood.
Since then:
on 6 August 2018
he pleaded guilty to six counts of driving with an illicit drug, two counts of
driving while disqualified and four
counts of driving without a licence. He was
made subject to a probation order for 12 months and disqualified from
on 24 January
2019 he pleaded guilty to driving while disqualified and driving with an illicit
drug in his blood. He was sentenced
to a wholly suspended term of imprisonment
of two months and disqualified from driving;
on 24 April 2020
he pleaded guilty to driving offences including three counts of driving while
disqualified, two counts of driving
with an illicit drug in his blood and
evading police. He was sentenced to imprisonment for seven months;
on 11 January
2021 he pleaded guilty to driving while disqualified in an unregistered and
uninsured vehicle. He was disqualified from
driving and ordered to perform 49
hours of community service;
on 9 November
2021 he pleaded guilty and was sentenced for four counts of driving while
disqualified, driving with an illicit drug
in his blood and two counts of
evading police, committed in breach of an earlier suspended sentence. He was
sentenced to a total
term of imprisonment of 13 months. Three separate
cumulative orders of disqualification were made which, according to the record
of prior convictions, total four and a half years from 9 November 2021, which
would have expired on 9 May 2026;
on 12 September
2022 he was re-sentenced on the community service order made on 11 January 2021
to a different community correction
order with supervision for nine months;
on 28 June 2023
he pleaded guilty to driving while disqualified on 2 December 2022 in an
unregistered motor vehicle and was sentenced
to imprisonment for four months
from 28 June 2023 and disqualified from driving for 12 months commencing at the
end of any current
period of disqualification. That order took the period of
disqualification through to 9 May 2027.
respondent would have been released from the term imposed on 28 June 2023 on 23
October 2023. The driving for which he was then
sentenced occurred on 9 March
2024. He was sentenced a year later in March 2025. He told the magistrate that
since his release from
prison he had been "really trying to pull my head in and
get my stuff right", that there had been "no charges since this incident"
had "gone a whole year without driving". It was readily apparent from his record
that he had, for a long time, been using
illicit drugs to which he attributed
the breakdown of his earlier relationship. The record of prior convictions
expressly mentioned
methylamphetamine and amphetamine as having been, on two
occasions, the drug involved in the drug driving charges. The magistrate
the respondent whether he was "clean" and he told her Honour that since his
release he had "not touched meth like that or nothing"
and that he only used
cannabis every now and again to help him get to sleep. The magistrate told the
respondent when imposing sentence
that "you seem to actually have the prospect
of reforming yourself."
for the respondent correctly pointed out that the respondent, as a person
unrepresented before the magistrate, faced difficulties
in conveying to the
magistrate all that might be said on his behalf. This is not a case in which the
failure to put relevant matters
which were in the respondent's favour resulted
in a sentence which was too harsh. The question in this motion is the opposite,
the sentence was erroneously lenient. In deciding that question for a
person who was not legally represented before the sentencing
court, the interest
of justice may require some enquiry about whether there were facts which might
have been put in his favour, but
which were not. However, in this case, counsel
for the respondent did not point to any fact or matter material to sentence
the respondent did not sufficiently convey to the magistrate at the
sentencing hearing.
respondent was, at the same sentencing hearing, also sentenced for unrelated
summary offences, including escaping from the police,
committed two months later
on 14 May 2024, for which the magistrate imposed fines totalling
The sentence was manifestly inadequate
seriousness of driving while disqualified by virtue of a court order,
particularly with a history of similar offending, is well
established
. One reason that those
who breach an order of disqualification must expect punishment is that,
otherwise, the force and effect of
such an order is undermined and the law is
brought into disrepute. Orders of disqualification are made not just to punish
but also for protection of the public and for general and specific
deterrence. All of the sentencing aims are undermined if the order
is disobeyed.
Parliament has legislated for harsher penalties for subsequent offenders.
Because it was not the applicant's first
offence it was punishable by a fine not
exceeding 80 penalty units, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months, or
disqualification from driving for a period not exceeding five
Vehicle and Traffic Act
s 13(1)(b).
The penalty
provisions disclose an intention that subsequent offenders are liable to
increased punishment
enacting a provision of that kind, legislature indicated an intention that where
the punishment imposed for a first offence has
not operated as a sufficient
warning or deterrent to an offender, a higher penalty is then to be imposed for
a further offence.
respondent was not to be punished again for his past offences, but the offence
for which he was to be sentenced was yet another
instance of his continuing
attitude of disobedience to the law. Retribution, deterrence and protection of
society all indicated that
a more severe sentence was
. Progressively harsher
sentences imposed almost annually between 2017 and 2023 had not deterred the
respondent from yet again flouting
the force and effect of the orders of
disqualification to which he was subject. Although there were no factors which
aggravated the
objective seriousness of the driving, the reason the respondent
advanced for driving, to "clear his head", was flippant and indicative
of insight into the seriousness of his conduct. Previous sentences had not
deterred him from again, only a few months after
his release from prison,
demonstrating disdain for the force of the court orders that he not drive.
the greatest respect to the learned magistrate, the imposition of a wholly
suspended term of imprisonment of one month accompanied
by a period of
disqualification of only one month was, in the respondents' circumstances,
erroneously lenient and plainly outside
the proper limits of her Honour's
sentencing discretion.
The residual discretion
succeed in the motion, the applicant must also persuade the Court to not
exercise the residual discretion to dismiss a prosecution
appeal in accordance
with the principles outlined in
R v Hernando
[2002] NSWCCA
136 A Crim R 451
Green v The Queen
[2011] HCA 49
CMB v Attorney General for New South Wales
. Those principles apply to
motions to review the decision of a magistrate in this
factor which remains relevant to the exercise of the residual discretion to
dismiss the motion is the element of double jeopardy
which arises when the
respondent faces, for a second time, the prospect of going to
. I would infer that the
respondent was anxious about the prospect of returning to custody and, having
been served with the motion
to review, having his life put on hold again while
the motion was pending
the appeal process which disrupts an offender's progress towards rehabilitation
is also a factor relevant to the exercise
of the residual
. This motion was
filed on 26 March 2025. However, delay in service meant that it was a few months
before the respondent appeared
in answer to it, and the motion was not heard
until almost seven months from filing. The respondent has also, so far, complied
the conditions of the suspended term her Honour imposed.
Notwithstanding
these matters, I have concluded that the residual discretion should not be
exercised. Intervention is necessary for
the guidance of sentencing courts and
to maintain public confidence in the administration of justice by correcting an
unjustly lenient
sentence did not reflect the requirement for denunciation, protection of the
public and general deterrence in sentencing persons
who repeatedly offend
against court orders which prohibit them from driving. I would allow the motion,
quash the sentencing orders
made by the magistrate and re-sentence the
respondent.
Re-sentence
respondent was entitled to mitigation from his plea of guilty. As the magistrate
correctly recognised, there were some signs
of rehabilitation. In the period of
2025, the respondent
had not committed any further driving offences. The offence
for which he was sentenced was the only relevant driving offence he had
committed since his release from prison on 23 October 2023. On the material
before the magistrate it was not an offence accompanied
by use of an illicit
drug or alcohol or an attempt to evade police, in contrast to many of the other
similar offences on his record.
In re-sentencing the respondent I may also take
into account any relevant matter that has occurred between when the sentence was
imposed and the hearing of the motion to
. The respondent maintains
that he has remained abstinent from illicit drugs. He now has a different full
time job, working with a
forestry harvesting company. Most significantly, there
has been no further offending. He still wants to resume custody of his son
his daughter, although that process has been put on hold until the result of
these proceedings is known. I think that the magistrate
was correct to give
weight to the prospect that, for the first time in many years, the respondent
was showing signs of bringing his
life into order.
those reasons, although the term of imprisonment imposed by the magistrate was
plainly inadequate, I agree with her Honour that
the term should be wholly
suspended. The term of imprisonment should be long enough to mark the
seriousness of the respondent's criminality
and sufficiently provide for
deterrence and punishment. By suspending the term the respondent is permitted an
opportunity for rehabilitation
and the chance of avoiding a return to prison. I
will, however, also extend the period for which he will remain subject to the
sentence as incentive for him to continue his reform. The respondent
will understand that if he re-offends during the period the
order is in force,
it is almost certain that he will be required to serve the term of imprisonment
with whatever other sentence may be imposed for
any new offences. Similarly, the period of disqualification must be increased,
the effect will be ameliorated to take account of totality by an order that
part of the period be served concurrently with the lengthy
total period of
disqualification to which he is presently subject.
orders made by the learned magistrate on 12 March 2025 included that the
respondent be convicted on complaint 31778/24, count
1, and pay costs and fees.
I do not intend to interfere with those orders. Otherwise, I order:
(a) the motion is allowed;
(b) the sentencing orders of imprisonment and disqualification made by the
learned magistrate on 12 March 2025 are quashed;
(c) the respondent is sentenced to a term of imprisonment of six months, wholly
suspended for 18 months from 5 November 2025; and
(d) the respondent is disqualified from driving for 18 months. Twelve months of
that period is to be served concurrently with the
total period of
disqualification he is currently serving, and the balance is to be served
cumulatively. Any driver licence he has
is cancelled.
The principles are summarised
by Wood J in
Parker v Hall
[2015] TASSC 60
(1993) 72 A Crim R 561
at 562-563,
[1996] VicRp 83
[1996] 2 VR 520
at 522, approved by the High Court in
Lowndes v The
[1999] HCA 29
195 CLR 665
at 671, and
Director of
Public Prosecutions v Chatters
[2011] TASCCA 8
[1998] TASSC 151
Allen v Kerr
[2009] TASSC 10
(2009) 19 Tas R
Maher v Banks
[1992] TASSC
Green v Bessell
[1995] TASSC 15
Brown v Stone
[1995] TASSC 23
Peck v Visser
[1999] TASSC 38
Full Court at
[1999] TASSC 90
Parker v Bessell
Barrett v Wilson
[2015] TASSC 3
; 69 MVR 33.
[2009] TASSC 112
per Crawford
Veen (No 2)
; 164 CLR 465 per Mason CJ, Brennan, Dawson and Toohey JJ at
For discussion of the
residual discretion under the Criminal Code by the Court of Criminal Appeal in
this State see
Director of Public Prosecutions v Swan
[2016] TASCCA 9
DPP v Harington
[2017] TASCCA 4
, 27 Tas R 128
Director of Public Prosecutions v Harwood (No 2)
[2019] TASCCA
Director of Public Prosecutions v J S P
[2020] TASCCA
[2014] TASSC 41
Lyons v Bakes
[2015] TASSC
Parker v Hall
[2015] TASSC 60
[2016] TASSC 14
Merrigan v Oakley
[2016] TASSC
Parker v Shaw
[2017] TASSC 25
Harris v Leaman
[2022] TASSC 28
[2015] TASSC
29 A Crim R 452
Green v The Queen
Everett v The
[1994] HCA 49
181 CLR 295
Green v The Queen
, s 110(2AA)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (162 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter