URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMACT/2017/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Britton v Motor Accidents Insurance Board (Ref No. 26/2015) [2017] TASMACT 1 (3 May 2017)
[2017] TASMACT 1
MOTOR ACCIDENTS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
PETA LEANNE BRITTON V MOTOR ACCIDENTS INSURANCE
REFERENCE NO(S):
HEARING DATE(S):
5 April 2017
DELIVERED ON:
REFERRING SECTION(S):
DECISION OF:
Chairperson Webster
CATCHWORDS:
Traffic law – statutory compensation in respect of
motor vehicle accidents – jurisdiction of Tribunal – res judicata
– Regulation 4
Motor Accidents (Liabilities & Compensation) Act
Motor Accidents (Liabilities & Compensation) Regulations
Motor Accidents Compensation Tribunal Regulations
Stiftung v Rayner & Keeler Limited (No 2)
(1967) 1 AC 853
International Catamarans (Tasmania) Pty Ltd v Stewart
[1994] TASSC 50
Stagg v Tasmania Feedlot Pty Ltd
[2011] TASWRCT 11
Tasmania Feedlot
Pty Ltd v Stagg
[2011] TASSC 48
Vita Pacific Ltd v Heather
Vanramer Pty Ltd v Higgins
(1991) 24 NSWLR 661
Qasair Investments Pty Ltd
[2014] TASFC 11
Chamberlain v Deputy Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[1988] HCA 21
Isaacs v The Ocean Accident &
Guarantee Corp. Limited
[1958] SR NSW 69;
Motor Accidents Insurance Board
v Motor Accidents Compensation Tribunal
[2016] TASFC 6
Neil Pearson and
Co Pty Ltd & Anor v Comptroller-General of Customs
(1995) 38 NSWLR 443
Motor Accidents Insurance Board v Korajzl
[1993] TASSC 159
DETERMINATION:
The Tribunal has jurisdiction to determine the
applicant’s claim for the employed person’s allowance from and
30 June 2014 to 19 November 2015.
REPRESENTATION:
C. Bartlett
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Bartletts Barristers &
Respondent:
Murdoch Clarke
[2017] TASMACT 1
Chairperson Webster
INTRODUCTION
1. The applicant was notified by letter dated 19 November 2015
from the Motor Accidents Insurance Board (“MAIB”) that
the MAIB had
determined not to pay the applicant a disability allowance (“the
determination”). This letter was sent
by the MAIB to the
applicant’s solicitor in response to a letter it had received from the
applicant’s solicitor dated
16 November 2015 which had provided two
medical certificates and which had claimed payment of the disability allowance
on the basis
that the applicant was wholly disabled.
2. The applicant
referred the determination to the Tribunal by a reference dated 3 December 2015
which was received by the Tribunal
on that day. A consideration of the
Tribunal’s file indicates that a teleconference was held between the
parties on 18 December
2015. On that day the parties indicated they were ready
to proceed to hearing. Counsel for the MAIB advised that such a hearing
include a determination of whether or not there was an issue estoppel given the
dismissal of an earlier claim for the disability
allowance (Tribunal’s
file number H20/2014).
3. On 29 April 2016, notices were forwarded to the
parties setting this reference down for hearing on 19 and 20 May 2016 in
Launceston.
On 12 May 2016, counsel for the applicant gave notice of his
instructions to apply for an adjournment of the hearing. That application
heard by the Tribunal on 16 May 2016. On 17 May 2016 the Tribunal granted the
application. Subsequently further directions
were made in relation to the
provision to the MAIB and the Tribunal of the applicant’s medical
4. Since that time the parties have agreed the applicant is
entitled to payment of a disability allowance. There is, however, a dispute
between the parties as to from what date the MAIB can be ordered to make
payments of that allowance. The applicant’s position
is the Tribunal has
received payment of a disability allowance
which was 29 June 2014. The MAIB
contends the Tribunal’s jurisdiction does not extend back that far. It
says the Tribunal
only has jurisdiction to make an order from 20 November 2015
and that no evidence is required for payment of the disability allowance
that date as the parties are agreed from that date on.
5. This decision is
therefore confined to the question from what date the Tribunal has jurisdiction
to make the order. It has been
agreed between the parties that if the Tribunal
decides it has jurisdiction to make an order prior to 20 November 2015, then
will need to be a further hearing at which evidence from various medical
practitioners would be called as to whether or not the applicant
satisfies the
relevant statutory test for the payment of the disability allowance.
6. The applicant was notified by letter dated 8 July 2014 that
the MAIB had received medical advice in which the opinion was expressed
applicant was no longer considered to be wholly disabled from engaging in any
employment for which she would otherwise be
suited by education, training,
experience or ability as a result of the injuries which the applicant sustained
in a motor accident
on 29 June 2012. Accordingly, the MAIB determined that it
was unable to make any further disability allowance payments beyond 29
7. In the letter dated 8 July 2014, the MAIB also advised it would be
unable to attend to the payment of any further medical expenses
incurred by the
8. The applicant referred the determinations by the MAIB in
paragraphs 6 and 7 to the Tribunal by notice dated 13 August 2014 (reference
number 20/2014), received on that date by the Tribunal. In his written
determination with respect to this referral ([2015] TASMACT
4), Chairperson
Carey said the following at [3]:
“Apparently
the applicant’s delay in making the referral to the Tribunal was caused by
some misunderstanding on her behalf;
firstly by reason of a curious request by
the MAIB that she undergo a medical assessment on 10 September 2014, that notice
by letter also dated 8 July 2014. Additionally the applicant had engaged
a solicitor to assist her in relation to matters arising
from her motor vehicle
accident, however, unfortunately, this proposed representation related to
possible common law proceedings
and did not extend to the Board’s
determination set out in its letter of 8 July
9. It is clear from Chairperson Carey’s determination
that the issue of jurisdiction in relation to the first referral remained
one throughout the period that reference was before the Tribunal. The point as
to jurisdiction being that the reference was
made outside the 14 days provided
by r4(3)(a) of the Motor Accidents Compensation Tribunal Regulations 2009
(“the 2009 Regulations”)
and that no application was made by the
applicant for an extension of time before the expiration of that initial period:
The jurisdictional argument was listed for hearing and at that
hearing the MAIB sought an order that the reference be dismissed
whereas counsel
for the applicant made no submissions on that application. It is clear from
Chairperson Carey’s determination
this first referral was dismissed and he
also ordered the applicant pay the respondent’s costs of that referral at
of 85% of the fees set out in Part 1 of Schedule 1 of the Supreme Court
Rules 2000.
10. It is against that background that the matter for
determination before the Tribunal in this referral needs to be
considered.
RELEVANT LEGISLATIVE PROVISIONS
11. The payment of disability allowances is governed by Part 5
of Schedule 1 of the Motor Accidents (Liabilities & Compensation)
Regulations 2010 (“the 2010 Regulations”). Part 5 provides for
different types of disability allowances: clause 2(2).
The relevant allowance
in this case is an employed person’s allowance given the applicant was
employed prior to the motor
accident. The statutory test in relation to payment
of the employed person’s allowance is set out in clause 3(4) of Part 5
Schedule 1 to the 2010 Regulations and it provides:
employed person's allowance is payable –
(a) for such periods, falling within the
period of 104 weeks beginning on the day of the motor accident, during which the
person is wholly disabled from engaging in his or her usual employment
or occupation as a consequence of the injury; and
(b) for such other periods, falling
within the prescribed period, during which the injured person is, by reason of
the injury, wholly
disabled from engaging in any employment or occupation for
which he or she would otherwise be reasonably suited by education, training,
experience or ability.”
For the purposes of clause 3(4)(b), the prescribed period means
a period of 156 weeks beginning at the expiration of the period referred
clause 3(4)(a): clause 3(1).
12. The power of the MAIB to determine a
person’s right to scheduled benefits, which includes a person’s
right to be paid
an employed person’s allowance, is provided for in s28(1)
of the Act. That section provides:
Board is to determine –
(a) whether or not a person is to be treated as
a person within a class of persons to whom scheduled benefits may be paid;
(b) the right of a person to be paid any
scheduled benefit; and
(c) the amount of any scheduled benefit to be
paid to a person.”
13. A person aggrieved by a determination made by the MAIB
under subsection (1) or by the refusal or failure of the MAIB to make a
by way of a scheduled benefit may refer that matter to the Tribunal:
14. Regulation 4 of the 2009 Regulations provides the mechanism by
which an aggrieved person can refer a matter to the Tribunal.
to Tribunal
(1) A person may refer a matter to the Tribunal
section 28(2)
of the Act by giving the
secretary –
(a) written notice in the form determined by the
(b) a copy of all relevant documents in the
possession of that person.
(2) The Board may refer a matter to the Tribunal
section 28(3)
of the Act by giving the
secretary –
(a) written notice in the form determined by the
(b) a copy of all relevant documents in the
possession of the Board.
(3) A person is to give notice under
subregulation (1)(a)
(a) 14 days after the person is notified of a
determination or refusal of the Board or becomes aware of the failure of the
make a payment by way of a scheduled benefit; or
(b) any further period the Tribunal, on
application by the person before the expiration of that period, allows.
(4) A copy of a notice under
subregulation (1)(a)
subregulation (2)(a)
is to be served on each other party
to the reference.
(5) A copy of a notice under
subregulation (1)(a)
is to be served within the period
required by
subregulation (3)
15. The provisions relevant to this determination are r4(1) and
(3). Regulation 4(2) is not relevant and no issue is taken by either
respect to the operation of r4(4) and/or r4(5).
DETERMINATION
16. At the hearing of this matter I received into evidence the
following documents:
(a) A medical certificate dated 21 February 2017 from Dr
Susan Sheehan which certifies the applicant “unfit for all forms of
for which she is reasonably suited by education, training and experience, as a
result of her car accident in 2012 from June
2014 to November 2015”:
Exhibit A1.
(b) Letter from Bartletts Barristers & Solicitors to MAIB
dated 16 November 2015 together with medical certificates of Dr Hilton
August 2015 and Dr Sheehan dated 1 June 2015 which represents the claim the
subject of the MAIB’s determination which
the applicant referred to the
Tribunal on 3 December 2015: Exhibit A2.
(c) Letter from MAIB to the
applicant dated 8 July 2014 giving the applicant notice of a medical examination
to be conducted on her
by the psychiatrist Dr Evenhuis on 10 September 2014 at
1:00pm at Level 4, 33 Salamanca Place, Hobart: Exhibit A3.
(d) List of
disability allowance payments made to the applicant by the MAIB dated 4 April
2017: Exhibit R1.
17. The applicant gave oral evidence and was cross examined.
On behalf of the MAIB, Mr Ian French, who holds the position of Team
Claims and Rehabilitation Services, gave evidence and he was cross examined.
The oral evidence of these two witnesses was
as follows.
18. Prior to the
motor accident, the applicant was employed as a disability support worker with
Able Australia. She provided care
to people with disabilities who were housed
in group homes of four to six patients. On 29 June 2012, she was driving a
motor vehicle
when she hit a stray cow on the roadway. The collision severely
damaged her car and she sustained injuries. The applicant’s
practitioner, prior to the motor accident, was Dr Sheehan and she has continued
to see Dr Sheehan since that time. Subsequently
the applicant completed an
application for scheduled benefits and notice of accident and those documents
were lodged with the MAIB.
She says for 2 months after the motor accident she
received payments of the employed person’s allowance in the sum of
per fortnight. That figure, she understood, was calculated by the
MAIB and was based upon her earnings from her employment with
Able Australia.
The MAIB also paid her medical accounts and travelling expenses.
applicant returned to her pre-accident employment in or about September 2012 and
remained at work until in or about October
2013. When she returned to work she
thought “[she’d] get better” and therefore she kept working
given that expectation.
However, by October 2013 she came to the realisation
that from a physical and psychological point of view she could no longer carry
out the physical aspects of her job and undertake the amount of travel that was
required to transport clients.
20. After she ceased working in October 2013,
she received Newstart allowance from Centrelink. In March 2014, Dr Sheehan
the applicant with a medical certificate in relation to her capacity
for work which was sent to the MAIB. On receipt of that medical
evidence, the
MAIB determined the applicant was entitled to payment of the employed
person’s allowance and it therefore backdated
payment of that allowance to
October 2013 and refunded to Centrelink what that organisation had paid to the
applicant from 20 October
2013 to 28 March 2014. Thereafter the applicant
continued receiving payments of the employed person’s allowance, pursuant
to certificates provided by the applicant to the MAIB, until 29 June
21. Subsequent to that date the MAIB made the determination which was
the subject of the first reference and which is referred to
in paragraph 2
above. On the same date as notice of the MAIB’s determination with
respect to payment of the employed person’s
allowance and medical expenses
was dispatched to the applicant, she was also sent Exhibit A3. She believed
that the reasons why
the MAIB had previously had her assessed by Dr Haynes and
then sought to have her assessed by Dr Evenhuis (psychiatrist) was so that
would then have evidence with respect to both her physical and mental condition.
That seems to be a reasonable assumption given
Exhibit A3 says the reason for
the appointment with Dr Evenhuis is “[t]o assist the MAIB in the ongoing
management of your
claim...”. She thought that evidence provided by those
specialists would be considered with other evidence on the file and
continue to be assisted by the MAIB by way of continuing payments of the
disability allowance and payment of her medical
22. The applicant
then gave evidence with respect to the lodgement of the first referral and the
circumstances in which it was lodged
which are briefly set out in paragraph [8]
above. During her dealings with the MAIB, it seems from the evidence the
applicant gave,
she saw Dr Parkes and Dr Rowe in October 2014 and Dr Sale and Dr
Gorman in August 2016. These doctors were seen as part of her case.
Haynes and Dr Evenhuis for the MAIB and she also saw Dr Jack Dale for the MAIB
around the 2 year anniversary of the motor
accident. She confirmed that since
June 2014 she has not received any payments of the employed person’s
allowance and no medical
or travelling expenses have been paid by the MAIB. In
relation to her physical and psychological condition she says nothing has
23. Under cross examination she confirmed that when she was in
receipt of the employed person’s allowance she received payments
fortnightly direct into her ANZ bank account. She conceded the payments came to
an end because of the determination made by the
MAIB in its letter dated 8 July
2014. She was aggrieved by that determination and therefore made the first
referral. Thereafter
she acknowledged she knew she was not in receipt of
payments of the employed person’s allowance and she knew every fortnight
she was not being paid because the payments were not being credited to her bank
account. That situation has continued up until the
date of this hearing. She
confirmed that she instructed Mr Bartlett to make a further claim for the
employed person’s allowance
on 16 November 2015 because she knew she was
not receiving payments of the employed person’s allowance. Her evidence
she cannot work because of the motor accident and there are medical
reports which support that position.
24. The applicant accepted she had
pre-motor accident conditions including a left shoulder injury at work and a
long standing depressive
illness; however these were not incapacitating her at
the time of the motor accident. She also accepted there is no record of her
making any complaints in relation to motor accident related injuries in Dr
Sheehan’s records between October 2012 and June
2013 but this did not mean
she did not make complaints about those injuries in that period. She also
conceded there was a dispute
at work in or about July 2013 which she raised with
her general practitioner because she says her team leader came to work drunk
to her that was wrong. It seems as a result of making a complaint about that
her hours at work were reduced as she was employed
on a causal basis and this
was a matter of concern to her. She says she mentioned this, along with many
other matters (e.g. they
would often discuss the fact that they both had horses
and she recalls discussing with Dr Sheehan her driveway collapsing), to Dr
Sheehan as she had been her general practitioner for a long time. As to her
shoulder injury at work, she says the motor accident
caused a rotator cuff
injury which she did not have prior to the motor accident. It was put to her
that the situation at work was
the catalyst for her to complain about her motor
accident symptoms because about 2 months after making the comments to her
practitioner about the situation at work, she commenced making
complaints about symptoms arising from the injuries sustained in the
accident. The applicant denied this. She denied encouraging her general
practitioner to link her symptoms to the motor accident.
25. The applicant
explained that she loved her job but she was now financially ruined. She was
employed as a casual and did not have
any sick leave and was dependent upon her
own income having no partner. She took what hours she could get but now she
says she cannot
26. Mr French gave evidence that he was in charge of
the claims team which deals with common law claims, scheduled benefit claims
the rehabilitation of injured motorists. He is familiar with the claims
administration process of the MAIB. In relation to
payments of an employed
person’s allowance, information is obtained from the claimant with respect
to the claimant’s
earnings and that person’s average weekly earnings
are calculated and that information is entered into the claims system.
of the employed person’s allowance are processed and paid to a claimant
when appropriate medical certification is
provided. The MAIB’s preference
is to pay by EFT on a fortnightly basis apart from the first 7 days after the
motor accident:
r6(1)(a) of Part 5 of Schedule 1 to the 2010 Regulations. The
payments are recorded in the MAIB’s computer system and reports
the payments that have been made can be produced and printed: Exhibit
27. In cross examination Mr French conceded the applicant was entitled to
payment of $1,128.29 gross per fortnight from 20 November
2015 until the date of
an order from the Tribunal.
28. The evidence set out in paragraphs 18, 20,
21, 26 and 27 is not in dispute and therefore accepted by the Tribunal. I also
the evidence in paragraph 19. Although there is a dispute as to whether
the applicant meets the statutory test for payment of the
person’s allowance on and from 30 June 2014 to 19 November 2016
(“the disputed period”) there is no dispute
that she satisfied the
relevant test in late October 2013 because she was paid the employed
person’s allowance according to
Exhibit R1 from 20 October 2013. All of
the evidence but for the last sentence in paragraphs 22 and 23 is also not in
dispute and
is therefore accepted by the Tribunal. The extent of her physical
and psychological injuries and their effect on her capacity for
during the disputed period are issues that will be considered at any further
hearing mentioned in paragraph 5 above; should
that hearing be required. The
evidence set out in paragraphs 24 and 25 is not relevant to the issue for
determination in this decision
and therefore no findings are made in relation to
it. I have simply recorded that this evidence was given because it may become
relevant in any subsequent hearing should that hearing be required.
29. Counsel for the applicant submitted the Tribunal has
29 June 2014. The MAIB disagrees and says the Tribunal only has jurisdiction to
order the MAIB to make payments of the employed
person’s allowance from 20
November 2015; that is 14 days prior to this referral being filed. The MAIB
contended the Tribunal
had no jurisdiction to determine the question of the
payment of the employed person’s allowance before that date on two bases.
The first basis was that there was a res judicata in respect of the
applicant’s entitlement to payment of the employed person’s
allowance in the period between 29 June 2014 and 17 November 2015 and the second
argument was based upon the statutory construction
of r4(3)(a) of the 2009
Regulations. The first basis was different to that put at the directions
hearing on 18 December 2015; see
paragraph 2 above.
30. I will deal with the
res judicata argument first. The matter before the Tribunal on the first
reference was the determination
of the MAIB not to pay the employed
person’s allowance after 29 June 2014 and the applicant’s
entitlement to that allowance
to the date of that hearing. The hearing was held
on 17 November 2015. At the hearing, an application was made by the MAIB to
the referral. The applicant was represented by Mr Bartlett who made no
submissions with respect to that application. The reference
was dismissed on
the basis that it had been filed and served out of time. It was therefore
contended by counsel for the MAIB that
the applicant’s right to be paid
that allowance between 29 June 2014 and 17 November 2015 was accordingly
determined and that
right crystalized in the dismissal of her referral. That is
the right of the applicant to that allowance passed into finality by
determination and that right merged and has no longer an independent existence:
Quarmby v Qasair Investments Pty Ltd
[2014] TASFC 11.
It was contended that as
the order was made by consent, or was unopposed, that determination does not
affect the application of
the principle because finality is the touchstone:
Chamberlain v Deputy Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1988] HCA 21.
clear from the decision of the Tribunal with respect to the first referral
([2015] TASMACT 4), that no submissions were made
in response to the
MAIB’s application to dismiss the referral.
31. As to the application
of the res judicata principle, counsel for the applicant submitted it does not
apply. All the Tribunal
did in relation to the first referral was determine
that it did not have jurisdiction and as a result it was dismissed. It was
submitted that the right of the applicant to be paid the employed
person’s allowance between 29 June 2014 and 17 November 2015
had not been
determined. There was no analysis of the merits of the case because the
Tribunal was without jurisdiction and was therefore
not able to make a
determination about the applicant’s entitlement to the employed
person’s allowance from 29 June 2014.
It was also contended that the
dismissal of the first referral without an analysis of the material facts and
the taking of evidence
was not an adjudication on the merits: International
Catamarans Tasmania Pty Ltd v Stewart
[1994] TASSC 50
, Zeeman J; Stagg v
Tasmanian Feedlot Pty Ltd
[2011] TASWRCT 11
and on appeal at
[2011] TASSC 48.
In addition the Tribunal did not make a “conclusive determination of
matters in controversy”: Slicer J. in Vita Pacific
[2001] TASSC
and Vanramer Pty Ltd v Higgins
(1991) 24 NSWLR 661.
32. I am satisfied
that doctrines such as res judicata, issue estoppel and abuse of process apply
to this Tribunal. In Carl Zeiss
Stiftung v Rayner & Keeler Limited (No 2)
(1967) 1 AC 853
at p933-934 Lord Guest stated:
it is now quite immaterial whether the judicial decision is pronounced by a
Tribunal which is required to keep a written
record of its decisions, this
nomenclature has disappeared and it may be convenient to ascribe res judicata in
its true and original
form as a ‘cause of action
estoppel’.”
33. A consent judgment which is intended by the parties to
dispose fully of substantive proceedings between those parties will give
the application of the doctrine of res judicata: Isaacs v The Ocean Accident
& Guarantee Corp. Limited [1958] SR (NSW)
69. Therefore in circumstances
where a statutory tribunal has power to make a decision that is judicial in
nature, and makes a consent
order dismissing a claim, the claimant will be
prevented from reviving that claim if the result is consistent with the relevant
legislation:
Motor Accidents Insurance Board v Motor Accidents Compensation
[2016] TASFC 6
. There was no such consent in this
34. The judgment of Kirby A-CJ. in Neil Pearson & Co Pty Ltd and
Anor v Comptroller-General of Customs
(1995) 38 NSWLR 443
at p450-455 provides a
concise summary of each of the doctrines mentioned in paragraph 32. Kirby A-CJ.
makes it clear that res judicata,
issue estoppel and abuse of process have
traditionally been considered to be forms of “estoppel by record”.
as the phrase suggests, the doctrines initially operated only on
decisions of courts of record but this is clearly now not the case.
judicata he says at p450-451:
judicata thus operates so that, once a cause of action between certain parties
has been finally determined by a competent
tribunal, neither of those parties
can challenge the adjudication in subsequent litigation between
35. As to issue estoppel, his Honour says at p451:
“Unlike res judicata
which operates so as to prevent the bringing of the cause of action which has
previously been definitively
determined in a suit at law, the plea of issue
estoppel asserts that a relevant issue or matter has been decided by a prior
Thus, the two concepts are closely aligned. The only difference lies
in whether the issue said to have been resolved constituted
the Tribunal’s
formal conclusion, or whether the issue was subsidiary to, or underlay its
conclusion.”
36. As to abuse of process, his Honour says at p451:
“The third, and most
limited form of estoppel by record, occurs when a court prevents a party from
litigating an issue because
to do so would amount to an abuse of process. This
mechanism will most often be employed where, although not technically bound by
an earlier determination, a party should, in substance, be so
37. In this case the only determination made with respect to
the first reference was that the Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to
the applicant’s entitlement to the employed person’s allowance from
29 June 2014 until the date of that hearing.
The right to that entitlement was
therefore not finally determined, in fact a hearing on the merits never
commenced. On the assumption
then that the right to payment of the employed
person’s allowance equates to a cause of action, there can be no res
Neither was a relevant issue or matter in relation to the
applicant’s entitlement decided by the dismissal of the first referral.
There can therefore be no issue estoppel. Finally, in relation to abuse of
process, there has not been an earlier determination
of the applicant’s
entitlement to which to bind the parties so there cannot be an abuse of process.
Put simply, all the first
reference determined was not the entitlement to the
employed person’s allowance but that the Tribunal did not have
to determine that entitlement. In my view then, there is no res
judicata, issue estoppel or abuse of process argument which prevents
Tribunal considering the applicant’s entitlement to the employed
person’s allowance prior to 20 November 2015.
38. As to the statutory
construction argument, counsel for the MAIB submitted a strict time limit
applies for any matter to be referred
to the Tribunal over which the Tribunal
has jurisdiction to make a determination. That time limit is provided for in
r4(3) of the
2009 Regulations. It was submitted the 14 day limit
• after notification of a determination to a person;
• after the refusal of or a failure by the MAIB to make a payment by
way of a scheduled benefit; or
• a person becomes aware of the failure
of the MAIB to make a payment by way of a scheduled benefit.
39. It was contended then that the time period for which the
matter referred, can be determined in respect of any order to be made
November 2015 only. This was because the applicant was aware as each fortnight
passed she was not being paid the employed
person’s allowance as that
allowance was not being paid into her bank account. She therefore had 14 days,
after becoming aware
of each failure of the MAIB, to refer each failure to make
the payment of the employed person’s allowance to the Tribunal.
time has expired with respect to each payment and as there has been no
application made for an extension of time pursuant
to r4(3)(b) there is no
to 3 December 2015. It
was also contended that the referral before the Tribunal
was based upon a claim made on 16 November 2015 and nothing which accompanied
that claim goes back to June 2014. In particular, the certificates which were
filed with the claim and comprise part of Exhibit
A2 only certify the applicant
wholly disabled, as a result of the injuries sustained, from engaging in her
usual employment or occupation
between 1 June 2015 and 13 October 2015. The
certificates also do not address the correct statutory test which applied to
this applicant
from 29 June 2014: see clause 3(4)(b) of Part 5 of Schedule 1 to
the 2010 Regulations set out in paragraph 11 above.
40. The Act and the
Regulations, like the workers compensation legislation in this State, generally
speaking, is beneficial legislation.
As a general rule beneficial legislation
ought to be given an interpretation that is favourable to the class of persons
to be benefited by the legislation; namely injured motorists. See, for
example, McDermott v Owners of SS Tintoretto
[1911] AC 35
at 46; Wilson v
Wilson’s Tyre Works Pty Ltd [1960] 104 CLR 328 at 335 and Bird v The
Commonwealth
[1998] HCA 23
(1988) 165 CLR 1
41. While on the face of
the regulation, the argument put by counsel for the MAIB appears correct; that
is the applicant had 14 days
after she became aware of each failure of the MAIB
to pay the employed person’s allowance on a fortnightly basis to refer
failure to the Tribunal, given the use of the word or in the provision
there seems to be three circumstances in which the applicant
can refer a matter
to the Tribunal. See paragraph 38 above. While counsel for the MAIB says the
third option set out in paragraph
38 is the applicable one, it is clear the
MAIB’s letter of 19 November 2015 constitutes notice of a determination
because after
acknowledging the applicant’s request for payment of a
disability allowance, the second sentence of that letter says “[t]he
has determined not to pay on that claim.” Accordingly the applicant
contends her reference is within time because it
was filed within 14 days after
she was notified of the MAIB’s determination that it would not pay the
claim for the disability
allowance. I agree. To hold otherwise would not only
be to ignore the clear words of the regulation, it would also infringe the
principle that the provision should be interpreted in a manner that is most
favourable to the applicant. If the argument put by
the MAIB is correct then it
means that between 29 June 2014 and the filing of the second referral on 3
December 2015, the applicant
should have filed, on my calculation, up to 37
separate referrals to cover each fortnight from 29 June 2014. Not only would
be an unwieldy method by which to refer matters which respect to the
disability allowance to the Tribunal, it would result in many,
references before the Tribunal and would in many cases require an applicant, who
thought their entitlement to the disability
allowance should continue but who
had no medical evidence, to file references without supporting medical evidence
or, at the very
least, multiple applications for extensions of time which would
need to be heard and determined once that evidence was to hand.
42. So what
was referred? Clearly what was referred was the applicant’s entitlement
to payment of the employed person’s
allowance. True it is she did not, at
the time of referral, specifically seek payment of the allowance from a certain
date, or if
she did, it might have been interpreted, given the certificates
which were filed with the reference, as from 1 June 2015 at the earliest.
is, however, clear on the evidence she has not been paid the allowance since 29
June 2014. It is also clear that she sought
payment from that date in an
earlier referral which was dismissed for want of jurisdiction. These were facts
known by the MAIB.
43. The manner in which a matter is referred to the
Tribunal is by way of written notice in the form determined by the MAIB:
of the 2009 Regulations. That form appears on the MAIB’s website
under the “Already have a claim? – Disputed costs
tab. The form on the MAIB’s website is identical to the form used by the
applicant in this reference. It
sets out that she is aggrieved by the
MAIB’s determination set out in the attached letter of 19 November 2015
and refers that
determination to the Tribunal under s28(2) of the Act on a
number of grounds which her solicitor has inserted on her behalf. In
reference, the applicant has also indicated that she is aggrieved on an
alternative basis by the refusal or failure of the MAIB
to make any payments by
way of an employed person’s allowance and that matter was referred on the
same grounds. The form does
not require the applicant to specify the date from
which she seeks payment of the allowance.
44. The term “matter”
in s28(2) has been given a very wide meaning. As to its meaning, Underwood J.,
as he then was,
in Motor Accidents Insurance Board v Korajzl
[1993] TASSC 159
said at [9]:
appellant was aggrieved by the Board’s determination to stop payments of a
self employed person’s allowance.
‘The matter’ that he
referred to the Tribunal was that determination. Although the terms of the
condition precedent
to the entitlement becoming payable changed with the lapse
of time after the occurrence of the injury, the matter put in issue by
Board’s refusal to pay was the entitlement to payment of an employed
person’s allowance. This was ‘the matter’
referred to the
Tribunal. The meaning of the word ‘matter’ in this statutory
context is very similar to its meaning
in the Workers Compensation Act 1988.
There it has been given the widest possible construction. I venture to repeat
part of that
which I wrote in
Atkinson v Nipper Cleaning Services Pty Ltd
trading as Burrell Hy-Tech Cleaning Service
‘Whilst it is trite to say that words must be construed in their
statutory context, ‘matter’ is a word that has
consistently been
given a wide meaning. With respect to its use in the
Constitution
‘all matters between States’ – Griffith CJ said in South
Australia v Victoria
[1911] HCA 17
(1910-1911) 12 CLR 667
at 675: 'The word
‘matters’ was in 1900 in common use as the widest term to denote
controversies which might come before
a Court of Justice.' With respect to the
extent of the jurisdiction of the High Court to issue a writ of mandamus or
prohibition
the words, 'all matters' in the
Constitution
, have also been
given the widest construction. See R v Drake-Brockman Ex parte Natural Oil Pty
[1943] HCA 35
(1943-44) 68 CLR 51
at 57-58; Adamson v West
Perth Football Club Incorporated and Ors
[1979] FCA 81
(1979-80) 27 ALR 475
at 498. In Goscombe v
Cadbury Schweppes Pty Ltd as yet unreported A23/1993, Zeeman J held that 'the
included an inquiry as to the correctness of the facts and
opinions in a medical certificate relied upon as the basis for terminating
weekly payment. At 12 he cited a passage from the judgment of Brennan J in W A
Pines Pty Ltd v Bannerman
[1980] FCA 79
(1979-1980) 30 ALR 559
at 565 that dealt with the
meaning of 'matter' in the Trade Practices Act, s155(1). Part of the passage
cited read: '"Matter", said
Franki and Northrop JJ in Melbourne Home of Ford Pty
Ltd v Trade Practices Commission
(1979) 5 TPC 26
at 47 ... ‘is to be
construed in its ordinary sense of an affair or a thing.’ It refers to a
body of facts, a body of
facts which ‘constitute’ or ‘may
constitute’ a contravention’.’
[10] The same approach should be taken to the word ‘matter’ as
enacted in the Act, s28(2) so as to confer jurisdiction
on the Tribunal to deal
with all matters relating to the issue referred to it, including entitlement to
payment up to the date of
the Tribunal's
45. Therefore, although the referral did not stipulate the date
from which the applicant alleged her entitlement to the employed person’s
allowance commenced, the matter which she referred to the Tribunal was her
entitlement to payment of the allowance up to the date
of the Tribunal’s
decision and all matters relating to that issue. This must, following the
decision of Motor Accidents Insurance
Board v Korajzl (supra.), include the
date of commencement of the entitlement to the allowance.
46. Accordingly
the Tribunal is of the view that it has jurisdiction to determine the
applicant’s entitlement to the employed
person’s allowance from and
including 30 June 2014 (she having been paid to 29 June 2014) and it is not
prevented from doing
so by either of the arguments raised by the MAIB. There is
agreement between the parties which respect to payment of the employed
person’s allowance from 20 November 2015 until the date of an order of the
Tribunal. There is no such agreement for the disputed
period. Accordingly, the
Tribunal will need to receive medical evidence from the parties and determine
whether or not the applicant
is entitled to payment of the employed
person’s allowance during the disputed period. This reference will
therefore be listed
shortly for directions in order to allocate hearing
CHAIRPERSON
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (177 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter