URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASFC/2023/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:13:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Olympus Superannuation Fund (Tas) Pty Ltd v Recorder of Titles [2023] TASFC 6 (8 December 2023)
[2023] TASFC 6
: SUPREME COURT OF TASMANIA (FULL COURT)
Olympus Superannuation Fund (Tas) Pty Ltd v Recorder of
[2023] TASFC 6
: OLYMPUS SUPERANNUATION FUND (TAS) PTY LTD as trustee for the
Olympus Superannuation Fund
RECORDER OF TITLES
BLUEHOUSE CORNER
APPEALED FROM:
Olympus Superannuation Fund (Tas) Pty Ltd v
Recorder of Titles
[2022] TASSC 16
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
Wood J, Pearce J, Brett J
Real Property – Torrens title – Amendment or variation of title
record – Extent of Recorder's power – Whether
Recorder authorised
under s139 to correct an error resulting from an earlier correction –
Recorder may exercise the power under
s 139 from time to time as occasion may
Aust Dig Real Property [1236]
Real Property – Torrens title – Indefeasibility of Title –
Generally – Effect of registration of benefit of
easement on the title of
the dominant tenement – Interest of the registered proprietor of the
dominant tenement conclusive
provided that an estate or interest in the land is
described in the folio – What is described in the folio is determined by
the endorsement on the title and any underlying instrument which forms part of
the Register.
Aust Dig Real Property
Legislation:
Land Titles Act 1980
Acts Interpretation Act 1931
Authorities referred to:
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
Breskvar v Wall
(1971) 126 CLR 376
Bursill Enterprises
Pty Ltd v Berger Bros Trading Co Pty Ltd
[1971] HCA 9
[1971] 124 CLR 73
[2015] TASFC 8
Castle Constructions Pty Ltd v Sahab Holdings
Pty Ltd and Another
[2013] HCA 11
(2013) 247 CLR 149
Day v Hunter
[1964] VicRp 109
[1964] Vic Rep 109
[1964] VR 845
Deguisa v Lynn
[2020] HCA 39
268 CLR 638
DM & Longbow Pty Ltd v Registrar-General of
[2016] NSWSC 1844
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
(2003) 214 CLR 118
Gapes v Fish
[1926] ArgusLawRp 104
[1927] VLR 88
Hillpalm Pty Ltd v
Heaven's Door Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 59
220 CLR 472
Hogan v Australian
Crime Commission
[2010] HCA 21
(2010) 240 CLR 651
[1993] TASSC 48
2 Tas R 290.
Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
Nightingale v Recorder of
[2018] TASSC 56
Parramore v Duggan
[1995] HCA 21
183 CLR 633
Pirie v Registrar-General
[1962] HCA 58
; (1962)109 CLR
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
194 CLR 355
Purton v Jackson
[2012] TASFC 2
Sahab Holdings Pty Ltd v Registrar-General
[2011] NSWCA 395
Sahab Holdings Pty Ltd v
Registrar-General
Sahade v Owners Corporation SP
Sahade v Owners Corporation SP 62022
[2013] NSWSC
State Bank of New South Wales v Berowra Waters Holdings Pty Ltd
(1986) 4 NSWLR 398
Swancare Group Inc v Commissioner for Consumer
[2014] WASC 80
Taylor v The Owners – Strata
Plan No 11564
[2014] HCA 9
(2014) 253 CLR 531
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
(1979) 142 CLR 531
Westfield Management Ltd v Perpetual
Trustee Co Ltd
[2007] HCA 45
, (2007) CLR 528
Registrar-General
[1934] HCA 29
(1934) 51 CLR
REPRESENTATION
L Sealy SC, M Rapley
First Respondent
: P Turner SC
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Butler McIntyre &
First Respondent:
Solicitor-General
Respondent:
Page Seager
Judgment Number:
[2023] TASFC
Number of paragraphs:
Serial No 6/2023
File No 707/2022
OLYMPUS SUPERANNUATION FUND v RECORDER OF TITLES and
BLUEHOUSE CORNER PTY LTD
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
December 2023
of the Court:
1 The appeal is allowed.
2 The order of the
primary judge dismissing the originating application is set aside.
originating application is to be reheard by the primary judge.
Serial No 6/2023
File No 707/2022
OLYMPUS SUPERANNUATION FUND v RECORDER OF TITLES and
BLUEHOUSE CORNER PTY LTD
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
8 December 2023
I have had the opportunity to read the reasons for judgment of Brett J. I agree
with those reasons and the conclusion reached by
his Honour about the orders
that should be made.
OLYMPUS SUPERANNUATION FUND v RECORDER OF TITLES
BLUEHOUSE CORNER PTY LTD
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
8 December 2023
I agree with Brett J.
OLYMPUS SUPERANNUATION FUND v RECORDER OF TITLES and
BLUEHOUSE CORNER PTY LTD
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FULL COURT
8 December 2023
This appeal is from a decision of Blow CJ in respect of relief sought by the
appellant pursuant to
Land Titles Act
(the Act). The
issue concerns a determination by the Recorder of Titles to record the benefit
of a purported easement on titles to
the second respondent's land, which is
adjacent to the appellant's land. The easement was purportedly created by the
reservation
of a right of way over the appellant's land in favour of the then
owners of the second respondent's land when they sold the land
appellant's predecessor in title in 1915. Both parcels of land were then subject
to the general law system. The burden of
the easement was recorded on the
appellant's land when that land was brought under the Act in 1989. However, when
the second respondent's
land was brought under the Torrens system in 1923, the
benefit of the easement was not recorded on the titles issued at that time.
remained the case until 2019, when the Recorder did so, relying on his power
to correct errors and supply omissions in the Register. The
appellant then requested the Recorder to reverse this decision and remove
recording of the easement from the Register, claiming that the instrument in
question did not identify a dominant tenement, and
hence was not an easement,
but merely granted a personal licence to the individuals named in it. The
Recorder refused to remove the
recording, and the appellant then applied to the
Supreme Court for relief pursuant to
The learned primary judge concluded that the originating application was
confined to the question of whether the Recorder could
subsequently revisit and
reverse this decision under
His Honour determined that the recording of
the benefit of the easement pursuant to the original determination was protected
indefeasibility provisions of
and that this prevented the Recorder
from acting under
in any way which was inconsistent with that protection.
Accordingly, the Recorder was not entitled to vary or reverse that decision,
the application was dismissed. His Honour found it unnecessary to determine any
other question raised in the proceedings, including
whether the original
reservation of land created an easement over the appellant's land for the
benefit of the second respondent's
land, or merely created a personal
The primary question raised on the appeal is whether the primary judge
correctly concluded that the recording of the benefit of
the easement on the
second respondent's titles was protected by indefeasibility arising under
of the Act. This will require consideration of the definition and operation of
the principle of indefeasibility, and its application
to the recording of an
estate or interest in land by the Recorder when utilising the power of
correction arising under
It will also be necessary to consider the
effect of recording the benefit of an easement on the title of the dominant
and the relevance to that question of the provisions of the Act which
implement the Torrens system of land registration.
The evidence before the learned primary judge consisted of several affidavits,
which annexed a substantial volume of documents.
The documentary evidence
includes many of the documents relevant to the historical transactions
pertaining to the land which is the
subject of this appeal. An affidavit by the
Recorder, in particular, annexes the general law documents taken from records
the Land Titles Office upon which he relied when making the decision to
record the benefit of the easement on the titles of the second
respondent's
At the outset of the hearing before the learned primary judge, his Honour was
informed by senior counsel for the appellant, Mr Sealy
SC, that there had been
an agreement between the parties "that the convenient course for your Honour...
is that that material goes
in de bene esse, and after your Honour's had an
opportunity to consider the law and reach a determination about that, your
can make a determination about what evidence you can have regard to and
what evidence you can't have regard to." Counsel was in fact
referring to an
issue concerning the use by the Court of extrinsic evidence to determine whether
words in a deed of conveyance amounted
to an easement or some other form of
legal right, perhaps falling short of an estate or interest in land. However,
the primary judge
took this as a general agreement that all of the evidentiary
material would "once it's read......come in de bene esse". There was
no argument
to the contrary by any party, and all the relevant material was placed before
his Honour on that basis. The admissibility
of the evidence was not revisited by
the primary judge during the hearing or in his decision. Indeed, as will be
seen, his Honour
did not take a path of reasoning which required him to
determine the issue which had apparently prompted the original agreement between
the parties about the evidence being received de bene esse, the use of extrinsic
evidence. The status of the evidence was not raised
by any party again during
the hearing. However, on this appeal, it became clear that the parties have not
reached an agreement about
that question, and the status of the evidence remains
in issue. In particular, senior counsel for the second respondent, Mr Spence
SC, submitted that "the evidence at first instance was taken de bene esse, so if
the appeal was to be upheld, it would need to be
remitted to the learned Chief
Justice". There was no further submission or discussion about the power of this
Court to "remit" to
the primary judge nor the nature of such a disposition.
The difficulty in principle arising from this unresolved issue concerns the
task of this Court on the appeal. The appeal is by
way of rehearing,
Court Civil Procedure Act
Supreme Court Rules
657(1)(a). It is well established that an appeal of this nature, to be
successful, requires the appellate court to identify error
on the part of the
primary decision-maker. See
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
[2000] 203 CLR 172
Calvert v Badenach
[2015] TASFC 8
, Porter J at 46. This requirement was
explained by Gageler J in
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v
[2018] HCA 30
"Like an appeal in the strict
sense, of which an appeal to the High Court under s
Constitution
is the prime
example, an appeal by way of rehearing is a procedure under which the appellate
court is permitted and, unless the appellate
court dismisses the appeal or
remits the matter for rehearing, required to 'give the judgment which in its
opinion ought to have
been given in the first instance'. And like an
appeal in the strict sense, an appeal by way of rehearing is a procedure for the
correction of error. '[T]he existence of an error, whether of law or fact,
on the part of the court at first instance is an indispensable
condition of a
successful appeal.'"
The Court is obliged to conduct a real review of the evidence and draw its own
conclusions. See
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
(1979) 142 CLR 531
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
(2003) 214 CLR 118.
Clearly, this Court's
capacity to perform the task required of it becomes difficult where there is
uncertainty about the status of
the evidence before the court of first instance.
Having said that, there was little factual dispute which affected the arguments
presented on the appeal. All the material placed before the primary judge was
included in the appeal book, and we were referred to
various aspects of it
without objection. To the extent that there may be factual dispute, it largely
arises from inferences to be
drawn from the contents of historical documents.
There did not seem to be any objection to the authenticity or even admissibility
of those documents. Further, as I will explain shortly, there is a related
question concerning the scope of the appeal, in the sense
of the issues before
the primary judge, which are properly the subject of this appeal, and that
question also affects the extent
of factual dispute.
There is no question that this is an unsatisfactory situation. However, given
the manner in which this case was argued by the parties
and the conclusions I
have reached concerning the scope of the appeal, I am of the view that the
appropriate way to proceed is that
this Court should regard all of the evidence
presented to the trial judge as constituting the record for the purpose of
determining
the appeal. This means that the court will consider it all and draw
its own conclusions on the facts, including inferences arising
evidence. Of course, any question which may arise from proceeding in this way
may become relevant to the disposition of
the appeal in the event that the
appellant is successful. I intend to proceed accordingly.
The land in question consists of two adjoining parcels which are located on the
corner of Gladstone Street and Salamanca Place in
Hobart. The first parcel, is
owned by the second respondent and is located at 21-23 Salamanca Place. It
consists of two lots, contained
in Certificate of Title Vol 67868, Folios 1 and
2. It is owned by the second respondent and currently contains the hospitality
known as Irish Murphy's. I will refer to those two lots as the "second
respondents land". The second parcel is owned by the appellant
and consists of
one lot recorded in Certificate of Title Vol 41654 Folio 1. This lot sits at the
back of Irish Murphy's, shares a
common boundary with one lot of the second
respondent's land, that is contained in CT 67868 Folio 1, and provides a means
from that land to Gladstone Street. It is, in fact, part of a larger
parcel consisting of two other lots which together form a property
adjacent to
Irish Murphy's, 25 Salamanca Place. I will refer to the single lot described in
Certificate of Title Vol 41654 Folio
1, as "the appellant's land".
Until 1915, the five lots were in common ownership as part of a much larger
parcel of land in the adjacent area. The owners at that
time were the executors
of the original owner, George Adams. Mr Adams had purchased the land in 1902 and
died in 1904. There were
four executors, William Joseph Adams (W.J Adams),
Gerald Joseph Barry, David Hastie Harvey and William Alexander Finlay. The
lots comprising 25 Salamanca Place, all now owned by the appellant, were
sold in 1915, as part of the sale of a larger parcel of
the land owned by the
executors, to the same purchaser, the Tasmanian Rosella Processing Company
Limited. The appellant came into
ownership of 25 Salamanca Place in 2011. When
the land was sold in 1915, the executors retained the ownership of the land not
in the sale, including the two lots comprising 21-23 Salamanca Place.
The second respondent purchased that land on 23 June 2016.
The transfer which gave effect to the sale of the lots which constituted the
parcel of land which became 25 Salamanca Place, including
the lot relevant to
this appeal, was contained in a deed of conveyance. At the time of the sale,
neither the appellant's land nor
the second respondent's land was subject to the
Real Property Act
1862, and was accordingly, subject to general law. The
deed was registered with and recorded by the Registrar of Deeds as conveyance
13/7548. The conveyance included the reservation of land which is central to
this case, and according to the respondents, created
the easement which is said
to benefit the second respondent's land. The relevant words in the deed of
conveyance are as follows:
".. .. reserving nevertheless, to the
Vendors their heirs executors administrators and assigns and all persons
authorised by them
at all times hereafter by day or by night and for all
purposes with or without horses, carts carriages or wagons laden or unladen
go pass and repass and to drive cattle sheep and other animals along over and
upon ALL that piece of land shown in the said plan
and therein surrounded by
brown boundary lines being the land secondly hereinbefore described."
It is common ground that the final words of this reservation relate to the lot
in question.
The appellant's land remained subject to the general law system until 1989. The
Recorder's affidavit annexes a series of documents
of conveyance relating to
transactions subsequent to the 1915 sale, commencing in 1943 when the land was
sold by the Tasmanian Rosella
Processing Company Limited. There are three
further sales, with the last being documented by an indenture of conveyance
September 1988. This conveyance was registered as No 64/7974. On 2
November 1989, the purchasers of the land made a successful application
the land under the
Land Titles Act
. In accordance with
, this was achieved by creating a folio for the land in the Register. The
folio in question was Vol 4611 folio 15. The lot is described
in the folio as
"the land secondly described in Conveyance No 64/7974 and shown as Lot No 1 on
Sketch Diagram No 41654". As already
noted, the land is now contained in
Certificate of Title 41654 Folio 1.
In his reasons for the decision to record the benefit of the easement
purportedly created by the reservation contained in the conveyance
relevant to
the 1915 sale, no 13/7548, on the second respondent's land, the Recorder
"The burden of the Easement was carried forward to the
Burdened Land when the title constituting the Burdened Land was brought under
Land Titles Act
on conversion and remains registered on the
title to the Burdened Land".
All parties have proceeded, both at first instance and on this appeal on the
basis that this statement is accurate. However, the
documentary evidence reveals
a slightly more nuanced position. It is true that in each of the subsequent
conveyances, the reservation
is repeated in substance, albeit in slightly
different terms. The principle difference is that the reference to the "Vendors"
replaced by the words "W. J Adams and others". The reservation is recorded on
the original title after conversion, Vol 4611 folio
15, in the Second Schedule
in these terms:
"35/834 CONVEYANCE - Burdening Easement: Right
to pass and repass (For W J Adams) over the said land within described."
This reference is repeated in the same terms in the current title, Vol 41654
Folio 1. The instrument referred to in the Schedule
as 35/834 is the registered
number of the Memorial of Conveyance relating to the sale of the land on 11
February 1963 from J Walch
& Sons Pty Ltd to W H Ikin and Son Pty Ltd. That
company held the land until it was sold in 1985. Conveyance No 35/835 contains
the reservation to "W J Adams and others". I am unable to determine an
explanation as to why titles created upon conversion to the
Torrens system in
1989 carry through the reservation contained in the conveyance in 1963, albeit
in terms which do not seem to accurately
reflect the contents of that document.
The second respondent's land was brought under the
Real Property Act
1862 in 1923, pursuant to a conversion application by the remaining executors (W
J Adams had passed away by then). The two lots in
question were recorded in
Certificate of Title Vol 329 Folio 79. The conversion application did not refer
to the reservation of land,
either as an easement or in any other way, and the
benefit thereof was not recorded on the title. This remained the case when the
land was brought under the
Land Titles Act
and recorded in Certificates
of Title Vol 67868 Folios 1 and 2.
In 2016, a solicitor acting for the second respondent requested the then
Recorder to "register the right to pass and repass" over
the appellant's land on
the folios relating to the second respondent's land. The letter containing the
request relied on the original
reservation of land, and referred to conveyance
35/834. The letter did not refer to
or any other provision of the Act to
support the Recorder's power to act in accordance with the request. The Recorder
refused the
request, noting that the reservation had not been included in the
1925 conversion application, had not been registered on the titles
pursuant to it and that she could find "no authority under legislation giving"
the Recorder power to " bring the reserved
rights" onto the relevant folios of
the Register.
On 15 August 2019, different solicitors for the second respondent wrote to the
Recorder to request that the benefit of "the easement
described in Indenture No
13/7548" be recorded on Vol 41654 Folio 1, which is the only lot which shares a
common boundary with the
appellant's land. The request relied on the power of
the Recorder to correct errors or supply omissions in the Register pursuant
Land Titles Act
It also referred to and relied upon my
decision in
Nightingale v Recorder of Titles
[2018] TASSC 56
, in which I
discussed the proper operation and power conferred by that section.
On 11 December 2019, the Recorder wrote to the solicitors for the second
respondent advising that he intended to exercise his powers
pursuant to that
section to record the easement on the title. The Recorder also wrote on that day
to the appellant advising that
he had made that decision. That letter was
described as "a courtesy letter". It spoke of the decision in retrospect and did
submissions.
On 18 December 2019, the solicitors for the appellant wrote to the Recorder
asking him to withdraw his determination and making
arguments in support of that
request. However, on 20 December 2019, without any further correspondence, the
Recorder recorded the
benefit of the purported easement on both titles
comprising the second respondent's land. This was done by recording in Schedule
2 on each title, a reference to 13/7548, followed by a description in the
following terms:
"13/7548 Conveyance: Benefiting Easement: The right
for William Joseph Adams, Gerald Joseph Barry, David Hastie Harvey, William
Finlay their heirs executors administrators and assigns and all
persons authorised by them at all times hereafter by day or by night
and for all
purposes with or without horses carts carriages or waggons laden or unladen to
go pass repass and to drive cattle sheep
and other animals along over and upon
ALL that piece of land shown in the said plan and therein surrounded by brown
boundary lines
being the land secondly hereinbefore described (and as also set
forth in Conveyance 35/834 and being the whole of that land now comprised
1 on D41654)"
Recorder then wrote to the appellant's solicitors advising that the easement had
been recorded and stating his reasons for doing
On 18 February 2020, the appellant's solicitors wrote to the Recorder
submitting that there had been no omission in the Register
and it was not
appropriate for the Recorder to act under
The letter requested "the
Recorder reconsider his earlier determination and reverse the 'corrections' made
to the titles" constituting
the second respondent's land. It then set out
detailed submissions in support of this position.
Some further submissions were made in a letter forwarded on 2 March 2020.
The Recorder responded to both letters in correspondence dated 19 May 2020. It
is clear from that letter that the Recorder did not
regard the letters from the
appellant's solicitors as invoking jurisdiction under
to reconsider his
decision to record the benefit of the easements on the appellant's title. In
particular, the letter said:
"You have not lodged an application
section 139
for determination that the earlier decision to supply an
omission has now created an error in the Register.
While it is open to you to make a fresh
section 139
application, it is noted
that in reaching the earlier decision, the Office of the Recorder has not relied
upon extrinsic materials
or purported facts and circumstances. To conduct an
examination extending beyond the Register as you have submitted, is a matter
the Court."
The Recorder went on to state that, in any event, the information supplied by
the appellant's solicitors did not support the existence
of an error created by
the recording of the benefit of the easement on the titles of the second
respondent's land.
On 6 August 2020, the appellant's solicitors wrote to the Land Titles Office
requesting the Recorder to regard the letters dated
18 December 2019, 18
February 2020 and 2 March 2020 "as being a 'requirement' for the purpose of
Land Titles Act
(Tas) for the Recorder to state in
writing the grounds for his decision as detailed in his original correspondence
dated 11 December
By letter dated 16 October 2020, the Recorder responded to the appellant's
request as follows:
"Your formal request in your letter of 6 August
2020, pursuant to
section 144(1)
was made outside of the usual 3 month period
within which any such requirement under
section 144(1)
was required to be lodged
with me. I am also empowered to allow a longer period within which to make a
request under
section 144(1).
Given the Earlier Letters were sent to me within 3 months after my decision
and noting that I responded to the submissions and queries
in those letters, I
have determined to accept the Earlier Letters as your formal request (now stated
in those terms to be made under
section 144(1))
, as having been made within
Your request under
section 144(1)
requires me to state in writing the grounds
for my decision to record the benefit of an omitted easement on folios of the
Volume 67868 Folios I & 2."
The letter then goes on to provide reasons for the original decision in
considerable detail. The recording of the easement remains
on both titles
constituting the second respondent's land.
The proceedings at
first instance
On 2 March 2021, the appellant commenced the proceedings to which this appeal
relates by filing an originating application against
the first respondent. The
second respondent became a party to the proceedings after commencement.
The application clearly purported to invoke the jurisdiction of the Court
pursuant to
I will consider this section in more detail later in these
reasons, but for the time being it is sufficient to note that the section
provides the Supreme Court with a general power to review a decision by the
Recorder to refuse to do an act which he is required
or empowered to do under
the Act, or where he gives a direction or makes an order while exercising his
powers under the Act.
Despite the last two pieces of correspondence which had passed between the
appellant's solicitor and the Recorder, the application
did not directly relate
to or seek relief in respect of the Recorder's original decision to record the
benefit of the easement on
the titles of the second respondent's land. Rather,
the application sought orders in the following
the Recorder justify his decision to:
(a) refuse to reverse his decision, made on or shortly before 11 December 2019,
to record the benefit of an omitted easement on the
titles comprised in folio of
the Register Volume 67868 Folios 1 & 2.
(b) to affirm his decision made on or shortly before 16 October 2020, to record
the benefit of an omitted easement on the titles
comprised in folio of the
Register Volume 67868 Folios 1 & 2."
The attempt by this application to activate jurisdiction under s 144 in respect
of decisions of the Recorder subsequent to the original
2019 decision to record
the easement on the second respondent's titles, and the failure to directly seek
the review of that decision,
was apparent to the learned primary judge. In
respect to subpar (b), his Honour said this:
"It can be seen at once
that subpar (b) of the originating application was misconceived. That
subparagraph referred to a decision
of the Recorder 'made on or shortly before
16 October 2020, to record the benefit of an omitted easement on the titles
Recorder did not make a decision on or shortly before 16 October 2020.
He wrote a letter explaining why he had caused the benefit
of the easement to be
recorded on the two titles some ten months previously."
Clearly, his Honour was of the view that subpar (b) did not give rise to
to it in his
judgment. The balance of the judgment deals with the matter raised in subpar (a)
which the primary judge characterised
as referring to a subsequent decision by
the Recorder to refuse to reverse the original decision, by removing the record
of the benefit
of the purported easement from the applicant's titles pursuant to
his power under s 139 to correct the error in the Register arising
recording of the easement in 2019. His Honour determined that although the
authority of
Purton v Jackson
[2012] TASFC 2
21 Tas R 310
clear that "Subject to any indication in the relevant legislation to the
contrary, the primary position in Tasmania is
that a statutory authority or
decision-maker has the power to vary or reverse a statutory decision", the
principle of indefeasibility
contained in
Land Titles Act
applicable to the Register as altered by the Recorder in 2019 and, accordingly,
the Recorder did not have power to reverse "the
recording of the benefit of the
easement on the titles of that company." His Honour noted that by virtue of
, upon alteration, the Register "has the same validity and effect as it
would have had if the error or omission had not occurred",
and concluded that
the general power to act under
to correct errors in the title is not an
exception to the principle of indefeasibility. Accordingly, the appellant was
not entitled
to institute a proceeding under
because the Recorder had
not refused to do an act which he was "required or empowered to do under" the
Despite the nature of the relief sought in the originating application, it is
abundantly clear that the appellant's position at
the hearing before the primary
judge was to have his Honour determine whether the Recorder's decision made on
or about 11 December
2019 to record the benefit of the purported easement on the
second respondent's titles was justified, and if not, to invoke the jurisdiction
of the court to order the Recorder to remove the record of the easement from
those titles. This is apparent from the first paragraph
of the written
submissions filed by the appellant in respect of the hearing at first instance.
"This is an Application pursuant to
Section 144
Titles Act 1980
(Tas) (the Act)
for Recorder of Titles (the Recorder) to
justify his decision made on or about 11 December 2019, pursuant to section 139
of the Act,
to "record [the benefit of] an omitted easement on folios of the
Register, volume 67868 Folios 1 & 2".
This was reinforced in the hearing at first instance by Mr Sealy during the
course of oral submissions:
"MR SEALY SC: - So, your Honour, this
application is made pursuant to
Land Titles Act
and calls upon the
Recorder to justify his decision. The application itself refers to two
decisions, but in truth, one is the decision
– the positive decision and
the other decision complained of is the failure to
HIS HONOUR: Make the opposite decision –
MR SEALY SC: – make the opposite decision –
HIS HONOUR: Yes.
MR SEALY SC: – yeah, but nothing much, in our respectful submission,
turns upon that. We're content to say that this is a challenge
to the decision
to record the benefit of the easements on 21 and 23 Salamanca Place."
The issue concerning the identification of the decision relevant to the
originating application was not again re-agitated by the
appellant's counsel nor
the primary judge. The first respondent seems to have proceeded on the basis
that it was the original decision
in 2019 to record the benefit of the easement
which was under attack, but argued that the procedure under
did not apply
to that decision. One of the reasons advanced for this position was that the
exercise of power under
did not amount to a "refusal, direction or order"
within the meaning of
The second respondent argued that the Recorder
had no power to revisit the original decision under
, for reasons which
included the indefeasibility attaching to the recording on the title in 2019,
and that therefore, as the primary
judge accepted, jurisdiction to review the
decision did not arise under
Ultimately, the identification of the relevant basis for jurisdiction under
invoked by the application was critical to the primary judge's decision. The
appellant seems to have assumed that subpar (b) of the
originating decision
directed consideration to the merits of the 2019 decision. However, his Honour's
decision about the effect of
the wording of that claim for relief, rendered that
decision irrelevant, at least with respect to the jurisdiction arising under
Hence, the focus of his Honour's consideration was on the power to reverse
or alter that decision under
, and his Honour's decision concerning
indefeasibility was determinative of that question. As will be seen, this has
implications
for the scope of the appeal to this Court. However, before moving
on to that question, I would make the point that it is somewhat
difficult to
understand the disconnect between the obvious intention of the appellant, to
seek relief concerning the 2019 decision,
and the way in which the application
was framed. The decision to focus on subsequent decisions may well simply be a
concession to
the points raised by the first respondent concerning the
restrictions imposed by the use of the words "refusal, direction or order"
However, it is clear enough that both at the first instance hearing
and before this Court, the appellant's focus continued to be
on the merits of
the original decision. Further, the purpose of the appellant's letter to the
Recorder of 6 August 2020, requesting
the Recorder to treat the earlier
correspondence as, in fact, being a requirement to state the grounds of the
original decision,
was clearly intended to provide a jurisdictional basis for
the forthcoming
application. The primary judge considered this letter
to make "an inappropriate request" because the three letters referred to in
6 August letter had not sought reasons for that decision, and noted that the
effect of the earlier letters had been to ask for
the decision "to be reversed,
not explained". His Honour did note, however, that in the response of 16 October
2020, the Recorder
had agreed to the request. In my view, the Recorder went
well beyond this. As can be seen from the passages set out above, the Recorder
accepted the request contained in the letter dated 6 August 2020 as the
requirement to state the grounds of the original decision
for the purposes of
, noting that such a request was therefore made outside the time limit of
90 days provided by
However, then, as the Recorder is entitled to do,
he allowed an appropriate extension of time to overcome the time limit problem.
The Recorder then responded to the request by giving detailed grounds. The real
intention of subpar (b) of the originating application
seems to have been to
invoke the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under
in respect of the
original decision by relying upon the requirement to justify that original
decision made in the letter of 6 August
2020. However, this is not what was
actually sought by subpar (b). That subparagraph refers to a later decision,
made "on or shortly
before 16 October 2020, to record the benefit of an omitted
easement on" the relevant titles. This was unnecessary because the Recorder
accepted that the reasons related to the original decision, with an appropriate
extension of time. By taking these steps, the
Recorder had removed any
impediment to a direct attack on the 2019 decision by review under
However, no application was made to the primary judge to amend the orders sought
in the originating application, and the primary
judge was therefore correct to
restrict the ambit of the case before him. His Honour's approach has not been
the subject of challenge
in this appeal.
The scope of the
Notwithstanding the failure to challenge the primary judge's approach to the
issues raised by the originating application, the appellant's
arguments in the
appeal before this Court again focused on the merits of the original decision
made by the Recorder in 2019. There
was no attempt by the appellant to deal
with the problems described above arising from the terms of the originating
application,
either through the grounds of appeal to this Court nor through
The grounds of appeal are as follows:
Court erred in holding or finding that the Recorder of Titles did not have the
power to reverse the recording of the benefit
of the easement on folios of the
Register volume 67868 folios 1 and 2.
Court erred in holding or finding that the provisions of
operate to extinguish, nullify, or otherwise wholly override
the provisions of
of the said Act.
Court erred in failing to hold or find that, on their true construction, the
provisions of
Land Titles Act
constitute and operate as
an exception to the provisions of
of the said Act.
Court erred at law in finding that when the benefit of the easement was recorded
on folios of the Register volume 67868 folios
1 and 2, 'in December 2019, the
registered owners acquired an indefeasible title to the easement pursuant to s
40(2) of the Act.'"
It is immediately apparent that the grounds deal exclusively with findings made
by the primary judge in respect of subpar (a) of
the originating application,
that is the failure of the Recorder to subsequently reverse the original
decision, and in particular
whether the primary judge's finding that such a
reversal was precluded by the principle of indefeasibility is correct.
Critically,
the grounds do not raise the issue that the primary judge erred by
failing to consider or determine the merits of the original decision
in reliance
on the jurisdiction said to arise from subpar (b) of the originating
application. This issue was squarely raised by the
Court with Mr Sealy, during
the course of his submissions, but the discussion did not result in an
application to amend the existing
grounds of appeal or to add a further
Although senior counsel for the first respondent, Mr Turner SC, asked for time
to consider the question, it was not further agitated
by him in any substantial
way. However, the argument was fundamental to the submissions made by the second
respondent. For example,
the second respondent's outline of written submissions
made these points:
"Olympus has not advanced any grounds of appeal
in respect of the learned primary judge's finding the subpar (b) of the
originating
application was misconceived. Olympus has identified four closely
related grounds of appeal, all of which relate to the learned primary
finding in respect of subpar (a) of the originating application."
The second respondent argued strongly against the proposition that there was
any entitlement on the part of the of the Recorder
to reverse the original
decision utilising the provisions of s 139 and further, sought to uphold the
primary judge's ruling that
to do so would infringe the indefeasibility of the
second respondent's title.
Rule 657(4)(b)
Supreme Court Rules
provides that the notice of
appeal "is to state...specifically and concisely the grounds of appeal." The
broad principle underlying
this requirement is procedural fairness. Because this
appeal is in the nature of a re-hearing, a critical function of the grounds
to identify the error or errors on the part of the primary judge which are the
subject of complaint. The link between the grounds
of appeal and the
identification of error, in an appeal by way of re-hearing, seems to have been
accepted as trite by Gageler J in
Minister for Immigration and Border
Protection v SZVFW
"To the extent necessary to address the
ground or grounds on which an appellant claims that a judgment under appeal is
an appellate court in an appeal (whether in the strict sense or by
way of rehearing) from a final judgment of a judge sitting without
obliged to conduct a real review of the trial and ... of [the] judge's
It is not uncommon, as a matter of practice in this Court, for arguments to be
advanced on appeal which are not the subject of a
ground of appeal. Because of
the need for procedural fairness, the issue is normally addressed with the
appellant's counsel by the
Court, which often prompts an application for
amendment of or addition to the grounds of appeal. This can be done immediately
the argument is anticipated by the respondent. Any claim of prejudice can
usually be dealt with by adjournment.
In this case, the fundamental argument advanced by the appellant would require
this Court to consider an issue which the primary
judge found was not properly
raised by the originating application, and accordingly, was not considered by
him. As has already been
demonstrated, the primary judge's decision about this
question is not raised in the grounds of appeal. In other words, the appellant
has not asserted an error on the part of the primary judge in respect of this
question. The issue was squarely raised by the Court
with the appellant's
counsel, but no attempt was made to expand the grounds of appeal to deal with
it. Although both respondents
made submissions which respond to the argument
advanced by the appellant concerning the merits of the original decision, it is
at least in the case of the second respondent, that this was an
alternative position, and that the second respondent was not conceding
argument should be entertained. Further, the primary judge has not considered
nor determined the merits of the original
decision of the Recorder.
I am, therefore, of the view that the scope of the appeal should be confined to
the grounds of appeal. However, as will be seen,
a consideration of the primary
judge's conclusion about indefeasibility may well bring in the need to determine
the fundamental issue
of whether the original reservation of land in 1915
created an easement which benefits the second respondent's land, in any event.
will return to this issue in due course.
Ground 1 – Power
of Recorder to revisit and reverse an act undertaken in accordance with
The primary judge's reasoning with respect to the power of the Recorder to
reverse the decision to record the benefit of the easement
on the second
respondent's titles relied upon his Honour's conclusion with respect to the
indefeasibility of title, which he held
arose pursuant to
. While the issue of indefeasibility was critical to his Honour's
reasoning, the arguments before this Court extended beyond that
question, in
particular to the correct operation of
, and whether it authorised the
Recorder to re-visit an act performed in accordance with that section. The
appellant submits that
if the original decision creates an error in the
Register, then
authorises the correction of that error at a subsequent
time. The respondents submit that the omission corrected in 2019 is protected
indefeasibility, and cannot be altered or reversed under
respondent submits further that, having made the original decision in 2019, the
Recorder is
functus officio
in respect of the exercise of power under
in respect of that question, and has no authority to revisit the decision
by way of a further exercise of power. If this submission
is correct, and the
Recorder was not authorised to reconsider the decision and to reverse it under
irrespective of the question of indefeasibility, then such a determination
will be dispositive of the appeal.
Section 139
relevantly provides as follows:
"(1) Subject to
subsection (2) and upon such evidence as appears to the Recorder sufficient, the
Recorder may correct errors or supply
omissions in the Register or in any
instrument or duplicate registered dealing, and may call in any certificate of
title, grant,
or duplicate registered dealing for that purpose.
(2) When the Recorder makes an alteration pursuant to subsection (1)
(a) the Recorder shall, except as may be otherwise prescribed, authenticate the
alteration and record the date of the alteration,
and preserve a record of the
matter which has been altered;
(b) the alteration does not prejudice or affect a right accrued from a
recording made in the Register pursuant to a dealing lodged
alteration; and
(c) subject to paragraph (b) , the Register, instrument, or duplicate
registered dealing shall, as so altered, have the same validity
and effect as it
would have had if the error or omission had not occurred."
The construction of
, as with any statutory provision, begins with
consideration of the plain and ordinary meaning of the text of the provision,
in the context of its place in the legislative scheme. See
Project Blue
Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
194 CLR 355
Taylor v The Owners – Strata Plan No 11564
[2014] HCA 9
per Gageler and Keane JJ at 65-66. See also
Acts Interpretation Act
Nightingale v Recorder of Titles
, I considered the
legislative scheme of the
Land Titles Act
, and the role of
it. I observed that the starting point of this consideration, is, of course, the
implementation by the Act of the Torrens
system of registered title, and the oft
quoted words of Barwick CJ in
Breskvar v Wall
[1971] 126 CLR 376 at 385
that "the Torrens system of registered title of which the Act is a form is not a
system of registration
of title but a system of title by registration". I went
on to note as follows:
"By s 33, the Recorder is charged with the
responsibility of keeping 'a register of title to land which is subject to this
is necessarily implicit in that obligation, that the Recorder ensure
that the Register is accurate. The accuracy of the Register
is a fundamental
assumption underlying the concept of indefeasibility, and the certainty which is
sought to be achieved thereby.
The Act confers substantial and varied powers upon the Recorder. It is clear
that an important purpose of this conferral is to ensure
that the Recorder has
sufficient powers to maintain the accuracy of the Register. These include
various powers to amend the Register,
which are contained in Pt X of the Act.
That Part is entitled 'Amendment of the Register'. Section 139 confers a general
correct errors or supply omissions 'upon such evidence as appears to
(the Recorder) sufficient'".
These views are not controversial, and would seem self-evident in any event.
Further, the parties in this appeal point out their
consistency with higher
authority. For example, in
Pirie v Registrar-General
[1962] HCA 58
(1962)109 CLR 619, Kitto J, in respect of comparable provisions under New South
Wales legislation, said this at [4]:
"From the nature of the
Torrens system of registration of titles, and in particular from such provisions
Real Property Act
as ss. 4, 12(d) and (f), 32, 40, 42 and 43, it
is, I think, a necessary conclusion that the Registrar-General, as head of the
authorized to carry the provisions of the Act into execution (s. 4),
is under a general duty to keep the register book clear of all
notifications
save those which are authorized by law: see
Wolfson v. Registrar-General
[1934] HCA 29
(1934) 51 CLR 300
. The removal of an unauthorized
notification is therefore, in my opinion, an act or duty which by the Act is
prescribed to be done
or performed by the Registrar-General, within the meaning
Windeyer J agreed with these comments as follows:
"The Torrens
system of registered estates and interests, as it exists in New South Wales, has
as its main foundation s. 42 of the
Real Property Act
. Once a grant or
certificate of title has issued the Registrar-General is, I think, under a duty
to permit no entries or notifications
to appear on the folium of the register
book except such as the law authorizes. Persons claiming equitable interests, or
having other
claims the notification of which on certificates of title the law
does not authorize, may up to a point protect their interests by
caveats. But
that does not cut across the fundamental principle of the system. It follows, I
think, that the Registrar-General whose
duty it is to put no unauthorized
entries in the register book is under a corresponding duty to remove any that
ought not to be there.
And that duty can, I think, be enforced by proceedings
pursuant to s. 121 of the Act."
After considering the text of the provision and the legislative scheme, as well
as other judicial views, I concluded in
Nightingale
that s 139 provided
the Recorder with a "general power to correct errors in the register or an
instrument... irrespective of the
source of the error". The power so conferred
is to be construed broadly, but is subject to some implied limitation, including
principle of indefeasibility, a point to which I will return in more detail
"This section confers a general power of correction upon
the Recorder. As both counsel have noted, the corrective power under this
provision relates to errors and omissions in the Register, as well as any
instrument or duplicate registered dealing.
defines "instrument" to include a plan. Section 139 is contained
, which is headed "Amendment of the Register". This Part also contains s
142. The content and structure of the Act containing these
provisions, in my
view, clearly evinces a legislative intention to provide the Recorder with wide
power to correct errors in the
Register. I reiterate my earlier point that the
accuracy of the Register is a fundamental assumption underpinning the principle
indefeasibility. The powers of correction must be construed in this statutory
Of course, the statutory purpose also requires that these powers of
correction be subject to appropriate limitation. The authorities
judicial concern that the unqualified exercise of the power of correction could
undermine and put at risk the principle of
indefeasibility. Some cases support
the proposition that general powers such as that contained in s 139 should be
read down so that
the provision applies only to the correction of administrative
errors made within the office of the Recorder. However, the cases
cited by Mr
Swancare Group Inc v Commissioner for Consumer
[2014] WASC 80
Sahab Holdings Pty Ltd v
Registrar-General
[2011] NSWCA 395
DM & Longbow Pty Ltd v
Registrar-General of NSW
[2016] NSWSC 1844
, and the application of general
principle, persuade me that the relevant provisions of this Act should not be
read down in that way.
The correct approach is to construe those provisions in
accordance with the plain and ordinary meaning of the text, and in the context
of the purpose and object of the Act (
Interpretation Act
Applying these principles, I construe s 139 in accordance with its
terms, that is that it provides the Recorder with a general power
errors in the Register or an instrument, including a plan, irrespective of the
source of the error."
This approach to the construction of s 139 is consistent with judicial views
expressed in respect of similar, but not identical,
legislative provisions in
other jurisdictions. For example in
Sahab Holdings Pty Ltd v
Registrar-General
, the New South Wales Court of Appeal considered a case in
which the Registrar-General had in 2001 removed the burden of an easement
provided for a right of way over adjacent land. In 2009, the registered
proprietor of the dominant tenement sought to have
the Registrar-General restore
the right of way to the titles of the servient tenement. The proceedings were
unsuccessful at first
instance. An issue arose on the appeal as to whether
Real Property Act
(NSW), which confers power on the
Registrar-General to " upon such evidence as appears to the Registrar-General
sufficient, correct
errors and omissions in the Register", authorised the
Registrar-General to restore the right of way to the Register. The Court of
Appeal held that the earlier removal of the easement had resulted in an
omission, for the purpose of this provision and other relevant
sections of the
legislation. It concluded that
did confer power on the
Registrar-General to correct the earlier removal of the right of way. In order
to arrive at this decision,
the Court considered the proper construction and
operation of
, and in particular the suggestion which had arisen in
earlier cases that such a power is limited to correction of "clerical or
departmental
errors", a term drawn from the judgment of Needham J in
Bank of New South Wales v Berowra Waters Holdings Pty Ltd
(1986) 4 NSWLR 398
at 404. Campbell JA and Tobias AJA, with whom McColl JA agreed, said at
[183]-[185]:
"However, we doubt that it can be decisive of the
outcome of the present case whether expungement of the right of way falls within
the description of 'departmental errors and omissions'. While that expression
has been used in some of the relevant cases, it is
not a term that finds any
place in the statute. It has been used to explain why some factual situations
count as an 'error or omission'
within the meaning of
while others do
not, but those explanations need to be understood in the context of the
particular factual situations with which
the cases in question were
Section 12(1)(d)
and s 136(1)(b) are expressed in language that taken in
isolation and literally, would confer extremely wide powers of correction
Register, and of calling in for cancellation or correction of certificates of
title and duplicate dealings. On a literal reading,
there could be an error in
the Register if it was inaccurate in any respect, regardless of why it was
inaccurate, regardless of how
long ago the source of the error arose, and
regardless of who might be affected by correction of the error.
However, it is impossible for this literal reading of
136(1)(b) to coexist with the provisions of the Act that provide for
indefeasibility. Enabling an indefeasible title to land
to be obtained by
registration is a central purpose of the Act. Reading the Act as a whole, and
giving it a purposive construction,
demands that the literal words of s 12(1)(d)
and s 136(1)(b) be read down. The case law has attempted to identify the sorts
that can be corrected, consistently with indefeasibility, by
describing them collectively as 'departmental errors and omissions'.
application of that phrase is not a substitute for applying the wording of the
statute, construed as a whole and purposively,
to the particular fact situation
that arises for decision in a particular case."
The decision to uphold the appeal was overturned by the High Court in
Constructions Pty Ltd v Sahab Holdings Pty Ltd and Another
[2013] HCA 11
(2013) 247 CLR 149.
However, this decision was made on a basis which did not
relate to, nor detract from the force of, the reasoning expressed in the
passages from the judgment of the Court of Appeal which have been quoted
Sahade v Owners Corporation SP 62022
[2013] NSWSC 1791
applied these comments as follows:
"Instructed by the approach of
the Court of Appeal in
, s 12(1)(d) operates as follows:
(1) The Registrar-General's exercise of the power under s 12(1)(d) is
subject to the balance of s 12. For example, s 12(3) governs
the exercise of the
power under s 12(1)(d) in ways not relevant to these proceedings.
(2) The Registrar-General is to act 'upon such evidence as appears to the
Registrar-General sufficient'. The proper content of that
phrase was not a
matter before me. However, without attempting to be exhaustive, it is to be
expected that the evidence would include
an explanation for how the error or
omission occurred and, depending on the case, evidence as to how it could be
(3) The 'errors and omissions' are not confined to errors and omissions
attributable to the Registrar-General. If the Registrar-General
is satisfied, as
a matter of fact, that there is an error or omission in the Register, that error
or omission does not lose its character
as being capable of correction under s
12(1)(d) depending upon the identity of the person responsible for the error or
(4) Upon its proper construction, the scope of the power of correction is to
be ascertained by reference to whether the correction
of the error would impinge
upon a right to which indefeasibility attached (see
(5) While not the subject of argument in these proceedings, I add for
completeness my view that 'may' does not denote a discretion
Registrar-General as that term is sometimes understood. Given the centrality of
the register in the scheme of the Act (which
reaches its high point in the
indefeasibility provisions under s 42 of the Act), it would be an odd
construction of s 12(1)(d) that
would permit the Registrar-General, having come
to the view that there was in fact an error or omission in the register, not to
to correct it (cf.
Pirie v Registrar-General
[1962] HCA 58
(1963) 109 CLR 619
at 623 (per Kitto J) and
644 (per Windeyer J) and, by parity of reasoning,
Hogan v Australian
Crime Commission
[2010] HCA 21
(2010) 240 CLR 651
In this case, it is not necessary to go beyond these observations in respect of
the operation of s 139. It is enough to observe,
as I did in
Nightingale
that the power of correction is not confined to administrative and clerical
errors or omissions for which the Recorder or his staff
are responsible, and the
ultimate purpose of the provision is to ensure the accuracy of the Register.
As already noted, the second respondent submitted that irrespective of the
validity of this approach to the construction of s 139
generally, once the
Recorder has exercised power under this provision, he is
functus officio
in respect of the subject matter of that decision, and cannot revisit it
subsequently. However, the primary judge seemed to assume
that, leaving aside
the question of indefeasibility, the Recorder was authorised by s 139 to reverse
the original decision:
"Subject to any indication in the relevant
legislation to the contrary, the prima facie position in Tasmania is that a
statutory authority
or decision-maker has the power to vary or reverse a
statutory decision:
Purton v Jackson
(above) at [21]. That is a
consequence of
Interpretation Act
which provides as follows:
20 Exercise of powers and performance of duties
Where an Act confers a power or imposes a duty, the power may be exercised
and the duty shall be performed –
(a) from time to time as occasion may require
His Honour did not further consider whether the legislative scheme prevented
revisitation of the original decision absolutely, because
he concluded that any
exercise of the powers of the Recorder under s 139 was subject to the principle
of indefeasibility, and that
principle was determinative of the question in this
Mr Spence accepts that
Purton v Jackson
[2012] TASFC 2
21 Tas R 310
authority for the proposition stated by the primary judge. However, it is
further submitted that that case makes clear that the
prima facie position must
give way to the provisions of the relevant legislation. In that case, it was
held that the relevant legislative
scheme compelled the conclusion that a
decision by the statutory tribunal in question was final and could only be
altered on appeal.
There was specific provision for appeal from the tribunal's
decision in the relevant legislation and this was regarded as a critical
informing the legislative intent.
The proposition advanced by Mr Spence that the effect of
Interpretation Act
must give way to any contrary legislative intent is
clearly correct. In
Nightingale
, I considered this question in relation
to other powers conferred on the Recorder by the
Land Titles Act
particular, under
, which permits the Recorder to adjust or add to the
description of land which has been brought under the Act, and s 142 which
a process whereby the Recorder can rectify, among other things, the
boundaries of land. In relation to the former, I was satisfied
legislation permitted the Recorder to better describe the land from time to time
but under specified conditions and that
this restriction was inconsistent with
and excluded the application of
Acts Interpretation Act
took a similar position in relation to s 142 because of the detailed process set
out in that provision, which included a right
of appeal to the Supreme
However, I am of a different opinion in relation to s 139. As has already been
observed, s 139 is a general provision, which provides
the Recorder with a
broad, but not unlimited, power to correct errors and supply omissions. It is
part of the suite of powers provided
to the Recorder for the purpose of ensuring
the accuracy of the Register, which is critical to the proper operation of the
of registration of title implemented by and fundamental to the
legislative purpose. In my view, provided that the provisions of
properly engaged in the circumstances, there is no reason why the Recorder
cannot exercise power under that provision to
revisit or vary an earlier
decision made under the same section. The broad scope of the provision and its
legislative purpose to
keep the Register accurate, supports such a conclusion.
There is nothing in the text of the legislation which suggests that the prior
exercise of power under the provision precludes a later decision which has the
effect of reversing or altering it. There are powers
of review that can apply to
a decision under s139, for example s144, but these are general provisions which
do not apply specifically
to s 139, and do not evince an intention inconsistent
Acts Interpretation Act
Mr Spence submitted that
this Court should conclude that a power which permits reversal of an earlier
decision is inconsistent with
the legislation because as a matter of
practicality, it would permit repetitive and unlimited requests for reversal. In
other words,
it would become unworkable. Counsel submits further that this
undesirable practical consequence would be compounded by repetitive
review, if s 144 applies to decisions under s 139. I see little merit in this
argument. These consequences flow inevitably
from, and are inherent in, the
operation of
Acts Interpretation Act
. It is a clear
legislative choice and there is nothing in the
Land Titles Act
inconsistent with it. In any event, I doubt that the practical consequence is as
dire as Mr Spence would have it. Repetitive
requests for re-consideration
without further evidence would undoubtedly be met with the same answer, both by
the Recorder and upon
review by the Court. The latter's decision would carry
costs consequences.
I conclude, therefore, that having regard to
Interpretation Act
the Recorder may exercise the power under s 139 from
time to time “as occasion may require”, and is not precluded from
doing so because the exercise of power relates to an earlier act performed under
that section. However, it must be borne in mind
that the further exercise of
power is not a review or appeal from the earlier decision. A further exercise of
power under s 139 is
only authorised if, at the time of exercise, the statutory
preconditions provided in that section are met. This is the clear effect
and, in the case of an exercise of power which will reverse or alter an
earlier act under that section, is the consequence of s 139(2)(c).
This construction of s 139 is consistent with the reasoning of the High Court
Castle Constructions Pty Ltd v Sahab Holdings Pty Ltd and Another
The Court held that at the point at which the Registrar-General was being asked
to exercise power under
to restore the right of way to the title of
the servient tenement, it could not be said that the absence of the easement
title amounted to an "omission" from the Register. It had been
deliberately removed by the Recorder some years before, and this act
had altered
the Register accordingly. Hence, the easement had not been omitted in the sense
of being "left out."
This reasoning is also consistent with the approach taken by the primary judge
in this case. His Honour reasoned that although the
Recorder had power to act
under s139 in respect of the easement from time to time, at the point that the
Recorder was being asked
to reverse the decision and remove the record of the
benefit of the easement on the second respondent's titles, the principle of
indefeasibility, which his Honour found arose under
, applied and
protected the Register as it was at that time.
Accordingly, I conclude that this argument, to the extent that it underpins
ground 1, has merit. However, the dispositive question
which arises under all of
the grounds of appeal, including this one, is whether the primary judge was
correct in holding that the
recording of the benefit of the purported easement
on the second respondent's titles was protected by indefeasibility. If so, then
this ground, and the appeal generally must fail.
Section 144
As already discussed, the originating application is based on the jurisdiction
of the Supreme Court conferred by s 144(2). Both
respondents argue that s 144 is
not properly engaged, and accordingly, the court of first instance did not have
the application. Hence, it is argued, although the
primary judge proceeded on the assumption that there was jurisdiction, the
lack of jurisdiction deprives this Court of a jurisdictional basis to
consider the appeal, and it should be dismissed as incompetent.
Having regard
to my conclusions concerning the scope of the appeal, and the capacity of the
Recorder to act under s 139 to correct
an error in the Register by reversing the
original 2019 decision, it is convenient at this point, before moving on to the
grounds of appeal, to consider the arguments raised by the respondents
with respect to jurisdiction.
Section 144 relevantly provides as follows:
"(1) Subject to
subsection (6), if the Recorder –
(a) refuses to do an act which the Recorder is required or empowered to do
under this or any other Act; or
(b) gives a direction or makes an order upon the Recorder's own motion or
upon an application while exercising the Recorder's powers
under this or any
other Act –
a person who believes that person to be aggrieved by the refusal, direction,
or order may require the Recorder to state in writing
the grounds for the
Recorder's refusal, direction, or order notwithstanding that the Recorder has
acted under a discretionary power.
(2) A person referred to in subsection (1) may proceed against the Recorder
by summons in the Supreme Court requiring the Recorder
to justify the Recorder's
refusal, direction, or order, and the Court may make such order as it thinks
(6) This section does not apply where the Recorder has acted pursuant to
another Act that provides for an appeal to the Supreme Court."
The basis of this Court's jurisdiction is set out in subs (2). Clearly, that
or order" by the Recorder.
There can be no question that those terms refer back to their use in subs (1).
Although submissions were
made by the respondents concerning what amounts to a
direction or order, my determination of the limited scope of the appeal results
in that question now being irrelevant. The question is whether the Recorder
refused to do an act which he was required or empowered
to do under the Act. The
only relevant act is the reversal of the order and consequent removal of the
record of the easement from
the second respondent's titles pursuant to powers
under s 139. The primary judge's finding that the Recorder was not empowered to
act under that provision because it would infringe the principle of
indefeasibility was the basis of his decision that the jurisdictional
the summons was not satisfied. If his Honour was correct about the question of
indefeasibility, then clearly he was correct
consider that matter shortly.
However, the respondent's raise further arguments in respect of the application
of s 144 (2):
precondition of the jurisdiction conferred by that provision is that the
Recorder has first been required under subs (1) to
state in writing the grounds
for the refusal. The second respondent's counsel points out that at no time did
the appellant make that
requirement of the Recorder in respect of the refusal to
reverse the original decision. The letters dated 18 December 2019, 18 February
2020 and 2 March 2020 require the Recorder to reverse the decision, not to state
the grounds for not doing so. The correspondence
of 6 August 2020 and the
Recorder's reply refer to the original decision. This point was made by the
primary judge, as I have noted
That in any
event, the appellant cannot be considered to be a "person...aggrieved by the
Before considering the detail of these arguments, it is useful to consider the
statutory context of s 144. It is clear, in my view,
that the section is
intended to provide an avenue of redress for persons aggrieved by decisions
taken by the Recorder. Such a provision
complements the role of the Recorder in
discharging his duties under the legislation, and of contextual importance in
in ensuring the accuracy of the Register. There are commensurate
provisions in other jurisdictions, see for example s 122,
Real Property
(NSW). While these provisions are in different terms, their purpose is
the same, to provide a broad reaching avenue for redress of
decisions made by
the Registrar-General. In my view s 144 should be regarded in this way, that is
as a catchall provision for such
The general nature of the provision is reinforced both by specific rights of
appeal under particular provisions, see for example
s 142, and s 144(6) which
provides that it will not apply where the Recorder has acted pursuant to
"another Act that provides for
an appeal to the Supreme Court." This supports
the view that the section is intended to provide a general avenue of review
in the specific circumstance provided by subs (6). Mr Spence points out
that there are, in fact, other ways in which the original
decision to record the
easement could be challenged, and accordingly that this should restrict the
general application of the provision,
and its application in this case. In
particular, he submits that the appellant could seek a declaration concerning
the validity of
the purported easement, or apply for review of the decision
Judicial Review Act
(the JRA). I am not persuaded by this
argument. The specific ouster of jurisdiction by s 144(6) does not include
either of the alternatives
posited by Mr Spence. In any event, the power of
review under s 144 would seem to be granted in more general terms than the
grounds of review available under the suggested alternatives. I note
also the provisions of
of the JRA.
Nightingale
, I did make some comments about the nature of the
discretion afforded to the Court by s 144 (2):
"By virtue of s
144(2), because the Recorder has been required to justify her refusal but has
failed to do so, this Court now has
the power to make such order as it thinks
fit. The only sensible interpretation of this provision, is that it empowers the
to order the Recorder to do that which she is empowered to do and, in the
opinion of the Court, should do. The Court's power, as
explained, is clearly
discretionary.
Of course, a dispute about the ownership of land may, in some circumstances,
be dependent upon the determination of rights in personam,
founded on law or
equity, and in such a case, it will be necessary for the parties to bring
proceedings in court to resolve the question:
Hillpalm Pty Ltd v
Heaven's Door Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 59
220 CLR 472.
The case referred to,
Hillpalm Pty Ltd v Heaven's Door Pty Ltd
good example of circumstances in which the court might decline to exercise
discretion under s 144. The case related to a claim
by the respondent that it
was entitled to an easement over the appellant's adjacent land, in order to
facilitate access to its property.
It was common ground that no easement
existed, but the claim was based on a condition of planning approval of the
subdivision creating
the blocks, which required the creation of the easement. In
a decision in which two of the five judges dissented, the majority determined
the appeal on the basis that the planning condition was not binding on the
appellant. However, it also considered the respondent's
claim that the
condition created a right to an easement "in rem". The majority observed that if
such a right existed, it would have
been defeated by the indefeasibility of the
title at the time that the appellant became the registered proprietor of the
servient tenement. However, the judges concluded that the claim for the
easement, if successful, would not have created a right "in
rem" but was a
personal claim based on rights arising under different statutory provisions,
which fell under the general umbrella
of a claim in law or equity. Such a claim
would not be defeated by indefeasibility, but also would need to be determined
through the courts outside the system of land
registration.:
"If the consent to the subdivision did create a right
in rem, that would be a right or interest in the land not shown on the Computer
Folio Certificate. There would then be a real and lively question about how the
two statutory schemes (the scheme under the EPAA
and the Torrens system for
Real Property Act
provides) were to be reconciled, and questions of
implied repeal or amendment might arise. But those questions are not raised by
this matter. That is because it was common ground that the appellant's title was
not and is not now subject to any interest of the
kind which the respondent
asserted it was entitled to have the appellant create in its favour. If the
respondent has any such right,
it is a right to have an interest in land
created and that is said to be a right enforceable by personal action against
the appellant,
not by any action or application to rectify the Register
maintained under the
Real Property Act
That right, if it exists, is not a
right in rem." (the emphasis is mine).
The availability of rights in personam is entirely consistent with the
Torrens system of title. The immediate indefeasibility of a
title to land under
the Torrens system does not deny "the right of a plaintiff to bring against a
registered proprietor a claim in
personam, founded in law or in equity, for such
relief as a court acting in personam may grant" and those proceedings "may have
their terminal point orders binding the registered proprietor to divest
himself wholly or partly of the estate or interest vested
registration". If the respondent has a right against the appellant, it is a
personal right, not a right in rem, and that
personal right must be found, if at
all, in the relevant statutory provisions."
The case before us does not depend on rights to be established or created "in
personam" under law or equity. It concerns the effect
of past transfers of land,
directly subject to registration under the
Land Titles Act
. There is no
apparent reason why it would be inappropriate for the Court to make such order
"as it thinks fit".
With respect to the arguments raised by the respondents concerning the standing
of the appellant to bring the application, I am
satisfied that the definition of
"a person referred to in
subsection 1"
refers to "a person who believes that
person to be aggrieved by the refusal, direction or order", and has "required
the Recorder
to state in writing the grounds for the Recorder's refusal,
direction or order". However, both aspects of this qualification should
a broad interpretation, consistent with the general approach to the section. The
strict terms of the provision suggest that
a subjective and honest belief is
sufficient to satisfy the first aspect. Whether this is correct or not, the
approach of courts,
at least in this State, to the assessment of what is meant
by a person aggrieved for the purpose of standing to bring proceedings
relevant legislation has always received a broad interpretation, see
[1993] TASSC 48
2 Tas R 290.
In this case I do not think there is
any doubt that the appellant falls within the relevant category. Clearly it is
"really and directly
interested in the proceedings" per Green CJ in
Day v Hunter
[1964] VicRp 109
[1964] Vic Rep 109
I think the same considerations must apply to the question of whether the
appellant's correspondence requested a statement of the
grounds of refusal. I
note firstly that the requirement relates to "grounds" not full reasons.
Although the correspondence was argumentative,
it was clearly directed to either
compliance or impliedly invited a more complete statement of grounds. This was
clearly how it was
interpreted by the Recorder. In any event, the Recorder had
stated his grounds for the 2019 decision in the original "courtesy" letter
in 2019, and in the responses to each of the subsequent items of correspondence.
Each can only reasonably be interpreted as
a ground, not only for the original
decision, but also for refusing to alter or revisit that decision. In my view,
the appellant
clearly has standing to apply to the Court under
respondents' submissions about this are rejected.
Accordingly, it follows that I am satisfied that these proceedings are
competent, and, subject to the question of indefeasibility,
properly engage the
Court’s jurisdiction under
Of course, ultimately if the primary
judge's determination concerning the question of indefeasibility is correct,
then so is his
Honour’s related decision on the question of
Indefeasibility
The primary judge's finding in relation to the power of the Recorder to reverse
the recording of the benefit of the easement relied
on the following
propositions:
That the powers
of the Recorder under
are subject to the provisions of the Act which
implement the principle of indefeasibility. His Honour relied, in particular,
s 40 (1) and (2) in this regard.
That upon the
Recorder recording on the titles of the second respondent the benefit of the
easement, the second respondent "became
the registered proprietor of the right
of way on 20 December 2019 and its title as such is indefeasible". Again, his
Honour relied
on s 40(2) to support that proposition.
That because of
this indefeasibility, the Recorder did not have power to reverse the recording
of the benefit of the easement on the
titles of the second respondent.
Accordingly, the appellant "was not a person or entity to whom s 144(1)(a)
applied, and was not
entitled to institute a proceeding pursuant to
Grounds 2, 3 and 4 attack this reasoning in various ways. Firstly, the
appellant argues that s 139 should be construed as an exception
indefeasibility, notwithstanding that it is not referred to in the exceptions
set out in s 40(3) and (4). It is submitted that
the Recorder can act under s
139 to correct errors and supply omissions in the Register notwithstanding the
indefeasibility provisions
of the Act, although the appellant concedes that the
power to do so is limited. This is the argument raised by grounds 2 and 3.
4 challenges the finding that the recording of the benefit on the second
respondent's titles resulted in the second respondent acquiring
an indefeasible
title to the easement. I will consider these questions in turn.
Grounds 2 and 3 – Section 139 and indefeasibility
At the outset, I observe that the appellant's arguments concerning the
relationship between s 139 and indefeasibility conflate the
power to review a
decision under s 139 with the question in issue in this case, the further
exercise of power under s 139 to reverse
or alter an earlier act under that
section. The former argument also brings into consideration whether any
indefeasibility arising
from the original recording in 2019 is subject to or
deferred until the completion of such review. Given the scope of the appeal,
2019 recording and questions relating to it do not arise and I express no view
However, the general question of whether and, if so, the extent to which s 139
operates as an exception to indefeasibility is relevant
within the context of
the issue in this case. The primary decision and the debate in this appeal
focussed on the provisions of s
40. As I will explain shortly, the statutory
basis of the protection afforded by the Torrens system, as it is constituted
Act, is wider than that provision. However, insofar as s 40 is
relevant, it is not suggested that the primary judge erred in his
observation
that none of the exceptions to indefeasibility, as it is applied by that
section, are relevant to this case. The effect
of the appellant's argument is
that the legislation should be construed in a way which, in effect, makes those
provisions subject
In this regard, I repeat and endorse what I said in the case of
Nightingale
"However, I also accept that there is implied in
s 139 a limitation that the power of correction should not be utilised in a
which undermines or threatens the principle of indefeasibility. In
particular, the relevant sections should not be construed as authorising
correction in circumstances in which rights which would otherwise be protected
by the principle of indefeasibility are affected.
It is not appropriate, in this
case, to fully explore the extent of the practical application of that
limitation."
The conclusion expressed in this passage is consistent with judicial views
expressed in other jurisdictions, including in those
cases already discussed. I
refer, in particular, to the observations quoted above from
Sahab Holdings
Pty Ltd v Registrar-General
Sahade v Owners Corporation SP 62022,
in respect of the position in New South Wales. Further, as already
explained, it is consistent with the reasoning of the High Court
Constructions Pty Ltd v Sahab Holdings Pty Ltd and Another
Accordingly, I am satisfied that the primary judge was correct in his
conclusion that in determining whether to take action to correct
an error under
s 139 which may have arisen as a result of the initial decision to record the
benefit of the easement on the second
respondents titles, the Recorder was bound
by the provisions of the Act which implement the general principles of
protection afforded
by the Torrens system. It follows that there is no merit in
grounds 2 and 3.
Ground 4 - Did the second respondent acquire an
indefeasible estate or interest to the benefit of the easement?
As already discussed, the critical finding of the primary judge was that the
second respondent acquired title to the right of way
which became indefeasible
upon registration of the easement on its titles. A review of that finding calls
for examination of what
is meant by indefeasibility under the
Land Titles
and the application of that concept to the facts of this case.
As the primary judge correctly observed at [15]:
"Indefeasibility
of title is a central and essential feature of the Torrens system of land
titles. The Torrens system, of which the
Land Titles Act
is a form, is
"not a system of registration of title but a system of title by registration":
Breskvar v Wall
(1971) 126 CLR 376 at 385;
Castle Constructions Pty
Ltd v Sahab Holdings Pty Ltd
[2013] HCA 11
247 CLR 149
The words quoted by his Honour from
Breskvar v Wall
were taken from the
judgment of Barwick CJ. In that case, the High Court was dealing with relevant
legislation in Queensland. Barwick
CJ went on to make the point that the
application of the Torrens system in a particular jurisdiction arises by virtue
of legislative
provisions. His Honour noted in respect of the legislative form
of the system of registration throughout the Commonwealth, that there
uniformity in that respect:
"I have thus referred under the
description, the Torrens system, to the various Acts of the States of the
Commonwealth which provide
for comparable systems of title by registration
though these Acts are all not in identical terms and some do contain significant
variations. It is I think a matter for regret that complete uniformity of this
legislation has not been achieved, particularly as
Australians now deal with
each other in land transactions from State to State."
Hence, although the general intention of the Torrens system is understood, it
is critical that it is applied in a particular case
according to the relevant
legislative provisions applicable in the jurisdiction.
The critical elements of the system of "title by registration" was further
explained by the High Court, in a joint judgment, in
Deguisa v Lynn
[2020] HCA 39
(2020) 268 CLR 638:
"As Professor Whalan has
explained, the Torrens system is characterised by the guarantee of the State
that the title which it produces
to a person seeking to take an interest in a
parcel of land is an accurate and comprehensive statement of the state of the
to that land, as to both the title of the registered owner and the
interests of others in that land. With the benefit of that guarantee,
dealing with a registered proprietor of land need look no further than the
registered title and the interests notified on
it in order to ensure that his or
her dealing does not miscarry."
This passage points out the two essential components of the system. These are
firstly the "title of the registered owner" in the
land and secondly "the
interests of others in that land". The fundamental assumption is that an
examination of the Register will
identify the nature and extent of the
proprietary interest held by the registered proprietor and by those taking an
estate or interest
in the land, and further will protect the title of the
registered proprietor against any claims by others not notified on the Register.
In respect of both, the Register will be conclusive and exhaustive. In some
Australian jurisdictions, both components are provided
for in the same section.
However, under the
Land Titles Act
they are implemented by the combined
effect of two sections.
provides for the conclusive nature of the
estate or interest in the land recorded in favour of the registered proprietor
entitled to a recorded estate or interest, and
protects the
interest of the registered proprietor with respect to the interests of others in
the land, by providing that the owners'
title is "subject only" to estates or
interests recorded on the folio. I set out the relevant parts of these
provisions below:
"39 Folio of the Register conclusive evidence of
(1) A folio of the Register is evidence of the
particulars recorded in the folio.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, a
folio of the Register is conclusive evidence that –
(a) the person named in the folio as registered
proprietor of or as taking an estate or interest in the land described in the
is entitled to that land for that estate or interest; and
(b) that land has been duly brought under this
40 Estate of registered proprietor indefeasible
(1) For the purposes of this
indefeasible
, in relation to the title of a registered
proprietor of land, means subject only to such estates and interests as are
recorded on
the folio of the Register or registered dealing evidencing title to
(2) Subject to
subsections
the title of a registered proprietor of land is indefeasible."
complementary yet distinct effect of these provisions has particular relevance
when considering an easement. By definition, an
easement must have a dominant
tenement, which enjoys the benefit of the easement, and a servient tenement
which bears the burden
thereof. An easement falls under the definition of "land"
contained in
Land Titles Act
, and hence the burden and benefit
arising under it runs with the land in each case. It follows from the provisions
that the recording of an easement on the folio of the servient
tenement establishes conclusively that the "person named in the folio
taking an estate or interest in the land described in the folio is entitled to
that land for that estate or interest". It
is important to note that the wording
refers to the person named in the folio "as registered proprietor of"
and "as taking an estate or interest in the land described
in the folio"
disjunctively and separately. In the case of an easement, the interest of the
person entitled to the benefit thereof,
is protected by the registration of the
easement on the title of the servient tenement, by the combined effect of
. This was explained in respect of the servient tenement by Brennan J in
Parramore v Duggan
[1995] HCA 21
(1995) 183 CLR 633:
is a difference between the terms used to describe the subject of conclusive
evidence in
and the terms used to describe the subject of
indefeasibility in
Section 39(2)
relates to the entitlement of
a 'registered proprietor of or (a person) taking an estate or interest in the
land described in the
confers indefeasibility on 'the title
of a registered proprietor of land' subject to the 'estates and interests ...
recorded on the
folio ... evidencing title to the land'. Indefeasibility
necessarily relates to the title to land which might otherwise be defeated.
is erroneous to regard indefeasibility as relating to an interest which merely
confers rights in or over the land of another registered
proprietor whose title
is indefeasible. A registered proprietor of a dominant tenement has an
indefeasible title to the land to which
the easement is appurtenant but the
easement is not indefeasible. Similarly, where the servient tenement is land to
which a registered
proprietor has title under the Act, that title is
indefeasible. Unless the easement is registered on the certificate of that
or unless the easement falls within one of the exceptions contained in s
40(3), the unencumbered title of the registered proprietor
of the servient
tenement is not subject to the easement: see s 40(1). In other words, the
registered proprietor of land to which
an easement is appurtenant has an
indefeasible title to that land but not to the easement, so that the easement
cannot be enforced
unless the certificate of title of the registered proprietor
of the servient tenement states that that title is subject to the easement
unless the easement falls within s 40(3)(e) of the Act."
It follows in my view that s 40 has little to do with the determination of this
case. As Brennan J noted, that section is concerned
with the interests of others
in the land to which the title of the registered proprietor is subject, and
which might otherwise defeat
that title. The protection of indefeasibility under
that section is therefore concerned with the effect of the registration of the
easement on the title of the servient tenement. Further, by s 39, registration
of the easement of the title of the servient tenement
conclusively establishes
that the registered proprietor of the dominant tenement "is entitled to the land
for that estate or interest".
The question which arises in this case is the effect of registration of the
benefit of a purported easement on the folio of the
dominant tenement. Such
registration is required, see s 105. By s 106, a statement in a folio of the
Register to the effect that
the land comprised in the folio has the benefit of
an easement shall be conclusive evidence that the land has that benefit. In
Parramore v Duggan,
Toohey J explained, with Brennan J's agreement, that
this is "an evidentiary provision" which "prevents a collateral attack upon the
existence of an easement to which the title refers". His Honour concluded that
the provision could not override the indefeasibility
afforded by s 40 in respect
of the servient tenement, although it would "give force to the respondent's
claim ...where there was
a provision which made all easements exceptions to the
indefeasibility provided by the Act...".
In any event, it is likely that s 106 does not add much to the effect of s 39.
It can be accepted that the benefit of the easement
is an estate or interest in
the land benefitted, as well as the burdened land. As such, the estate or
interest is protected upon
registration on the title of the dominant tenement as
conclusive by s 39. However, the protection afforded by that section is confined
to "the estate or interest described in the folio". The appellant's argument, of
course, is founded on the proposition that the reservation
of land which was
said to create an easement did not actually do so because it did not identify a
dominant tenement and conferred
at the most a personal right of way in favour of
individuals. It did not create "an estate or interest in the land" described in
the second respondent's titles. Accordingly, in order to assess the nature of
any conclusivity arising from recording the purported
easement on the second
respondent's titles, it is necessary to examine what was "described in the
folio" in order to determine whether
it was of "an estate or interest" in the
second respondent's land. If so, then it will be protected as conclusive by s
This conclusion applies with equal effect to s 106. That provision will only
apply where there is "a statement in a folio of the
Register to the effect that
the land comprised in the folio has the benefit of an easement". Further, s
106(2) provides that:
shall not be construed so as to give effect as an easement to a
right which is not recognized as an easement at common law."
At common law, the identification of a dominant tenement is an essential
requirement of an easement.
Gapes v Fish
[1926] ArgusLawRp 104
[1927] VLR 88.
This view is consistent with authorities which establish that the mere
recording of an instrument on what is purported to be the
dominant tenement is
not of itself conclusive of the existence of an easement. These authorities
establish that it is necessary to
examine what is recorded in the memorial on
the title, as well as any instrument referred to in the memorial which forms
the Register, in order to determine the true nature of the estate or
interest protected by provisions
, which in this State
have the effect of s 39 and 40. In
Bursill Enterprises Pty Ltd v Berger Bros
Trading Co Pty Ltd
[1971] HCA 9
[1971] 124 CLR 73
, the High Court was concerned with an
instrument which was notified on the certificate of title as a right of way, but
the instrument itself was examined, revealed that it was in fact a
transfer of land. The case was concerned with Torrens system provisions
Real Property Act
(NSW). The critical issue was whether what was
notified by the register was limited to the description in the title, which was
and misleading, or included the actual and different nature of the
interest as described in the underlying instrument. The instrument
registered as part of the register book. The majority held that the notification
included the underlying registered instrument,
and accordingly, conclusivity and
indefeasibility attached to a transfer of land rather than simply an interest
described as a right
of way. In other words, in order to determine the true
nature of the estate or interest protected by the legislative provisions
the Torrens system, it was necessary to go beyond the memorial on the
title, and to examine the terms of the underlying instrument.
As Barwick CJ
"It seems to me that it was not intended that the certificate
of title alone should provide a purchaser dealing with the registered
with all the information necessary to be known to comprehend the extent or state
of that proprietor's title to the land.
The dealings once registered became
themselves part of the Register Book. It was therefore sufficient that their
registration should
be by statement of their nature recorded on the certificate
However, the endorsement in this case was not confined to the words I have
set out. Both in the endorsement in 1862 and in the endorsement
on the present
certificate of title a description of what the memorandum of transfer achieved
appears. In practical terms this inadequate
description cannot be of moment
because even to ascertain the nature and extent of the right or rights of way
which it is said to
have created or extended the memorandum of transfer must be
In affording protection to purchasers of land under the Act against the
consequences of failure to search, s. 43A (2) expressly confines
the effect of
that protection to a failure to search registers not kept under the Act. To my
mind, it is inescapable that a person
dealing with the registered proprietor in
this case would be bound to search the registered dealing of which particulars
were endorsed
on the relevant certificate of title. Further, s. 42 says that the
registered proprietor holds the described interest in land subject
the stated exception, to 'notified' encumbrances etc. and s. 43 does not protect
a purchaser from the effect of notice
of registered interests. In my opinion, no
purchaser from the registered proprietor in this case could properly claim to
land free of the registered estate or interest created by the
memorandum of transfer of 1872."
This decision was followed in this respect by the High Court in
Management Ltd v Perpetual Trustee Co Ltd
[2007] HCA 45
, (2007) CLR 528. The
case was concerned with an easement duly registered on both dominant and
servient tenements. The issue concerned
the extent of the benefit afforded by
the easement, in particular whether it extended to other land owned by the
registered proprietor
of the dominant tenement. The High Court concluded that
the rights afforded by the easement depended upon the construction of its
but excluded consideration of extrinsic evidence, on the basis that to do so
would infringe the principles of the Torrens
system. The relevant material was
that which would be available to a third party searching the register, including
both information
on the folio and relevant registered instruments:
"Section 31B of the RP Act requires the Registrar-General to
maintain the Register. The Register comprises, among other instruments
records, both folios and dealings registered therein under the RP Act (s
31B(2)). A 'dealing' includes any instrument registrable
under the provisions of
the RP Act (s 3(1)). Section 96B classifies the Register as a public record and
provides for its inspection.
Together with the information appearing on the relevant folio, the
registration of dealings manifests the scheme of the Torrens system
third parties with the information necessary to comprehend the extent or state
of the registered title to the land in
question. This important element in the
Torrens system is discussed by Barwick CJ in
Bursill Enterprises Pty Ltd v
Berger Bros Trading Co Pty Ltd
The passages quoted above from
were also quoted with approval,
and some explanation, by the High Court in
Deguisa v Lynn
. The court in
that case emphasised that it is only registered instruments which inform the
nature of the estate or interest protected
by the Torrens provisions.
Land Titles Act
, the Register comprises both folios of
the Register and "the dealings registered under this Act and any of the Acts
specified in
". This includes the
Real Property Act
1862. It follows that the
information necessary to determine the nature of the estate or interest
"described in the folio" for the
purposes of s 39, will include both the
particulars recorded on, and the content of any registered dealing referred to
in, the folio.
I therefore conclude that although the primary judge correctly considered that
the 2019 recording on the second respondent's title
attracted the provisions
which incorporate the Torrens system of registration, he incorrectly determined
that the Recorder was prevented
from undertaking an act which had the effect of
reversing or altering that recording by the indefeasibility provisions of s 40.
correct question was whether the memorial of the instrument 13/7548 and the
description recorded at Schedule 2 of CT Vol 67868 Folio
2 recorded an estate or
interest in the land contained in that folio, and was thereby protected as
conclusive by the provisions of
s 39 and 106. In my view, the answer to this
question required an assessment of the effect of the Memorial and, if part of
the Register,
the underlying instrument. This necessarily required his Honour to
assess and rule upon the appellant's arguments in this regard
concerning whether
these created an easement, and in particular whether there was identification of
a dominant tenement. If the reservation
in fact created an easement, then the
benefit thereof runs with the land of the dominant tenement
However, if,
as the appellant argues, it did nothing more than confer a personal licence,
then neither s 39 nor s 106 will add anything
to this, and will not prevent the
Recorder acting under s 139 to correct the Register. I am therefore of the view
that ground 4 has
been made out.
Disposition
Although I have concluded that the primary judge erred in this respect, the
question is what, if any, practical effect this has
on the outcome of the
appeal. The reasoning process necessitated by the above provisions of the Act
identifies and emphasises that
the critical question in this case is whether the
original reservation of land created an easement which benefited the second
respondent's
title or merely resulted in a personal licence. Of course, the
question which arises in the case of the latter finding is whether
the recording
of the instrument constitutes an error in the Register and, if so, whether the
Court should exercise its discretion
to remove it.
Ultimately, however, the practical issue of concern to the parties is whether
there is an enforceable easement over the appellant's
land which benefits the
second respondent's land. The second respondent argues that there are other more
appropriate avenues of redress
available to the appellant in respect of this
question. However, as I have demonstrated, this issue is critical to the
of the originating application, and the exercise of the Court's
proceedings. The question is whether that should occur on a rehearing by the
primary judge, or by this Court.
In my view, the appropriate order is a rehearing before the primary judge.
There are a number of questions still to be determined
on the trial. This
includes the admissibility of the evidence. Further, the primary argument of the
appellant concerns whether the
original reservation identifies a dominant
tenement. The High Court in
Deguisa v Lynn
emphasised the point that the
enquiry concerning the effect of the Register extends only to documents which
are actually part of
the Register and does not extend to material which is not,
notwithstanding that it may be incorporated by reference. While this case
concerned with indefeasibility of the title of the servient tenement of the
nature arising under s 40, the same principle in
my view applies to the
conclusivity of the estate or interest recorded on the title of the asserted
dominant tenement. This question
is not clear from the material before this
Court, and is a matter appropriately resolved on a hearing. Finally, if the
Court finds
that the recording is not protected by s 39 and s 106, then it will
still need to consider what order "it thinks fit", and this may
be influenced by
other considerations raised by the parties on the evidence. These questions are
best determined on a full hearing,
and that should occur before the learned
primary judge. This will also preserve rights of appeal arising from such a
hearing, on
questions which have not yet been determined by his Honour.
Accordingly, I would allow the appeal and order that there be a rehearing of
the originating application.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (563 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter