URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASGAB/2021/49.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:15:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DFS (Review of Enduring Power of Attorney) [2021] TASGAB 49 (28 October 2021)
DFS (Review of Enduring Power of Attorney)
[2021] TASGAB 49
HEARING DATE(S):
28 October 2021
DATE OF ORDERS:
28 October 2021
DATE OF STATEMENT OF REASONS:
18 November 2021
Mr R Greuber, Senior Member
Mr G Dibley, Member
Ms V Jones, Member
APPLICATION
Review of Enduring Power of Attorney
CATCHWORDS:
Enduring Power of Attorney – review - capacity of donor – power
not yet entered enduring phase – collateral purpose
for seeking review -
futility of making an order
LEGISLATION CITED:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION:
The decision has been anonymised for the purpose of publication
STATEMENT OF REASONS
Application
1. By an Application dated and filed 28 September
2021 (‘the Application’) XKS applied for Review of an Enduring Power
of Attorney dated 17 March 2016 registered on 15 April 2016 number PAXXXXX
(‘the EPA’) granted by DFS.
2. The Application seeks alternatively: a determination about the operation
of the EPA, a suspension of the operation of the EPA,
a revocation of the EPA or
the appointment of a new attorney or an administrator.
3. The Application was heard by the Board on 28
October 2021.
4. The following people appeared at the hearing:
(the Applicant and DFS’ son);
(the donor);
Jane Tolman (geriatrician);
(Attorney and DFS’ daughter);
(Attorney and DFS’ daughter);
Sutherland (Legal Practitioner for DFS);
Mitchell (Public Trustee);
(DFS’ daughter);
(DFS’ son);
(DFS’ daughter);
(DFS’ daughter); and
(DFS’ granddaughter);
5. The Board had before it the following documents:
Application
to Review of an Enduring Power of Attorney dated and filed 28 September
by Dr Jane Tolman to Dr Andrew Hutchison dated 11 October 2021;
Enduring Power of Attorney of DFS dated 17 March 2016 and registered on 15 April
2016 no.PAXXXXX;
appointing Enduring Guardian dated 17 March 2016 and filed on 21 April 2016
Aged Care Assessment dated 23 June 2018;
Property Information Report for [Address];
from McMullen Lawyers to Simmons Wolfhagen dated 20 March 2020 with sale
settlement statement;
from XKS to NS and others dated 19 June 2020;
from NS to XKS dated 14 April 2020;
from XKS to NS and others dated 14 April 2020;
from XKS to NS and others dated 26 September 2020;
from HS to NS dated 13 September 2020;
from XKS to DN dated 11 February 2021;
from XKS to DN dated 10 February 2021;
from XKS to the Board dated 19 October 2021;
Declaration by HS made 14 October 2021;
by TI dated 20 October 2021;
by DN dated 12 October 2021;
by BF dated 7 October 2021;
by NS dated 15 October 2021;
for DFS from 1 October 2020 to 30 September 2021;
family photographs;
for NS by MV dated 10 October 2021;
by VF for NS undated;
by QE dated 10 October 2021; and
Taxation Office Notices of Assessments for DFS for 2019, 2020 and 2021 financial
6. The donor in this matter, DFS, was married to OS,
who died on 15 March 2019. DFS and OS had seven children. Unfortunately, it
apparent from the evidence that a schism has arisen within the children,
dividing them into two factions. On one side is NS,
DN, QE and BF. On the other
side is XKS, TI and HS.
7. The fact of the schism is relevant to understanding the genesis of the
Application. As to the substance of it, it is sufficient
to note that the
division arose from different views and blame in connection with a substantial
loan or gift by DFS and OS to XKS
to assist with medical treatment of his
daughter C, and the subsequent loss by XKS of his home and business, allegedly
in connection
with repayment.
8. On 17 March 2016 DFS signed the EPA appointing her then husband OS as her
attorney and in the alternative appointing her daughters
NS and DN if OS became
incapable or unavailable to exercise the appointment. On OS’s death on 15
March 2019 NS and DN became
DFS’ attorneys. On the same date as she signed
the EPA, DFS also signed an instrument of Enduring Guardianship appointing OS
her guardian and NS and DN in the alternative. There is some confusion of the
terms ‘attorney’ and ‘guardian’
between the two
documents, but nothing turns on that.
9. In the Application XKS expresses concerns about NS and DN misusing and
abusing their powers as attorneys, not as might be expected
in respect to the
management of DFS’s estate, but in respect to her relationship with her
family. He wants the Public Trustee
to take over management of his
mother’s affairs and not use the power ‘as a pawn in a game of
sibling and cousin rivalry
to create division and distrust’, which might
then result in reconciliation within the family. For the reasons set out below,
XKS’ use of the process for reviewing an EPA to achieve some sort of
change in the balance of power or rapprochement within
the family is
misconceived and the application must be dismissed.
10. The crucial issue for the Board, and one which was raised at the outset
of the hearing, was DFS’ legal capacity. In the
Application XKS candidly
states that DFS does not have any diagnosed disability. The Board was provided
with a report by Dr Jane
Tolman, geriatrician, dated 11 October 2021 to Dr
Andrew Hutchinson, DFS’ GP. Dr Hutchinson referred DFS to Dr Tolman for an
assessment, particularly in respect to capacity, in the light of the
Application. Dr Tolman undertook an assessment of DFS’
cognition. Dr
Tolman’s conclusions were as follows:-
I found DFS to be remarkably insightful. It is my
clinical impression that there is no cognitive impairment at all.
I have rarely seen a resident so well set up as DFS is, and she herself feels
very well supported by the majority of her children.
She goes out, she enjoys
her hobbies, and she walks to Mass. She has identified risks around the house
and has herself rectified
DFS was clearly saddened by recent events including the submission of papers to
review her chosen powers of attorney and guardian.
She shed tears when talking
clearly affected by what
she sees as undermining and cruel behaviour by her
There may be matters of which I am unaware, but DFS has good cognition and is
making very sensible decisions about her home and about
how to stay independent.
She enjoys a good relationship with her daughters. I see no reason to believe
that there are grounds for
overturning her current powers of attorney and
guardianship documents.
11. Dr Tolman attended the hearing and gave evidence. She said that in his
referral Dr Hutchinson expressed his perplexity in respect
to the matter. Dr
Hutchinson had noted that he considered that DFS had full capacity and that he
had known her over a long period
of time. Dr Tolman said that she found DFS a
woman of high intellect. She was impressed by DFS’ attitude and insight
cognition, notwithstanding that she was shaken by the Application and
the family circumstances. Dr Tolman made note of what she referred
to as little
things, such as how the house was set up. Dr Tolman said that she does not
believe that she has been in a house so well
set up for a person’s needs.
DFS explained to Dr Tolman why she had made changes in the house to reduce
risks. Dr Tolman found
no issues with DFS’ cognition. She considered that
DFS had the capacity to both appoint and revoke an enduring power of attorney.
She had no concerns whatsoever in that regard and considered the issue very
straightforward.
12. DFS told the Board that she wanted NS and DN to continue as her
attorneys. She said that she would not have it any other way.
She would not
consider appointing anyone else in their place. She trusts them. The attorneys
do not currently exercise their powers
under the EPA.
13. XKS told the Board that he did not assert that DFS lacked capacity. Nor
was he concerned that she was not being taken care of.
He said that he made the
Application to bring to the Board’s notice what he described as
intimidation, manipulation and misrepresentation
that he, XKS, ‘had to
cop’ when he visited DFS.
14. No person attending the hearing asserted that DFS lacked capacity.
Notwithstanding that the Board explained several times the
limits of its
children spoke to the dysfunction within the
family. There is little point in
setting out those matters. It is sufficient to observe that none of them related
to substitute decision
making or to DFS’ capacity to make decisions. It is
not necessary for the Board to make any finding in respect to any of the
allegations raised as between DFS’ children.
Determination
15. Section 33(1) of the
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
Act’) provides that the Board may review an EPA. On the face of the
section it is not necessary that the EPA
enter its enduring phase for a review
to be conducted. Section 33(2) sets out a range of powers available to the Board
Section 33(2)(b) provides that the Board may appoint a substitute
attorney and section 33(2)(f) provides that the Board may revoke
appoint an administrator of the donor’s estate.
16. Although the PA Act does not expressly provide that the exercise of those
powers is dependent on the donor having lost capacity
and the EPA having entered
its enduring phase, exercising those powers would be futile in the
circumstances. The evidence established
positively that DFS has capacity to
make and revoke an EPA. If the Board were to revoke the EPA she could make a
new one in the
same terms. If the Board were to vary the EPA to substitute an
attorney she could further vary it to reappoint the substituted attorney,
revoke it and make a new EPA in the same terms. It should be noted that, given
the evidence in respect to DFS’ capacity
and her very firm views as to
maintaining the EPA in its current terms, the Board would not vary or revoke it
even if doing so was
not futile.
17. For the sake of completeness, something should be said about the
appointment of an administrator of DFS’ estate. Section
33 of the PA Act
provides that the appointment of an administrator under that section has the
same effect as if it had been made
Guardianship and Administration
. In making such an Order the Board would consider the criteria for
making an Administration Order under that Act. Pursuant to section
Board may only make an order appointing an administrator if it is satisfied that
the proposed represented person is a person
with a disability within the meaning
in section 3(1) of the Act, and that he or she is unable by reason of that
disability to make
reasonable judgments in respect of matters relating to all or
any part of his or her estate. Once again, there was no evidence or
that DFS is a person with a disability. The evidence positively established that
DFS had no issues of cognition.
18. Whatever XKS’ motives in terms of repairing the rift in the family,
the Application is misconceived. The Board has no inherent
powers are limited to those granted to it by legislation. It is not a forum for
healing internecine sibling rifts.
19. The Board orders that:
1. The Application for Review of the Enduring
Power of Attorney PAXXXXX is dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (186 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter