URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASMC/2024/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:18:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Police v Gleeson [2024] TASMC 7 (13 August 2024)
[2024] TASMC 07
MAGISTRATES COURT OF TASMANIA
Police v Gleeson
[2024] TASMC
GLEESON, Bevan
DELIVERED ON:
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
DECISION OF:
CATCHWORDS:
Magistrates – Jurisdiction and Procedure – other orders –
declaration of a serial family violence perpetrator
Criminal Law – Sentencing order – orders relating to serious,
violent, dangerous offenders and family violence offenders
– declaration
of serial family violence perpetrator – nature of statutory power –
factors relevant
Words and phrases – “Serial”, “perpetrator”,
“is to”, “the court or judge is of the
opinion that the
declaration is warranted”
Family Violence Act 2004
Criminal Code
Youth Justice Act
Children, Young
Persons and Their Families Act 1997
Acts Interpretation Act
Police Offences Act
Firearms Act
Corrections
Community Protection (Offender Reporting) Act
Processing Laboratory Limited v Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration
[1978] AC 655
[2008] TASSC
Grayson v R
[1920] WALawRp 5
[1920] 22 WALR 37 (CCA)
[1988] 164 CLR 465
Cook v Dylan
Tasmanian Unreported List B 1/
Hoare v The Queen
[1989] 167 CLR
Traynor v McCulloch
[2011] TASSC 61
REPRESENTATION:
Solicitors:
Tasmania Police
Rae & Partners
Number of Paragraphs:
Serial No.07/2024
File No. 32961/2024
POLICE V BEVAN JOHN GLEESON
REASONS FOR DECISION
13 August 2024
Introduction
defendant has pleaded guilty to one count of driving whilst disqualified and 15
counts of breaching a family violence order.
In short, on 16 October 2023 the
defendant was disqualified from holding or obtaining a driver’s licence in
the Launceston
Magistrates Court. Further, on 27 September 2022 a family
violence order was made against the defendant protecting one Jamie-Lin
and the parties’ child X. That order included a condition that the
defendant was not to directly or indirectly contact
Ms Richards or the child by
any means and that he was not to approach or be found within 50 metres of Ms
Richards or the child.`
14 May 2024 police spotted the defendant driving a motor vehicle on Pipers River
roadway, having left Ms Richard’s address.
He was following Ms Richards
who was driving in front of him with their child. Police were unable to
intercept him. The defendant
was later arrested. He admitted being in
Ms Richard’s company. He admitted that he was driving, that he and
Ms Richards had
been together on that day and he admitted that he had been in
that day, and that the parties were engaged in trying to change the family
violence order to allow them to have contact but had not
done so. The relevant
order was in place until 26 September 2024.
defendant’s phone records revealed that he had breached the order as
(a) Sending three text messages to her on 28 April 2024.
(b) Phoning her four times on 3 May 2024.
(c) Contacting her 12 times by phone on 4 May 2024.
(d) Texting her twice on 4 May 2024.
(e) Contacting her by phone four times on 5 May 2024.
(f) Texting her twice on 5 May 2024.
(g) Contacting her by phone nine times on 6 May 2024.
(h) Texting her on 6 May 2024 some 20 times.
(i) Contacting her by phone 14 times on 7 May 2024.
(j) Texting her three times on 7 May 2024.
(k) Contacting her by phone five times on 8 May 2024.
(l) Contacting her by phone six times on 9 May 2024.
(m) Contacting her via text message on 10 May 2024 on two occasions.
(n) Contacting her by phone on 12 occasions on 11 May 2024.
(o) Texting her 12 times on 11 May 2024.
mitigation it was put that whilst there were many contacts, many of the contacts
and text messages were part of ongoing
"conversations"
carried on via
text et cetera between the two in an entirely consensual way. It was
submitted that none of the communications involved
any sorts of threats or
violence or similar but that the two were romantically involved, they shared a
child, and that the complainant
was a willing participant in their communication
and them being together.
the conclusion of counsel’s plea in mitigation I raised the matter of the
Family Violence Act
Pt 4A (declaration of serial family violence perpetrator). Ms Jenkins submitted
that such a declaration was not appropriate in
this case. She underlined that
the communications here were two-way, consensual and involved no threat, or
abuse, no stalking and
no danger to the complainant. She also noted that the
parties had wished to vary the order to permit such contact but had not achieved
that by the time the defendant was intercepted and seen with the complainant and
subsequently arrested.
Violence Act
2004 Pt 4A - Declaration of serial family violence
perpetrator
4A, section 29A of the
provides as
29A. Court or judge may declare
offender to be serial family violence perpetrator
(1) This section applies to a court or a
judge before whom an offender is –
(a) convicted of a family violence offence;
(b) brought up for sentence after being
convicted of a family violence offence.
(2) The court or judge is to declare the
offender to be a serial family violence perpetrator if –
(a) the offender has attained the age of 18
(b) the offender has –
(i) on that conviction, been convicted
of at least 2 indictable family violence offences, with at least 2 of those
offences being
committed on different days; or
(ii) on that conviction, been
convicted of at least 3 family violence offences, whether indictable or summary,
with at least 3 of
those offences being committed on different days; or
(iii) on that conviction or a
previous conviction, been convicted of persistent family violence under
section 170A
of the Criminal Code; and
(c) the court or judge is of the opinion
that the declaration is warranted.
(3) In determining under
subsection (2)(c)
whether to declare an offender to be a serial family violence perpetrator, the
court or judge is to have regard to the following:
(a) the nature and circumstances of the
family violence offences referred to in
subsection (2)
(b) the risk that the offender may commit
further family violence offences;
(c) the offender’s antecedents and
(d) any other matter that the court or
judge considers relevant.
(4) For the purposes of
subsection (2)
, each of the family violence offences taken into account must have been
committed within the 10-year period immediately preceding
the declaration,
unless the court or judge is satisfied that exceptional circumstances exist that
make it appropriate to make a declaration
under this section.
(5) In determining under
subsection (4)
whether exceptional circumstances exist, the court or judge may have regard to
any or all of the following:
(a) the level of risk that the offender may
commit another family violence offence;
(b) the offender’s antecedents and
(c) the nature of the family violence
offences for which the offender has been convicted;
(d) any other matter that the court or
judge considers relevant.
(6) The court or
(a) may order the Director of Corrective
Services or any other person to prepare and provide to the court or judge a
report in relation
to the risk of the offender committing further family
violence offences or any other matters that the court or judge specifies in
(b) may have regard to the report for the
purpose of determining under
subsection (2)(c)
whether to declare an offender to be a serial family violence
perpetrator.
(7) The court or judge is to provide
(a) the prosecution with a copy of a report
that is provided to the court or judge in accordance with an order under
subsection (6)
, other than a report provided to the court or judge by the prosecution;
(b) the offender with a copy of a report in
relation to the offender that is provided to the court or judge in accordance
order under
subsection (6)
has provided the declaration is to be made where a person is found to be a
"serial family violence perpetrator"
. The use of the words
"perpetrator"
bear consideration. The word
is defined in the Oxford English Dictionary (Australian Edition)
"consisting of or forming part of or taking place in a series, repeatedly
committing the same offence or following a characteristic
behaviour pattern; a
serial killer"
. Obviously s 29A deals with the minimum required level
of frequency of offending which must be attained before such a declaration
be considered (see s 29A(2)(b) and (4)). Nevertheless it must be said that
does carry with it a requirement of it being offending
in a series or being repeated, characteristic behaviour or part of an
established
pattern of conduct.
Parliament used the word
"perpetrator"
rather than
balance I do not believe that terminology provides much guidance as to the
exercise of the power granted by the section. To
“perpetrate”
(Oxford English Dictionary (Australian
Edition)), is a verb which means
"to carry out or commit (a harmful, illegal
or immoral action)”.
definition also notes that the word
was first used in statutes referring to crimes hence its negative association.)
That underlines
that in common parlance the term is very often seen as carrying
with it a meaning or flavour beyond merely to commit – i.e.
that is that
the term connotes a real sense of moral turpitude, grave conduct and conduct
involving real harm to another. However,
in recent times the term has found its
way into other provisions (see the
s 240A (Carjacking);
Youth Justice
s 22 and the
Children, Young Persons and Their Families Act
On balance I think the use of the term is of little help in
gaining a particular understanding of the statutory scheme here. In
this context the term simply means
and represents
no more than the use of a term which perhaps is more prevalent in the United
States but the use of which now is creeping
into parliamentary drafting in this
adopts a structure whereby the Court
offender, a serial family violence perpetrator, if the criteria set out in
subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) of that provision
are met. In this regard
subsection (c) is relevant in that it provides that
“(c) the court or
judge is of the opinion that the declaration is warranted.”
extent, the legislation includes obligatory words
together with words indicating the exercise of discretion
"if the court or
judge is of the opinion that the declaration is warranted.”
section, on its ordinary language, imposes a duty but is also a facultative one
in the sense that simple “box ticking”
does not give rise to the
exercise of the power. See
Grunwick Processing
Laboratory Limited v Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service
per Lord Diplock at 690 and Lord Salmon at 698.
any event the
Acts Interpretation Act
provides that the term
is to be construed as
“directory”
. That is that it casts an obligation on the
Court to do so. See:
[2008] TASSC
per Crawford CJ. I can see no reason to find that the use of that term, even
in conjunction with the rider to be found in
s 29A(2)(c)
, can be shown to
clearly demonstrate that the term must somehow be interpreted differently.
considering the matter generally it should not be forgotten that the issue of
the making of a declaration is an obligation cast
on the Court in every relevant
case. It is not a matter which arises for consideration on the making of an
application by the prosecution
for example. That would favour the view that the
making of a declaration is not something which is reserved for cases that are
particularly
serious, grievous, or atypical.
the relatively modest extent of offending which triggers the obligation to
consider the issue favours the view that the making
of declarations is not
limited to such cases.
fact that the risk of further “family violence offences” being
committed is a consideration also underlines that the
making of a declaration is
not reserved to those types of cases. “Family violence offences”
include offences that relate
to the physical safety of complainants (assaults
Police Offences Act
Criminal Code
, but also far more serious crimes involving physical and/or
psychological harms) but that definition also includes breaching of a
violence order, an interim family violence order or a police family violence
order in any way – regardless of whether
anybody suffers harm or not. So
clearly Parliament is not seeking to limit declarations only to cases where
someone has suffered
a harm in that sense. If Parliament intended to do so it
would not have used the language it has.
countervailing or balancing consideration is the requirement that the making of
the declaration be
“warranted”
(s 29A(2)(c) and the breadth
of the factors relevant to that as set forth in s 29A(3) – particularly
“any other matter that the court or judge considers
is to be taken into account – allows the Court to
consider the issue fully and without fetter, save for improper or irrelevant
considerations. However, those factors need to be themselves considered within
the legislative framework of the Act, as does the
entire issue of the making of
declarations generally.
long title to the Act provides that it is
"an Act to provide for an
integrated criminal justice response to family violence which promotes the
safety of people affected by
family violence"
. The Act includes penal and
protective and rehabilitative elements. It was enacted – as has been said
so many times in these
Courts – largely to protect people from the grave
and corrosive evil that family violence so often is. That is a major focus
the legislative scheme. Put another way the Act is concerned to a significant
degree with the matter of the safety of persons,
that term including but not
being limited to physical safety or wellbeing only. A number of provisions of
the Act recognise the reality
that people do not always act in a self-protective
way and, to an extent, the Act sometimes imposes the judgment of police and
which may well be contrary to the views of persons who are affected by
family violence. This underlines the very strong emphasis
on the protection of
people affected by family violence (as broad a term as that is) apparent in the
determining whether to make a declaration or not, a court should of course be
mindful of the consequences which flow from it. The
use of the term
“warranted” itself supports that in any event. At first blush they
might appear to be relatively significant.
The consequences or detriments or
potential limits on the liberty of a person so declared are as
(i) Section 13A(2) provides that if a serial family violence perpetrator again
breaches the Act then the declaration is and subsequent
offending by a person so
declared is seen as an
“aggravating factor”
for sentencing
(ii) It may prompt the making of a family violence order if such an order is
warranted. (Section 29C(1)(a).)
(iii) It allows the Court to make any other order that it can make under the
s 29C(1)(b).
(iv) It authorises the Court to order the Commissioner of Police or any other
person to provide a report to the Court assessing
the defendant’s
suitability for electronic monitoring.
(v) It results in the automatic cancellation of any firearms licence held by a
defendant (see
Firearms Act
s 51(1)(b)).
(vi) The existence of the declaration is also a factor relevant to the granting
or otherwise of a licence under the
Firearms Act
Firearms Act
s 29(2)(fa)).
(vii) A declaration for a person who is a prisoner is a matter relevant to the
granting of parole (see
Corrections Act
s 72(4)(ba)).
(viii) The period of declaration can be up to five years, but it can be any
period less than that. There are no other obligations
cast on those declared so
declaration does not have any practical effect at all provided they do not
these consequences or potential consequences insofar as a defendant is concerned
are perhaps not actually as extensive as
might first appear to be the case. It
must be accepted that for sentencing purposes, the existence of a declaration is
an aggravating
factor for any subsequent offending. Of course, the presence
prior convictions (even particularly relevant ones) is not an aggravating
for sentencing generally, but the existence of prior offences –
particularly family violence offences – goes to
the antecedents and
character of the person to be sentenced and it is abundantly clear that repeat
offenders are generally more severely
dealt with than those who have not been
previously convicted. See
Grayson v R
[1920] WALawRp 5
[1920] 22 WALR 37
[1988] 164 CLR 465 at [477]. Of course in the
absence of a provision such as this the principle of proportionality in
would be infringed if a person is sentenced on his or her record.
Cook v Dylan
Tasmanian Unreported List B
is also to be noted here that the
itself provides that where a person
breaches family violence orders or police family violence orders, that penalties
increase markedly
for first, second, third, fourth and subsequent offenders to
the point where for a first offence the maximum penalty of 20 penalty
imprisonment for up to 12 months is set as the maximum, whereas for a fourth or
subsequent offence a person can be in prison
for up to five years. Further,
even if the existence of a declaration against a defendant for subsequent
offending is an aggravating
factor, that does not detract from the overall
obligation of any sentencing in court to ensure that:
principle of sentencing law is that a sentence of imprisonment imposed by a
court should never exceed that which can be justified
as appropriate or
proportionate to the gravity of the crime considered in the light of subjective
circumstances":
Hoare v The Queen
[1989] HCA 33
167 CLR 348
All the usual factors whether in aggravation or mitigation remain to be
considered and the existence of a declaration is given no
primacy in any event.
Therefore, the extent to which the declaration is aggravating is a matter for
the sentencing court and will
doubtless vary depending on the circumstances of
the offending, of the offender and other relevant factors.
to the making of a declaration enabling a court to make a family violence order
(s 29C(1)(a)) it is to be noted that pursuant to
s 36 the Court
already possesses a power in proceedings for a family violence offence to make
any order that it wishes to under the
if it is satisfied on the
balance of probabilities of the matters set out in s 16 of the Act.
Therefore the adverse consequence
of declaration at s 29C(1)(b) does no
more than mirror the same power as appears in s 36 for any family violence
adverse consequence of a declaration regarding the cancellation of a firearms
Firearms Act
s 51(1)(b)) needs to be considered in the
light of s 51(1)(a) of the same legislation which provides that a firearms
licence is automatically
cancelled in the case of the existence of a family
violence order and of course cancellation can be considered by the Commissioner
under that Act if the Commissioner believes that the person is no longer
“a fit and proper person” to hold a firearms
licence. Experience
teaches that repeat offenders under the
Firearms Act
may well have the continuation of their licences considered in the light of
convictions for that sort of offending under the pre-existing
legislative scheme
in any event.
as to the granting of a firearms licence it is noted that the existence or
otherwise of a declaration of a person being a
serial family violence
perpetrator is to be “taken into account” by the Commissioner in
deciding whether to grant such
a licence. It must be kept in mind that the same
provision (s 29(2)(f)) requires the existence of a family violence order or
family violence order or police family violence order being in place or
having been in place for a period of five years immediately
prior to the
application as being factors which are taken into account as well. Experience
teaches that many persons who might be
declared as serial family violence
perpetrators are very likely to already be caught by both those provisions in
Firearms Act
as parole is concerned s 72(4)(ba) of the
Corrections Act
that the Parole Board take into consideration on any application for parole
whether the prisoner who is serving a term of
imprisonment for a family violence
offence has been declared a serial family violence perpetrator under that Act.
Nevertheless, the
other considerations to be taken into account under subsection
72(4)(a) to (l) respectively are extremely broad ranging and include
such as the prisoner’s likelihood of re‑offending, the protection of
the public, their prospects for rehabilitation,
the nature of the circumstances
and gravity of their offence and the behaviour of the prisoner while subject to
any order of a court.
So again, if a person is serving a term of imprisonment
for a family violence offence and has a poor history of compliance with family
violence orders, that matter will already doubtless be taken into account by the
parole board in considering its application.
should not be forgotten in all of this that the existence of such an order in
all these instances is no more than a factor to be
considered and is not to be
determinative of any matter relating to firearms, parole or otherwise. So while
there are obviously consequences
flowing from a declaration, those are not as
onerous as those which flow from an order placing a person on the register made
Community Protection (Offender
Reporting) Act
, for example.
s 29A(3)(c) requires the Court to take into account
“the risk that the offender may commit other family violence
The extent of that risk is not quantified, but the term is
used in conjunction with the term “may” rather than
or “will again” or similar. Further, the risk is
related to family violence offences generally, not just those involving
harm or injury. A somewhat analogous assessment is required when assessing
whether an offender should be placed on the register
maintained under the
Community Protection (Offender Reporting) Act
, 2005 s 6. In that regard
(see above) and in
[2011] TASSC 61
Crawford CJ found that the level of risk required
there to be a real risk, a risk of some significance and not a risk which was
or far-fetched. The risk there had to be more than simply something
which was just conceivable or possible. It did not have to be
more likely than
not, either. In my view that language is a useful guide in assessing the matter
of the risk of future offending
considering risk, family violence offences very often occur in circumstances
where emotions are heightened for any number of reasons:
passion, enmity and
even hatred, clashes over finances, infidelity, power and interaction regarding
children and property. Experience
teaches that these issues can very often play
out over prolonged periods, often long after any romantic relationship has
parties are not uncommonly involved in litigation in some forum or
other. Often people’s judgment is coloured by past events
or emotions.
Experience also teaches that family violence is sadly common and has remained so
despite the enactment of the
20 years ago. Experience also teaches
that clashes, conflict, and antagonism not uncommonly take place over a
prolonged period. Parliament
was, undoubtedly, well aware of all of that when
this provision was drafted.
in no way wanting to be seen to suggest that the making of declarations under s
29A should be in any way rote, pro forma, something
done without proper
consideration or automatic (even for offenders with very bad family violence
records) it must be said that the
test propounded in Pt 4A is one which will
mean that declarations under this provision will be far from uncommon. The
is in no way drafted so as to reserve declaration for exceptional or
particularly serious cases.
“label” assigned to those who are declared as “serial family
violence perpetrators” – using as it
does terminology which is
likely to attract odium amongst fair minded people – will cause defendants
some consternation and,
if made, has the potential for them to suffer some
detriments up to and including increased time in prison. In my view the
inescapable
conclusion to be drawn from all this is that Parliament intended
declarations to aid the cause of protecting people from family violence,
awareness of the issue and as a further deterrent to those who might consider
committing family violence offences.
Discussion as to this
offender here has breached the family violence order in place on 28 April 2024,
on 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 May 2024 by
phone or text over a total of 110 occasions as well as breaching it by being in
her presence on 14
May 2024. The defendant is now 35 years of age. He has a long
criminal record going back to the Youth Court. As an adult he has been
of aggravated burglary and
Criminal Code
assault on two occasions in
April 2008. As to assaults he has been convicted of common assaults on seven
occasions having been convicted
of that offence in 2010, 2011, 2017 and 2022. He
was convicted of aggravated armed robbery in the Supreme Court in 2012. He has
been convicted on charges of possession of firearms, possession of
shortened firearms, possession of loaded firearms in public places,
of dangerous articles in a public place, and has also been convicted of
recklessly discharging a firearm on 10 February
2021, the same day that he was
convicted of assaulting the complainant and breaching a police family violence
order by firing a weapon
at her car. The defendant has also been convicted of
driving whilst disqualified on several occasions and has numerous convictions
for breaching conditions of bail.
December 2021 he was convicted of nearly 90 counts of breaching an interim
family violence order. Those offences occurred between
13 March 2021 and 20
September 2021. That offending involved contacting the same complainant as here
by phone (on some occasions
the defendant was sentenced to six months in prison for assaulting this
complainant
(the sixth and seventh of the common assault convictions referred to
above). Those assaults occurring on 16 January 2021 and 10
February 2021. On
the same day he was also sentenced for breaching a police family violence order
made to protect the same protected
person by possession of a firearm and by
damaging her property by firing a firearm at her car on 10 February 2021. He was
also convicted
of further breaches of an interim family violence order on 26 May
2022 by again telephoning the same complainant as here. In April
2021 he was
sentenced to two and a half years imprisonment for recklessly discharging a
firearm on 10 February 2021. The defendant
was on parole when the offences he is
to be sentenced on today occurred.
summary the defendant has a long, long history of violent offending and of
breaching protective orders made under the
in relation to the same
complainant as here. He has been convicted of assaulting the person protected
here on two occasions after
which he breached protective orders made in her
favour over a period of six months by repeatedly telephoning her on about 80
I further note that the relationship continues. In breaching
protective orders by being with her and by contacting her on numerous
must be seen as being part of a pattern of offending. In these circumstances it
is clear that the risk of the defendant
committing a further family violence
offence is a real one.
accept that in the matters before me today it is not suggested that the
defendant threatened or abused the complainant at any point.
I accept the
complainant was complicit in them being together and in communicating with him.
I accept that the extent of contact
between them on some days was somewhat
artificially elevated by virtue of them effectively having a conversation by
text exchange.
However, the offending was blatant and repeated and cannot be
seen in isolation from its past.
defendant’s antecedents and character are poor generally. He is a mature
offender. His history of family violence offending
is poor. His history of
violent offending is poor. His history of non-compliance with protective orders,
bail conditions and even
orders of disqualification from driving is poor. The
relationship in question continues. In all the circumstances this is plainly
case where a declaration under s 29A is warranted.
convicted the defendant on the complaints I therefore also declare the defendant
to be a serial family violence offender. The
period of declaration is for two
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (163 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter