URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASRPDComm/2009/30.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:20:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Southern Midlands Planning Scheme 1998 Amendment 02/2008 [2009] TASRPDComm 30 (6 July 2009)
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Planning and Approvals Act 1993
Resource Planning
and Development Commission Act 1997
Decision and Reasons for Decision
SOUTHERN MIDLANDS
PLANNING SCHEME
Draft Amendment 02/2008
Permit No DA 2008/3167
The applications are to:
− Amend the plans to rezone part of 8 Hall Street, Campania (CT 15390/2)
from Intensive Agriculture to Village.
− Grant a permit to adhere CT 204304/1, an adjacent lot which is currently
zoned Village, to CT 15390/2 and to subdivide the
consolidated title into three
lots with areas of 5.9, 1.8 and 8.1 hectares.
meeting on 20 April 2009 and pursuant to Section 8 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission Act 1997
, the Commission
delegated to Mr Robin Nolan:
powers and functions under
sections 40
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
in relation to draft
amendment 02/2008 to the Southern Midlands Planning Scheme 1998 and Permit SA
2008/3167; and
connection with the exercise of those powers in performance of those functions,
its powers under Part 3 of the
Resource Planning and Development Commission
Date and Place of Hearing: Tuesday 26 May 2009
Campania Hall, Reeve
Street, Campania.
Representation
T Mathers of the Department of Infrastructure, Energy and Resources
Attendance at the Hearing
: Mr Damien Mackey represented the Southern Midlands Council
with Councillor Colin Bevan in attendance
: Ms Catherine Nicholson obo J. French
Mr and Mrs J French
Representors:
Mr Tony Mathers for DIER
Issues Raised in the representation
The representor raised the following issues.
- The rezoning of land should be consistent with Council’s strategic
direction for Campania.
- Vehicle access for any further residential subdivision facilitated by the
draft amendment should be via Hall Street.
− Applications proposing the use of Mud Walls Secondary Road (Reeve
Street) for vehicle access may need to be accompanied by
a Traffic Impact
Assessment and to meet satisfactory standards with regard to safety and
construction.
- The road network within any future residential subdivision should involve a
continuous path of travel and should incorporate direct
access to adjacent
community facilities.
- Planning instruments such as rights of way and building exclusion zones need
to be applied to the lots subject to the s.43A permit
to ensure further future
subdivision potential is not compromised by inappropriate
development.
Council’s response to the representations
Council’s report considered the representation in the context of the draft
amendment and permit and recommended no changes
to the amendment or subdivision
were warranted.
Commission’s assessment of the draft amendment
The draft amendment
The draft amendment is to rezone 8.7ha of the western portion of 8 Hall Street,
Campania from Intensive Agriculture to Village.
Site and Locality
The site is located at the south eastern end of the township of Campania and
consists of 15.1ha of predominantly flat land currently
containing a dwelling
and outbuildings with the remaining land fenced to form paddocks used for dry
land grazing. The site has road
frontage to both Hall and Reeve Streets. Reeve
Street is the section of Colebrook Road through Campania. The DIER
representation
referred to this stretch of road as Mudwalls Secondary Road and
the planning scheme refers to Colebrook Road and Mudwalls Road without
the location of these roads. Adjacent land uses include a recreation ground
immediately to the west, Campania District
High School to the north and rural
land fringing the remaining peripheries. Residential development of urban
densities are located
within close proximity to the west of the site.
Campania is located approximately 25 km north east of Hobart in the Coal River
valley. Census figures from 2006 indicate that Campania
had a population of
239. The town is essentially based on a primary industry economy which services
the surrounding agricultural
Relevant provisions of the scheme
The intent of the Intensive Agriculture zone is to:
(a) give priority to the sustainable use of land within the Coal River Valley
for intensive agricultural purposes;
(b) protect agricultural land from development, including rural residential
uses, which would reduce potential production values in
the future and increase
the potential for residential – v – agricultural use
(c) encourage expansion and diversity of agricultural opportunities within
the zone, with allowance for subdivision only for intensive
agricultural
(d) ensure that buildings are predominantly integral and subservient to the
agricultural use of the land;
(e) ensure that land is used and developed within its capability as defined
by the Land Capability Classification System; and
(f) ensure that adjoining non-agricultural use or development does not
unreasonably fetter agricultural uses.
The intent of the Village zone is to:
(a) give priority to maintaining Kempton, Bagdad, Campania, Tunbridge,
Parattah and Tunnack as local settlements;
(b) allow for a broad range of uses within the settlements provided they do
not adversely affect the amenity of the settlement, nor
place undue burden on
the Council to provide infrastructure services; and
(c) encourage, where possible, the centralisation of future commercial and
business development in positions close to existing facilities.
The standards for subdivision in the Village zone are provided in Table 3.2 of
the scheme which states:
Minimum Lot Size
Minimum Internal Rectangle
Minimum Frontage
(unsewered)
0.5ha, or larger as required for the treatment of waste
Use and development in the Village zone is set out in Table 3.3 of the scheme.
The table provides for a wide range of uses consistent
with Village zoning
including a provision that makes discretionary commercial uses permitted where
fronting the main street in the
towns of the Southern Midlands including
Campania. As part of the draft amendment the provision benefiting commercial
uses by making
them permitted is removed for the section of Reeve Street south
of the recreation ground.
Consideration of issues raised by the Representor
Consistent with Council’s strategic objectives
The representation contended the rezoning should align with Council’s
strategic plan for the region.
Council submitted that Campania is confined by significant agricultural land to
the east and rural residential land to the west making
the availability of land
for future residential purposes scarce. Campania has 37.5 ha of land zoned
Village but much of this land
is bound in large lots with uses such as the
school and school farm, Flour Mill Park and the sport and recreation ground,
not available for subdivision. Rezoning the site to Village provides
a land bank for residential growth within an existing, planned
and serviced area
representing consolidation of a township that has adequate social infrastructure
to sustain future urban growth
facilitated by the draft amendment.
Council referred to the land use strategy from the ‘Joint Land Use
Planning Initiative’ (JLUPI) that recognised Campania
as one of the few
towns where there is limited land available for residential
subdivision.
The JLUPI has stated:
‘In Campania, the school farm accounts for the vacant residential land
and is not likely to be available for development in
the near future. In the
specific case of Campania this will necessitate some controlled expansion of the
Council also referred to their Annual Report 2007-2008 that refers to
‘Campania remains a town where subdividable land is in shortest
Currently Campania has residential subdivision taking place to the north of the
town. Mr Mackey submitted that the third stage of
that development was to be
progressed and that would complete the development for the last significant
parcel of land capable of
subdivision in Campania. Mr Mackey further submitted
that various uses prevented the intensification of the town and development
the south provided the remaining area for expansion. Council’s preference
is to encourage residential development close
to Campania to provide residential
land for workers in the district and to support various services including the
school that the
community wishes to retain its viability.
The extension of Village zoning to the south in terms of the structure of the
town has merit. Council’s strategy to promote
the development of
Campania, based on the services provide, is supported.
Access to Reeve Street
Current Village zoning for part of the subject land has a frontage to Reeve
Street of some 130m. The addition of the adjoining title
for rezoning to
Village will add approximately 22 metres to this frontage.
DIER’s representation is principally that Reeve Street (Mudwalls Road) as
a State road should not be considered as frontage
for development. Mr Mathers
referred to DIER not opposing the rezoning but sought to limit the
intensification of accesses on to
State roads and to use existing formed
accesses where possible.
Whilst matters of access relate more to the permit and any subsequent permits
the draft amendment is relevant to the extent of the
policy aspects of Reeve
Street providing frontage for development.
The relevant section of Reeve Street is a straight road with houses with
approximately 20m frontages lining the western side of the
road. This section
of road is 60kmph speed restricted. The planning scheme has the road as
category III (sub-arterial) and for
within the 60kmph access in terms of a high
traffic generator, low traffic generator or new public road junction is
permitted, unless
some other aspects of the planning scheme triggers a
discretion.
A Traffic Impact Assessment will be required for a low generator or public road
junction in accordance with clause 8.6.2(c) of the
planning scheme at the time
when access to Reeve Street is required.
In terms of the policy of the planning scheme access to Reeve Street is
permitted. Despite this permitted status, the next point
is, should all access
requirements for the site be to Hall Street as contended by
Hall Street is a minor residential street that provides access to the school
which is the extent of its construction. A policy position
to confine all
access to Hall Street concentrates traffic on the environs of the school. In
contrast a through road linking Hall
Street to Reeve Street provides the
additional road network and greater permeability for vehicular movement within
the Village, which
is preferred.
The DIER representation in consideration of the large lots proposed in the
permit advocated the protection of the proposed Village
zoning for closer
settlement through rights of way and building exclusion zones. The showing of a
notional subdivision layout and
provisions to retain the eventual closer
settlement has merit and is a matter that is addressed in the
In terms of policy considerations the matters raised in the DIER representation
do not lead to the modification or rejection of the
Conversion of agricultural land
The next consideration is the conversion of agricultural land. Council
submitted that although the site is zoned Intensive Agriculture
it did not meet
the strategic objectives associated with the zone’s intent because it is
not connected to the Coal River Irrigation
Scheme, thereby the land is unable to
fulfil its productive agricultural potential. Council advised that there was no
water available for irrigation and there were no plans in the
immediate future to extend the irrigable area to encompass the subject
raised later, despite the site mostly being within the Coal River Irrigation
District, no irrigation water is available.
The relevant facts are:
− Campania is an agricultural area and expansion of the town is
constrained by agricultural land.
− The agricultural report for the applicant defines the site as class 4/5
land with poor quality soil.
− No irrigation water is available from the south east irrigation scheme
which cannot meet the demand from already established
irrigators.
− The soil quality improves towards the eastern end of the title.
− The conversion to residential will not impact on local and state
agricultural outputs.
The conclusion is the land is not suitable for intensive agriculture and is
confined to dry land farming. Further, the agriculture
report contended that if
a reliable supply of water became available in the future, the prevailing soil
sands, severely restrict the extent of farming
practices that could be successfully completed on a sustainable basis. The
of agricultural land is further considered below in terms of the
Interim State Policy on the Protection of Agricultural Land
Other Matters
The application to Council to initiate the rezoning (Pitt and Sherry submission
of December 2008) and Council’s report of 10
February 2009 (s.35(4) of
LUPAA) describe the attributes of the site and provide justification for the
draft amendment. The principles
of those reports are adopted and do not require
reiteration. Principally the Village zoning provides for the extension of
that can be served with town water and sewerage. Eventual development
of the site for the estimated 76 lots would require an enlargement
sewerage treatment facility. Council’s levies of headworks charges allow
for such expansion. There is nothing adverse
to Village zoning identified in
the reports in terms of flora and fauna, Aboriginal heritage, historic heritage
and matters requiring
consideration under the planning scheme.
Modifications to the draft amendment.
The draft amendment requires modifications to properly show Village zoning by
colour on the plan and to clarify the text.
Commission’s assessment of the s.43A permit
The permit is to adhere the title (CT 204304/1) of 0.7ha zoned Village to the
title (CT 15390/2) of 15.1ha zoned Intensive Agriculture
and to subdivide the
consolidated title into three lots with the eastern most lot of 6.4ha remaining
in the Intensive Rural zone.
As considered in the assessment of the permit, part of the site has attributes
for Village zoning. The two large lots in the Village
zone show an indicative
road layout and the permit conditions seek to retain the option for closer
settlement without houses or other
development frustrating this eventual
The permit conditions require modification principally to clarify the
responsibility of the applicant.
Application of State Policies
State Coastal Policy 1996
The draft amendment is not in the Coastal zone as defined in the
State Policy on Water Quality Management 1997
The conditions on the permit should ensure that waste water and stormwater can
be managed in accordance with the Policy. The amendment
is assessed as being
prepared in accordance with the
State Policy on Water Quality Management
Interim State Policy on the Protection of Agricultural Land 2008
The draft amendment is subject to the Policy. The Policy defines
‘agricultural land’ as meaning:
All land that is in agricultural use or has the potential for agricultural
use that has not been zoned or developed for another use
or would not be unduly
restricted for agricultural use by its size, shape and proximity to adjoining
non-agricultural uses.
Relevant principles from the State Policy are as follows:
agricultural land is a valuable resource for Tasmania and should not be
unreasonably fettered by non-agricultural use and development.
The proposed Village zoning does not have a common boundary with intensive
agricultural activity with the current use being dry land
farming. The permit
requires tree planting within a 30m wide buffer along the zone boundary to
protect future residential use from
agricultural activities.
protection of non-prime agricultural land from conversion to non-agricultural
use will be determined through planning schemes
taking into account the local
and regional significance of that land for agricultural use.
The draft amendment process is consistent with this principle.
schemes must make provisions for the appropriate protection of non-prime
agricultural land within Irrigation Districts proclaimed
Water Management Act 1999
The site is in the proclaimed Cole River Irrigation District except for a small
triangular area between the sports ground and Reeve
Street. The land capability
assessment for the applicant reported:
‘The Rivers and Water Supply Commission has indicated that it is very
unlikely irrigation water would be made available in the
longer term from the
already over extended South East Irrigation Scheme for areas outside those
presently serviced.’
The amendment is assessed as being prepared in accordance with the
State Policy on the Protection of Agricultural Land 2008.
The national Environmental Protection Measures are not
applicable to the draft amendment.
Schedule 1 Objectives
promote the sustainable development of natural and physical resources and the
maintenance of ecological processes and genetic
The site forms an extension to the Campania and will add to the sustainability
of that settlement. There is no evidence of threats
to ecological processes or
genetic diversity.
(b) to provide for the fair, orderly and sustainable use and development of
air, land and water;
The draft amendment represents the fair, orderly and sustainable use and
development of land as it provides for the eventual consolidation
of residential
development in an area that is adequately serviced for that purpose.
(c) to encourage public involvement in resource management and
The draft amendment has included public processes.
(d) to facilitate economic development in accordance with the objectives set
out in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c);
The draft amendment facilitates economic development in accordance with the
above objectives
(e) to promote the sharing of responsibility for resource management and
planning between the different spheres of Government, the
community and industry
in the State.
The use or development arising from the draft amendment will involve the sharing
of responsibility for resource management and planning.
Objectives are furthered principally in terms of
objectives,
policies and controls for the use, development and protection of
land and to secure a pleasant, efficient and safe working and living
environment.
Pursuant to
Section 41(ab)
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
the Commission modifies the draft amendment as set out in Annexure A and
gives its approval to the draft amendment as modified pursuant
to Section 42 of
Pursuant to
Section 43H
(1)(b)(ii) of the
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act
the Commission modifies the permit as set out in Annexure
Robin Nolan
Resource Planning and development Commission
6 July 2009
Attachments:
Annexure A: Amendment to the plan
Annexure B: The permit
Annexure A:
SOUTHERN MIDLANDS PLANNING SCHEME 1998
AMENDMENT 02/2008
The planning scheme is amended as follows:
amend the plans to rezone land in the western portion of the parcel described in
folio of the register 15390/2, (Property Identification
No. 7472043) from
‘Intensive Agriculture’ to ‘Village’ as shown below.
amend the ordinance at footnote (a) to Table 3.3 to insert the additional
provision after ‘Tunbridge’:
this sub-clause does not apply to land at Campania fronting Reeve
Street south of the Recreation Ground)
Resource Planning and Development Commission
SOUTHERN MIDLANDS
PLANNING SCHEME
DA 2008/3167
SUBDIVISION OF THREE LOTS, FROM TWO EXISTING TITLES, AT 8 HALL STREET, AND
REEVE STREET, CAMPANIA,
The Permit is granted, subject to the conditions set out below, for the
subdivision of three lots, from two existing titles, for
land situated at 8 Hall
Street / Reeve Street Campania and described as Lot 1 on Plan 204304/1 and Lot 2
on Plan 15390.
This Permit will lapse after a period of two (2) years from the date on which it
was granted if the use or development in respect
of which it was granted has not
substantially commenced within that period.
Subdivision
shall be substantially in accordance with Development Application No. DA
2008/3167 submitted on 24 December 2008.
Applicant must construct a domestic-standard vehicular access to Lot 1 from
Reeve Street (Colebrook Main Road) in the location
where the indicative future
subdivision layout plan provides for a new public road junction. The access is
to be constructed to
the requirements of the road authority, the Department of
Infrastructure Energy & Resources.
No works are to commence until the Department of Infrastructure Energy &
Resources has issued a Works Approval for the access.
1 and lot 2 are to contain reciprocal rights-of-way coinciding with the future
road location shown on the indicative future subdivision
layout plan, to the new
access to Reeve Street required in Condition 2, above and to the access point
shown on Hall Street.
access road at the end of Hall Street passing over that portion of Hall Street
that is not a Council maintained public road and
serving Lot 3, is to be
upgraded by the Applicant to comply with Council’s Standard Drawings
S9350-01 & 02 and Standard
Specification S9350-S
, modified to suit site
conditions in accordance with the requirements of Council’s Manager Works
& Technical Services.
Upgrading work is not to commence until the approval of Council’s Manager
Works & Technical Services is received.
and sedimentation control measures are to be implemented by the Applicant during
the construction phase of the subdivision.
Such measures shall be in accordance
with the Hobart Regional Soil and Water Management Code of Practice and to the
satisfaction
of Council’s Manager Development & Environmental
works required by the conditions of approval contained within this Permit must
be at the applicant’s expense.
Applicant must place building restriction envelopes on Lots 1 and 2 to protect
the location of the future roads on those lots.
The envelopes must cover the
area of the future roads and are to prevent the construction of buildings within
Applicant must establish
a buffer strip 30 metres wide on Lot 3 along the
boundary with Lot 1 so as to provide protection for future residential use and
development
on Lot 1 from agricultural activities on Lot 3:
(a) The buffer strip is to be planted with native trees and shrubs
in accordance with a landscaping plan to be prepared by the developer
satisfaction of Council’s Manager Development & Environmental
Services. Plantings are to be established in accordance
with a timetable agreed
with Council and specified in the landscaping plan.
(b) The Applicant must place a suitable restrictive covenant on the title to
Lot 3 in favour of the land within Lot 1 which prevents
the use of the buffer
strip for intensive agricultural purposes upon the further subdivision of Lot
Applicant must incorporate any necessary easements in the final survey plan
lodged for sealing.
Applicant must lodge with Council the Final Plan of Survey, (with 2 copies)
together with the Schedule of Easements (with 1 copy),
a copy of the survey
notes, a copy of the balance plan and Council’s $100 sealing fee.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.66 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter