URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VLSC/2018/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:34:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Commissioner Determination (Breach of confidentiality, no costs disclosure) [2018] VLSC 21; (25 June 2018)
Victorian Legal Services Commissioner
A notice made under s.
318 of the Legal Profession Uniform Law (Victoria)
Commissioner Determination (Breach of confidentiality, no
costs disclosure) [2018] VLSC 21
Date of Determination:
25 June 2018
to section 299(1) of the Legal Profession Uniform Law (Victoria)
(‘the Uniform Law’), I have decided that the Respondent Lawyer
has engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct and
I make the following
Pursuant to
section 299(1)(b) of the Uniform Law, the Respondent Lawyer is reprimanded for
the following:
to provide a costs disclosure statement to the Complainant in breach of section
174(1)(a) of the Uniform Law;
a third party in confidential communications with the Complainant on three
occasions in breach of rule 9.1 of the
Legal Profession Uniform Law
Australian Solicitors’ Conduct Rules 2015
(‘the Rules’);
in an inappropriate communication with the Complainant in breach of rule 4.1.2
of the Rules.
Pursuant to section 292 of the Uniform Law, I make a binding determination about
the costs of the Law Practice’s bills dated
11 July 2015, 14 September
2015 and 17 September 2015 (‘the Bills’), which are the subject of
the dispute and I make
the following order –
Pursuant to
section 290(2)(c) of the Uniform law, that the Law Practice reduces its fees
from $4,306.00 to $2,064.20.
I consider the amount of legal costs that are fair and reasonable in all
circumstances in relation to the Bills to be
(including GST and
disbursements), which the Complainant must pay the Law Practice.
to sections 290(2)(d)(i) and 299(1)(e) of the Uniform Law, I make the following
The Respondent
Lawyer must attend four (4) continuing professional development
(‘CPD’) courses within the current CPD
cycle (in addition to the 10
units required). Such courses are to be approved by the Victorian Legal Services
Commissioner (“the
Commissioner’s office”) and, where
possible, to be focused on:
appropriate
billing methods and compliance with costs disclosure requirements; and
ethics in relation to professional communication and confidentiality
requirements.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
or about early June 2015 the Complainant first met with the Respondent Lawyer in
relation to her separation from her husband. At
the request of the Respondent
Lawyer, the Complainant paid $1,500.00 to the Law Practice on account of future
or about 8 July 2015 the Complainant first instructed the Law Practice in
relation to Federal Circuit Court proceeding [number]
Proceeding’), to which the Complainant was a party (‘the
Respondent Lawyer’s file in respect of the Matter contains an unsigned
disclosure statement (purportedly prepared under
Profession Act 2004
) dated 8 July 2015.
14 September 2015 consent orders were made in the Proceeding effectively
concluding the matters in dispute.
the course of the Matter the Law Practice issued the following lump sum
dated 11 July 2015, totalling $1,500.00 (‘Bill 1’); and
dated 14 September 2015, totalling $1,500.00 (‘Bill
receiving Bill 2, or otherwise being notified that a further payment of
$1,500.00 was required, on 15 September 2015 the Complainant
requested an
itemised bill. On 16 September 2016 the Respondent Lawyer indicated he was
happy to prepare and provide an itemised account
be more than the amount I requested
previously.
17 September 2015 the Law Practice issued an itemised invoice dated 17 September
2015, totalling $4,306.00 (‘Bill 3’).
16 September, 17 September and 30 September 2015 the Respondent Lawyer sent
emails to the Complainant, copied to a third party
[Name] (‘Ms K’),
regarding the (allegedly) outstanding fees. In particular, on 30 September 2015,
the Respondent Lawyer
stated that “
I haven’t herd
anything from you
I will have to write to your
superior in the department and explain your conduct
4 November 2015 the Commissioner’s office received the Complainant’s
complaint about the Respondent Lawyer.
Complainant and Respondent Lawyer were unsuccessful in their attempts to resolve
the cost dispute informally.
Issues under
consideration
allegations that have been considered are whether:
Law Practice’s legal costs are fair and reasonable;
disclosure was provided to the Complainant in compliance with the Uniform
Respondent Lawyer breached lawyer-client confidentiality;
Respondent Lawyer engaged in an inappropriate communication with the
Complainant; and
itemised bill was provided to the Complainant in compliance with the Uniform
Investigation
reasonable legal costs
Law Practice issued three bills in respect of the Matter, two of which were lump
sum bills (Bill 1 and Bill 2, totalling $3,000.00)
and a third, which covered
the same work, which was an itemised bill (Bill 3, totalling $4,306.00).
3 was prepared by reference to the hourly rates and charges specified in the
unsigned costs disclosure statement. The Complainant
stated that she did not
receive a costs disclosure statement from the Respondent Lawyer. The Respondent
Lawyer stated that he provided
the costs disclosure statement by hand to the
Complainant and there was no requirement for it to be signed. While there was an
costs disclosure statement dated 8 July 2015 on the Respondent
Lawyer’s file (‘the File’) in respect of the Matter,
no evidence on the file that it had been provided to the Complainant.
172(1) of the Uniform Law provides that a law practice must not charge legal
costs in excess of what fair and reasonable in
all the circumstances. Under
section 172(4) of the Uniform Law, a costs agreement is prima facie evidence
that legal costs disclosed
in the agreement are fair and reasonable, but only if
the provisions of Division 3 in relation to costs disclosure are complied with.
Under section 178(1)(b), if costs disclosure is not provided, or not adequately
provided, the client of the law practice is not required
to pay the legal costs
until they have been assessed or any costs dispute has been determined.
independent costs review was undertaken on behalf of the Commissioner’s
office of the File. The File was assessed by reference
to the Scale of Charges
attached to the unsigned costs disclosure statement. The result of that costs
review was that $1,321.70 (including
GST) was assessed as the amount of fair and
reasonable legal costs attributable to the Law Practice’s work on the
completion of the costs review, the Respondent Lawyer indicated that there were
further documents forming part of the File which
he had not previously provided.
Following receipt of those documents, a further costs review was undertaken to
determine if those
documents altered the conclusion of the original costs
review. The result of that second costs review was that $2,064.20 (including
and disbursements) was assessed as the amount of fair and reasonable legal costs
attributable to the Law Practice’s work
on the Matter.
Accordingly, I have determined that
(including GST and
disbursements) represents the fair and reasonable legal costs, which amounts to
a reduction of
from Bills 1 and 2 and
3. On this point I note that the Complainant has already paid the sum of
to the Law Practice.
Provision of costs
noted above, while there was an unsigned costs disclosure statement dated 8 July
2015 on the File in respect of the Matter, there
was no evidence on the file
that it had been provided to the Complainant.
174(1)(a) of the Uniform Law provides that a Law Practice must, when
instructions are received or as soon as practicable thereafter,
provide the
client with information disclosing the basis on which legal costs will be
calculated in the matter and an estimate of
the total legal costs.
the material before me, I am not satisfied that the unsigned costs disclosure
dated 8 July 2015 was provided to the Complainant.
Further, even if it was, the
unsigned costs disclosure did not comply with section 174(1)(a) in that it did
not set out the basis
on which legal costs would be calculated and an estimate
of the total legal costs, and it referred to the repealed
Legal Profession
Lawyer-client
confidentiality
16 September and 17 September 2015 the Respondent Lawyer sent three emails to
the Complainant, copied to Ms K, regarding the (allegedly)
outstanding
In communications with the Commissioner’s office, the Complainant stated
that she did not consent to the Respondent Lawyer
including Ms K as a recipient
of those emails. In the Respondent Lawyer’s written submissions to the
Commissioner’s office
dated 23 March 2017, he stated that he copied Ms K
into those emails because:
Complainant had said she would speak to the Ms K about how Ms K had paid legal
fees in her family law matter; and
introduced the Respondent Lawyer to the Complainant.
Respondent Lawyer further stated that he only copied Ms K into emails regarding
outstanding fees, and all three parties were aware
of that issue and no further
confidential information was discussed with Ms K.
of the Rules provides that a solicitor must not disclose a client’s
confidential information acquired by the solicitor during
the client’s
engagement to any person who is not another solicitor of the same law practice
or a barrister or other person
employed or engaged by the law practice for the
purpose of delivering or administering legal services in relation to the
have determined that the Respondent Lawyer has breached
of the Rules by
sending the following emails to the Complainant, copied to Ms K:
September 2015 at 9:05am;
September 2015 at 9:15am; and c. 17 September 2015 at
Inappropriate
communication
30 September 2015, the Respondent Lawyer sent an email to the Complainant
stating that “
anything from
I will have to write to your superior in the
department and explain your conduct
the Respondent Lawyer’s written submissions to the Commissioner’s
office dated 7 November 2016, he stated that he took
responsibility for that
email and expressed regret and remorse for writing it.
of the Rules provides that a solicitor must be honest and courteous in all
dealings in the course of legal practice.
may be breached where a
lawyer makes untoward, inappropriate or threatening comments to a client.
comment by the Respondent Lawyer, “
I will have to write to your
superior in the department and
your conduct
context of a dispute regarding unpaid fees, appears designed to pressure the
Complainant into paying those fees with
the threat of professional consequences
if she did not.
Accordingly,
I have determined that the Respondent Lawyer breached
of the Rules by
sending the 30 September 2015 email to the
Complainant.
Provision of an itemised bill
noted above, on 15 September 2015, the Complainant requested an itemised bill
and, on 17 September 2015, the Law Practice provided
Bill 3, being an itemised
bill for $4,306.00.
of the Uniform Law provides that an itemised bill must be provided within
21 days of a request under sub-section (2). Given Bill
3 was provided within two
days of the Complainant’s request, I am satisfied that the Law Practice
complied with section 187(3)
of the Uniform Law.
Findings of
fact on issues under investigation
investigated the matter, I have found –
amount of $2,064.20 represents the fair and reasonable legal costs in respect of
the Matter within the meaning of section 292
of the Uniform Law;
Respondent Lawyer breached section 174(1)(a) of the Uniform Law by failing to
provide a costs disclosure statement to the Complainant;
Respondent Lawyer sent three emails on 16 and 17 September 2015 to the
Complainant which were copied to a third party in breach
of rule 9.1 of the
statement “
I will have to write to your superior in the department and
explain your conduct
”, in the Respondent Lawyer’s email to the
Complainant on 30 September 2015, was in breach of rule 4.1.2 of the Rules;
Respondent Lawyer provided an itemised bill to the Complainant within two days
following the Complainant’s request and,
accordingly, there was no breach
of section 187(3) of the Uniform Law.
172 of the Uniform Law states that legal costs must be fair and reasonable.
174 of the Uniform Law outlines a law practice’s costs disclosure
obligations.
9.1 of the Rules provides that (except as permitted in Rule 9.2) a solicitor
must not disclose any information which is confidential
to a client and acquired
by the solicitor during the client’s engagement to any person who is
solicitor who is a partner, principal, director, or employee of the
solicitor’s law practice, or
barrister or an employee of, or person otherwise engaged by, the
solicitor’s law practice or by an associated entity
for the purposes of
delivering or administering legal services in relation to the
4.1.2 of the Rules provides that a solicitor must be honest and courteous in all
dealings in the course of legal practice.
292 of the Uniform Law states that the designated local regulatory authority may
make a binding determination concerning legal
costs where the designated local
regulatory authority is unable to resolve a costs dispute (whether wholly or
partly) and the total
amount of legal costs still in dispute is less than
290(2)(d)(i) of the Uniform Law provides that, in determining a consumer matter,
the designated local regulatory authority
may order the respondent lawyer to
undertake training, education, counselling or be supervised.
296 of the Uniform Law states that unsatisfactory professional conduct includes
conduct of a lawyer occurring in connection
with the practice of law that falls
short of the standard of competence and diligence that a member of the public is
entitled to
expect of a reasonably competent lawyer.
299(1) of the Uniform Law provides that the designated local regulatory
authority may, in relation to a disciplinary matter,
find that the respondent
lawyer has engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct and may determine the
disciplinary matter by making
reprimanding
the respondent lawyer (sub-section (b)); and/or
the respondent lawyer to undertake training, education or counselling or be
supervised (sub-section (e)).
Determination
considered all of the evidence and relevant law, and having made the above
findings on the issues under investigation, I determine
that it is fair and
reasonable in all the circumstances to make the orders detailed above.
in making a determination as to costs, I have determined that the amount is fair
and reasonable in all the circumstances
having regard to section 200 of the
Uniform Law. I have also considered the principles in section 172 of the Uniform
to Section 314 of the Uniform Law, a respondent lawyer or a legal practitioner
associate of a respondent law practice may,
in accordance with the applicable
legislation appeal to the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(“VCAT”), or
seek a review by the VCAT, of this determination made
under section 299 of the Uniform Law.
Non-compliance
failure to comply with a determination made under section 299 or section 290 of
the Uniform Law is capable of constituting unsatisfactory
professional conduct
or professional misconduct pursuant to section 298(h) of the Uniform
Russell Daily
Delegate of the Victorian
Legal Services Commissioner
25 June 2018
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (227 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter