URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VSC/2021/396.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 17:24:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Horton [2021] VSC 396 (2 July 2021)
IN THE SUPREME
COURT OF VICTORIA
Not Restricted
AT MELBOURNE
CRIMINAL DIVISION
JOSHUA HORTON
DATE OF HEARING
21, 22 & 23 June 2021
DATE OF SENTENCE
2 July 2021
CASE MAY BE CITED AS
MEDIUM NEUTRAL CITATION
[2021] VSC 396
CRIMINAL LAW – Sentence – Manslaughter and intentionally
causing serious injury (‘ICSI) – Unprovoked knife
attack at bus stop
upon brothers aged 17 and 18 – Accused found guilty by jury after trial
for murder - Aged 18 at time of
crimes and still only 20 – Early offer to
plead guilty to manslaughter and ICSI – Serious criminal history –
of remorse – Reduced impact of youth – Serious examples of
crimes – Denunciation, general and specific deterrence,
and protection of
community all important sentencing purposes – Total effective sentence of
13 ½ years’ imprisonment
– Non-parole period of 9 ½
years’ imprisonment.
APPEARANCES
For the Crown
Mr R Gibson QC with
Ms S Lenthall
Ms A Hogan, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions
For the Accused
Mr S Norton with
Mr J Barrera
Stary Norton Halphen
HIS HONOUR:
Introduction
1 Joshua Horton, by unprovoked, cowardly,
brutal and entirely senseless acts of violence, you caused the death of a 17
year old child
named Maaka Hakiwai (‘Maaka’) and caused serious
injury to his older brother Nathanial Hakiwai (‘Nathanial’).
those acts, you have been found guilty by a jury of manslaughter and
intentionally causing serious injury (‘ICSI’).
2 The maximum penalty for manslaughter at the time
of your offence was imprisonment for 20 years. The maximum penalty for ICSI is
also 20 years.
3 Manslaughter and ICSI are both
category 2 offences under
Sentencing Act 1991
Act’). This means that pursuant to
of the Act, in sentencing you I
am required to impose a sentence of imprisonment upon you in the absence of the
application of one
of the exceptions contained in parts (a) to (e) of that
subsection. It has not been submitted on your behalf that I should do anything
other than impose a term of imprisonment and set a non-parole period.
4 Nathanial was aged 18 at the time of the
events. His younger brother Maaka was 17, having celebrated his birthday only
before his death. They are the two sons of Stirling and Karli Hakiwai.
Mr Hakiwai was from New Zealand of Maori background. He moved
to Australia in
1999, meeting his eventual wife shortly after his arrival. They have four
children together, the younger two being
sisters for Nathanial and Maaka named
Leilani and Kiripaeahi.
5 For some years, the family
lived on the Gold Coast while Mr Hakiwai worked in various locations on a fly-in
fly-out basis. In May
2019, however, he secured new employment in Melbourne. He
relocated here in June 2019, and was joined in turn by Maaka and then Nathanial.
It was planned that his wife Karli and the two younger children would move to
Melbourne to join Stirling and the boys at the conclusion
of the 2019 school
year. Tragically, because of your criminal actions, that never occurred.
6 At the time of these events, Stirling, Nathanial
and Maaka were living together at a house in Main Road West, Kings Park.
and Maaka had each secured employment shortly after moving to
Melbourne, Nathanial at an abattoir and Maaka as a concreter. As they
been in Melbourne a short time, they did not know many people. They spent their
time working, hanging out together and going
7 You were 18 at the time of your crimes. You
lived in Sydenham with your mother and sibling. You were not working and were a
user of illicit drugs. You had already by that time accrued a worrying
history of convictions for crimes of violence, marked by repeated
offences of
robbery and armed robbery. You were friends with two young males named Chol Kur
(‘Kur’) and AM.
Events leading up to your crimes
8 Nathanial and Maaka spent the morning of
Saturday 28 September 2019 at home with their father, Stirling. In the early
, Maaka arranged to meet up with his cousin and go to a gym. Nathanial
decided to go with him. Just prior to 2.30 pm, the brothers
left their house and
walked the short distance to a bus stop on Main Road West, 50 metres west of the
intersection with Oakwood Road
which was controlled by a roundabout. They waited
for the bus to come. Nathanial was wearing a Philadelphia 76ers
9 In circumstances the details of which are not
necessary to relate here, but which are set out in the
Prosecution Opening on
(‘the prosecution opening’), on that morning, you, Kur and
AM were rear seat passengers in a Toyota RAV4 vehicle being
driven by a young
female named NW
and containing two
other young females. The vehicle was driven to a number of locations that day.
10 It so happened that a few minutes after the
arrival of Nathanial and Maaka at the bus stop in Main Road West, the vehicle in
you were a passenger arrived at the intersection with Main Road West via
Oakwood Road and hence, came upon the Hakiwai brothers who
were waiting at the
bus stop, minding their own business. There was discussion in the car between AM
and Kur about ‘drilling’,
that is, robbing the boys, and an
agreement reached between them that they would do this. You were not involved in
this discussion.
The RAV4 entered the roundabout and completed two full circles
before exiting west onto Main Road West. During this process, AM directed
stop the car so that he and Kur could go and drill the boys.
11 The vehicle came to a stop a short
distance to the west of the bus stop. Nathanial observed a male, alleged to be
Kur, put his
head out of the rear of the vehicle and yell out, ‘Where are
youse going?’ Nathanial replied that they were off to the
gym. Kur got out
of the vehicle, followed shortly thereafter by AM. Your two friends approached
the Hakiwai brothers. Kur engaged
Nathanial in some small talk to disarm him,
and then, in reference to the cap being worn by Nathanial, stated, ‘Run me
hat’. Nathanial refused to do so. Kur lunged forward and grabbed the
cap by the peak and removed it from Nathanial’s
head. Nathanial grabbed
the cap and snatched it back. Nathanial pushed Kur and also pushed AM whom he
saw approaching Maaka. Nathanial
was then punched by Kur to the mouth and also
kicked to the chest. He ended up on the ground. At some point, Kur was also
by some of the occupants of the car to fall to the ground. As Nathanial
was getting up, he observed Maaka being held in a headlock
by AM in a somewhat
bent-over position. As Nathanial saw it, Maaka seemed confused about what was
happening, but was not resisting
and his body language was quite relaxed.
12 At this point, you left the vehicle by the rear
drivers’ side door, armed with a large knife which had the appearance of
being a weapon rather than a kitchen-style knife. You walked straight over to
where Maaka was still being held by AM. As Nathanial
observed it, although I
note at this point that your counsel disputes that I should be satisfied of the
correctness of this aspect
of Nathanial’s evidence, you placed one hand on
Maaka’s back, and with the knife in the other hand, stabbed him once
the abdomen in an upwards motion towards his chest. What on any view, no matter
my conclusion as to the precise mechanism, was
a vicious thrust of the weapon,
penetrated sufficiently deep into the body of Maaka to cause the catastrophic
injuries which I will
later detail. Maaka could do no more than say, ‘What
the fuck?’ He tried to run but almost immediately collapsed to the
13 Nathanial himself tried to run but stopped
when he saw his brother fall to the ground. He yelled out for help. Not content
what you had just done to Maaka, you then turned your attention to
Nathanial. You came at him with the knife. He tried to fend you
off but you got
past his outstretched arms and without saying a word, stabbed him to the outer
side of his left thigh. He fell to
the ground and tried to defend himself from
further attack by kicking out with his legs whilst screaming for help. You tried
him again while he was on the ground. He managed to get to his feet and
started yelling at you. You stabbed him again to the outside
of the thigh, this
time thrusting the knife all the way through. You then immediately pulled the
knife out of the thigh of Nathanial.
14 After you
had stabbed Nathanial, inflicting serious injury upon him which I will later
detail, Kur went up to him and removed the
Philadelphia 76ers cap from his
You left your two seriously
injured victims lying bleeding on the ground as you, in company with Kur and AM,
ran back to the RAV4.
The vehicle was driven quickly from the scene.
Aftermath of your crimes
15 In the immediate aftermath of the
stabbings, Nathanial continued to yell for help. He asked an elderly couple
across the road to
call an ambulance. He then telephoned his father, informing
him that he and Maaka had been stabbed. Stirling ran immediately to the
finding his two stricken sons lying blood-soaked and seriously injured on the
ground near the bus stop. Nathanial was in and
out of consciousness. Maaka was
unconscious, and lifting his shirt, Stirling was horrified to observe the knife
wound to Maaka’s
abdomen and some of his bowel protruding from the wound,
which he tried to push back in. He did his best to help his two sons and
courage and great love in doing so. The police arrived at the scene a few
minutes later. The product of body-worn cameras
operated by police members which
was played to the Court during the plea hearing revealed the full extent of the
tragedy unleashed
by your senseless acts of mayhem. The terrible trauma to which
your actions exposed the devastated father of Maaka and Nathanial
as he grappled
with the realisation of the serious condition of his two sons was plain to see
on the footage. So too were the sensitive
and calm efforts of Victoria Police
and Ambulance Victoria members as they sought to save the lives of your victims.
16 Paramedics found Maaka to be unresponsive and in
cardiac arrest. They commenced efforts at resuscitation, which were continued
Maaka was transported by ambulance to Royal Melbourne Hospital. Although Maaka
intermittently regained cardiac output, upon arrival
at the hospital at
approximately 3.30 pm, he was in cardiac arrest with no pulse. Following an
emergency thoracotomy, it was found
that the peridcardium (heart sack) was tense
and full of blood. The heart was empty of blood, not beating, and found to be
in two locations. Despite all efforts made by the trauma team, Maaka was
unable to be saved due to the severity of his injuries.
He was declared deceased
at 3.58 pm.
17 Nathanial, having been stabilised at
the scene by paramedics, was transported by ambulance to The Alfred Hospital. He
was observed
to be in shock as a result of substantial blood loss. He had low
blood pressure and a high heart rate as well as impaired liver function
the severe blood loss. He was found to have two stab wounds to the outside of
the left thigh. He underwent emergency surgery
to repair damage to his popliteal
and to his profunda femoris
both of them major blood
vessels which ran deep in the leg in close proximity to the femur. There was
also damage to one of the muscles
of the thigh which needed to be surgically
repaired. Nathanial received in excess of two litres of blood products during
his treatment.
He remained in hospital for 13 days. His injuries were considered
to be life threatening. I am satisfied that had he not received
prompt medical
treatment of a high standard, he, too, would have died.
18 Returning to the aftermath of your crimes as it
concerned you, the three of you having arrived back at the car, AM told NW to
away, which she did, at speed, as it happened being followed by a nearby
motorist who was able to obtain the registration number
of the car. You were
still in possession of your knife, and Kur was holding onto the stolen cap.
There was a good deal of yelling
in the vehicle, and some condemnation of your
actions, for which you apologised to AM and Kur. You said that you had fucked
and did not mean for it to go that way. You were heard by one of the female
occupants of the vehicle to say, ‘Did I really
just shank them?’,
and by another to say, ‘I hope I didn’t get him in the heart’.
You were seen to place
the knife, which had blood on it, into a black cover. You
later placed the knife in your bum bag. The knife was never recovered by
investigating police. I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that you must have
disposed of it.
19 After the vehicle was driven to a
number of locations, you were dropped off in Caroline Springs. In the early
hours of the next
morning, one of the female occupants of the car telephoned you
and informed you that one of the people you had stabbed had died.
‘Which one?’.
20 An autopsy was carried out on the body
of Maaka on Sunday 29 September 2019 by a forensic pathologist, Dr Greg Young.
examination, Dr Young observed a sharp force injury entering the
upper abdomen just to the left of the midline. The external appearance
wound was of an inverted V-shape which may have been indicative of movement of
the edged weapon. The wound track produced
by the weapon proceeded upwards,
backwards and slightly to the right side of the body, damaging the left lobe of
the liver, the stomach
wall, the colon, the left costal cartilage, the left
diaphragm, and the pericardium or heart sac. A through-and-through penetration
of the right ventricle of the heart was observed, and damage to the front wall
of the aorta. The depth of the injury from skin to
aorta was ascertained to be
approximately 10 centimetres. There were also injuries by way of abrasions and
bruises to the face, arms,
hands and right leg of Maaka indicative of blunt
force. Dr Young was of the view that, in light of the fact of there being damage
to the costal cartilage, the degree of force used to inflict the wound was at
least moderate. I note that that description did not
put an outer-limit on the
degree of force.
21 The cause of death of Maaka was
determined to be blood loss resulting from this wound.
Investigation and arrest
22 The registration number of the RAV4
quickly led investigators to the father of NW who was the owner of the vehicle.
NW was arrested
on the evening of 28 September 2019 and provided your name to
the police as the person responsible for the
23 You were arrested at the Sunshine
Market Place on the afternoon of 8 October 2019. You were later interviewed and
made no comment.
Trial, offers to plead guilty and question of remorse
24 You stood trial on charges of common
law murder, statutory murder, ICSI and recklessly causing serious injury
in March 2021. When arraigned in front of the jury on 15
March 2021, you pleaded not guilty to the charges of murder but guilty to
manslaughter. You pleaded not guilty to ICSI and RCSI but guilty to
intentionally causing injury.
25 On 30 March 2021,
you were found not guilty of both forms of murder by the jury but guilty of
manslaughter. You were also found
guilty of ICSI.
26 Prior to your plea of guilty to manslaughter in
front of the jury on 15 March 2021, you had, on 25 March 2020, made an earlier
offer to plead guilty to that offence. You also later offered to plead guilty to
the charge of ICSI.
27 Your counsel submitted that
you should receive a substantial discount in sentence for your early offer to
plead guilty to both
offences of which you were eventually found guilty by the
jury. As he put it, you should receive a discount for both of what have
known for some time as the objective and subjective criteria of your plea
In respect of the discount
for the utilitarian benefit of your plea of guilty, Mr Norton submitted this
should be increased because
of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
28 The prosecution accepted that you are entitled
to a reduction for the notional utilitarian benefit of your offer to plead
to manslaughter. It was disputed, however, that you should receive a
benefit for your offer to plead guilty to ICSI, because you
did not plead guilty
to this charge before the jury, being willing to acknowledge guilt only of a
lesser charge.
29 I do not accept that your failure
to plead guilty to ICSI before the jury should prevent you from receiving the
benefit of your
earlier offer to plead guilty to this charge. The fact that you
did not renew the earlier offer did not detract from the fact that
earlier offer been accepted by the Crown, a trial on the charge of ICSI would
not have been necessary.
30 I am satisfied that you are entitled to a
reduction in sentence on both charges on account of the utilitarian benefits
to the plea offers you made. Had those offers been accepted, no trial
would have been necessary, and there would have been the corresponding
time, resources and emotional energy expended in the trial. I also note and have
regard to what was said by the Court of
Worboyes v The
as to pleas of guilty in
these COVID-19 times carrying with them greater utilitarian benefit than at
other times.
31 Turning to the subjective aspects of
your plea offers, such as remorse, a willingness to facilitate the course of
justice, and
an acceptance of responsibility, as indicated already, Mr Norton
sought a reduction for these as well. He submitted that your early
plead guilty to manslaughter was not a strategic one , but rather a reflection
of your intention to take responsibility
for your offending at an early time. He
pointed out that your offer at least in respect of manslaughter was repeated on
of occasions, including in front of the jury. Furthermore the trial was
contested on a very narrow basis, and involved a concession
by you that you
caused the death of Maaka and the injuries to Nathanial, and did so with a
32 Mr Norton submitted that there is
evidence of genuine remorse in your case. He pointed to the early offers to
plead guilty, the
manner in which the trial was conducted, the utterances to
others in the RAV4 in the immediate aftermath of your crimes, and things
you to the clinical psychologist who assessed you, Dr Matthew
33 On that score, Dr Barth, in his report
dated 6 June 2021,
having described
you as difficult to assess, guarded in your answers, very immature,
unsophisticated, and of below average intelligence,
noted your claim to him of
having used ice the night before your offending, Xanax throughout the day, and
of having no recollection
of your offending behaviour or the events surrounding
it as a result of the intoxicating effects of the Xanax. He went on to say:
Mr Horton had considerable difficulty discussing his
feelings for his offending behaviour. Through sustained questioning, he was able
to express his understanding of the consequences of his offending conduct. Mr
Horton expressed remorse for his offending in these
‘I’m sorry for the family. If I
had a son and that happened, I would be
devastated’.
34 Mr Norton submitted that when
assessing the question of your remorse, the Court should not expect to see from
a person with your
limitations of intellect, education and personality the same
sort of expressions of remorse as would be given by an eloquent and
35 The Crown submitted that there was
nothing beyond the offer to plead guilty and the pleas of guilty themselves to
indicate true
remorse on your part. The capacity of the plea of guilty to
indicate remorse should be assessed in light of the considerable strength
prosecution case. The plea of guilty could be seen as a pragmatic decision made
to your forensic advantage, it was submitted.
Your actions in the aftermath of
the crime were not indicative of remorse. You immediately fled the scene. In the
car, you made the
callous statement, ‘Did I really just shank them?’
Although you apologised to your associates, it was only in response
chastised by them. As for the psychological report of Dr Barth, a true reading
of that would indicate a lack of genuine
remorse. Nearly two years after the
events in question, and in the face of sustained questioning, your limited
utterances were not
indicative of real remorse, and indeed, showed that you
still failed to grapple with the enormous impact of your conduct on its victims.
In respect of the assertion that your limited intelligence and other aspects of
your personality may have hindered your ability to
make clear statements of
remorse, Ms Lenthall for the Crown submitted that expressions of remorse need
not be eloquent, and that
even a child can express remorse and regret.
36 Ms Lenthall submitted that beyond the plea of
guilty itself, there was insufficient other material to warrant a finding on the
balance of probabilities that you are truly remorseful.
37 The law does not permit me to take the strength
of the prosecution case into account in arriving at the discount you should
for the utilitarian benefit of your rejected plea
I do not do so. As I have
already indicated, you are entitled to a reduction in sentence to reflect your
offer to plead guilty, and
the timing of it. But the position of the subjective
criteria is different. The apparent strength of the prosecution case is relevant
to an assessment of those matters.
38 From the time
you went into police custody, you undoubtedly realised that there would be a
very powerful case showing that you
were the person who, for no good reason,
stabbed the two Hakiwai brothers, killing one and seriously injuring the other.
circumstances, and bearing in mind you were facing a prosecution for
murder, your offer to plead guilty to manslaughter and ICSI
could not be
considered to be evidence of the existence of remorse or the other subjective
aspects of a plea of guilty.
39 On the specific
matter of remorse, I accept the submissions of the prosecution. I do not believe
there is any evidence which would
warrant a finding by the Court that you are
genuinely remorseful for your offending. Of course you are not to be punished
fact, but it does mean that a mitigating circumstance seen in many
cases is not present in your case.
40 In summary,
then, I indicate that in formulating the appropriate sentence to impose upon
you, I have had regard to your relatively
early offer to plead guilty to the
crimes of which you were eventually convicted, and have reduced your sentence to
reflect a reduction
for the objective aspects of that offer. I make no such
reduction for the subjective aspects, and note that I am not satisfied that
are, even now, truly remorseful for your crimes.
Personal background and criminal history
41 You are now 20 years old. You were
brought up in the north-western suburbs of Melbourne. You have a younger
half-sister. You were
educated at Sydenham-Hillside Primary School and then
Taylors Lakes Secondary College where you exhibited significant behavioural
problems including aggressive behaviour towards fellow students and failure to
attend. You were suspended a number of times before
being ultimately expelled.
You never knew your biological father, and took the name of your step-father.
You strived for a paternal
connection with him, but his presence in the home
during your early years had a negative and destabilising influence upon you. He
was a violent drug addict, and as well as being the victim of his violent
conduct directed towards you, you witnesses his physical
abuse of your mother,
and carry with you feelings of regret that you were unable to protect her in the
face of a particularly serious
instance of family violence which occurred when
you were 13. Your mother separated from your step-father following this
which, according to your mother, caused you to feel abandoned. As it
was put before me, your life started to unravel from that time,
although not for
the want of ongoing support of your mother, which continues to this day. From
that age, you ceased your previous
involvement in sport, began socialising with
other disaffected youths, and commenced using drugs, moving rapidly from
cannabis to
ecstasy and methylamphetamine (‘ice’). You also
commenced a rapid descent into criminality marked by a disturbing tendency
towards violence and a lack of concern for the welfare of others.
42 You have an extremely limited employment
history, confined to two brief periods of work at an auto repair store. You have
a barista course but have not pursued any vocational opportunities,
other than being employed for a short time in the prison system.
unclear about a potential career although you have expressed a desire to work in
the music industry.
43 Your first interaction with
the criminal justice system occurred when you were only 14 years old, I was
told, in the context of
your involvement with antisocial peers, and experiencing
difficulty at school. Your first disposition in the Children’s Court
when you were dealt with for two charges of armed robbery and other offences on
5 February 2018 for offending which took place
in November 2017 when you were
16. Those armed robberies involved you and a co-offender, wearing balaclavas and
armed with hammers,
robbing employees at a Subway store and a café, in
the course of which gratuitous violence was inflicted upon the victims.
following year-and-a half until the current crimes, you accrued an unenviable
record of offending, comprising 26 findings
of guilt dealt with at five separate
court hearings. Overall you were dealt with for three armed robberies, one
attempted armed robbery,
an attempted robbery, two affrays, several charges of
assault, and a variety of other offending including committing indictable
whilst on bail. The pattern of committing crimes of violence in company
with others whilst armed with weapons was repeated a number
of times. In terms
of sentences, you fairly quickly ran the gamut of the available dispositions of
the Children’s Court,
arriving at your first period of detention in a
youth justice centre in October 2018 when ordered to be detained for 7 months
charges of affray, attempted robbery and recklessly causing injury. On a
number of occasions, sentences you received had components
built in to deal with
your drug problem and lack of vocational training. Unfortunately, your lawless
behaviour continued unabated.
44 On 22 July 2019,
you were placed on a bond for a further affray, assault, and other crimes. You
were subject to this bond at the
time of the present crimes.
Psychological material
45 As indicated already, you were
assessed by Dr Barth in preparation for the plea hearing. You detailed no formal
psychiatric history,
although you did apparently receive counselling to cope
with the emotional effect upon you of the separation of your mother and
step-father. Dr Barth detailed your history of transient periods of dysphoria in
your mid to late teenage years, predominantly due
to your turbulent lifestyle,
drug use, and dissatisfaction with the trajectory of your life.
46 In dealing with the background to your current
offending, as noted earlier, Dr Barth indicated that you claimed to have no
recollection
of your offending or the events surrounding it due to the
intoxicating effects of the use of Xanax. Not surprisingly, Dr Barth challenged
you about this claim but you stood firm.
should say two things about this claim you made to Dr Barth. First, I do not
accept it. There is no evidence at all to indicate
that you were noticed to be
affected by any substance by any of the people who saw you or were in your
company before, during or
after your offending. Some of these people were in
your presence at close hand for a number of hours. If you were so substantially
affected by a substance as to wipe your memory for the very notable events in
which you involved yourself, someone would have noticed
it. No one apparently
did. You gave no account to the police or evidence to the Court suggesting
impairment by drugs or a loss of
memory. In my view, it was an
implausible-sounding claim which you made to the psychologist for some reason
which is unclear. I do
not accept that the claim was a truthful one.
48 Secondly and in any event, even if was true that
you have no memory of the crimes you committed, it would say nothing at all
the deliberateness and brazenness of your offending and would not provide
any significant context to the lack of remorse seemingly
indicated by your
overall behaviour, about which I have already had something to
49 Dr Barth considered the most salient feature
of your mental state when he assessed you to be reactive depressive symptoms of
intensity. He considered that you do not meet the criteria for any mood
disorder, anxiety disorder or adjustment disorder. Furthermore,
there are no
indications, he considered, that you were labouring under the effects of any
such disorder at the time of your offending.
have already touched on Dr Barth’s opinion as to your below-average level
of intelligence. He concluded that notwithstanding
this, you are not
intellectually impaired and there are no deficits in your ability to appreciate
the wrongfulness of your behaviour.
51 Turning to
your personality, he described your personality and behavioural adjustment as
dysfunctional’
that your entrenched personality and behavioural problems can be traced back to
your childhood and have been intensified
by your subsequent lifestyle. You have
a distorted self-identity, in which you have ‘placed a considerable
emphasis on projecting
an intimidating and aggressive persona to others to
compensate for the emptiness and resentfulness he has felt about his
You are poor at
regulating emotional reactions and experience an intense escalation of feelings
of hostility when you feel challenged.
As a result, your ability to manage
conflict effectively is very limited and you place a premium on dealing with
conflict by resorting
to overtly aggressive behaviour.
52 Dr Barth opined:
...Mr Horton lacks the adequate life skills and
behavioural control to function effectively in mainstream society. His decision
is impulsive and focused solely on short term gratification. Mr
Horton’s behaviour subsequently became more disinhibited in
the context of
his drug addiction and turbulent lifestyle.
Mr Horton displayed significant delinquent behaviours during his adolescence and
he continues to exhibit entrenched antisocial traits.
Mr Horton’s
maladaptive personality traits are intensely problematic and clearly meet DSM-5
diagnostic criterial for an
‘Antisocial Personality
53 Dr Barth also diagnosed you as
suffering from
Stimulant-Use Disorder
Cannabis-Use Disorder
both at the severe level, but in remission due to the controlled environment in
which you have been held. He said that your insight
into your drug-taking
behaviour is poor and that with your entrenched involvement in drugs subculture,
you would pose an elevated
risk of relapse when released into the community.
This would represent a critical criminogenic factor which would need to be
to reduce your risk of future offending.
54 Dr Barth carried out a violence risk assessment
of you with the use of
Historical Clinical Risk Management-20 Version 3
(HCR-20 V3)
a widely used actuarial measure of the risk of violent
recidivism. The test comprises 20 risk assessment items scored across three
domains. The results you obtained led Dr Barth to the view that you pose a high
risk of future violent offending. He stated:
An assessment of Mr Horton’s risk of violent
recidivism indicated the presence of several significant criminogenic factors.
In particular, his antisocial personality, his significant substance abuse
issues, his history of engaging with antisocial peers
and his propensity to
resort to violent behaviour as a means of achieving his personal and material
goals. Further to this, Mr Horton
lacks insight into his behaviour, his coping
skills are poor and he has little realistic concept of the steps required to
a healthier lifestyle.
55 As he put it, your ability to engage
appropriately in offence-specific treatment for violent offenders will be
critical in determining
your long-term rehabilitative prospects in the
56 Dr Barth expressed the clear opinion,
however, that there is no indication that your psychological functioning was
impaired at
the time of your offending. Further to that, I note the concession
of Mr Norton that no reliance is placed on your behalf on any
of the principles
set out in the decision of
Barth detailed some of the treatment which would be essential to reduce your
risk of violent recidivism and increase your prospects
of rehabilitation. This
would include psychological treatment for your antisocial personality disorder,
offence specific treatment
focussing on your violent offending, substance abuse
treatment and vocational education and training.
58 In respect of your prospects of rehabilitation,
Dr Barth stated:
I remain guarded about Mr Horton’s prognosis.
Without comprehensive, integrated and sustained psychological treatment and
supervision, Mr Horton’s rehabilitative prospects when he is
ultimately released into the community are poor. To his credit,
he expressed his
desire to participate actively in any treatment offered to him to change the
trajectory of his life. From a psychological
perspective, this is encouraging.
Nevertheless, he faces an extensive period of intense rehabilitation if his
issues are to be addressed
effectively in the
Victim impact statements
59 22 victim impact statements were
placed before the Court, in all but one case being read aloud either by the
particular victim,
or by Stirling Hakiwai. These statements were compiled by or
on behalf of a very large number of the family members of Maaka and
including, at the centre of the process, Stirling and Karli Hakiwai, the
heartbroken parents of the boys. The material
was presented over a period in
excess of one full day of Court time. The statements set out in vivid,
intelligent, and emotional
manner, sometimes with the use of poems, songs,
photographs and video presentations, the completely devastating effect your
conduct has had and undoubtedly will forever have on the life of the
close-knit and loving family of Maaka and Nathanial. It would
impossible to overstate the eloquence and power of the tragic picture portrayed
by the material.
60 Mr Norton, at the commencement
of his plea in mitigation, in clearly heart-felt and decent words, said of the
victim impact statements:
...what we have been witness to over the last day and a
half has been extraordinary on any view and anyone that was present for it
not but be affected by it. The material itself...is incredibly powerful but the
manner in which it has been delivered, the
cultural significance of it and the
dignity with which those involved have carried themselves really one can only
describe it as
profound and what that brings with it, your Honour, is a very
real challenge in terms of ensuring that the sentencing exercise isn’t
swamped by it and even with your Honour’s vast experience, it’s
important to guard against that swamping, accepting...as
I do immediately in the
pure legal sense that the victim impact in this matter is high. I’m not
sure there’s a higher
than high but...no issue is taken with the pure
gravity of it.
61 All but one of the victim impact
statements was aired in open court, and all were tendered in evidence as part of
Exhibit C. I
will not pause, now, to set out any of the specific content of the
many accounts of the loving mother, father, brother, sisters,
grandparents,
aunts, uncles and other relatives of Maaka and Nathanial. Suffice to say that Mr
Norton’s description of the
material was no more than fair and accurate.
The victim impact statements present a clear depiction of the ongoing anguish,
sense of loss, anger and almost overwhelming sadness produced by your
heartless actions. In addition, as I said to the authors of
the statements, in
commending them for having had the courage and fortitude to set down their
innermost thoughts in writing and then
convey them to the court, the victim
impact statements and the way in which they were presented painted a powerful
picture of the
wonderful, supportive and loving family from whom Maaka and
Nathanial are fortunate to come.
62 It is true that
the sentencing exercise in which I must engage must not be allowed to be swamped
by the power of the victim impact
statements. I will guard against that, in the
clear knowledge that the impact of your offending on its victims, the injury,
and damage resulting directly from your crimes, and the personal
circumstances of the victims are but some of the many matters which
required to take into account pursuant to
63 I note, also, that not surprisingly, many of
the victim impact statements contain material which would go beyond that which
permitted by
of the Act. No criticism is intended of them in so
saying. In particular, it is hardly surprising that the grief-stricken loved
of a deceased child would feel inclined to demand that strong punishment be
meted out by the sentencing judge to the offender responsible
for their pain.
Having said that, it should be observed that on the whole, the victim impact
statements contain material which is
admissible and entirely appropriate to be
considered by the Court.
64 I am fully conscious of
the fact that no sentence I can lawfully pass would provide any measure of
satisfaction to the family of
Maaka and Nathanial. Nor can any sentence
alleviate their pain. They can be assured, however, that their loss and
suffering will
be taken into account by me as permitted and required by law, and
will be reflected in the sentence I will pass.
Nature and gravity of the offences
65 For the most part, the prosecution and
the defence were at one as to the many factors which mark the obvious
seriousness of your
offending. I will turn to some of these shortly. First, I
will focus on the actual mechanism of your fatal stabbing of Maaka, which
some dispute.
66 The prosecution opening on the
plea asserted that while Maaka was being held in a headlock by AM, you left the
RAV4 armed with
the knife. As stated in the opening:
Whilst Maaka was still being held by [AM], Horton walked
directly over to them and placed one hand on Maaka’s back and, with
knife in his other hand, stabbed Maaka once to the abdomen, in an upwards motion
towards his chest.
67 This account was based principally on
the sworn evidence of Nathanial.
68 Mr Norton,
through his written outline and oral submissions, asserted that for reasons he
spelt out, ‘it is not possible
to make a finding, consistent with the jury
verdict, to the requisite standard that the blow was landed in the manner
described in
the Prosecution Opening on the
The requisite
standard as he put it was beyond reasonable doubt, reflecting the proposition
that such a finding would be about an
aggravating circumstance and would require
proof to that standard. I note that Mr Norton did not urge upon me any
alternative finding
as to the precise circumstances of the stabbing of Maaka.
Nor was any such alternative finding advanced for the consideration of
69 The matters pointed to as calling the account of
Nathanial into question were the conflicting evidence of
some evidence of the
pathologist Dr Young as to the unlikelihood of the particular injuries sustained
by Maaka having been inflicted
by the type of mechanism described by Nathanial
if Maaka was bent over when struck, and the fact that in a number of respects
had expressed uncertainty about aspects of his
70 Having made these submissions, Mr Norton
conceded that no matter whether I made a finding of fact consistent with the
of Nathanial on the one hand, or whether I was unable to make a finding
as to the specific mechanism of the stabbing on the other,
the difference in
terms of seriousness of the offending would be marginal.
71 The position of the Crown was that the precise
mechanism of the stabbing was not an aggravating circumstance, but rather simply
a description by the closest and best eye witness of what occurred in the
attack. In any event, Ms Lenthall submitted that I would
be well entitled to act
on the evidence of Nathanial as to the precise nature of the mechanism, even if
proof beyond reasonable doubt
is required.
have re-read the evidence of Nathanial in its entirety, and the other evidence
relied on by your counsel as calling Nathanial’s
evidence into question in
the specific respect now being considered. Having done so, and reflected on the
submissions on both sides,
and accepting for the purposes of the argument that
the precise mechanism of the stabbing of Maaka is an aggravating circumstances
in respect of which proof beyond reasonable doubt would be required, I am
satisfied to that standard that you stabbed Maaka in the
way described so
clearly and strongly by Nathanial.
73 Nathanial
observed the fatal stabbing of his brother from very close range. He made it
clear that he was watching carefully as
this shocking event unfolded in front of
him. Whilst he expressed some doubts about some aspects of his evidence, no such
were expressed about this central aspect. It was not put to him that he
was wrong, and nor was any alternative mechanism advanced
on your behalf during
the trial or before me on the plea. The observations of JD were made from some
distance away through the window
of the motor vehicle. This witness made it
clear during her evidence that her memory was not very good. She was mistaken
matter so fundamental as the order in which Maaka and Nathanial were
stabbed. As for the evidence of the pathologist, it must be
remembered, of
course, that he, unlike Nathanial, did not witness the infliction of the stab
wound. He was able to comment only
on the appearance and orientation of the
wound and its track. He could not say how it was inflicted. To my mind, neither
the evidence
of JD nor that of Dr Young undermined the clear evidence given by
Nathanial Hakiwai about how you stabbed Maaka. Furthermore, there
was nothing
having been inflicted as Nathanial said
it was. I am satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that the stabbing of Maaka occurred as described by Nathanial in his
evidence before
74 That takes me, then, to
a consideration of your offending. Your offending comprised brazen acts of
violence carried out in a suburban
street on a Saturday afternoon. Your victims
were young, unarmed and doing nothing wrong when you decided to launch your
them. They were unknown to you and did nothing to warrant your
attention towards them, other than being there and in the case of
Nathanial, at
least, justifiably resisting the efforts of Kur to rob him. Your crimes occurred
in the context of your friends or
associates, Kur and AM, having, to your
knowledge, selected Maaka and Nathanial as targets of a robbery in which you
were not involved,
and then being met with some resistance.
75 It was asserted on your behalf that your
offending was unplanned and that you joined the physical action only in response
compatriot being knocked to the
The Crown challenged
that contention on the basis that there is no evidence before the Court that
this was in fact your state of
mind. It was submitted on your behalf that to
accept the Crown’s contention would be to deny you the full benefit of the
of the jury, it having been run on your behalf in the trial that you got
out of the vehicle in response to the falling over of one
of your friends rather
than because you were involved in the robbery.
do not accept Mr Norton’s submission. The jury verdict on the charge of
statutory murder means no more than that the jury
was not satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt of the existence of all of the elements of the crime. One of
the elements of the crime
was that at the time of stabbing Maaka, you had
knowledge of the essential circumstances of the robbery which was in progress,
intended to assist or encourage the commission of that crime. The jury
verdict of not guilty does not imply any particular conclusion
by the jury as to
your motivation in getting out of the vehicle and going up and stabbing Maaka.
For example, the jury verdict would
not rule out a view by the jury that your
motivation in the attack was wholly punitive, and not out of any concern for
your friends.
77 On the available material, beyond
observing that you did not get out of the vehicle until such time as one of your
friends fell
to the ground, I can reach no conclusion about precisely why you
left the vehicle at the point when you did. As to what you had it
in mind to do,
that is clear enough. You had armed yourself with a large knife. You proceeded
straight over to where Maaka was being
held by AM. Without any further ado, and
without saying a word, in the very deliberate way described by Nathanial in his
you stabbed this defenceless and helpless young person in the abdomen.
78 Your stabbing of Maaka was directed at a
vulnerable part of his body, and aimed upwards in the body. Significant force
been involved. The knife penetrated sufficiently deep into the body to
damage a large number of vital internal structures, ending
with the heart itself
and the aorta. From the time you carried out this action, Maaka was destined to
quickly die. That eventual
outcome could have come as no surprise to you. You
were a person of normal intelligence. The thrusting of a knife deep into the
and chest of another human being was something anyone would know, and
something you knew, would carry with it the very high risk,
inevitability, of at least serious injury being caused. This was a very serious
mechanism for the carrying out of the
manslaughter.
79 You carried out this shocking and
entirely unwarranted attack upon Maaka in the presence of his brother, who
watched on in horror
from only metres away.
80 Having carried out that crime, and having seen
the victim of your crime fall to the ground a short distance away, and not
with the result you had brought about, you focused your attention on
Nathanial, another person who constituted no threat to you whatsoever.
volumes as to your immediate lack of regret and concern for the plight of the
victim of your first stabbing that you so
quickly turned your attention to a
second prospective victim. Having done so, you pursued Nathanial, and despite
his efforts to retreat
and to defend himself, you managed to stab him to the
thigh, causing him to fall to the ground. Again, not content with the violence
you had already inflicted, you sought to stab him further when he was on the
ground, and then succeeded in stabbing him again when
he had got to his feet.
One of the stabbing actions led to the knife penetrating all the way through
Nathanial’s thigh. Serious
damage was caused to vital blood vessels deep
in his leg. As put by the prosecution, this was a sustained act of physical
which involved concerted effort to injure Nathanial.
81 The effect of this attack upon Nathanial could
not have been more devastating, following closely, as it did, your fatal attack
upon his younger brother only seconds before. The physical scars your crime left
upon Nathanial are graphically shown in photographs
admitted with his victim
impact statement. Neither these, nor the emotional scars of which his statement
spoke so eloquently, will
ever truly heal.
of the aspects of your crimes upon which some reliance was placed during the
trial and the plea was the speed with which things
unfolded. A CCTV camera in
place on a nearby house recorded the time which elapsed from your departure from
the rear driver’s
side of the vehicle until your return there as being
only 16 seconds. To my mind, that short period speaks volumes about the brutal
efficiency of your crimes and your capacity for extreme violence.
83 Manslaughter is of course a crime which is
inherently serious, involving as it does the taking of a human life. In
the Court of
Appeal stated:
The sentencing range for the crime of manslaughter is
strikingly wide, as is the range of criminal conduct that can cause the relevant
unlawful killing. The range of conduct commences with ‘a joke gone
wrong’ and extends to conduct ‘just short of
84 In that case, as the sentencing judge,
I characterised the manslaughter as being at the upper end of the range of
seriousness for
that crime. The Court of Appeal agreed with that
characterisation and stated that the manslaughter in that case could
legitimately
be characterised as ‘just short of
85 Before me, the prosecution
submitted that your crime of manslaughter falls just short of murder. It was
submitted that your moral
culpability can only be described as high. Mr Norton
on your behalf did not dispute that the objective seriousness of the crime is
high. His written outline set out a number of the features of the crime which
would warrant that conclusion. He accepted that I should
sentence you on the
basis that at the time you stabbed Maaka, you knew full well that your action
was extremely dangerous and likely
to cause at least serious injury.
86 On the question of your moral culpability for
your offending, Mr Norton relied on your young age and disadvantaged background
reducing, to some extent, your moral culpability. I will say something more
culpability
87 Having considered all of the objective
features of your offending, I am satisfied that your crime of manslaughter is a
most serious
one falling just short of murder. This crime was carried out by you
upon a defenceless 17 year old child who had done absolutely
nothing to warrant
any attack upon him. In no way were you acting in defence of your friends at the
time. You knew they were in the
process of carrying out a robbery. You
intervened for no good reason with that
88 As for your second crime, it, too, was
a most serious one, for many of the reasons I have already mentioned. In callous
for what you had already done to Maaka, you saw fit to attack his
brother in determined and frightening fashion. You stabbed him
not once but
twice with that dangerous weapon. You inflicted serious injury upon him, as was
you obvious intention. Only good fortune
and the intervention of expert medical
attention prevented Nathanial from paying the ultimate price for your violent
and nasty conduct.
Your age and prospects of rehabilitation
89 As I have already mentioned, you were
18 years old at the time of your crimes, and are still only aged 20.
90 A long line of authority dictates that the
youthfulness of an offender may be a primary consideration in sentencing, and
such a case, rehabilitation is usually far more important than general
deterrence.
That is not always
the case, however, and the law has recognised that there will be cases in which
factors such as youth and rehabilitation
would take a ‘back seat’ to
other sentencing considerations.
In considering the authorities on the topic in
Azzopardi v
Redlich JA (with whose
judgment the other members of the Court of Appeal agreed), stated:
The general propositions which flow from these
authorities is that where the degree of criminality of the offences requires the
objectives of deterrence, denunciation, just punishment and
protection of the community to become more prominent in the sentencing
the weight to be attached to youth is correspondingly reduced. As the level of
seriousness of the criminality increases
there will be a corresponding reduction
in the mitigating effects of the offender’s youth. But only in the
circumstances of
the gravest criminal offending and where there is no realistic
prospect of rehabilitation may the mitigatory considerations of youth
as all but extinguished.
91 There was a later confirmation of the
principle by the Court of Appeal in
Siilata v The
a case concerning an
offender sentenced for aggravated carjacking who was 18 years old at the time of
the offence and 19 at the time
of sentence:
True it is that the applicant was young but, as the
cases make plain, the more serious the offending, the more the mitigating effect
of youth diminishes. Denunciation, general and specific deterrence must have
greater emphasis as the seriousness of the offence increases.
That must be so in
92 In this case, your counsel relied upon
your young age at the time of your offending and now, your disadvantaged
background, and
your immaturity as remarked upon by Dr Barth, as matters which
should inform an assessment of your moral culpability. Mr Norton accepted
the mitigatory effect of your youthfulness would need to give some ground, as he
put it, in light of the seriousness of your
offending, but he submitted that the
mitigatory effect of youth should not be considered to be extinguished
altogether.
93 Ms Lenthall for the prosecution did
not submit that your young age should be entirely extinguished as a sentencing
consideration,
but asserted that it should be substantially moderated by the
seriousness of your offending and your extensive criminal history.
94 In the circumstances of this case, I consider
that your prospects of rehabilitation cannot, at this time, be realistically
as anything other than poor. By the time you reached the age of 18, you
had accrued an unenviable criminal history of violent offending
apparent disregard for the welfare of others. This may be seen in the light of
your long history of illicit drug use and
your entrenched personality disorder.
You committed the current offences while on a bond for crimes of violence. There
was a heartlessness
and callousness to the current offending which is disturbing
to say the least. Almost two years after the events, having had ample
reflect upon your conduct, there is still nothing to indicate you are remorseful
for it. As for your antisocial personality
disorder, it is, thus far, entirely
untreated. There is no material before the Court indicating the prospects of it
being successfully
treated in future. It is not surprising that Dr Barth was, as
he put it, ‘guarded’ about your prognosis. He indicated
that without comprehensive, integrated and sustained psychological treatment and
strict supervision, your prospects of rehabilitation
upon your release are poor.
Whether you will, in the end, receive or be amenable to the sort of intensive
treatment to which he referred,
and be able to make the necessary changes to
your personality structure, remains to be
95 Having said that, hopefully it is not an
entirely forlorn hope that in future, with the right treatment and support, you
able to turn your life around. I do not consider that this is a case in
which the mitigatory considerations of youth should be viewed
as being all but
extinguished. I take into account in sentencing you the fact that you are still
only 20, and that when released
after the sentence I impose, you will still be a
relatively young person with a good deal of your life yet to be lived.
Your moral culpability
96 As I earlier noted, Mr Norton relied
upon matters relating to your background in combination with your youth as
justifying a submission
that your moral culpability for your crimes is not
I have already dealt with
the matter of your youth. I now turn to your background, and the question of
whether it may warrant a reduction
in moral culpability.
97 On the basis of what was described in
submissions as your unstable and difficult childhood and disrupted education, Mr
Norton relied
upon the principles set out in
Bugmy v The
Those principles were
the subject of recent consideration by the Court of Appeal in
Bergman v The
That case, like
, concerned an Aboriginal offender who had come from a very
deprived background. That is not to say that the principles are limited
application to those of Aboriginal heritage. The Court in
expressed regret that the sentencing judge had not had his attention drawn to
, or had the benefit of submissions directed to the question of how
the applicant’s deprived childhood bore on his moral culpability
offence, stated:
Some months after the sentencing in the present case,
this Court in
Director of Public Prosecutions v
applied the
principles in the following terms:
In particular, the profound dysfunction,
disadvantage and abuse experienced by the respondent during his formative years
were relevant
to an appropriate evaluation of his moral culpability. As
recognised by the High Court in
, those experiences, none of which
were of his making, all played a significant role in shaping the
respondent’s personality
and his responses. As a consequence, his
subjective culpability, for the offending in which he engaged, could not be
equated with
that of a person who committed the same offence but had had the
advantage of a normal, stable and regular home environment during
childhood years. In that way, those factors constituted an important mitigating
circumstance in the determination of
the respondent’s
For similar reasons, in our view, the applicant’s
moral culpability for the offending could not be equated with that of a person
who committed the same offences, but who had had the advantage of a normal
stable home environment in which he had been guided by
appropriate parenting.
It is most important not to underestimate the destructive effect on a small
child of growing up ‘in
a household where unemployment, drug use and
was antithetical
to the applicant developing a proper sense of the social norms
of appropriate behaviour, or an appreciation of the need to comply
98 While your background was not an ideal
one, it was of nothing approaching the level of deprivation and dysfunction
contemplated
by the High Court in
and considered in other cases to
which the principles have been held to apply. Of particular note is the fact
that your mother has
always remained supportive of you, and there is nothing to
suggest she has not been a good and appropriate parent for you. Of course
into account your somewhat difficult background. It may be considered to have
some impact on your moral culpability. In my
view, however, no substantial
reduction in your moral culpability is warranted by this factor alone.
99 Furthermore, in my view your young age did not
deprive you of a full understanding of the heinous nature of the crimes you saw
fit to carry out and of full responsibility for them.
100 In all of the circumstances, and
notwithstanding your young age and the sad aspects of your background, I believe
that your moral
culpability for your crimes is high.
Current sentencing practices
101 I have had regard to current
sentencing practices in arriving at the appropriate sentence. In seeking to
understand those practices,
I have had regard, amongst other things, to the
relevant Sentencing Snapshots for
manslaughter
the statistics maintained
by the Sentencing Advisory Council, the digests of appellate decisions
concerning both crimes in the Victorian
Sentencing Manual and other comparable
cases including those drawn to my attention by Mr Norton and Ms Lenthall. In so
note what has been routinely said by the Court of Appeal in recent
years as to the quite limited assistance that is provided by mere
statistics,
and the fact that no comparable case is truly comparable, or can in any way be
some sort of precedent for the sentence
I should pass.
COVID-19 considerations
102 I have had regard to the fact that
for much of the time you have spent on remand, the Victorian community has been
in the grip
of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, you have felt the effects of
the restrictions enforced in the prison system in order to try
to prevent the
introduction of the virus into that system. The provisions, it must be said,
have been extraordinarily successful,
but they have taken a toll on prisoners
such as yourself. Contact visits were not permitted for many months, denying you
the prospect
of visits from your mother, who has herself been going through
serious health issues which also would have interfered with that prospect.
Educational and other programs were suspended. You have been faced with the
ongoing uncertainty brought about by the advent of the
pandemic. Although in
recent months, things have eased substantially, the recent increase
Australia-wide in case numbers highlights
the ongoing uncertainty you face as to
what imprisonment will look like.
103 Another
aspect of your incarceration up to the time of the jury verdict is that you had
a charge of murder hanging over your head
for most of that time. This would have
involved a great deal of stress which I take into account.
The issues of concurrency, cumulation, and totality
104 It is necessary in this case to
impose individual sentences on each of the two offences of which you have been
found guilty. In
the absence of any order for cumulation, by operation of
such sentences would be
served concurrently.
105 In his submissions to me,
Mr Norton conceded that some cumulation between the sentences on the respective
offences would be necessary,
but conceded that a substantial degree of
concurrency should be directed. This, he submitted, would be consistent with the
principle. He urged caution in the application of that principle.
106 Mr Norton submitted that in arriving at the
appropriate degree of cumulation and concurrency, I should view the stabbings of
your victims as being part of a single event which occurred within a matter
of seconds in the same area. A global view should be
taken of the criminal
conduct for which you fall to be sentenced. He urged me to stand back from the
sentences imposed on both charges
and the degree of cumulation and take one
last look at the overall result in order to determine that it is an appropriate
to your criminality.
107 The prosecutor
acknowledged the relevance and importance of the totality principle, and that
some concurrency would be appropriate
given the timeframe of your crimes.
However, Ms Lenthall submitted that the overall sentence must reflect the fact
that the offending
involved two separate victims, that each offence cause
separate and significant impact for the victims and their family, and that
although the stabbings occurred in close succession, these were separate,
deliberate actions by you.
108 Whilst it is true
that your stabbings of the two victims occurred as part of the one course of
conduct and were very close in
time, it cannot be forgotten that you carried out
attacks upon not one but two distinct victims, each attack necessitating a
by you to deliberately stab the particular individual, and then the
performance of deliberate actions by you in order to put your
decision into
effect. Furthermore, each act was, in its own right, a serious criminal offence
with exceedingly serious consequences.
determining the appropriate period of cumulation between the respective
sentences, I have had regard to the applicable principles
as I understand them.
I have paid particularly careful attention to the Court of Appeal’s
judgment in
. That was a case with some parallels with this case
because it involved a man stabbing, in quick succession, two separate victims,
leading to the death of one, for which he was found guilty of manslaughter, and
the infliction of serious injury to the other, for
which he was found guilty of
RCSI. In that case, the sentences I imposed were 12 years’ and 6
years’ imprisonment respectively,
with an order for cumulation of three
years. The order for cumulation was held on appeal to be manifestly excessive
resulting in
a head sentence that was also manifestly excessive. The order for
cumulation was reduced to one year and six
110 In spite of the superficial similarities
between that case and this case, a closer look would reveal the multitude of
differences.
For example, whilst you are a young offender and Mr Vu was not, he
did not have any prior convictions for violence, no victim impact
were filed, the secondary victim provided a reference in support of him at the
plea, his prospects of rehabilitation were
viewed by me as being quite good, and
specific deterrence and protection of the community were not considered to be
important sentencing
considerations. Furthermore, the offence of RCSI of which
he was convicted was not as serious and did not have as serious an outcome
the charge of ICSI of which you were found guilty. All of this goes to
illustrate the obvious fact that even seemingly comparable
cases cannot serve as
precedents for the sentence to be passed by a court in another
111 Having determined what I consider to be
the appropriate terms of imprisonment to be imposed on each charge in light of
the circumstances, I have then decided the appropriate degree of
cumulation. Paying regard to the totality principle, I have reviewed
effective sentence at which I have arrived to determine whether it is just and
appropriate in the overall circumstances.
I have done my best to ensure that it
Non-parole period
112 I have considered the submission of
Mr Norton to the effect that in order to fulfil the sentencing purposes of
protecting the
community and facilitating your rehabilitation, I should set a
non-parole period that is, as he termed it, ‘disparate’.
I took this
to mean a non-parole period which may represent a lower proportion of the head
sentence than might often be the
113 I acknowledge the merit in there being a
significant period of time upon the expiry of your non-parole period to enable
your potential
rehabilitation in the community under the supervision of parole.
The non-parole period I will impose will ensure at least the prospect
114 I do make the point, however, that the
law is clear that both the head sentence and non-parole period imposed must be
to pay adequate regard to the purposes for which sentence must be
imposed. I turn to those purposes now.
Important sentencing purposes
115 Sadly, the extraordinary and
unforgivable acts of violence you carried out which led to the loss of a young
and treasured life,
the infliction of serious injury upon another innocent young
person, and cast a tragic and permanent pall over their extended families
friends, were of a kind not unknown to this Court. The comments of Redlich JA
and Kaye AJA
(albeit in the context
of a conviction for murder) are worth noting:
This was a crime of wanton and unprovoked viciousness by
a youthful offender who resorted to the use of a knife to inflict lethal
injuries. The victim was an innocent bystander. Violence of this nature by
youthful offenders in public places is so prevalent
that general deterrence and
denunciation of the conduct must be emphasised. The sentencing judge was obliged
to impose a sentence
which gave due recognition to not only the sanctity of
human life, but which also served to demonstrate that such violence was
intolerable
in a civilised society and gave emphasis to these sentencing
principles.
Section 5(1)
of the Act sets out the
only purposes for which sentence may be imposed. All of them have application in
your case, although in my
view, rehabilitation, notwithstanding your young age,
must have less impact on the sentence imposed than would so often be the case
for a person of your age. The fact is, the heinous nature of your crimes, your
personal background, your serious criminal history,
and the high risk you pose
of future violent offending, dictate that other sentencing purposes come to the
117 In my view, the important sentencing
purposes to be served by the sentence I pass on you are just punishment,
denunciation, general
deterrence, specific deterrence and protection of the
community. It is only right that you be appropriately punished for your crimes,
which I am satisfied you carried out with a full appreciation of their
seriousness. The sentence must also manifest the denunciation
by the Court of
the shockingly violent conduct which you carried out against innocent young
people for no good reason at all. Furthermore,
the sentence I pass on you must
be such as to bring it home clearly to others in the community who may be minded
to act with the
sort of wanton violence you exhibited that such behaviour will
be met with strong punishment. Specific deterrence also looms large
case. You have a proven history of violent conduct, and of being unwilling to
accept the chances you have been given by courts
to reform yourself. You must
understand that your actions will have consequences.
118 I turn now to the matter of protection of the
community. As noted already, you have a proven track record for unprovoked
In keeping with that history, you acted against Maaka and Nathanial
with a disturbingly callous disregard for their wellbeing. You
carried out
vicious and cowardly attacks upon them in a public street, acted afterwards
with a continuing lack of concern for them,
and even now, almost two years after
the events, I am satisfied that you are not remorseful. Your dangerous and
violent conduct and
want of normal human concern for your victims and their
plight may well be products of the serious personality disorder from which
suffer. There is nothing, however, to suggest that you were not fully
responsible for your actions. It is to be hoped that in
future, you may receive
some effective treatment for the disorder from which you suffer. Sentencing you
now, however, I must do so
in the knowledge that your disorder is untreated, and
that you currently pose a high risk of violent recidivism. The extravagantly
violent nature of the crimes for which I must sentence you is an indication of
the risk you may pose to society in future. In my
view, protection of the
community has an important part to play in the sentence I impose upon you.
119 Joshua Horton, for the manslaughter
of Maaka Hakiwai, you are sentenced to be imprisoned for a period of 11 years.
120 For intentionally causing serious injury to
Nathanial Hakiwai, you are sentenced to be imprisoned for a period of 7 years.
121 The sentence on the charge of manslaughter is
the base sentence.
122 I direct that 2 ½ years
of the sentence imposed on the charge of intentionally causing serious injury be
served cumulatively
upon the base sentence.
total effective sentence is therefore imprisonment for a period of 13 ½
124 I fix a period of 9 ½ years during
which you will not be eligible to be released on parole.
125 I declare a period of 633 days up to and
including yesterday, 1 July 2021, as being a period already served under this
I direct that the fact of the making of that declaration and its
details be noted in the records of the Court.
indicate pursuant to
Sentencing Act 1991
that, but for your
plea of guilty to the charge of manslaughter, I would have sentenced you to be
imprisoned for a total effective
sentence of 15 ½ years with a non-parole
period of 11 ½ years.
Name initialised to protect
the identity of AM who was a child at the time of the events.
Name initialised to protect
the identity of NW.
Nathanial was uncertain in his
evidence whether the cap was removed after the first or second stab to the
thigh. He believed it
took place after the second stab.
One of the major veins in the
A branch of the femoral
Phillips v The Queen
VR 594 [36] (Redlich JA and Curtain AJA).
Thurlow v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 71
[37] (Priest and Kaye JJA).
[2021] VSCA 169.
Exhibit JH2.
Phillips v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 140
(2012) 37 VR 594
Exhibit JH2 [39].
[2007] VSCA 102
(2007) 16 VR 269.
Plea transcript 133-4.
Prosecution opening
Defence outline [6].
Name initialised to protect
the identity of JD, one of the female occupants of the vehicle.
Addressing the jury in
closing, Mr Norton disputed that your fatal act was done in the course of a
robbery. He suggested that the
jury would not be able to exclude the prospect
that your purpose in carrying out the act was to go to the defence of your
[2020] VSCA 59
Ibid [33] (citations
Director of Public Prosecutions v Lawrence
[2004] VSCA 154
(2004) 10 VR 125
[2011] VSCA 372
(2011) 35 VR 43.
[2019] VSCA 277.
Ibid [31] (citations
Plea transcript 179.
(2013) 249 CLR 571
[2021] VSCA 148 (Maxwell
P, Kaye and McLeish JJA) (‘
[2019] VSCA 293.
Ibid [32] (Maxwell P,
Priest, Kaye, T Forrest and Emerton JJA) (citation omitted). See also
[2019] VSCA 130
, [57]–[58] (Priest, Kaye and T Forrest
Manslaughter Sentencing
Snapshot No. 249, March 2021.
ICSI Sentencing Snapshot No
238, April 2020.
Sentencing Act 1991
I am conscious of the
frequent entreaty of the Court of Appeal not to use the concept of a
‘longer than usual’ period
on parole, or a ‘shorter than
usual’ non-parole period.
As he then was.
[2013] VSCA 102.
Ibid [71] (citations
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (325 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter