URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/vic/VLSC/2018/28.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:34:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Commissioner Determination (Trust account breaches) [2018] VLSC 28 (29 June 2018)
Victorian Legal Services Commissioner
A notice made under s.
318 of the Legal Profession Uniform Law (Victoria)
Commissioner Determination (Trust account breaches) [2018]
Date of Determination:
29 June 2018
Pursuant to section 299(1) of the
Legal Profession
Uniform Law (Victoria)
(‘the Uniform Law’), I have decided that
the respondent lawyer has engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct and
make the following orders –
respondent lawyer is reprimanded pursuant to section 299(1)(b) of the Uniform
respondent lawyer is to complete the Law Institute of Victoria’s
Bookkeepers Trust Recording Workshop or other similar trust
account course
approved by the Victorian Legal Services Commissioner pursuant to section
299(1)(e) of the Uniform Law by 30 September
2018. These Continuing Professional
Development units will be in addition to the 10 units required to be completed
for the 2018/2019
renewal year.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
initial concerns raised in an External Examiners report dated 24 April 2015
(‘report 1’), this office has in
conjunction with the Law Institute
of Victoria (‘LIV’), conducted the following reports into [Law
practice] (‘the
law practice’):
Incorporated
Legal Practice Audit Report dated 15 May 2015 (‘report 2’);
Account Investigation Report dated 28 May 2015 (‘report 3’);
Account Investigation Report dated 28 August 2015 (‘report
Audit Report dated 16 November 2016 (‘report 5’);
Account Investigation Report dated 18 October 2016 (‘report
Account Investigation Report dated 22 April 2016 (‘report 7’); and
Account Investigation Report dated 21 February 2017 (‘report
reports identified a number of trust accounting breaches and raised concerns
that the law practice was being administered poorly
and that this had resulted
in the trust account not being maintained in accordance with the legislative
requirements.
External Examiners report dated 15 March 2016 (‘report 9’) also
identified ongoing trust breaches in relation to the
preparation of trust
account reconciliation reports.
2 May 2017 my office made a decision to initiate a disciplinary complaint
(‘the complaint’) and investigate the respondent
lawyer on the basis
of the reports, pursuant to sections 266(2) and 282 of the Uniform Law.
Issues under investigation
issues that have been investigated are whether:
law practice failed to reconcile trust records either at all or within 15 days
of the end of the relevant month.
law practice failed to lodge its External Examiner’s report on time for
the year ending 31 October 2014.
law practice failed to provide adequate costs disclosure in relation to the
following family law files:
“C”(reference
(reference 14171)
law practice failed to cost files in accordance with a costs agreement, the
Practitioners Remuneration Order or any Court scale
of costs in relation to the
following family law files:
(reference 13242)
“D”(reference
law practice failed to ensure appropriate management systems for an Incorporated
Legal Practice in that it had no policy to check
for conflicts of interest, no
method to record undertakings made that bind the firm and no register to record
complaints and their
law practice failed to ensure that its trust records were maintained and
reflected the true position of the trust account at any
given time.
law practice failed to record sufficient particulars on trust receipts, in cash
receipts and cash payment books.
law practice failed to keep separate trust ledger accounts in relation to each
client for each matter.
law practice allowed non-trust money to be intermixed with trust money in that
it accepted credit card payment of trust money
into the office account.
law practice failed to record movements of controlled money accounts.
Investigation
letter dated 2 May 2017 the respondent lawyer was given notice of the complaint
and invited to provide a responding submission.
23 May 2017 the respondent lawyer’s submission was received.
29 June 2017 my office had a telephone conversation with the respondent lawyer
to discuss the issues under investigation and the
possible outcome of the
letter dated 26 July 2017 the respondent lawyer was requested to provide further
information pursuant to section 371(1) of the
Uniform Law.
or around 23 August 2017 the respondent lawyer provided the requested
information.
letter dated 14 September 2017 the respondent lawyer was given a detailed
assessment of the investigation to date, a preliminary
view and an opportunity
to provide submissions or further information. No response was received from the
respondent lawyer.
letter dated 19 October 2017 the respondent lawyer was given written notice of
my proposed determination and offered an opportunity
to provide any final
submissions.
6 November 2017 the respondent lawyer’s submission was received.
letter dated 28 November 2017 the respondent lawyer was requested to provide
information pursuant to section 371(1) of the Uniform
Law in relation to the
specific issue of intermixing which had not been resolved.
8 December 2017 the responded lawyer provided a partial response to the request
for information dated 28 November 2017.
letter dated 12 December 2017 the respondent lawyer was requested to provide
information pursuant to section 371(1) of the Uniform
15 January 2018 the respondent lawyer provided a response to the request for
information dated 28 November 2017 & 12 December
compliance audit report prepared by [Name] dated 13 February 2018 provided
further information regarding the specific issue of intermixing.
Reasoning and findings on issues under
investigation
Issue (a) - Failure to reconcile trust records
1 identified that the reconciliations for the trust account had not been
completed since March 2014.
3 found that the reconciliations for the trust account had been completed to 31
March 2015 but the April 2015 had not been
completed. The investigator was
unable to conclude if the reconciliation reports were completed on time as the
reports were not dated.
However, as noted above, the reconciliations at the time
the external examiner completed his audit (report 9) had not been completed
since March 2014 so it can be accepted that reconciliations after March 2014
were all prepared well outside the required 15 working
4 identified that the May and June 2015 trust reconciliation reports were not
completed within 15 working days and were only
completed when the investigator
attended the law practice to assist in their preparation. The investigator
recommended that reconstruction
of some transactions in the ledger accounts
would be necessary due to errors dating back to November 2014 and recommended
qualified book keeper be employed by the respondent lawyer to assist with
this process.
6 found that there remained a number of discrepancies in the trust account
reconciliations.
7 noted that the trust reconciliation statements for June, July, August and
September 2016 did not reconcile. It was again
mentioned that the date of
preparation was not included so it was not possible to determine if the
statements had been prepared within
15 working days of the end of the relevant
month. The trust trial balance did not record the date of last transaction and
account reconciliation did not provide the date of the unpresented
cheques making it unclear if there were any dormant balances or
stale cheques.
8 found that the reconciliations had been prepared but did note that the
reconstruction of the trust records and reconciliations
going back to October
2015 had not been completed.
her submission dated 23 May 2017, the respondent lawyer agreed that there had
been problems with the firm’s trust account.
She further explained that
the trust account was reconstructed by an Accountant from the period 31 October
2015 to 31 January 2017
as requested. The trust account has been reconciled
monthly since February 2017 and balanced each month with no deficiencies.
the basis of the LIV investigations and conclusions, I find it proven that the
respondent failed to reconcile the law practice’s
trust records either at
all or within the required 15 working days from the end of month between March
2014 and September 2016.
Issue (b) – Failure to lodge
the External Examiner’s report on time
external examiners report for the year ending 31 October 2014 was due to be
lodged by 28 February 2015. The report was completed
by the external examiner on
24 April 2015 and lodged electronically with the Victorian Legal Services Board
on 12 May 2015.
external examiners audit report was therefore lodged 73 days late.
external examiners audit report was also lodged late for the year ending 31
October 2015. This is not the subject of disciplinary
action as the Uniform Law
does not specify that this is a breach for which the respondent lawyer is
responsible.
respondent lawyer did not address the issue of the late lodgement of the report
for the year ending 31 October 2014. However she
did address the issue of late
lodgement of the 2015 external examiner report in her submission dated 23 May
2017. The respondent
lawyer noted the delay in lodging the report was caused by
trying to find convenient time for the inspection. She notes this year’s
report was lodged on time and all future reports will be lodged on time.
this basis I find it proven that that respondent lawyer failed to ensure that
her external examiner audit report for the year ending
31 October 2014 was
lodged on time.
Issue (f) – Failure to ensure that the
trust records were maintained and reflected true position
4 noted the follow up trust investigation that took place after the LIV’s
initial trust investigation and findings in
report 3. During this visit it
became apparent that the respondent lawyer would need to complete extensive
reconstruction of the
law practice trust account records from 1 November 2014
and recomplete reconciliations. Reference was made to the relevant provisions
errors that had been discovered.
4 also found that the trust cash book had been reconciled to the bank statements
up to 30 April 2015, but had not been reconciled
to the trust ledger trial
balances as is required.
respondent lawyers’ submission on 23 May 2017 acknowledges problems with
the trust account but refers to the fact that she
had engaged several book
keepers and an accountant over the past two years to assist with the issues and
they had caused further
problems. She said that her office manager attempted to
reconcile accounts but was busy running the office. She outlines the steps
have been taken since the involvement of this office and that the issues have
now been resolved.
respondent lawyer confirms that the reconstruction of the trust account from 31
October 2015 to 31 January 2017 was completed
and said that from February 2017
there have been no further issues found with the reconciliations for the trust
the basis of the LIV’s investigations and conclusions, I find it proven
that the respondent lawyer failed to ensure that
the trust records were
maintained appropriately so as they reflected the true position of the trust
account at any given time between
March 2014 and January 2017.
Issue (g) – Failure to record sufficient particulars
in trust records
7 identified a number of issues where records did not contain sufficient
particulars as follows:
were 5 instances within the month of July 2016 in which there were no details
clearly identifying the person on behalf of who
the payment was made.
were 5 receipts that did not record the required particulars, including the
purpose for which the money was received and the
person on whose behalf the
funds were received.
were 3 instances where the BSB and account number details were not recorded in
the cash payments book following EFT payment
transactions.
the respondent lawyer’s submissions dated 23 May 2017 and 6 November 2017
there is no specific mention of these issues. However,
the respondent lawyer
does acknowledge that there have been problems with the law practice’s
trust account for some time and
outlines the steps taken by the law practice to
resolve those issues.
the basis of the LIV’s investigations and conclusions, I find it proven
that the respondent lawyer failed to record sufficient
particulars in the trust
records including in the trust receipts, trust ledgers, cash receipts and cash
payments books during the
period May 2016 to October 2016.
Issue (h) – Failure to keep separate trust ledger
accounts for each client’s matter
7 identified that the respondent lawyer used ledger account 120070 for the sale
of a property and the distribution of funds
of a related but separate estate
matter. In addition it was noted that there was a ledger for Victoria Legal Aid
which is used to record funds paid by VLA to the law
practice in respect of a number of different matters.
8 noted the issue with the individual ledger for VLA identified above in Report
respondent lawyers’ submission dated 23 May 2017 says that in relation to
receiving funds from VLA she now keeps separate
ledger cards for each matter.
There is no explanation in relation to ledger account 120070.
the basis of the LIV’s investigations and conclusions, I find it proven
that the respondent lawyer failed to keep separate
trust ledger accounts in
relation to ledger 120070 and in relation to VLA client matters.
Issue (i) – Allowed non-trust money to be intermixed
with trust money
6 observed that the respondent lawyer accepted payment of trust money through a
credit card facility. These funds were automatically
deposited into the office
account and then transferred into the trust bank account.
7 found that funds are received from VLA into the trust account for work
completed by the law practice. A tax invoice was prepared
for the work completed
and the funds were then deposited in the trust account as payment for this
invoice. This money is not trust
money and should therefore have been deposited
into the office account.
8 notes that the funds received from VLA are receipted into one ledger and not
to the individual client ledger to which the
funds relate.
7 notes that during the investigation the law practice explained the reason for
doing it this way was that it allowed for amounts
payable to barristers to be
easily identifiable.
respondent lawyer’s submission dated 23 May 2017 says that in relation to
receiving funds from VLA she now keeps separate
ledger cards for each matter. In
relation to trust money received from clients by credit card, she has spoken to
the bank and they
are unable to split payments. As most clients seek to pay
trust money by credit card but there were no credit card facilities attached
the trust account, she will have to allow the credit card payment to be made
into the office account and then transfer the funds
to the trust account.
respondent lawyer in her submission admitted that the issue of intermixing was
continuing both with the credit card payments and
the receipt of funds into the
trust account from VLA. Despite being advised by investigators to change her
processes the respondent
lawyer appeared to be planning to continue to handle
these funds in this way.
a result of the admission by the respondent lawyer that the conduct was ongoing,
a further letter dated 28 November 2017 was sent
advising her of the seriousness
of the intermixing issue. This letter also sought further information and
confirmation from her that
the conduct would immediately cease.
respondent lawyer’s submission dated 8 December 2017 in relation to this
issue was that she had previously arranged for
VLA to pay all funds into the
trust account to ensure all disbursements were paid. Training had however been
arranged with VLA to
make changes to how the payments were made. Discussions
were had with the bank about splitting the credit card payments between the
office account and the trust account however they were advised this could not be
investigator attempted to discuss this issue in more detail with the respondent
lawyer on Monday, 11 December 2017. Before she
was able to explain why the issue
with the credit card payments had not been resolved and the implications of this
on the investigation,
the respondent lawyer said “I am sick of dealing
with this” and abruptly terminated the call.
letter dated 12 December 2017 the Respondent lawyer was asked to confirm that
this conduct would cease immediately together with
a request for additional
information.
respondent lawyer’s final submission dated 15 January 2018 noted that
during audits carried out by the LIV they were advised
to have separate LIV
ledgers which they complied with.
report of the compliance audit by [Name] dated 13 February 2018 confirms that
the intermixing issues had now been resolved as
by VLA are now made directly to the office account and are no longer paid into
the trust account.
trust account now has its own eftpos device that is able to accept payments by
way of credit card.
the basis of the LIV’s investigations and conclusions, I find it proven
that the respondent lawyer allowed non-trust money
to be intermixed with trust
money from at least 15 May 2015 to December 2017.
– Failure to record movements of controlled money accounts
8 found that in the matter of [Name2](CMA 14143), the record of money movements
had not contained all of the required details
of interest income relating to the
term deposit, nor did it have the details of the withdrawal upon the closure of
the account completed.
submission by the respondent lawyer dated 6 November 2017 did not address the
failure to record movements of the controlled money
accounts other than to say
that the firm’s trust account was now being conducted on the LIV’s
online accounting program
and controlled money is entered according to the
of the submissions from the respondent lawyer dated 23 May 2017 and 6 November
2017 addressed the issue of controlled money
accounts and otherwise comments
were general to the extent that she acknowledged there had been problems with
the firm’s trust
account for some time.
the basis of the LIV’s investigations and conclusions, I find it proven
that the respondent lawyer has failed to record movements
of the controlled
money account of Marshall and that this occurred after the introduction of the
Uniform Law.
Characterisation of conduct
complaint is about conduct that occurred from 15 May 2015 to December 2017.
Section 27, Schedule 4 of the
Legal Profession Uniform Law Application Act
prescribes that complaints are able to be initiated on or after 1
July 2015, the commencement date of the Uniform Law, about conduct
that occurred
before 1 July 2015. A complaint of this type is handled under the Uniform Law.
However, the conduct that occurred before
1 July 2015 is measured against the
applicable law that existed at the time to determine the relevant disciplinary
breach. Further,
any order that I make under the Uniform Law cannot be more
onerous than an order that was available at the time of the conduct.
I find issue (a) to be a breach of:
3.3.19(1) and 3.3.19(3) of the Regulations regarding the period before 1 July
Legal Profession Uniform General Rules
(‘the General Rules’) regarding the period from 1 July 2015 onwards.
find issue (b) to be a breach of:
3.3.47 or of the Regulations regarding the period before 1 July 2015.
3.3.54 of the
Legal Profession Act
find issue (f) to be a breach of:
3.3.25(2)(b) of the LPA before 1 July 2015
(2)(c) of the Uniform Law for the period from 1
July 2015 onwards.
find issue (g) to be a breach of Rules 45(1)(e), 45(1)(d), 36(2), 44(1) and
47(1) of the General Rules regarding the period from
1 July 2015.
find issue (h) to be a breach of Rule 47(1) of the General Rules regarding the
period from 1 July 2015.
find issue (i) to be a breach of Sections 135, 137 and 146 of the Uniform Law
regarding the period from 1 July 2015 onwards.
find issue (j) to be a breach of:
64(4) of the General Rules regarding the period from 1 July 2015 onwards
139(4) of the Uniform Law.
of the General Rules and the Uniform Law are capable of amounting to
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct pursuant to
sections 298(b) and (c) of the Uniform Law respectively. The breaches of the LPA
and the Regulations regarding
conduct prior to 1 July 2015 are capable of
amounting to unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct
to section 4.4.4(a) of the LPA.
have considered previous decisions of my office and decisions of the Victorian
Civil Administrative Tribunal (‘VCAT’).
Of the decisions considered,
conduct involving trust accounting breaches with respect to insufficient record
keeping, but without
evidence of dishonesty, have been characterised as both
unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct.
this case I find that the respondent lawyer’s conduct is properly
characterised as unsatisfactory professional conduct rather
than professional
misconduct.
Reasons for order
the basis of the analogous decisions I have considered in relation to the types
of orders imposed and the factors that were taken
into account in determining
them, I have decided to take into account the following mitigating
respondent lawyer eventually resolved the issues under investigation concerning
the trust account.
of the issues with the trust account were contributed to by the use of several
book keepers and an accountant who did not have
full knowledge of the
requirements of trust accounting.
respondent lawyer had a condition on her 2016/2017 practising certificate that
required a book keeper, to be employed to maintain
the trust account that is
experienced in the requirements of trust accounting. This condition was complied
with and that book keeper
continues to be employed by the law practice.
have also decided to take into account the following aggravating
respondent lawyer has taken more than two years to get the issues that were the
subject of this complaint resolved. This has required
the preparation of 11
reports by the LIV and Legal Services Board since the issues were first raised
in May 2015, when the law practice
should have been able to rectify the
identified issues far sooner.
respondent lawyer only resolved the issue of intermixing of VLA funds and credit
card payments in December 2017 after numerous
requests from my office.
respondent lawyer had a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct made by
our office in 2010 following the unauthorised transfer
of trust money in the
settlement of a property that had not been completed.
respondent lawyer had a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct in 2013
for failing to supervise a clerk.
respondent lawyer has failed to appreciate the seriousness of the trust account
breaches and expressed the view multiple times
that as the issues that are the
subject of this complaint are now resolved there should be no
consequences.
considered all of the evidence and relevant law, and having made the above
findings on the issues under investigation, I determine
that it is fair and
reasonable in all the circumstances to make the orders detailed
Other issues under investigation
– The law practice failed to provide adequate costs disclosure
2 found that the law practice had poor costs disclosure and billing practices.
It identified 2 files with issues as follows:
family law file of ‘C’ (reference 13242) had no evidence of a costs
disclosure statement or a costs agreement.
family law file of ‘D’ (reference 14171) did have a copy of the
costs disclosure statement and costs agreement on
file. The estimated range of
costs was $1,200 to $30,000. There was no breakdown of the cost for various
stages of work.
respondent lawyer provided copies of her files for both the matters of
‘C’ and ‘D’ and my staff conducted
a review of those
review of the file of ‘C’ confirmed that signed costs disclosure and
costs agreement was contained within the file
and no further action was
review of the file of ‘D’ confirmed the costs disclosure and costs
agreement on file and concerns were not such that
any further action was
the basis of the review of the client files provided by the respondent lawyer, I
do not find this issue proved, in relation to
the ‘C’ and
‘D’ files. Therefore, I close this part of the complaint pursuant to
section 277(1)(h) of the
Uniform Law.
Issue (d) – The
law practice failed to cost files in accordance with the costs agreement, the
Practitioners Remuneration Order
or Court scale of costs.
2 found that the law practice did not provide evidence on how bills were
calculated in the files referred to in paragraph 73(a)
and (b) above.
respondent lawyer provided copies of her files for both matters and my staff
conducted a review of those files.
review of the file of ‘C’ found that the bill was a fixed fee. There
being no complaint from the client and the fee
did not appear to be unreasonable
no further action was warranted.
review of the file of ‘D’ found that the bill was a fixed fee. There
being no complaint from the client and the fee
did not appear to be unreasonable
no further action was warranted.
the basis of the review of the client files provided by the respondent lawyer, I
do not find this issue proved. Therefore, I close
this part of the complaint
pursuant to section 277(1)(h) of the Uniform Law.
– The law practice failed to ensure appropriate management systems for an
Incorporated Legal Practice
2 identified a number of issues which have since been addressed by the law
practice. In the recent compliance audit conducted
by [Name] he confirmed that
the system deficiencies previously identified have been rectified.
issue has not been the focus of this investigation and I therefore close this
part of the complaint pursuant to section 277(1)(h)
of the Uniform Law.
to Section 314 of the Uniform Law, a respondent lawyer or a legal practitioner
associate of a respondent law practice may,
in accordance with the applicable
legislation appeal to the VCAT, or seek a review by the VCAT, of this
determination made under
section 299 of the Uniform Law.
Non-compliance
failure to comply with a determination made under section 299 is capable of
constituting unsatisfactory professional conduct or
professional misconduct
pursuant to Section 298 (h) of the Uniform Law.
Executive Director, Complaints & Intervention
of the Victorian Legal Services Commissioner
29 June 2018
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (170 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter